BACKGROUND
when females mate with multiple partners, sperm from rival males compete to fertilise the ova  <cit> . sperm competition has been shown to influence the evolution of testes size and efficiency  <cit> , and sperm form and function  <cit> . studies of experimental evolution have shown that male reproductive traits can evolve in response to sperm competition  <cit> . however, this does not prove that sperm competitive ability responds to selection or how different genotypes contribute to future generations. the assumption that divergence in sperm number and/or quality translates to competitive ability has been demonstrated in only two cases  <cit> , and never before in a vertebrate.

it is now recognised that the sperm competitiveness phenotype is a multifarious, transitional trait that can be influenced by genetic interactions between females and/or rival males. in some species, the female genotype plays a major role in determining the outcome of sperm competition  <cit> . additionally, it seems that sperm competitive ability may also be contingent on the genotypes of the competing males, and ejaculate-by-ejaculate interactions. indeed, males have been shown to display non-transitivity in their sperm competitiveness  <cit> . in drosophila, the repeatability of sperm competitiveness declines when ejaculate × ejaculate × female combinations become inconsistent  <cit> , and in vivo observations of sperm within the female tract have demonstrated the complexity of these interactions  <cit> . on top of this, fertilisation and/or paternity success is only a relative predictor of sperm competitive ability dependent upon the stochastic 'background' against which it is measured  <cit> . collectively, these factors might constrain sperm competitiveness from responding to selection.

we have generated replicate selection lines of house mice evolving with and without sperm competition. in the eighth generation, we observed genetic divergence in ejaculate quality; males evolving under sperm competition had higher sperm numbers and better sperm motility compared to males with a selection history of monogamy  <cit> . here, in the 12th generation we conducted competitive matings using males from our selection lines, and investigated whether the sperm competitiveness phenotype responds to selection by determining whether improved sperm quality translates to superior sperm competitiveness in house mice.

RESULTS
we used sexually mature male and female house mice from our established selection lines that had been evolving with  and without  sperm competition for  <dig> generations, and performed competitive matings between males . a first male to mate advantage  is a general pattern of paternity in mammals  <cit> . for example, in competitive matings of mice the proportion of offspring sired by the second male to mate  is close to  <dig>   <cit> . here we assess p <dig> for males with a polygamous selection history when competing against males with a monogamous selection history, and vice versa. to quantify female effects on sperm use, the experimental females were taken from both the monogamous and polygamous selection lines. we examined the relative sperm competitiveness of males from the monogamous and polygamous lines by including the proportion of offspring sired by a male when mating in the offensive role of sperm competition  in a nested anova. although 53% of the litters were multiply sired, our microsatellite data revealed a significant paternity bias toward males from the polygamous selection lines. thus, there was a significant effect of male selection history on the proportion of embryos sired by the second male to mate  , but no effect of female selection history . the average proportion of offspring sired by males from the polygamous lines when they competed against males from the monogamous lines  was significantly higher than the proportion of offspring sired by monogamous males when competing against males from polygamous lines  . in both the defensive  and offensive  roles, males from the polygamous lines gained exclusive paternity of 33% of the litters, while males from the monogamous lines gained exclusive paternity of just 14% of the litters.

discussion
we conducted competitive matings between male house mice from polygamous and monogamous selection lines, and found that males evolving with sperm competition  had a significant paternity bias over males evolving without sperm competition . we thus provide evidence that the sperm competitiveness phenotype can respond to selection, and show that improved sperm quality translates to greater competitive fertilisation success in a mammal.

male mice have been shown to adjust their ejaculate expenditure according to the perceived risk of sperm competition  <cit> . under the established mating regimes of the selection experiment, it is possible that males from the polygamous lines became more sensitive to cues that are indicative of female mating history, which thereby influenced their copulatory behaviour and competitive ability. in a previous experiment we conducted remote observations of copulatory behaviour in a monandrous and polyandrous context  <cit> . mating behaviour did not differ between the two treatments, suggesting that males do not adjust their copulatory behaviour according to the number of previous partners a female had mated with  <cit> . following eight generations of selection, we assessed the sperm quality of males from the monogamous and polygamous selection lines  <cit> . our analyses revealed genetic divergence between the two selective regimes, and provided evidence that sperm traits had evolved in response to sperm competition. we found that males from the polygamous lines had ejaculates with greater numbers of sperm and better sperm motility compared to males from the monogamous lines  <cit> . given that the mean sperm quality scores and the mean p <dig> values were derived from different generations  we are unable to test directly for a correlation between sperm quality and sperm competitiveness among our selection lines. however, it is striking that the mean sperm quality scores from generation eight  <cit>  follow the rank order of mean p <dig> values found here across the replicate selection lines . indeed, we have shown that the males from the polygamous lines have evolved ejaculates with greater numbers of sperm and increased sperm motility  <cit> . improved sperm quality in the polygamous lines may have been driven by directional selection on standing genetic variation, and/or via the removal of deleterious mutations that suppress sperm quality  <cit> . regardless of the precise mechanism for the divergence, it would appear that the polygamous males outcompeted their rivals by reaching the ova first and/or by penetrating the ova first, and thereby gaining greater numbers of fertilisations. indeed, competent sperm motility is an important determinant of fertilisation success in vertebrates  <cit> .

it is also possible that a paternity bias toward the polygamous males could have been generated  via preferential implantation of ova fertilised by males from the polygamous line. it has been proposed that females can benefit from polyandry when genetically superior males are successful in sperm competition and transfer good genes to their offspring  <cit> . studies of invertebrates have shown that additive genetic contributions, such as intrinsic male effects, can contribute to offspring fitness  <cit> . thus, males from our polygamous lines may have evolved an intrinsic trait that improved zygote quality and ensured higher rates of implantation. males from the polygamous lines sired a higher proportion of offspring compared to males from the monogamous lines. additional experimentation is required to further assess the paternity success of the polygamous males, and to separate potential effects of preferential zygote implantation from competitive ejaculate quality.

in studies of postcopulatory sexual selection, paternity success at birth has routinely been applied as a measure of male fertilisation success and sperm competitiveness. these studies have provided convincing support for the evolution and maintenance of polyandry based on the good genes  <cit> , and compatible genes hypotheses  <cit> . however, inequalities between paternity success at birth and fertilisation success may have significant consequences for studies assessing sperm competitive ability and postcopulatory paternity biasing mechanisms  <cit> . unfortunately, there are methodological limitations to achieving this in internally fertilising species. here, we reduced variation in paternity arising from embryo mortality by genotyping embryos in utero at  <dig> days gestation. thus, our study provides a more accurate estimate of fertilisation success and sperm competitiveness than has previously been used in studies of mammals.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown that polygamy influences the evolvability of the sperm competitiveness phenotype in house mice. previously, following eight generations of experimental evolution, we found that males with a selection history of polygamy evolved ejaculates with more sperm and better sperm motility compared to males with a selection history of monogamy  <cit> . here, by conducting competitive matings between males with selection histories of monogamy and polygamy, we provide the first demonstration that polygamy selects for superior sperm competitiveness in a vertebrate.

