BACKGROUND
there is considerable interest in discovering polymorphic loci that regulate differences in gene expression since this information can help us understand not only how genes are regulated but also how they interact. genetic polymorphisms may regulate genes that are physically close to them on the chromosome  or anywhere else in the genome . there is a trivial sense in which all genes are expected to be both trans regulated by multiple transcription factors and cis regulated by transcription factor binding sites and this has been confirmed experimentally in yeast  <cit> . however the distinction between cis and trans regulation is only useful when the gene is differentially expressed between two conditions; then we can ask whether that difference is due to differences in the transcription factor binding region  or due to differences in structure or abundance of transcription factors  or both.

one strategy for the discovery of cis and trans acting genes is to use gene expression as a phenotype and to map associations between thousands of markers and the expression of thousands of genes in hundreds of samples to discover expression quantative trait loci   <cit> . this strategy routinely detects hundreds of cis regulatory loci since it is only necessary to test a few markers around each gene, but its statistical power to detect trans regulatory loci is limited by the large multiple testing correction that is required when correlating the genotype of thousands of genome wide markers with the expression of thousands of genes. the proportions of trans regulated genes discovered in these studies vary widely depending on the significance threshold used. furthermore it has been argued that polymorphisms in transcription factors that cause extensive phenotypic effects are likely to be rare and rapidly purged from populations  <cit> . consequently, although polymorphic network hubs that appear to regulate large numbers of genes have been detected, their discovery is very sensitive to the analysis strategy and probability thresholds used, they have rarely been confirmed experimentally and many may be false positives  <cit> . therefore most trans regulators that effect multiple genes might have small individual effects making them hard to detect by genetic mapping and give the misleading impression that cis regulation is the dominant form. these problems make eqtl studies an unsatisfactory platform for discovering the relative contributions of cis and trans regulation to the observed differences in gene expression.

the availability of data for  <dig> million single nucleotide polymorphisms  in inbred mouse strains has been used to construct a comprehensive haplotype map of the mouse genome  <cit> . this makes it possible to determine the extent to which differences in gene expression are associated with haplotype differences. however since only  <dig> strains were genotyped there is insufficient statistical power to approach this question directly. instead we have divided the list of ratios of gene expression between two mouse strains into one hundred groups with increasing p values for differential expression and then for each group asked whether there is a significant excess of genes with haplotype differences. this strategy makes it possible to identify the p values associated with differences in expression and haplotype and hence the contribution of cis effects to differential expression. importantly this strategy also makes it possible to objectively identify a threshold p value at which there is a significant association between haplotype differences and gene expression. this value can then be used to quantify the contribution of cis regulation to differential regulation.

we estimated the contribution of trans regulation independently using expression data from a panel of congenic mice and their controls that had been developed for other purposes. since congenic mice have a small region of donor genome introgressed into the host genome, any differential expression that is outside the introgressed congenic region can be assumed to be trans regulated by that region, permitting a direct estimate of the proportion of trans regulated genes. these trans regulated genes were highly enriched for cholesterol synthesis genes. this suggested that the congenic region was altering cholesterol flux and this in turn was causing changes in cholesterol gene transcription a process we call indirect trans regulation. indirect trans regulation is likely to be even more sensitive to environmental and genetic effects than direct trans regulation by a transcription factor. it is therefore important to be aware of the extent of this effect.

RESULTS
gene expression data were obtained for the parental and congenic lines for a total of  <dig> conditions . genes were defined as differentially expressed between lines if they had an absolute log <dig> difference in expression >  <dig>  and a pplr less than the value indicated in the text . the expression ratio and pplr for all relevant comparisons, together with the number of upstream snp and the assigned haplotype is shown in additional file  <dig> expression+snp+haplotype.

conditions for which expression data was obtained. expression was compared between three pairs of strains: c57bl/ <dig> v aj ; tir1cc v tir1aa and tir3cc v tir3aa. pairs of values separated by a slash are the number of arrays hybridised for each of the pair of lines being tested. values separated by commas are for the different tissues. the tirncc v tirnaa pairs were lines derived from the homozygous littermates of an intercross between n <dig> heterozygotes for the congenic region  that acted as controls for each other. hence tir1cc and tir1aa mice are carriers of c57bl/ <dig> and a/j alleles respectively at the tir <dig> locus.

effect of sequence polymorphism on the probability of differential expression between inbred lines
any snp that causes a mismatch between probe and target might have a direct effect on the measure of expression by reducing signal and hence confound the observations  <cit> , however affymetrix arrays are probably relatively insensitive to this effect  <cit> . since probes were designed against the c57bl/ <dig> sequence any effect of mismatches on signal would be expected to lead to a loss of signal from a/j and an excess of genes that appear to be over-expressed in c57bl/ <dig>  the positions of each affymetrix  <dig> mer probe in probesets that were scored as differentially expressed between a/j and c57bl/ <dig> liver were retrieved from the ensembl <dig>  database and compared with the position of snp in the perlegen  database.  <dig> out of the  <dig> differentially genes had snp under probes but there was no evidence for an excess of snp associated with probesets that were under-expressed in a/j . furthermore 49% more genes were over-expressed in a/j than c57bl/6; the opposite direction to any effect that would be expected to be caused by snp modifying expression. consequently the data could be used with confidence that observations were not a simple consequence of snp causing expression differences .

association between upstream snp and differential expression
our objective was to identify any association between the number of upstream snp and the probability of genes being differentially expressed. the genes represented in the liver data were ranked by pplr and divided into  <dig> groups of  <dig> genes each, representing the percentiles of the pplr distribution. for each percentile group the number of genes with each number of snp between  <dig> and  <dig> in the  <dig> kb upstream region was obtained. for each percentile the number of genes with at least  <dig> upstream snp was compared with the number with no upstream snp by a χ <dig> test. then this was repeated for each number of upstream snp between  <dig> and  <dig> additional file  <dig> snp_and_expression). after a bonferroni correction for multiple testing, there was only a significant association between upstream snp and differential expression for the first three  percentiles of the pplr distribution, containing  <dig> genes with pplr <  <dig> , of which  <dig> were on different haplotypes. the relative risk of a gene being differentially expressed was obtained for genes with each number of snp . there was a strong correlation between the relative risk and the number of snp in the upstream region for the first percentile  and a similar relationship was observed for the next two but not subsequent percentiles.

the χ <dig> tests showed highly significant associations with the presence of snp and differential expression when pplr <  <dig> . however there was no evidence for an association between the presence of snp and genes that had pplr >  <dig> . this was interpreted as evidence that the genes that are differentially expressed under the immediate control of upstream snp have highly reproducible expression differences and hence give rise to low pplr values. in order to test this hypothesis the proportion of genes that were differentially expressed between the tir1cc and tir1aa mice and inside or outside the tir <dig> congenic interval were compared for genes with pplr <  <dig>  and  <dig>  <pplr <  <dig> . of the  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in tir <dig> spleen or liver at the pplr <  <dig>  confidence level,  <dig> were in the tir <dig> congenic interval whereas of the  <dig> that were differentially expressed at the  <dig>  <pplr <  <dig>  confidence level only  <dig> were in the congenic interval . this provided persuasive evidence that low pplr values are associated with haplotype differences.

estimating the frequency of differentially cis regulated genes between parental inbred mice
the haplotype of the  <dig> kb upstream region differed between c57bl/ <dig> and a/j for 30% of all genes for which haplotype data were available. this value is likely to be an estimate of the proportion of genes regulating any phenotype that can be discovered in a cross between these two strains. the extent to which genes are cis regulated may be reflected by the excess of those genes that are both differentially expressed and on different haplotypes over the number that would be expected to be on different haplotypes by chance. in the parental mice 30% of all genes were on different haplotypes in the two strains, but 55% of genes that were differentially expressed in at least one tissue were also on different haplotypes . applying bayes theorem shows that approximately 36% of genes  that are differentially expressed in any one tissue can be attributed to haplotype difference and hence putatively cis-regulated . 83% of genes that were differentially expressed in all three tissues tested in the parental strains had different haplotypes for the  <dig> kb upstream region and 61% of these genes may be differentially expressed due to the haplotype differences . 51% of genes that were differentially expressed in two tissues were predicted to be due to difference in haplotype.

genes that were potentially cis regulated, i.e. those with differential expression and on different haplotypes, were also five times more likely to be differentially expressed in multiple tissues than genes that are potentially trans regulated: 46/ <dig>  of genes that were differentially expressed in at least one tissue and on different haplotypes  were differentially expressed in all three tissues, whereas only 7/ <dig>  of genes that were differentially expressed in at least one tissue and on the same haplotype , were differentially expressed in all three tissues . this suggests that cis effects were five times less sensitive to tissue environment than trans regulated genes.

effect of genetic background on differential expression
the number of genes that were differentially expressed in each condition or in relevant combinations of conditions are summarised in figure  <dig>  as expected, there was little overlap in the lists of genes differentially expressed in different tissues. in the parental lines for example , 85% of all differentially expressed genes are differentially expressed in only one of the three tissues.

surprisingly however, there was relatively little overlap between the sets of genes that were differentially expressed in the congenic strains and in the parental strains from which they were derived . in the spleen only 3/ <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in the congenic mice were also differentially expressed in the parents and outside the congenic interval. in the liver there were no genes that were outside the congenic interval and differentially expressed in both congenics and parents. this is less than would be expected by chance in each case and shows that the trans effect of genes within the congenic interval on genes outside the interval is not detectable in the parental mice. microarray studies to detect pathways that cause the difference in phenotype between strains are based on the assumption that the difference in expression of those pathways will be substantial enough to be observable. in this case there was no observable difference in the parental strains in any of the pathways that were regulated by the qtl in the congenics and therefore expression data from the parental strains may not be a reliable resource for identifying the pathways that regulate the phenotype.

estimating the proportion of trans regulated genes
in the spleen of the congenic mice  <dig> of  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were outside the congenic interval and therefore putatively trans regulated. in the congenic liver  41/ <dig>  of genes appeared to be trans regulated. the most prominent group of trans regulated genes was the cholesterol and steroid synthesis pathway, which was significantly differentially regulated  in the liver between tir1cc and tir1aa mice but no difference in this pathway was observed between the parental or the tir3nn strains . eleven of the thirteen genes in the steroid biosynthesis pathway between hmgcs <dig> and dhcr <dig> were significantly over-expressed in the liver of tir1aa mice pplr <  <dig>  . in contrast only  <dig> out of the thirteen had significantly higher expression in parental c57bl/ <dig> than in a/j, the opposite direction of effect and not enough differentially expressed genes to cause the pathway to be flagged as differentially expressed.

discussion
the availability of high-density genotype data for mice has made it possible to quantify the relationship between haplotype structure and differential gene expression. a relationship between snp in the  <dig> kb upstream region and differential expression was only observable when using a stringent test of differential expression . this was interpreted as evidence that the variance of expression of cis regulated genes is much lower than that of trans regulated genes. although the  <dig> kb upstream region may contain the highest density of regulatory elements it does not contain all of them, they can be spread throughout the gene and its 3' region as well as going tens to hundreds of kilobases upstream. therefore we are likely to have underestimated the numbers of cis regulated genes using this strategy. however snp in the upstream region will frequently be markers for larger haplotypes that extend into or through the whole gene region so these regions will not have been completely excluded from the analysis. by selecting the region with the highest density of regulatory elements we have maximised our power to detect an association between snp and gene expression, which would have been more difficult in the presence of higher proportions of non-functional snp distributed through the rest of the gene region.

if snp within probe positions were directly affecting signal then this would confound our results. since the probes were designed against c57bl/ <dig> sequence any snp that effected signal would be expected to reduce signal in a/j relative to c57bl/ <dig>  however we have shown that only  <dig> of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the liver had snp under probes and even for these  <dig> there was no association between their presence and reduced signal in a/j. therefore we do not consider that snp under probes is a source of bias in our data.

by examining the correlation between gene expression differences and haplotype allele differences in a/j and c57b/ <dig> mice we estimated that haplotype differences accounted for 36% of expression differences and these were assumed to be cis regulated, although as noted above this is likely to be an underestimate. we independently estimated that  <dig> and 85% of genes were outside the congenic interval and hence trans regulated in the spleen and liver of the tir <dig> congenic mice respectively. this also likely to be an underestimate since some genes within the congenic interval may also be trans regulated. the combined data suggests that there might be an approximately 2: <dig> ratio of trans:cis regulated differences in gene expression. clearly this is a preliminary estimate based on a very small sample but it emphasises the dominance of trans regulation.

genes are both cis and trans regulated and by multiple cis binding sites and multiple trans acting factors. however the 2: <dig> ratio may reflect the contributions of trans and cis factors to the observed differences in expression. it is well established that there are large differences in gene expression between tissues  <cit>  and this observation was replicated here. indeed this must be so for cell types to differentiate, thus underlining the sensitivity of gene expression to environment and this regulation must be by a trans mechanism. a study of mouse brain regions in multiple mouse strains found that region specific transcription was mainly trans regulated whilst strain specificity was mainly cis regulated  <cit> .

the cholesterol synthesis pathway appeared to be trans regulated by the tir <dig> region in the congenic mice but this was not observable in the parental mice. this pathway is regulated by the transcription factor srebf <dig>  which is inactive when cholesterol concentrations are high but migrates to the nucleus when cholesterol is low to bind transcription factor binding sites in cholesterol pathway genes and promote transcription; thus forming a negative feedback loop on cholesterol synthesis  <cit> . the co-ordinated up-regulation of the cholesterol pathway in tir1aa mice implies that srebf <dig> is responding to lower cholesterol levels in the livers of tir1aa mice than tir1cc mice. since cholesterol synthesis is co-ordinately regulated by an end-product feedback mechanism through srebf <dig>  the most likely explanation for the co-ordinated response is that some gene or genes in the tir <dig> congenic region is modifying cholesterol flux  by changing the rate of absorption or excretion from cells or the body. there are at least two genes in the tir <dig> region that are directly involved in cholesterol metabolism  but cholesterol plays an important role in the response to infection and tnfa which is also in the tir <dig> region has been shown to regulate cholesterol as well  <cit> , any of the other immune related genes in the mhc region could also be contributing to changes in cholesterol flux. we cannot exclude the possibility that a novel transcription factor in the tir <dig> region may be competing with srebf <dig> to directly regulate cholesterol pathway transcription. however, since there is no evidence in our data to suggest that a novel mechanism is responsible for our observations, it is most parsimonious to assume that the standard model holds here and the cholesterol pathway is responding to changes in cholesterol flux through the liver. since no significant difference in cholesterol pathway expression was observed in the parental strains we assume that multiple other interacting processes are buffering the effect of the tir <dig> region in these lines, as would be expected if the region was acting by modifying cholesterol flux rather than acting through a transcription factor.

we describe this mechanism of regulation by multiple intermediates such as metabolites as indirect trans regulation to distinguish it from direct trans regulation of a target gene by a transcription factor. cholesterol synthesis is a particularly well-known example of indirect trans regulation  <cit> .

almost completely different sets of genes were found to be differentially expressed between the congenic mice and their controls and between the parental inbred mice, as has been observed before  <cit> . this suggests that the problem of identification of trans regulated genes goes well beyond the lack of statistical power of eqtl studies for this purpose. expression differences in cis regulated genes were found to have lower variances than those of trans regulated genes in this study, and several eqtl studies have found that cis regulated differences in transcription are larger than trans regulated differences  <cit> . this is to be expected since trans regulated genes are likely to have a much larger number of intermediates involved in their effect on expression. firstly there is usually a complex of gene products and metabolites that bind to a given regulatory factor binding site, eg a mean of  <dig>  loci have been found to regulate each trans regulated gene in radiation hybrid cells  <cit> . secondly the concentrations and activities of members of that complex may be regulated by other molecules elsewhere that regulate translocation to the nucleus. consequently the regulatory binding site acts as a transponder for the whole cascade of events leading to regulatory complex binding or activation, for example a study in yeast found that trans acting eqtl were not enriched for transcription factors and that a wide range of gene classes could cause trans differences in expression  <cit> . this suggested that most differences in gene expression were caused by indirect rather than direct  trans effects. each interaction in the regulatory cascade is likely to introduce an element of noise and hence the effect of a trans acting regulatory factor polymorphism on gene expression is likely to have much higher variance than a cis polymorphism. therefore indirect trans regulation is likely to have even larger variance than direct trans regulation. these higher variances will make trans regulated differences in expression between conditions much harder to detect than cis regulated differences and indirect trans harder than direct trans. we do not know the proportion of genes that were indirectly trans regulated in the congenic mice; there are several zinc finger proteins with unknown targets in the congenic region that might be direct trans regulators. indirect trans regulation relationships are likely to be less well known because they are more complex and harder to discover experimentally by methods such as chromatin immunoprecipitation. but if the cholesterol synthesis pathway is representative of the main mode of trans regulation in the congenic mice, most regulation was indirect.

the greater sensitivity of trans regulated expression to experimental conditions than cis regulated genes may make it even harder to detect those genes that are subject to both polymorphic trans and cis factors. since the penetrance of the cis acting factors is usually likely to be higher than the trans factors only the strongest trans effects will be observable in the presence of concurrent cis effects.

the large proportion of trans regulated genes is important because their regulation appeared to be less stable under different conditions and consequently gene expression based approaches to the discovery of genes regulating a phenotype are likely to be exquisitely sensitive to the particular experimental conditions used. there was almost no overlap between genes that were differentially expressed between congenics and controls and outside the congenic regions, and genes that were differentially expressed between the parental inbred mice strains, even when comparing the same tissue, and this is consistent with previous observations  <cit> . this indicates that the observable trans regulation of gene expression is highly context dependent; the context in this case being genetic background. a study of recombinant inbred strains of mice estimated that  <dig> genes differed between conditions and  <dig> were sensitive to genetic background and hence presumably trans regulated  <cit> . the sensitivity of phenotype to genetic background in which a trait is expressed has also been dramatically illustrated by a study of  <dig> selected traits in a complete panel of chromosome substitution strain mice  that found that for 56% of phenotypes the sum of the trait differences from the host strain over all css lines exceeded 500% of the difference between the host and donor strain  <cit> .

the sensitivity of both expression and phenotype to genetic background has profound implications for the interpretation of expression data for a range of purposes. for example, the use of expression arrays is a common strategy for following-up qtl mapping studies with the objective of identifying the genetic polymorphism underlying a qtl. gene expression is typically measured in the parental lines that are used to generate the mapping populations in order to infer the genes regulated by the qtl. the candidate quantative trait gene  causing the phenotypic difference may be identified because they are differentially expressed in at least one tissue. candidate genes can be selected from these long lists by identifying those that participate in networks that are differentially expressed and that intersect with the qtl region. we have previously identified a candidate gene  in the tir <dig> qtl region that is not differentially expressed, but was subsequently found to have an amino acid indel, on the basis of its membership of a differentially expressed kegg pathway in the parental strains  <cit> . however it is clear from the data presented here that there is no reason to expect that the genes and pathways that are regulated by the qtl gene will respond in the same way in the parental mice as they will in the mapping populations and hence the pathways that differ between the extremes of the mapping population may not be detected by measuring gene expression in the parental mice.

the observation that the gene expression phenotype of congenic mice is overwhelmingly not predictable from the expression of genes in the parental strains has consequences for both qtl discovery and exploitation. it begs the question of why congenic mouse lines often retain the expected trait associated with the introgressed qtl. the explanation may be that most qtl that are discovered in mapping populations are those that are caused by alleles that are insensitive to genetic background. this would explain why mapping studies that have used parental strains with limited genetic differences have discovered unusually large numbers of qtl  <cit> . this could mean that conventional qtl mapping approaches fail to map the bulk of the theoretical potential of any given quantitative trait, not because the unmapped fraction is associated with multiple loci of small effect but because it is associated with loci that may be of large effect only on particular genetic backgrounds. if this is the case then the large number of inbred mouse strains being generated by the collaborative mouse cross  <cit>  are likely to reveal far more loci regulating phenotypic differences than a simple comparison between the eight founder lines would predict.

CONCLUSIONS
we have found that cis regulated genes are associated with low pplr values , presumably because the close coupling of the polymorphic regulatory region to the gene leads to much lower variances in expression. there was a ratio of approximately 2: <dig> of trans:cis regulated genes and the cis regulated genes were more likely to be differentially expressed in multiple tissues than trans regulated genes. the fact that genes that are regulated by a congenic region were not observably regulated in the parental mice, means that expression studies in the parents of a mapping population are unlikely to detect many of the trans regulated expression differences caused by the qtl genes. this will make it much harder to identify the pathways regulated by a qtl. the tir <dig> region of chromosome  <dig> regulated the cholesterol synthesis pathway, but this was probably because this region modifies cholesterol flux and not because it contains transcription factors that regulate cholesterol metabolism. this mode of indirect trans regulation may be the most common form of gene regulation but also the hardest to detect except in well defined genetic backgrounds such as congenic mice. consequently only the cis and largest direct trans regulatory relationships will be amenable to discovery and the large fraction of indirect trans regulation will be missed by most high throughput experimental strategies.

