BACKGROUND
disturbances are an important process structuring forests worldwide and have long been considered as significant drivers of dynamics and diversity  <cit> . in tropical forests, disturbances such as hurricanes and tree-falls from lightning or wind events create a mosaic of forest patches of different microhabitats at varying stages of succession  <cit>  superimposed upon background topographical and soil variation. if niche partitioning permits coexistence along the axis of tolerance to disturbance, different species should be selected by such disturbances, and we would expect to find predictable suites of species associated with different disturbance regimes  <cit> . this is indeed the case. because of a trade-off between growth and survival, fast-growing pioneer species occur predictably in tree-fall gaps. conversely, slow-growing shade-tolerant species survive well in closed canopy forest  <cit> . furthermore, resprouting of trees is high in areas affected by hurricanes  <cit> . these large-scale disturbances are obvious in the forest and are important mechanisms of species coexistence and community structure  <cit> . however, the contribution of gaps and their associated pioneer flora to species coexistence is likely to be limited, because full tree-fall gaps are relatively infrequent in lowland rain forest  <cit>  and most pioneer species occur at low abundance  <cit> . are there other kinds of disturbance in tropical forests affecting far wider areas of forest that influence species composition and community dynamics?

several authors have suggested that smaller disturbances such as branch-falls have a greater and more widespread effect on forest dynamics and composition than might be apparent at first glance  <cit> . in the absence of large canopy-opening disturbances, mortality in sub-canopy layers can increase light availability, free up resources and lead to faster sapling growth  <cit> . furthermore, these sub-canopy gaps occupy large proportions of forest  <cit> . sub-canopy openings occur from a variety of processes, including the death of sub-canopy trees, large branch falls, or in-filling of canopy gaps by trees in middle forest strata  <cit> . in addition to freeing resources, these events may cause disturbances to younger life stages, such as branch-falls affecting the survival and growth of seedlings and saplings  <cit> . falling branches are heavy and can kill or physically damage small plants  <cit> . if these branch-falls were prevalent enough of a selective force, species intolerant of this damage could be selected against in areas of high branch-fall. peters et al.  <cit>  extend this argument to apply to arborescent palm leaves, which are heavy enough to physically damage anything underneath . given the ubiquity of large palms in western amazonian forests , these authors suggested that falling leaves could select for species adapted to withstand this disturbance impact, such as those with storage organs or cotyledons that could easily resprout following damage. indeed, peters et al.  <cit>  found differences in sapling  communities in areas close to large arborescent palms compared to those with no influence of palm leaf fall. although theirs was only a small study over  <dig>  ha, it would seem that falling palm leaves could have a large effect on the species composition of forest communities.

however, falling branches and leaf fronds are not the only widespread small-scale disturbances in forests. large frugivores such as tapirs and peccaries are known to cause heavy localised disturbance, dramatically increase mortality of seedlings and saplings  <cit> , and consume and disperse seeds  <cit> . peccaries also consume palm fruit  <cit>  and in a repeat study of peters et al.  <cit> , beck et al.  <cit>  showed that sapling communities were impacted by the presence of palms in forest containing peccaries, but not in forest where they had been hunted out. beck et al.  <cit>  attributed the relationship between palms and saplings to peccaries rooting around palms and not to falling palm fronds. however, both studies  <cit>  suffered from using only static data, examining distributions of palms relative to other species without the ability to test how these distributions develop through differential growth or mortality.

whatever the mechanism , the disturbance around palms should cause differences in seedling and sapling density, growth, mortality, and/or re-sprouting close to palms compared to areas further away. if falling fronds are the cause, there should be similar effects in the neighbourhoods of large, fruiting palms as well as large, but non-fruiting palms. alternatively, if the disturbance is caused by peccaries, we would not expect an effect by non-fruiting palms. in addition, although palms are a common food source, many other species of large-fruited tree are also consumed by peccaries  <cit> . therefore, we would also expect an effect on the seedling and sapling communities around other large fruit-bearing tree species similarly eaten by peccaries. in this latter case, the effect of these small-scale disturbances may be even more widespread than peters et al.  <cit>  envisaged.

we should also consider that palms may have positive effects on some species. evidence gathered by connell et al.  <cit>  showed that smaller sub-canopy disturbances led to faster growth of understorey saplings, presumably because of increased light penetration or freed-up resources from the death of a sub-canopy individual. these sub-canopy gaps  were very common in the forest . falling palm fronds likely create such sub-canopy gaps and seedlings that survive palm or peccary damage may benefit from having  fewer competitors ,  more light  and,  more soil resources . ultimately, this increased availability of resources adjacent to palms could lead to higher growth or survival of saplings of some species.

in this study we use spatially-explicit data from long-term monitoring of seedlings, saplings in the neighbourhoods of large arborescent arecaceae  and reproductive myristicaceae trees in a large forest dynamics plot in western amazonia to examine the potential structuring effect of falling leaves and branches on tropical forest communities. we aim to test  whether large palms and other fruiting trees appear to impact seedling and sapling dynamics and distributions and  whether any difference is due to the trees themselves or an interaction with large frugivores. we extend previous studies of these phenomena in two key areas. first, we use dynamic data to understand the processes that lead to the patterns observed in static data in previous studies. second, we consider that small-scale disturbances and/or interactions with frugivores must also apply to other fruiting trees. in this case, we examined seedlings and saplings in the neighbourhood of fruiting adults in a common dioecious family at our site, the myristicaceae, fruits of which are also often consumed by peccaries  <cit> . the myristicaceae have been studied here for  <dig> years, and detailed information is available on the sex of each reproductive tree. comparing the sapling communities around male  and female  trees allows a rigorous comparison of fruit-eating by peccaries, and a counterpoint to understanding the impacts of disturbances associated with arborescent palms.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  mature arborescent palms  were recorded in the  <dig> ha yasuní fdp in the initial census . exactly  <dig> large arborescent palms in the size class 10- <dig> cm dbh were recorded. these palms were presumed to be immature  but still with large leaves capable of causing physical damage to seedlings and saplings beneath. a total of  <dig>  non-palm saplings  were recorded on the plot and  <dig>  of these survived to the next census. a total of  <dig>  new seedling recruits were recorded in the  <dig> seedling plots from  <dig> to  <dig>  fewer than half of these  survived to the next year.

spatial patterns of distribution and density
in initial neighbourhood analyses using a bivariate form of the o-ring statistic with a homogeneous poisson null model we found a significant large-scale effect, indicating that large palms are located in areas of somewhat lower sapling density . when we corrected for this effect using the heterogeneous poisson null model, randomly displacing palms within a  <dig> m neighbourhood, we found, as expected, notable small-scale repulsion of saplings from mature palms at distances <  <dig> m . considering immature palms, the large scale effect with respect to saplings existed as a tendency but was not significant and there were no significant small-scale effects . saplings were neither repulsed from or attracted to immature palm trees. when we extended these analyses to other fruiting trees, contrary to our predictions, there was no significant repulsion or attraction of saplings from neither male nor female myristicaceae trees and the observed o-ring values remained within the simulation envelopes .

spatial patterns of community structure
a total of  <dig>   <dig> ×  <dig> m quadrats contained or were adjacent to a quadrat containing a mature palm  and the remaining  <dig>  quadrats were defined as uninfluenced by mature palms . both stem density and species richness were lower in palm quadrats, by about  <dig>  of a stem/species. when we accounted for stem density, rarefied species richness was equivalent between palm and non-palm quadrats, indicating that the lower observed species riches in palm quadrats was primarily caused by a fewer individuals.

testing for differences in community composition at the quadrat scale, we found a significant difference between palm and non-palm quadrats , indicating that the assemblages of species in the neighborhoods of palms differed significantly from non-palm neighborhoods, despite similar levels of diversity. however, the amount of variation explained was very low, with an r <dig> of  <dig> . a comparison of the abundance of species within palm and non-palm quadrats indicated that only a minority of the over  <dig>  species in the plot showed a significant response to palms . ten species were more abundant than expected in palm quadrats, and  <dig> species were more abundant than expected in non-palm quadrats.

species in bold are those with more individuals than expected in quadrats close to palm trees. all other species have more individuals than expected in quadrats far from palm trees.

these results were confirmed in isar neighbourhood analyses, were we found a significant repelling effect of large arborescent mature palms on surrounding species at distances <  <dig> m . this result implies that mature palms have a limited direct negative effect on the diversity of surrounding sapling species. in contrast, immature arborescent palms had no such effect on surrounding species diversity, and the observed isar values for the null model generally remained within the simulation envelopes, indicating a significant but very small repelling effect at only one distance category .

dynamic demographic effects of large trees on seedlings
as expected, one-yr survival of new seedlings near  to mature palms was significantly lower than survival of seedlings far  from mature and immature palms . survival of new seedlings near to immature palms was also significantly lower, but only when also near mature palms. however, unexpectedly, survival of new seedlings near to male and far from female myristicaceae trees was significantly lower than survival of seedlings far from from sexes , survival of new seedlings near female trees was not significantly lower .

dynamic demographic effects of large trees on saplings
there were some significant effects of palm and myristicaceae trees on sapling dynamics. contrary to our predictions, saplings showed no significant difference in the probability of survival in areas near to  or far from  large arborescent palms, mature or not , and the probability of negative growth of saplings near to immature palms was greater than that of saplings far from either mature or immature palms . in accordance with our predictions, resprouting rates were higher in saplings near to palm trees compared to areas far from both immature and mature palms .

when we looked at the effects of mature myristicaceae trees on sapling dynamics, we found fewer significant effects. sapling survival near to male but far from female myrsticaceae trees was significantly higher compared to saplings far from both sexes . however, these same saplings also had a significantly higher probability of negative growth . there was no effect of myristicaceae trees on resprouting rates .

discussion
using a combination of spatially-explicit static and population dynamic data, we conducted multiple tests to examine hypotheses that falling palm fronds and/or peccaries are major structuring forces of lowland neotropical rain forests  <cit> . we found a restricted but significant direct effect of large arborescent mature fruiting palms on the spatial structure and species diversity of neighbouring sapling and seedling communities. there was also a strong and consistent larger-scale environmental effect of large palms being located in areas of lower neighbourhood density and diversity of saplings. further, these patterns were corroborated by process in that we also found significant differences in the population dynamics of saplings  and seedlings  in the vicinity of mature palms. evidence such as this was taken by previous authors to implicate falling palm fronds as major causal agents of mortality and selection in tropical forests  <cit> . however, when we attempted to exclude the confounding effects of frugivores by analysing still-large but immature  palm trees, we found no significant spatial signature, although there is some evidence of reduced growth of neighbouring saplings. this would suggest that large frugivores such as peccaries, and not falling fronds, are the more important cause of physical damage and mortality of seedlings and saplings in the vicinity of mature palms as they root around for fruit  <cit> , because we would expect falling fronds to have an equal effect around mature and immature palm trees.

we then tested these potential effects of peccaries by examining the spatial structure and population dynamics of seedlings and saplings around another important food source, the myristicaceae. most species of this family are large canopy trees  <cit>  and produce abundant crops of fruit that are eaten by peccaries  <cit>  among other frugivores  <cit> . unlike palms though, these trees do not have large heavy leaves that could damage seedlings and saplings beneath the canopy. furthermore, the family is dioecious and so we could compare fruiting female trees with non-fruiting male trees. however, we found no convincing evidence that the seedling and sapling communities near female myristicaceae were structured at all, and the significant population dynamic results we did find were in the opposite direction to that hypothesized.

why did we find these conflicting results? one possibility is that peccaries are not large consumers of myristicaceae fruit. it is known that peccaries consume a wide variety of species in tropical forests  <cit> . however, the abundance of each species in peccary diets is less well known  <cit> . peccaries may focus largely on palms and eat other fruit as and when they happen upon it  <cit> . arboreal frugivores such as toucans and primates will also likely have a large effect on the availability of fruit on the ground. further data on peccary and other frugivore diets are required. in addition, palm seeds likely remain attractive to peccaries  long after abscission because of their hard seed coat. myristicaceae seeds are not protected in this way and quickly decompose.

alternatively, there may be a difference in the pattern of abscission of palm and myrsticaceae fruit and the seed shadows these generate. palm fruits are held in a single infructescence at the top of the tree. these fruit then fall in rapid succession, creating a very dense carpet of fruit around the tree with a short dispersal tail  <cit> . animals rooting around in this small area will likely have a big impact on the juvenile plants growing there  <cit> . myristicaceae trees, on the other hand, have a much larger canopy, the fruit carpet is thinner and more spread out. animals foraging for fruit here will likely have a lower impact on juvenile plants.

a final possibility is our assumption that the fronds of mature and immature palms are equivalent does not hold, and that immature palm trees have lighter and/or smaller leaves that cause less damage to seedlings and saplings when they fall. we were not able to compare leaves from both types of palm trees to verify this, although iriartea leaves do change morphology throughout their life cycle  <cit> . furthermore, leaves falling from shorter immature palms will have lower velocity and might do less damage than leaves falling from the greater height of mature palms. finally, the size cut-offs determined by iriartea for mature and immature individuals might be different for other species. however, these species are much less abundant than iriartea and are unlikely to significantly influence our results.

implications for forest diversity and community structure
given the difficulties of reliably measuring seedling growth, it was not possible to repeat all three tests of dynamic data in both seedlings and saplings. growth and resprouting were analysed solely in saplings. however, it seems that significant mortality of seedlings occurs in the vicinity of palm trees, but that saplings can generally withstand physical damage caused by peccaries and/or palm fronds, and rather suffer reduced growth and can potentially resprout. this difference in mortality implies that different mechanisms are at work at different life history stages and that if seedlings can grow large enough, their fate is more secure  <cit> . the differences in spatial structure and sapling density around palms are therefore more likely to be formed at the seedling stage than the sapling stage. the small-scale repulsion of saplings  may be a consequence of the immediate negative effect of large palms on seedlings  and the large-scale effects  could be a long-term cumulative population dynamics effect that results from many generations of palms having a negative impact on nearby seedlings.

the impacts of palms on the forest structure are of smaller spatial scale than that hypthesized by peters et al.  <cit> , who suggested that the effect of palms extended out to  <dig> m and that at least a quarter of lowland forest could be impacted by falling palms fronds per year. we found significant negative effects of palm trees out to only  <dig> m  and  <dig> m . given the spatial pattern and density of palm trees in our plot, the area of forest predicted to be directly affected by this process is therefore reduced to 17%, although we noted above that these effects could multiply over generations leading to large areas of lower sapling density.

the negative impacts identified above appear limited to large palms and do not involve other fruiting trees such as the myristicaceae. we would conclude therefore that this process is not a disturbance that affects large swathes of forest . if the effect is limited to the environment of palms, this creates heterogeneity in the forest, which may lead to a wide variety of regeneration niches for species that can withstand the effects of falling leaves, fruit and rooting frugivores  <cit> . once established, however, these individuals may have better access to light and soil resources, given the diffuse nature of palm canopies and the large amounts of decaying fruit and animal faeces that likely accumulate around the base of palm trees. the stilt-roots of many arborescent palms probably increase nutrient availability by trapping leaves and organic matter.

this kind of widespread small-scale disturbance creates heterogeneity in regeneration niches in both space and time. fruiting and frugivory by peccaries is episodic, and palms generally mature one infructescence at a time. furthermore, in the aseasonal forest of yasuní, iriartea fruit production is not confined to a few months of the year . confoundingly, palm fronds are also produced regularly throughout the year. beck et al.  <cit>  found no difference in leaf-fall rates between two widely separated forests in peru. in seasonal sites such as yasuní, therefore, where seedling germination takes place throughout the year, some individuals may escape damage simply by growing enough before the next frond or infructescence falls. in more seasonal forests where germination is often restricted to short periods, individuals are of similar ages and/or vulnerabilities and so may suffer greater impact. a further test of our hypotheses could take place in seasonal forest and examine if seedlings and saplings suffer greater mortality during the fruiting season  or during the non-fruiting season .

the ubiquitous nature of the palm family in neotropical forests implies that given some effect, palm trees could be a powerful force structuring these forests  <cit> . several species of tree dominate large areas of lowland forests in western amazonia, and arborescent palms such as iriartea are among this 'oligarch' group  <cit> . widespread small-scale mosaics created by these palms may affect the composition of advanced regeneration for when a larger canopy gap does open. however, we note that peccaries are among the first large mammals to be hunted out of forest near to human habitation. hunting will likely have dramatic effects on forest structure  <cit> .

if reduced survival and growth around palms is predictable and selective, what can we hypothesize about species that occur in the neighbourhood of palms? species that are better able to survive damage by falling fronds or rooting peccaries would be more likely to survive in areas close to palm trees. from our community-level analyses we cannot identify traits of individual species. however, species with underground storage organs or cotyledons might find an advantage in germinating near to a large palm because of their increased resource availability allowing resprouting following damage  <cit> . we identified a number of species that had significantly higher or lower abundance around palms - identification of key functional traits of these species implicated by this pattern would be useful. an advantage might even apply to the seedlings of arborescent palm trees themselves, if they can survive predation and falling fronds. iriartea is one of the most widespread and abundant tree species in western amazonia. if iriartea seedlings can survive better in the adult zone of influence than the majority of non-palm species, this may go some way to explaining how such abundant populations can be maintained. future work should therefore look for more evidence of selection potential of the process that peters et al.  <cit> , beck et al.  <cit>  and we have identified. what species are selected for? does species diversity change predictably from seedlings to saplings? are there species that appear more frequently together in proximity to palms than in other parts of the forest? furthermore, a broader-scale comparison with other forests may be helpful. for example, the forests of se asia are not dominated by palms as are neotropical ones, and yet peccaries have a significant impact on seedling and sapling communities  <cit> .

palms themselves are not immune to the effects of branch falls  <cit>  and suffer negative density dependence  <cit> , caused by falling fronds  <cit> , peccaries  <cit> , and pathogenic fungi  <cit> . although palm trees significantly impact non-palms, the combination of falling fronds and peccary seed predation and fungal attack inhibit population growth such that palms may currently be at maximum density in the forest.

CONCLUSIONS
on a much larger scale then previously tested, we examined hypotheses that peccaries and/or falling palm fronds are major structuring forces of lowland neotropical rain forests. we found a restricted but significant direct effect of large arborescent mature fruiting palms on the spatial structure, population dynamics and species diversity of neighbouring sapling and seedling communities. these effects were not found in smaller non-fruiting palm trees. however, this evidence of a primary effect of peccaries on the seedling and sapling communities around palms was not supported in data from other edible species in the myristicaceae.

given the abundance of arborescent palm trees in amazonian forests, it is reasonable to conclude that their presence does have a significant, if spatially-restricted, impact on juvenile plants. the widespread effects of these small-scale disturbances appear, over long time-scales, to cause directional changes in community structure. however, the population growth of large arborescent palms themselves is very likely limited by the very same two factors that impact their surrounding juvenile plant communities.

