BACKGROUND
granulocyte colony-stimulating  factor is a secreted glycoprotein of  <dig> kda traditionally known as a hematopoietic growth factor stimulating the proliferation and differentiation of myeloid progenitors  <cit> . it is clinically used for the treatment of chemotherapy-associated neutropenia and for the mobilization of stem cells for bone-marrow transplantations. in addition to this hematopoietic function, we recently described important functions in the central nervous system , including anti-apoptotic properties on mature neurons, as well as a neurogenic function in adult neural stem cells  <cit> . g-csf and its receptor are widely expressed in the adult cns and induced upon cerebral ischemia. besides reducing infarct volumes in stroke, g-csf enhances long-term recovery after insults to the brain, which is linked to an increase in neurogenesis  <cit> . taken together, these data underline the clinical relevance of g-csf as a potential new drug for stroke and other neurodegenerative disorders .

g-csf and its receptor show a broad, mainly neuronal, colocalized expression throughout the murine brain  <cit> . beside the expression in pyramidal neurons in the cortex , the purkinje cell layer of the cerebellum, the hippocampus , the entorhinal cortex and the olfactory bulb, g-csf is also expressed in neurogenic regions in the adult brain: in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus and the subventricular zone. to see whether the expression in the nervous system of the adult organism had any correlation to embryonic expression of the receptor, we performed an expression pattern study of the g-csf receptor during cns development of the mouse embryo.

RESULTS
g-csf receptor expression outside the cns throughout development of the rat embryo
in order to analyze the g-csf receptor expression in the murine embryonic development, we performed immunohistochemical stainings. figure  <dig> gives examples of g-csf receptor expression outside the developing cns from e11–e <dig>  g-csf receptor expression can be found in vessels of the cardiac ventricle , of the intestine , of glomeruli in the kidney  and in the wall of blood vessels . moreover, the g-csf receptor is expressed in neurons of the upper cervical dorsal root ganglia , in nerve fibers and muscles of the tongue  and in the developing retina . receptor expression was also detected in muscle precursors  and muscles . in addition, its expression can be observed in the lens fibers of the eye .

identification of mrna expression of the g-csf receptor and g-csf in the developing cns
next we analyzed the g-csf receptor expression in the developing cns. we detected expression of the g-csf receptor and g-csf during murine embryonic cns development by reverse transcriptase pcr . in heads or brains of embryo development stages e <dig> – e <dig> and postnatal day  <dig>  pcr yielded the expected product sizes . g-csf and its receptor are detected as early as e <dig>  and are expressed continuously throughout p <dig> 

immunohistochemical localization of the g-csf receptor in the developing cns
by immunohistochemistry, the rna signal of the g-csf receptor at e <dig> corresponds to protein expression in the telencephalic vesicle of the e <dig> embryo . later in development we found g-csf receptor expression in other cns regions, for example in the developing spinal cord , in the hindbrain , in the olfactory bulb , in the diencephalon  and in the retina . cells with g-csf receptor expression commonly displayed long and fine processes, which pass through the neuroepithelial layer and terminate in small end feets at the pial surface . this morphology matches exactly that described for radial glia cells by ramón y cajal  <cit> . during postnatal development the radial glia scaffold decreases and the g-csf receptor is expressed in developing neurons .

in addition, we found g-csf receptor expression in structures of the peripheral nervous system such as the dorsal root ganglion and axon roots originating from the ventral spinal cord .

g-csf receptor and nestin co-localize in the e <dig> rat embryo
to further prove that the structures which express the g-csf receptor in the developing nervous system are radial glia cells, we performed co-immunofluorescence labeling with the stem cell marker nestin, which labels radial glia cells at these embryonic stages . figure  <dig> shows a complete overlap of g-csf receptor and nestin signals in cortex , diencephalon  and spinal cord  tissue.

discussion
the embryonic expression pattern of the g-csf receptor can be divided into three main categories. the first category with prominent g-csf receptor expression consists of blood vessels . expression in endothelial cells in the embryo is expected as the g-csf receptor is expressed in adult blood vessels, and g-csf has considerable effects on endothelial cell functions  <cit> . expression in blood vessels in the brain likely forms the basis for blood-brain barrier penetration of g-csf  <cit> , and for effects on g-csf-induced vascular remodeling after stroke  <cit>  or myocardial infarction  <cit> .

the second category with g-csf receptor expression is formed by muscles and their progenitors .

neurons represent the third category, where high abundance of g-csf receptor expression was observed in the rat embryo . broad neuronal expression of g-csf receptor and its ligand have been detected in the adult cns  <cit> . using rt-pcr, we detected embryonic expression of g-csf receptor and g-csf from e <dig> up to postnatal day  <dig> in the brain, respectively head of mice, consistent with the immunohistochemical detection. the embryonic expression pattern of the g-csf receptor in the cns is characterized by staining of elongated radial processes crossing through the developing neuroepithelium  and terminating in conical endfeet at the the pial surface . we identified these cells as radial glia because of their unique morphology and co-expression of the intermediate filament protein nestin   <cit> . because of their long processes, radial glia cells were originally interpreted as a transient scaffold upon which nascent neurons should migrate to their definitive positions  <cit> . in recent years, the view of radial glia cells as pure supportive cells has changed dramatically. they are now regarded as multifunctional cells involved in many aspects of brain and spinal cord development. one important feature of radial glia might be the involvement in cns regionalization. in hindbrain development for example, it has been shown that rhombomere boundaries are formed by radial glia cells in order to limit neuronal migration  <cit> . most intriguing however, is the recent perception that radial glia cells are the neuronal progenitors that generate neurons in the cerebral cortex  <cit> . the remaining adult neural stem cells found for example in the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle in the rodent forebrain are derived from the embryonic radial glial population  <cit> . this strong relationship between radial glia and adult stem cells is further highlighted by the fact that adult nscs can redifferentiate to radial glia  <cit> . the finding that the g-csf receptor is found on radial glial cells is therefore fully concordant with our data on the later expression of the receptor on adult neural stem cells  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
implications from our finding are threefold: first, it adds a further dimension to the presence of the gcsf system in the nervous system . second, it underlines the link between radial glial cells and adult neural stem cells where g-csf has functional relevance. third, our data provide a new and highly specific marker  for radial glial cells throughout cortical neurogenesis.

