BACKGROUND
classical scrapie  is a transmissible, chronic, neurological disease affecting small ruminants that was first described clinically in the 18th century  <cit> . it belongs to the group of diseases called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  together with, among others, bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle and creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in humans. cs has a worldwide distribution with the exception of australia and new zealand, which are usually recognized as free of cs  <cit> .

bse was first detected in  <dig>  <cit>  and the bse-agent is the probable cause of variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in humans  <cit> . sheep in europe have most probably been exposed to feed concentrates contaminated with the bse-agent  <cit> , and it cannot be ruled out that sheep might have been infected with bse in natural conditions. in experimental conditions, bse-infection can transmit horizontally between sheep  <cit> , if such transmission occurred in usual husbandry conditions, it is feared that bse-infection might persist in the sheep population with potential consequences for public health  <cit> .

because of this, the european union  introduced an active surveillance programme for tse in sheep from  <dig>  the surveillance programme targeted sheep older than  <dig> months, both those sheep routinely slaughtered in abattoirs  and those sheep either found-dead or killed but not intended for human consumption . a sample size was set for each target population in each country  <cit> . later, the sample size requirements varied with amendments to regulation ec 999/ <dig> in  <dig>  <cit> ,  <dig>  <cit> , and  <dig>  <cit> . eu member states could test above these minimum requirements and non-eu member states were free to establish their own objectives.

scrapie nor <dig> was first detected in sheep in norway in  <dig>  <cit> . after the introduction of the active surveillance programmes in eu, scrapie nor <dig> and tses in sheep designated "atypical scrapie" or "nor98-like" have been reported from several other european countries  <cit> . atypical scrapie  cases have been characterized by the distribution of pathological changes and deposits of the disease-associated isoform of the prion protein , which have been most prominent in the cerebellum. the prpsc has not been detected in peripheral tissues. the prpsc associated with as cases has a characteristic western blot profile  <cit>  and animals with specific prion protein  genotypes usually with the ahq or af141rq allele are associated with the occurrence of the disease  <cit> . in  <dig>  the european food safety agency  produced three documents, hereby used as reference. the first provided harmonised criteria to discriminate between as  and cs  <cit> . the other two documents evaluated submitted tests. they recommended the use of eight tests  and bio-rad tesee sheep/goat , idexx herdcheck bse-scrapie antigen test kit , enfer tse test v. <dig>  , inpro cdi- <dig>  institut pourquier scrapie test, prionics check lia small ruminants , prionics check wb small ruminants ) for the detection of cs on brainstem samples. for the detection of as, all tests above, except test d, could be used on cerebellum or cerebrum samples but only three rapid tests  were recommended for the detection of as in brainstem samples  <cit> .

in a norwegian case-control study, based on  <dig> cases and  <dig> controls, none of the risk factors that measure transmission of scrapie between flocks by movement of animals or animal-to-animal contact were significantly associated with the occurrence of scrapie nor <dig>  in great britain, a study found that the flocks associated with atypical scrapie had a higher size and dealt with more stock than control farms but no connection between atypical scrapie farms was found  <cit> . different authors have observed that one or two additional case of as have been found in only a few flocks in which all or most of the adult sheep in flock were examined for tses when culled due to the detection of an as  <cit> . although as was reported in  <dig> to be transmissible into mice transgenic for ovine prp  <cit> and into sheep  <cit>  in  <dig>  the epidemiological evidences cited above suggest either that as is not transmissible by direct contact between sheep, or that the transmission rate under natural conditions is low. due to this and because the distribution of prpsc has been limited to the cns, a spontaneous aetiology for as has been suggested  <cit> .

in  <dig> data on as were collected from  <dig> countries in a questionnaire-based study  <cit> . the results of this study showed firstly that 95% of as cases were detected by the bio-rad platelia/tesee rapid test  and secondly that the prevalence of as was more similar between countries than the prevalence of cs was. it was suggested that the differences in the prevalence of as might partly be explained by differences in sampling with regard to the surveillance streams and differences in the age structure or prp genotype distribution of the population. however, these hypotheses could not be tested due to lack of data.

the aim of this work has been to estimate and to compare the prevalence of as and cs in sheep for each country stratified by surveillance stream for the period 2002– <dig> 

RESULTS
participation
twenty-three replies were returned from  <dig> countries and the basque country of spain. three replies were excluded from the analysis because of missing information. data from the following  <dig> countries or region within a country  were included in the analysis: , belgium, cyprus, czech republic, denmark, estonia, finland, france, great britain, iceland, ireland, italy, lithuania, northern ireland, norway, portugal, slovenia, sweden, switzerland, the netherlands).

bias in the surveillance programmes
most countries  considered that animals tested within the healthy slaughter programme were representative of the slaughtered population, the other six considered that some biases could have occurred.

diagnostic tests used
the number of test results available and the type of diagnostic test used in active surveillance varied between countries. a total of  <dig> , <dig> tests results were reported. fifteen different diagnostic tests or combinations of tests were represented. test a was the most common. this was used in  <dig> countries and represented 50% of the total number of analyses. the second most commonly used was test b, which was used in eight countries and represented 23% of the total number of analyses .

tests associated with the detection of as case are in bold, tests recommended by efsa are underlined.

the large-scale active surveillance programmes started in 2002; although some countries started earlier in healthy slaughter  or in fallen stock  populations, it was decided to limit the analysis to surveillance data from  <dig> and onwards.

from  <dig> to  <dig>  56% of the samples in healthy slaughter and 42% of the samples in fallen stock were examined using test a. the overall use of tests recommended for the detection of as in active surveillance varied between countries  and with time. in  <dig>  ten countries  used test a; by  <dig> it was used by  <dig> countries . the proportion of samples examined by test a has also increased in countries that used several tests. in  <dig>  tests a, f and g were used for examination of 73% and 53% of the samples in healthy slaughter and fallen stock, respectively.

case detection
fourteen countries reported as cases. it was the only tse in sheep reported in four countries . five countries detected cs cases only. most  of the as cases and 43% of the cs cases were detected by test a .

classical scrapie prevalence estimates
the annual national cspe for each surveillance stream, for which the number of tests exceeds  <dig>  is presented in figure  <dig> to figure  <dig> . due to higher values of the cspe in slovenia and due to lack of separation of as and cs cases in data from cyprus the estimates from these countries are reported in separate figures .

for each year and country in which at least one cs case was detected, and more than  <dig> animals were tested, the cspe in healthy slaughtered animals varied from  <dig> ‰  in switzerland in  <dig> to  <dig> ‰  in northern ireland in  <dig> . the cspe in fallen stock varied from  <dig> ‰  in norway in  <dig> to 22‰  in slovenia in  <dig> . cspe was null in  <dig> country-years and  <dig> countries did not detect any cs case.

atypical scrapie prevalence estimates
fourteen countries reported as cases and it was the only tse in sheep reported in four countries. the annual national prevalence estimates of as  for each surveillance programme are presented in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> 

for each year and country in which at least one as case was detected and more than  <dig> animals tested, the aspe in healthy slaughtered animals varied from  <dig> ‰  in switzerland in  <dig> to  <dig> ‰  in great britain in  <dig> and the aspe in fallen stock varied from  <dig> ‰  in norway in  <dig> to  <dig> ‰  in great britain in  <dig>  aspe was null in  <dig> country-years and  <dig> countries did not detect any as case.

variability of classical scrapie prevalence estimates
the cs prevalence was significantly higher in fallen stock than in healthy slaughter in seven countries according to logistic regression models . six countries had detected cs but without significant difference in the cspe between streams. out of these, cs cases had been detected in three  only occasionally. the prevalence in fallen stock was higher than in healthy slaughter in belgium, although not significantly so  and the prevalence in fallen stock was lower than in healthy slaughter in two countries .

non-statistically significant results were not displayed.

the detection of cs cases also varied with time. in seven countries , cs cases were not detected in every year, in switzerland one case was found during the single year of surveillance. there was time-dependent variability of the cs prevalence in five countries, including cyprus for tse positives in the healthy slaughter population only, and ireland in the fallen stock only. the trend was a decrease with time in all countries except italy and great-britain. the results of the chi-square linear trend test were consistent with the results of the logistic regression model, except for italy where the trend was significant in healthy slaughter  but not in fallen stock .

variability of atypical scrapie prevalence estimates
no significant difference between the streams was found in ten countries that detected atypical scrapie . in four countries, the as prevalence was significantly higher in fallen stock than in healthy slaughter .

in seven countries  as cases were not detected in every year. no time-dependent variability of the as prevalence was found using logistic regression with adjustment on surveillance stream and time, parameterised as a categorical variable. however, there were some discrepant results depending on the parameterisation of the variable time. significant time dependant effects were found when time was set as a continuous variable or using the chi-square test for linear trend: significant decreases were found in france in healthy slaughter , in great britain in fallen stock , in norway in fallen stock  and an increase in portugal in healthy slaughter .

comparison of atypical scrapie and classical scrapie prevalence estimates
differences between the aspe and the cspe were found in six countries . in france and great britain, the aspe was less than the cspe in fallen stock. for the other countries with a significant difference, the aspes were greater than the cspes. the countries where no significant difference was found had relatively less samples tested than the other countries. the ors could be calculated in both surveillance streams for four countries. in these countries, the ors in the healthy slaughter stream were higher than the ors in fallen stock. in particular, the probability  of detecting an as case  was three to six times higher among healthy slaughter animals compared to fallen stock.

non-statistically significant results were not displayed.

probability to detect at least one case of as
if one expects a country aspe to be similar to the average european aspe, this prevalence could be estimated by the ratio of the total number of as cases detected by test a, f or g over the total number of tests a, f or g, which was  <dig> ‰ for the  <dig> respondent countries.

the sensitivity of the surveillance programme can be simulated to range from 50% to 100%.

a numerical example  shows that given the number of samples examined with tests a, f and g in estonia  and in lithuania  the probability that no case is detected , even with a perfect sensitivity of the surveillance programme  is higher than 5% .

comparison of the age of the cases
data on the age of  <dig> cases detected in healthy slaughter, fallen stock and tse eradication programmes were provided by  <dig> countries. as cases were reported in all classes of age over  <dig> months  and they were older than cs cases in healthy slaughter  and in fallen stock . also, there was no significant difference between the age of as cases in healthy slaughter and fallen stock  although cs cases were older in healthy slaughter than in fallen stock .

description of the genotype of the cases
eighteen countries provided the prp genotype of  <dig> cases detected in healthy slaughter and fallen stock .

the distribution of the allele frequencies  between as and cs cases was different in healthy slaughter  and fallen stock . in both streams, the frequency of arr and ahq carrier was higher in as cases than in cs cases and the frequency of vrq carriers was lower in as cases than in cs cases. the allele frequency in the two surveillance streams was similar for as . in contrast the allele frequencies differed for cs  with more arr carriers and less arq carriers in healthy slaughter compared to fallen stock.

discussion
this study of the active surveillance for ovine tses in  <dig> european countries has produced estimates of the detected prevalence of both cs and as over the time period  <dig> to  <dig>  with respect to the surveillance stream. this extends previous studies on scrapie prevalence in europe which have either been limited to one region or country  <cit>  or have not discriminated between cs and as  <cit> .

the capacity to determine the presence of either type of scrapie infection will depend on the true prevalence of disease and on several aspects of the surveillance programme. these are firstly, the ability to detect scrapie infection  with the use of an appropriate screening test; secondly, the ability to confirm that diagnosis with relevant confirmatory tests; thirdly, the number of samples tested, and fourthly, the design of the surveillance programme. the latter includes many components from the structure of the sampled population to the sampling methodology used.

the detection of atypical scrapie – appropriate tests
the finding that the detection of as was associated with the use of test a is consistent with the previous results presented by nöremark et al.  <cit>  and case reports from france  <cit> , germany  <cit> , great britain  <cit> , ireland  <cit> , norway   <cit> , portugal  <cit> , spain  <cit>  and sweden  <cit> . the tests recommended in the efsa evaluation account for an increasing proportion of the total screening tests used . it probably explains why as cases have now been detected in the basque country , denmark, finland, iceland, italy, and the netherlands, in addition to the eight european countries where the disease has been previously reported  <cit> . neither ireland nor slovenia had used screening tests recommended for the detection of as and as was not reported via active surveillance in these countries. two as cases have, however, been reported from ireland through the surveillance of clinical cases  <cit> , which demonstrates that as is present within the irish sheep population. we observed that in two countries, test h and a modified version of test b have detected two as cases each out of  <dig>  and  <dig>  tests respectively. however according to the trials organised by the efsa  <cit> , these tests could have a lower sensitivity, and by the end of  <dig> they were still used on a limited scale compared to tests a, f or g which may explain why they were less frequently associated with the detection of as case.

probability to detect at least one case of as
estonia and lithuania have regularly used test a but have not reported any case of as. however, in these countries the total number of samples tested with screening tests recommended for the detection of as is still relatively low. if as is present at the estimated european average as prevalence, estonia has more than a five per cent chance of not yet detecting as, whilst for lithuania this chance exceeds  <dig> per cent. therefore, as is not necessarily absent from these populations, but might have remained undetected by chance because sufficient numbers of appropriate tests have not yet accrued.

the confirmation of atypical scrapie
most countries reported that their diagnostic capacity to confirm as was established in  <dig>  some countries then retrospectively confirmed inconclusive diagnostic screening test results from previous years. these cases have been included when calculating the as prevalence estimates. if not all samples with inconclusive results were retested, it could lead to an underestimation of the prevalence of as.

cyprus, is experiencing an epidemic of cs  <cit> . discriminatory tests performed on  <dig> cypriot tse cases detected through tse eradication programmes have not found any as . although these samples are from outbreaks and are biased towards cs, we consider it probable that the majority of tse-cases in cyprus are cs. therefore, we find it justified to compare the prevalence estimates on tse cases in cyprus with the prevalence estimates of cs from other countries. nevertheless, the presence of as cases cannot be ruled out.

the prevalence of scrapie 
at less than nine per thousand animals tested in either surveillance stream from the majority of countries, both types of scrapie can be considered as rare diseases. the exceptions are slovenia, which has a slightly higher prevalence  of cs in the fallen stock stream, and cyprus for tses. the latter is a small, enclosed population with high connectivity that is in the throes of a  recent scrapie epidemic  <cit> .

in four countries  as cases were detected through the active surveillance programme, in the absence of any case of cs in sheep. the upper limit of the confidence intervals of the prevalence estimates of the cs in these countries suggest that if the disease exists it occurs at a very low level, yet one cannot conclude freedom of the disease. the single case of cs found in  <dig> in norway after five years of active surveillance and  <dig>  samples tested illustrates that cs could remain undetected by the current surveillance programmes for a long time, as during the same period four cases of cs were found through passive surveillance. this is probably due to a low overall sensitivity of the surveillance programmes. a lack of sensitivity of test a to detect cs cases in vrq allele carriers such as suggested by  <cit>  could be part of the explanation. however, in countries using different tests in parallel, the cspe did not vary with the nature of the test used .

under-estimation of prevalence estimates
active surveillance for the estimation of the apparent prevalence of infection of scrapie will always be an under-estimate of the true prevalence of infection. this is due to the long incubation period and the current absence of a detectable early marker for infection. furthermore, even if the sheep tested within the healthy slaughter population are thought to be representative of the slaughtered population, this does not equate to the standing population. for example, in great britain the healthy slaughter population has been used to estimate the prevalence in the national flock  <cit> . differences in the age structure of source and sampled population could be a source of bias that could not be ascertained in the absence of reliable data.

the evaluation of eu agreed diagnostic tests  <cit>  did not include quantification of their sensitivity, which may differ from test to test. the overall sensitivity will be dependent on the stage of the disease and some infected sheep will remain undetected  <cit> . the same may be true for the screening test used on cspe  <cit> .

the estimation of the prevalence of as is further complicated by the different tissue distribution of prpsc compared to cs. the efsa evaluation of small ruminant tses tests estimated the capacity to detect nor <dig> cases in cerebrum samples  <cit> . the obex is the tissue that is usually analysed in active surveillance programmes, as it is the site used for the discriminatory testing of tses in sheep to exclude bse. the presence of prpsc in the obex is not a consistent finding in as, whilst the cerebellum is a site of increased deposition. existence of cerebellum fragments in brainstem samples might explain the positive results for some cases  <cit> . although the inclusion of a sample from the cerebellum has been recommended since january  <dig>  <cit>  it is not mandatory to test it. the inclusion of cerebellum fragments in the samples analysed will thus increase the likelihood of the detection of as in that sample. if systematic differences in application of this existed between laboratories, the prevalence estimates of as might be biased.

comparison of the prevalence of a scrapie-type between surveillance streams within a country
higher prevalence estimates of scrapie in the fallen stock stream when compared with the healthy slaughter stream have been reported previously  <cit> . this may be due to increased mortality amongst scrapie-infected sheep associated with their scrapie-status i.e. scrapie-infected sheep are less likely to survive to be submitted for healthy slaughter. however, in  <cit> , as cases were not distinguished from cs cases. in our study this situation was observed for cs in eight countries, and in cyprus for all tse positive cases. in the six other countries, no difference between streams was observed, which might be due to a lack of power to detect a difference, if it exists, due to the small sample sizes.

prevalence estimates of as were higher in the fallen stock stream than in the healthy slaughter stream in four countries . this was not the case, however, in four other countries  where there was a difference observed for the prevalence of cs. whether this reflects a true difference, or absence of difference, is difficult to ascertain. depending on countries, it may reflect selection biases in the submission and collection of fallen stock schemes, and/or different farming and slaughter practices. alternatively, it could be explained by differences in the age structure between the surveillance streams within a country. no difference was, however, observed in the age structure in countries where it could be tested . for both types of scrapie, small sample sizes may have also explained the absence of observed difference between streams. the ratios found, of as to cs for the prevalence estimates in each of the surveillance streams, could represent an actual difference in france, great britain and italy, where large number of animals have been tested and cases of either disease are regularly found. if an actual difference does exist, one possible explanation could be a higher age at onset of clinical as i.e. sheep become sick closer to the end of their commercial lifespan.

variation in the scrapie-type specific estimates within a surveillance stream over time
in our study, decreases in the prevalence estimates for cs over time were observed in four countries and for the ovine tses prevalence estimate in cyprus. this could result from a variety of factors. these include the effect of genetic selection based on prp genotype and the reduction of sources of infection . such reduction echoes results of studies that evaluated control strategies based on mathematical models  <cit> .

in most countries, time was not a significant factor for aspe. in france and great britain the observed trends in aspe could be spurious due to increased number of tests in  <dig>  the discrepant outcomes between the cochran hermitage test and the logistic regression are more likely to occur with unbalanced counts  <cit> . the tests that found significant effect in time assume a linear variation of the prevalence which is not obvious. in addition, when the time variable is parameterised as categorical, the estimates of the coefficients of each year should be ordered in case of monotonic variation; this was not the case. the changes in the surveillance programme design in  <dig> could have resulted in selection bias, for instance, since the number of tests increased in the second half of the year, the age distribution of animals tested in  <dig> could be different compared to other years. in norway, the decreased prevalence in fallen stock could be due to selection biases  and/or changes in the age structure of the sampled population. in portugal unreported changes may have occurred in slaughterhouse operations; all slaughtered sheep were supposed to be sampled, yet the number of tests increased from  <dig>  in  <dig> to  <dig>  in  <dig>  this would represent a  <dig> per cent increase in the slaughter throughput, over the two years period. in these four countries trend would need to be confirmed by future observations.

genetic variability
it has previously been reported that the role of prp genetics differs in as compared to cs. in the latter the risk of developing clinical scrapie is greater for those sheep with the vrq/vrq, arh/vrq, arq/vrq and arq/arq genotypes when compared with those that carry the ahq and arr alleles  <cit> . there is little work published on the relative risks of infection  <cit> , although genotype-specific prevalence estimates by screening test have been published for the early british active healthy slaughter stream  <cit> . what makes as so remarkable is the involvement of alleles usually associated with low to negligible risks of clinical scrapie  <cit> . the case data in the current study are consistent with these previously reported findings, it also exhibits the rarity of cases in animals carrying the vrq allele.

the impact of the genetic structure of the tested sheep populations could not be assessed here. although results from surveys on genotype from healthy population were provided and/or published  <cit> , information on the codon  <dig> is required when considering the risk of as.

age
clinical scrapie is generally thought to occur most frequently in two to five year old sheep  <cit> . analysis of surveillance data gave a mean age at death between  <dig> and  <dig> months of age  <cit>  for clinical cases in the usa, and a peak incidence in three to four year old animals in great britain  <cit> . the high numbers of cs cases in the 18– <dig> months and 36– <dig> months categories,  for those culled in eradication programmes and fallen stock, observed in our study are consistent with these published findings. the different profile for the age of cs cases in the healthy slaughter population most probably reflects a different underlying age distribution. i.e. an older population from which cs cases have already been lost, either as clinical cases, fallen stock, or culling activities. in contrast, in our study, there is no 18– <dig> months old peak for as cases; only an increase in numbers with age in the healthy slaughter and fallen stock populations. this is similar to findings reported from a german study  <cit> . whether the difference between the age distributions of cs and as is a function of survival, genotype, incubation period or age susceptibility remains to be established.

bias in the surveillance programmes
the main potential for bias was the over-representation of certain flocks and possible geographical biases due to sampling rates applied in the different regions  <cit> . in addition, diagnostic laboratories in different regions in some countries used different tests, including those not recommended to detect as. in some countries, there was the potential for seasonal bias either because of a change in the use of the tests during the year or, for  <dig>  because data did not cover the full year. for example, seasonal differences in the numbers submitted could bias the prevalence estimates if there were differences in the age distribution, or the breed of animals submitted that was related to the annual pattern of production, and if age or breed was associated with the outcome – a positive test result. however it is difficult to ascertain how such biases would influence the results without a dedicated study for each country.

in many countries, collection of fallen stock was voluntary or had been only recently organised on a compulsory basis. it was, therefore, expected that an important, but unknown, number of sheep that died on farms were not submitted for sampling. difficulties to organise a proper tse surveillance in small ruminants and especially in fallen stock was already stressed by the scientific steering committee in charge of this matter  <cit> . the inclusion of animals that originated from known infected farms was reported in france   <cit>  and in ireland . in france, the decreasing trend observed in fallen stock for the cspe is still significant for the period  <dig> to  <dig>  in norway, where there was no rendering plant, dead animals were reported to veterinary officers and tse suspects animals were preferentially sampled. this could contribute to the explanation of the higher chance to detect as in fallen stock.

demographic differences
in both surveillance streams, demographic differences in the ovine population, especially those based on age and prp genotype could influence prevalence estimates. no reliable data are currently available to standardise these figures, which is why no between countries comparison was performed. if such demographic data were collected then it might be possible to compare active surveillance data between countries. these limitations in the data also apply to data collected during tse eradication programmes; age and prp genotype denominator data are vital. here, seven countries reported that they had detected more than one case in the same farm, but we have no further information on the monitoring activities or the characteristics of these farms.

comparison of the prevalence of atypical and classical scrapie within countries
comparison of estimates of the prevalence of as and cs is a complex issue. firstly, the potential biases in the structure and implementation of the surveillance programmes, including the challenges of the diagnosis of as can affect the result. secondly, each country has its own scrapie history with respect to its presence, introduction, establishment and control activities. thirdly, some differences might not have been detected because of only a limited number of tests or of cases.

in two countries – portugal and sweden – where scrapie was not reported for decades or was never reported, there was an increased chance to detect as, compared to cs. so it could be considered that if cs were present, notwithstanding selection biases in the surveillance programme, it existed at an extremely low level. in contrast, in three countries where cs exists and there have been a large number of tests – france, great britain and italy – there was higher chance to detect cs in the time period studied, compared to as in fallen stock. it was also the case in the netherlands when comparison was done upon tests b modified and h. in both france and great britain, however, there was increased chance to detect as in the healthy slaughter stream.

for france, great britain and italy, the method used to test the differences between the scrapie-type prevalence estimates was not ideal since it assumes an absence of interaction between disease and time. this was not the case as the trend in time was found to be statistically significant, but did not have a strong slope. hence, the methodology might not be sufficiently robust for these conditions.

the ors of the two types of scrapie by stream provides a way to measure if the two streams of surveillance within a country have similar outcomes and if some general pattern could be observed across countries such as france, great-britain, norway and portugal. however, the values of these ors depend on more than one factor and similar results could come from different patterns. first, it depends on the contrast between as and cs in each stream, the later being more frequent in fallen stock, secondly it is supported by the fact that cs is more frequent in fallen stock than in healthy slaughter. eventually, it could indicate an higher probability of detecting as instead of cs in the healthy slaughter stream compared with fallen stock. this could be due to some confounding effects. the different age distribution within the two streams, for instance, may account for that since as mostly affects the eldest animals. a lower diagnostic sensitivity for as in fallen stock could also contribute to that result, however such artefact has so far never been described from diagnostic reports on as.

from our study, it would appear that as is present wherever the capacity to diagnose it exists and a sufficient number of samples have been appropriately tested. in some countries that have no or an extremely low prevalence of cs infection, as exists at a low, constant and homogenous prevalence between streams and countries. in other countries that have a more substantial prevalence of cs, , as occurs, again at a relatively homogeneous prevalence. the homogeneity of the prevalence of as in populations in which there are such variations in the prevalence of cs in populations would suggest that the aetiology and/or epidemiology of the two scrapie-types differ. the homogeneity of the prevalence estimates for as provides support for the argument that it is not an infectious process; this would require the same conditions of transmission to exist in the different countries and for them to be different from the conditions of transmission of cs. yet, these data do not exclude an infectious process in which the transmission of as occurs at a low level especially since low prevalence rates hinder observation of differences. in addition, differences in the design of the surveillance programmes or in the structure of the sheep populations, especially with respect to age and genetic, could hide actual differences in the estimates of the prevalence of as and since data was absent this could not be assessed.

CONCLUSIONS
the neuroprion task group on epidemiology of as collected data on active surveillance of tses in sheep between  <dig> and  <dig> from  <dig> european countries. this has provided the first opportunity to compare the epidemiological situation of cs and as simultaneously in different countries. this descriptive study has shown that the prevalence estimates of cs and as have different patterns; the prevalence of cs has more variation than that of as, which is remarkably homogenous. since some biases and differences between countries were reported but not quantitatively assessed, it might be argued that the observed differences in the patterns of the prevalence of as and cs are due, at least in part, to such biases. however, it would be unlikely that biases in different countries would consistently reduce the variability of aspes and not those of cspes. if complementary data becomes available, further analysis could explore some of the differences between countries, e.g. through adaptation of meta-analysis  <cit> .

