BACKGROUND
many cellular processes depend on proteins being targeted to specific subcellular localisations. as a result, information about the subcellular localisation of a protein can provide important insights into its function. conversely, knowledge about which proteins are targeted to a specific subcellular localisation can lead to a better understanding of the functions of a particular compartment of the cell. this can be particularly interesting in an evolutionary context. for example, mitochondria and chloroplasts have evolved from being enslaved organisms, engulfed by a host cell, to become specialised cellular compartments integrated into the functioning of the host cell  <cit> . identification of proteins that are targeted to these organelles can provide clues as to how these organelles evolved.

a large variety of methods have been developed to predict the subcellular localisation of nuclear encoded proteins. pattern recognition methods which have been most favoured are hidden markov models   <cit> , neural networks   <cit>  and support vector machines   <cit> . bayesian methods  <cit>  and fuzzy k-nearest neighbour algorithms  <cit> , linear discriminant analysis   <cit> , position weight matrices  <cit>  and rule based systems  <cit>  have also been proposed. all subcellular localisation prediction methods use various approaches to interpret the intrinsic information present in protein sequences. the composition of amino acids within the polypeptide sequence or the composition of peptide sequences of fixed length   <cit> , sequence profiles  <cit> , physio-chemical parameters like hydrophobicity, charged residues and isoelectric points as well as details about the secondary structure like amphiphilic alpha helices, membrane regions and the orientation of n- and c-terminal ends are taken into account  <cit> .

the majority of subcellular prediction programs search for n-terminal targeting peptides since these sequences are common in proteomes  <cit> .

the heterokonts are a diverse evolutionary group that includes diatoms, brown algae, and oomycete plant pathogens such as potato late blight  <cit> . the plastids of the photosynthetic members of this group are thought to be derived from a secondary endosymbiotic event involving a red alga and a eukaryotic heterotroph . the enslavement of the endosymbiont involved alterations to its structure and most of the endosymbiont's genes were transfered to the host nucleus or lost  <cit> . as a result, present day heterokonts possess plastids with a complex structure. these organelles are surrounded by four concentric membranes and the nuclear-encoded proteins that function in these plastids have to be transported into the organelle through these four membranes. this is mediated by bipartite, n-terminal targeting sequences consisting of a leading signal peptide followed by a chloroplast transit peptide . kilian and kroth  <cit>  have identified a conserved motif  at the cleavage site of the signal peptide in heterokont plastid targeted proteins. this motif includes the alanine  residues at positions - <dig> and - <dig> relative to the cleavage site that are commonly found in all signal peptides  <cit> . the phenylalanine  residue just after the cleavage site is highly conserved, it occurs in almost all heterokont chloroplast targeted proteins, being only rarely replaced by tryptophan, tyrosine or leucine  <cit> . the asafap motif was shown to be essential for import into the plastid in experiments that involved transforming the diatom phaeodactylum tricornutum with constructs encoding modified plastid target peptides fused to green fluorescent proteins   <cit> .

we show here that the unusual structure of heterokont plastid targeting sequences causes problems for currently available subcellular prediction methods that have been designed to predict the subcellular localisations of proteins from other eukaryotic groups such as animals, fungi and green plants. to overcome this difficulty, we have created a new method that is specifically designed to predict the subcellular localisation of heterokont proteins.

RESULTS
shortcomings of existing prediction tools when applied to heterokont chloroplast targeted proteins
to determine how well existing subcellular localisation prediction methods perform on chloroplast targeted proteins from heterokonts, we submitted  <dig> experimentally verified sequences  to four widely used subcellular prediction methods: targetp  <cit>  , predotar  <cit>  , predsl  <cit>   and ipsort  <cit>  . these methods assign proteins to one of four different subcellular localisations: the secretory pathway, based on the presence of a signal peptide, the chloroplast or the mitochondrion, based on the presence of the respective transit peptides, or to none of these three localisations, based on the absence of a detectable n-terminal targeting sequence. as expected, these prediction methods erroneously assigned a significant proportion of the chloroplast proteins to the secretory pathway . in addition, predotar failed to detect the presence of a target peptide in a significant number of proteins, and some proteins were falsely predicted as being targeted to the mitochondrion by three of the four methods. in contrast, we were able to show that the signal peptide component of the bipartite chloroplast targeting sequences was efficiently recognised by methods that have been developed to specifically distinguish proteins with signal peptides  from non-secreted proteins. the four methods tested, phobius  <cit>  , predisi  <cit>   and both the neural network and hidden markov model versions of signalp  <cit>   , identified the signal peptide component of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of the  <dig> heterokont chloroplast proteins, respectively. based on this result, we decided to create a method that would be able to efficiently recognise the bipartite chloroplast targeting sequences of heterokonts by searching for each of the two components of this structure in a step by step manner.

the subcellular localisation predicting algorithms targetp, predotar, predsl and ipsort were used to analyse  <dig> heterokont chloroplast targeted proteins. for targetp we declared a protein as possessing no n-terminal target peptide if the highest category support probability was less than  <dig> .

a hierarchical procedure to recognise heterokont chloroplast targeting sequences
the heterokont subcellular localisation targeting method  has a hierarchical architecture consisting of three decision modules . each module is dedicated to the identification of one or two specific n-terminal target peptides. altogether, four target peptides can be predicted: signal peptides, type ii signal anchors, chloroplast transit peptides and mitochondrion transit peptides. the absence of any detectable target peptide represents a fifth category. the decision module at the root of hectar  differs from the two other modules in that it discriminates between three categories: n-terminal signal peptides, type ii signal anchors and proteins without either of these target peptides. type ii signal anchors resemble secretory signal peptides but have a longer n-terminal hydrophobic region which is able to span the membrane. type ii signal anchors are not cleaved. their function is to anchor proteins in the membrane. the n-terminus of a type ii signal anchor protein is located in the cytoplasm  whilst the c-terminus projects into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum or is on the outside of the cell   <cit> .

the first decision module of hectar identifies signal peptides and type ii signal anchors by combining the predictions of phobius, predisi, signalp_nn and signalp_hmm. hmmtop  <cit>   and tmhmm  <cit>   can detect the long hydrophobic regions which characterise signal anchors and were therefore also incorporated into the decision process. if hectar predicts a type ii signal anchor, the category for this protein has been found. otherwise, if a signal peptide is detected, the protein is further analysed to determine whether the signal peptide is a component of a chloroplast targeting sequence. to do this, hectar first searches for the asafap motif around the predicted signal peptide cleavage site . hectar then cleaves the signal peptide based on the signal peptide cleavage site predicted by phobius, predisi, signalp_nn and signalp_hmm. the truncated protein sequence, lacking the signal peptide, is then analysed by the "chloroplast targeted" module which determines whether a chloroplast transit peptide is present at what is now the n-terminal end of the protein sequence. the chloroplast targeted module combines the calculated score for the appearance of the asafap motif with the output of the plant versions of predotar, ipsort and predsl. initially, we also considered integrating chlorop  <cit>   into this module. however, this method predicted a chloroplast localisation for many secreted proteins after the leading signal peptide had been removed . if a chloroplast transit peptide is detected by the "chloroplast targeted" module, the protein is classified as being chloroplastic, otherwise it is labelled as being part of the secreted pathway. going back to the root of the hierarchy, if no signal peptide/anchor is detected at this level, the protein sequence is fed to the module that identifies mitochondrion targeted proteins. this module combines the predictions of mitoprot <dig>  <cit>   and the non-plant versions of targetp, predotar, ipsort and predsl. if a mitochondrion targeting sequence is detected, the protein is classified as mitochondrial, otherwise, it is assigned to the default category "no n-terminal target peptide", indicating that it is located in the cytosol or subcellular compartments where protein targeting does not require a n-terminal target peptide.

use of support vector machines as an ensemble method for detecting target peptides
since the early sixties, and more precisely since the work of bates and granger  <cit> , model combination has proved to be an efficient alternative to model selection for a wide range of statistical inference problems. theory in the field has made rapid strides, first in the framework of regression, and more recently in discrimination. the success of methods such as bagging  <cit>  and boosting  <cit>  has highlighted the usefulness of implementing large margin ensemble methods to improve the performance of weak classifiers. as mentioned above, programs that predict the subcellular localisations of proteins are based on different principles, and therefore provide complementary information . this is why hectar was designed to combine the output of selected prediction methods at each node of the hierarchy . we chose to use svms for this task. this choice was based on the usefulness of large margin models to combine classifiers, and on the fact that svms have already proved very efficient to combine prediction methods in the field of protein sequence processing . the "signal peptide/anchor" module discriminates between three categories. for this module, the multi-class svm  of weston and watkins was used  <cit> . the kernel of the svms incorporated in the "signal peptide/anchor" module and the "mitochondrion targeted" module is a radial basis function , the one for the "chloroplast targeted" module is linear. this choice was based on preliminary test results . for each of the three svms, an optimal subset of the outputs of the base classifiers was selected to constitute the set of predictors. this selection was performed based on the biological significance of the outputs.

assessment of the prediction accuracy of hectar
a set of reference proteins was established for each of the five categories of subcellular targeting predicted by hectar . the entire set comprised  <dig> secretory path proteins,  <dig> type ii signal anchor proteins,  <dig> heterokont chloroplast targeted proteins,  <dig> mitochondrion targeted proteins and  <dig> nuclear/cytosolic proteins. a five-fold cross-validation procedure was applied to this set to assess the prediction accuracy according to two criteria: the recognition rate and the pearson's/matthews' correlation coefficients   <cit> .

in our data set, the proportions of type ii signal anchor proteins, chloroplast targeted proteins and mitochondrion targeted proteins are  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively. this implies that the training sets of the three svms are highly unbalanced, which could a priori have a negative influence on the accuracy of the prediction. based on this observation, we decided to assess the usefulness of reducing the number of negative examples in the different training sets.

to identify the optimal ratios of examples from the largest categories in the training sets of the three svms, we introduced a second level of cross-validation . the criterion optimized was the mcc . in these procedures, sampling without replacement was used to select a number of examples from the two larger sets ranging from the number of examples of the smallest category to its maximum possible value . for each svm and each value of the ratio, five different sets of negative examples were sampled. it appeared that the prediction accuracy was systematically increasing with the size of the training set. as a consequence, no example was discarded in any of the training sets of the five-fold cross-validation.

confusion matrix of hectar predictions obtained by five-fold cross-validation. each line represents one specific category of subcellular targeting. the columns indicate the categories of subcellular targeting predicted by hectar.

additional testing of hectar using proteins with known subcellular localisations
we established an additional set of proteins whose experimentally-determined subcellular localisations corresponded to one of the five categories predicted by hectar. this data set included one mitochondrion targeted protein, the tim <dig> subunit protein from phytophthora infestans, and a number of proteins of the cryptophyte guillardia theta. cryptophytes are a sister group to the heterokonts, and they are also believed to be derived from a secondary endosymbiosis event involving a red alga  <cit> . like heterokonts, cryptophytes possess complex chloroplasts and chloroplast targeting is mediated by a bipartite target peptide consisting of an n-terminal signal peptide followed by a chloroplast transit peptide. chryptophyte chloroplast targeting peptides possess an asafap-like motif , with a highly conserved phenylalanine, at the signal peptide cleavage site  <cit> . ten cryptophyte proteins that have been shown experimentally to be targeted to different subcellular localisations were analysed by hectar. these included one cytosolic, three secreted proteins and two categories of chloroplast targeted proteins. the first were proteins that are targeted to the interior of the cryptophyte chloroplast  whereas the second corresponded to proteins that are targeted to the periplastid space between the second and third  chloroplast membranes   <cit> . proteins targeted to the periplastid space possess a bipartite target peptide but they do not have a conserved phenylalanine after the signal peptide cleavage site. it has been demonstrated that this phenylalanine residue is essential for a protein to be transported further into the chloroplast  <cit> . table  <dig> shows that hectar successfully identified the presence of signal peptides in the proteins that enter the secretory pathway. it also correctly predicted the subcellular localisation of the mitochondrial proteins, the cytosolic protein and the proteins that are targeted into the interior of the cryptophyte chloroplast. the proteins that are targeted to the periplastid space of the cryptophyte chloroplast were predicted to be either secreted or chloroplastic. this is not surprising because hectar has not been designed to identify this class of targeting sequence. this analysis confirmed the reliability of the predictions produced by hectar and demonstrated that it can also accurately predict the subcellular localisation of proteins from organisms such as the cryptophytes that belong to groups other than the heterokonts but possess complex plastids derived from a secondary endosymbiosis event.

hectar was applied on eleven proteins with known subcellular localisation.

analysis of putative fucus distichus secreted proteins using hectar
belanger et al.  <cit>  used a yeast signal sequence trap  screen to identify secreted proteins potentially involved in asymmetric zygote cell growth in the brown alga fucus distichus. the putative secreted proteins identified in this study included several probable chloroplast proteins such as fucoxanthin a/c-binding binding proteins  and the authors suggested that these may have been bona fide chloroplast proteins that were recognised by the yeast secretion machinery as secreted proteins due to their n-terminal signal peptide. to test whether hectar could distinguish between the secreted and the chloroplast proteins in this data set, we selected the protein sequences that were at least  <dig> residues long and applied a redundancy reduction . the remaining  <dig> f. distichus putative secreted proteins were analysed by hectar. of the  <dig> proteins,  <dig> were predicted to possess a n-terminal signal peptide . no target peptide was found in two of the proteins . the sst procedure has been shown to select a small percentage of non-secreted proteins as false positives  <cit> . this occurs because these proteins possess a short region that shares some similarity with signal peptides at their n-terminal end. bu <dig> and bu <dig> may belong to this category. the analysis by hectar suggested that nine of the  <dig> proteins with a signal peptide also possessed a chloroplast transit peptide, indicating that these proteins are targeted to the chloroplast. comparison with the genbank non-redundant protein database  using blastp allowed putative functions to be assigned to  <dig> of the  <dig> fucus proteins . blastp searches with the other  <dig> proteins either returned matches with proteins of unknown function or did not find any matches in the database. additional searches were carried out against published heterokont genomes, and using the pfam database, but no additional functional information was obtained for these proteins . the putative functions of the  <dig> proteins which matched proteins with functional information in the database were consistent with the subcellular localisations predicted by hectar.

hectar was applied on putative secreted fucus distichus proteins. the localisations predicted by hectar as well as the details of blastp searches against the ncbi non-redundant protein database  are listed. only matches were taken into account with an e-value of less than  <dig> .

hectarsec
hectar has been designed to predict the subcellular localisation of heterokont proteins. as a result, it cannot be used to determine the subcellular localisation of proteins from green plants because their chloroplast targeting peptides consist of a single unit, the chloroplast transit peptide. however, because signal peptides and type ii signal anchors have a similar composition in all eukaryotes  <cit>  and hectar has been trained on target peptides from across the eukaryotic tree, the "signal peptide/anchor" module can be used to identify these two types of target peptides in a protein from any eukaryotic organism. we call this version of hectar, consisting of only the "signal peptide/anchor" module, hectarsec . a five-fold cross-validation of hectarsec showed that it predicted the presence of signal peptides and type ii signal anchors with a high  accuracy and that with mccs of  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>   .

confusion matrix of hectarsec predictions obtained by five-fold cross-validation. each line represents one specific category of subcellular targeting. the columns indicate the categories of subcellular targeting predicted by hectarsec.

CONCLUSIONS
to date, complete genome sequences have been published for three heterokonts: the diatom thalassiosira pseudonana  <cit>  and two oomycete plant pathogens  <cit> . in addition, genome sequencing has been completed or is nearing completion for several other heterokont species, including the diatoms phaeodactylum tricornutum, fragilariopsis cylindrus and pseudo-nitzschia, the oomycetes phytophthora infestans and phytophthora capsici, the pelagophyte aureococcus anophagefferens, the chrysophyte ochromonas danica and the brown alga ectocarpus siliculosus. this rapidly increasing availability of sequence data for the heterokonts brings with it a need for specialised bioinformatics tools to identify genes and to make predictions about the characteristics of the encoded proteins. hectar addresses one aspect of this problem, the prediction of the subcellular localisation of heterokont proteins. we have shown that hectar fulfills this function with high efficiency using cross-validation and by further tests with additional proteins from several species including the cryptophyte guillardia theta and the brown alga fucus distichus.

in its present form, hectar can discriminate between four types of target peptides. however, because of its modular architecture, it could easily be adapted in the future to identify additional types of target peptides. these could include sequences that direct proteins to more precisely defined subcellular compartments  or regions within the protein sequence such as membrane-spanning domains or nuclear localisation signals.

