BACKGROUND
opioid ligands possess a variety of physiological activities and medical uses, with the most prominent being in the treatment of pain. pharmacological studies indicate that selective μ-opioid agonists are effective antinociceptive agents in virtually every test of analgesia  <cit> . however, at their analgesic doses, μ-opioid receptor agonists can induce ventilatory depression  <cit>  and the development of physical dependence  <cit> . delta opioid receptors have been reported to modulate analgesia, autonomic nervous system function, neuroendocrine system function, and mood driven behaviors  <cit> . activity of κ-opioid receptors modulate spinal antinociception  <cit> . mu and κ – but not δ-opioid receptors modulate ventilatory depression  <cit> . thus each class of opioid receptors represents an important drug target to investigate.

a major medical application of opioid ligands has been as potent analgesics. however, untoward effects associated with opioids limit their wider use for analgesia. numerous opioid ligands have been synthesized with the promise of effective analgesia and minimal side-effects; however this goal has yet to be realized. the studies leading to the synthesis of novel opioid ligands have relied on research in animals or tissues expressing multiple opioid receptors. thus, characterization of the activity profiles for these opioid ligands at individual opioid receptors has only been possible after the cloning of opioid receptors. such information is essential to the design of a new generation of opioid analgesics that would exhibit diminished side-effects.

we have previously characterized fifteen opioid ligands in cells expressing only δ-opioid receptor  <cit>  or μ-opioid receptor  <cit> . the present study was devised to characterize the activity of these same opioid ligands in a cell line expressing only κ-opioid receptors. the ligands were chosen based on our previous model tissue data suggesting that they bind to all three opioid receptor types  <cit>  and some display differential activation profiles in vivo at each of the opioid receptor types  <cit> . thus, the present study was designed to achieve the following goals;  to describe the activation profiles of a set of opioid ligands not previously defined in an isolated cell system expressing only κ-opioid receptor using inhibition of forskolin-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity in intact cells, and  to compare the intrinsic activities of these drugs to the known κ-opioid receptor agonist with very high intrinsic activity, fentanyl, and the endogenous κ-opioid ligand, dynorphin. the results obtained from this study can serve to clarify the categorization of each of the ligands studied as an agonist, weak/partial agonist or antagonist at κ-opioid receptors. moreover, these results demonstrate the interaction of each drug with a single receptor type at the molecular level. finally, these results, together with our previously published data on these ligands at μ and δ opioid receptors, help define the activity of these ligands at all three opioid receptor types.

RESULTS
the binding affinity and activation potency of fifteen opioid ligands were assessed in hek cells stably expressing κ-opioid receptors.

binding assays
to further investigate the activity or affinity of selected ligands at κ-opioid receptors, competition binding assays against a radiolabeled ligand were performed using cell homogenates from transfected cells. human embryonic kidney  cells were transfected with mouse cdna for κ-opioid receptor. these cells do not normally express endogenous κ-opioid receptors, as demonstrated by a lack of binding to the radioactive -u <dig>  . individual hek clones expressing single opioid receptor types were propagated and used for the experiments presented here. expression level of the selected clone was  <dig> ±  <dig> fmole/mg protein. similar levels of expression have been reported for these receptors in neurons  <cit>  and for other transfected cells expressing this receptor  <cit> . competition binding studies were carried out for each ligand in the presence of -u <dig> . all ligands studied exhibited ki values in the nanomolar range. the rank order of affinity of these ligands was; cyclazocine > naltrexone ≥ skf  <dig> ≥ xorphanol ≥ win  <dig>  > nalorphine > butorphanol > nalbuphine ≥ lofentanil > dezocine ≥ metazocine ≥ morphine > hydromorphone > fentanyl.

activation assays
overall, a range of intrinsic activities and potencies were observed for the different ligands at κ-opioid receptor . butorphanol, cyclazocine, etorphine, fentanyl, hydromorphone, lofentanil, metazocine, morphine, nalorphine, skf  <dig> and xorphanol were full agonists. these ligands inhibited forskolin-stimulated camp production to the levels that were not significantly different from the inhibitory levels of the endogenous ligand dynorphin. naltrexone, dezocine and win  <dig>  behaved as an antagonist . these ligands exhibited little or no measurable inhibitory effect on forskolin-stimulated camp production when used alone and were able to block the inhibitory effect of  <dig> nm etorphine . finally, nalbuphine exhibited partial agonist activity at these receptors. statistical analysis of the differences between the intrinsic activities of different ligands was carried out to distinguish the full agonists from the partial agonists. based on these analyses, there was no difference in the intrinsic activity of any of the agonists compared to both dynorphin and fentanyl , except for nalbuphine, which had significantly lower intrinsic activity . thus, nalbuphine is a true partial agonist at κ-opioid receptors . nevertheless, if these ligands were to be ranked based on their absolute level of activity, irrespective of statistical significance, their rank order of intrinsic activity would be fentanyl = lofentanil ≥ hydromorphone = morphine = nalorphine ≥ etorphine ≥ xorphanol ≥ metazocine ≥ skf  <dig> = cyclazocine ≥ butorphanol > nalbuphine. finally, as seen in figure  <dig>   <dig> nm win  <dig>  could antagonize the effect of etorphine, and  <dig> μm of win  <dig>   <dig> completely antagonized the effect of  <dig> nm etorphine.

effective concentrations of opioid ligands in inhibiting forskolin-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity were measured as described under "materials and methods". data for ec50's represent the mean ± sem obtained from two or more experiments carried out in duplicate. maximum inhibition data represent the mean ± sem obtained from the best fit curve for data from two or more experiments carried out in duplicate. all compounds denoted as antagonists completely reversed the effect of  <dig> nm etorphine. the effect of  <dig> nm etorphine in inhibiting camp production was 50–60% of maximum etorphine effect. lofentanil and fentanyl had the highest intrinsic activity among the ligands tested. relative intrinsic activity of the ligands were also compared to that of the putative endogenous ligand for κ-opioid receptor, dynorphin . all three ligands, lofentanil, fentanyl and dynorphin had similar intrinsic activity. the intrinsic activity of each ligand relative to fentanyl  and the endogenous ligand dynorphin was determined. statistical significance was calculated for the inhibitory effect of each ligand in comparison to fentanyl and dynorphin. . statistically significant difference  relative to fentanyl or dynorphin suggested that the test ligand was a partial agonist compared to both reference ligands. the binding affinity of each ligand was measured by competition assays. the ki for each ligand in denoted in the table.

nd = not determined

* = p <  <dig> 

discussion
a complex interaction between various opioid receptors exists as they modulate various physiological functions. understanding these complex interactions requires a thorough understanding of the activation pattern of individual opioid receptors. available data on the activation profiles of the test ligands relative to each specific opioid receptor were found to be either sparse or involved various systems and cell lines, thus making meaningful comparisons between affinities, intrinsic activities and potencies across various studies unreliable. the present study utilized a cell system that allowed for the expression of κ-opioid receptor subtype. previously, these ligands were characterized in the same expression system expressing μ or δ-opioid receptors  <cit> . thus, this data combined with the data reported in the last two reports can be used to compare the relative selectivity of these same ligands at the three different opioid receptors expressed in the same cell system.

a well-defined receptor expression system was used to characterize the activity of a set of opioid ligands and to compare the intrinsic activities and potencies of these ligands at κ-opioid receptors. the main advantage of using transfected hek cells for this study is that these cells do not contain endogenous κ-opioid receptors, but express the g proteins necessary for the proper coupling of the transfected cdnas to the respective second messenger systems. a well established method for assessing g-protein activation by opioid receptors and characterizing activity of opioid ligands is measuring the extent of inhibition of forskolin-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity  <cit> . adenylyl cyclase has been implicated in playing a role in mediating the analgesic effect of opioid ligands through μ-opioid receptors  <cit> . thus, characterizing the ability of opioid ligands to inhibit camp production, such as described in this report, could be used as an index for assessing their activity as a correlate of their analgesic effects. moreover, a simple well-defined system, such as the one used in this study, can be very beneficial in describing the mode of action of each ligand at a specific receptor. although hek cells are not neuronal in nature, and might be devoid of some of the intracellular machinery present in the body, nevertheless they serve as a useful tool for such studies on a single receptor. furthermore, it is understood that once applied to the whole animal in vivo, the overall effect of the drug will be a composite of the effects of the drug on all receptor types interacting with it. in addition, the pharmacokinetic parameters, such as metabolism, tissue absorption and distribution of the drug will play a major role in the overall drug effect in vivo. the present set of ligands exhibited a range of intrinsic activities and potencies. the drug with the highest intrinsic activity was fentanyl, supporting previous in vivo studies describing fentanyl as a highly potent and efficacious analgesic drug  <cit> . in the present study, the intrinsic activity of lofentanil was equal to that of fentanyl. nalbuphine was the only ligand that showed significantly lower intrinsic activity compared to fentanyl and dynorphin. the low intrinsic activity of this ligand combined with its high binding affinity to κ-opioid receptors  suggest that nalbuphine can potentially act as competitive antagonists at the κ-opioid receptors in vivo. while the ec <dig> of this compound in inhibiting camp production is in micromolar range, based on the nanomolar binding affinity, the concentration of this compound required to block the activity of agonists  in vivo could be much lower.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this report describes a detailed comparative study of the binding affinities and inhibitory effects of a set of opioid ligands on the accumulation of camp in intact cells expressing κ-opioid receptors. the intrinsic activities of these ligands have been compared to that of the endogenous opioid ligand, dynorphin, and the ligand identified in this study as having the highest intrinsic activity, fentanyl. moreover, this report serves to clarify the activity of many previously un-characterized ligands in cells expressing only κ-opioid receptors, thus leading to a better understanding of the mechanism of action of these drugs.

