BACKGROUND
mollusks are the second largest animal phylum with more than  <dig> described extant species and are grouped into eight classes: solenogastres or neomeniomorpha, caudofoveata or chaetodermomorpha, polyplacophora, monoplacophora, bivalvia, gastropoda, cephalopoda, and scaphopoda . morphology-based classifications consider neomeniomorpha and chaetodermomorpha as the earliest branching lineages within mollusks because they lack many typical features of mollusks, among which the most conspicuous is the shell  <cit> . whether they form a monophyletic group named aplacophora  <cit>  or a paraphyletic grade  is still a matter of debate  <cit> . some authors  place polyplacophora  as sister group of conchifera , forming the clade testaria. alternatively, the aculifera hypothesis proposes a sister group relationship of polyplacophora and aplacophora, suggesting that the aplacophoran morphology was secondarily modified from a chiton-like ancestor  <cit> . phylogenetic relationships within conchifera are also far from settled due to the highly derived morphologies within each class-level grade, which hinder the discovery of morphological synapomorphies across lineages  <cit> . the traditional morphology-based hypothesis groups together bivalvia + scaphopoda  and cephalopoda + gastropoda   <cit> .

earlier molecular studies based on partial sequences of one or few genes revealed important phylogenetic inference biases, and failed to recover the monophyly of mollusks and/or of several main lineages within the group  <cit> . the first studies analyzing the relative phylogenetic position of monoplacophora  <cit>  also rendered a surprising result in recovering the group as closely related to polyplacophora, forming the taxon serialia, which is in disagreement with most morphological evidence  <cit> . more recently, attempts to reconstruct the phylogeny of mollusks were based on concatenated matrices spanning many genes. a study  <cit>  based on  <dig> ribosomal protein genes recovered the monophyly of the phylum and of all five mollusk classes included in the analyses . however, recovered interclass relationships, although highly supported, were rather unconventional, with bivalvia and gastropoda being sister group to polyplacophora, and this clade being sister group to cephalopoda and chaetodermomorpha  <cit> . the latest phylogenetic studies based on seven housekeeping genes  <cit> , and on genomic-scale data sets spanning  <dig>  <cit>  and  <dig>  <cit>  genes, respectively, recovered monophyletic mollusca, aplacophora, and aculifera, thus rejecting the testaria hypothesis. one of these studies included monoplacophora, which was placed within conchifera, thus providing no support for the serialia hypothesis  <cit> . interestingly, phylogenomic studies  <cit>  arrived at highly supported but contrasting conchiferan interclass relationships. while both studies support a basal position of cephalopoda , one favors a clade composed of gastropoda and bivalvia  whereas the other groups together gastropoda and scaphopoda  <cit> .

during the last decade, complete mitochondrial  genomes have become a standard for phylogenetic reconstruction of animal relationships  <cit> . although the number of completely sequenced mollusk mt genomes has increased considerably in the last few years, the majority belong to the most common and economically important mollusk classes i.e., cephalopoda  <cit> , bivalvia  <cit> , and gastropoda  <cit> . in addition, there are reported three polyplacophora, katharina tunicata  <cit>  and two sypharochiton species  <cit> , and two scaphopoda, siphonodentalium lobatum  <cit>  and graptacme eborea  <cit>  mitogenomes . the only published study  <cit>  that has applied thus far whole mt genome data for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships of mollusks failed to recover the monophyly of mollusca and of many mollusk classes due to long branch attraction  artifacts. the authors concluded that representatives from all mollusks classes and a denser taxon sampling of most diverse lineages could render a more resolved mollusk interclass phylogeny, and that mt gene order data could become a promising source of phylogenetic information  <cit> .

in this paper, we present the complete mitochondrial genome of scutopus ventrolineatus, a representative of the supposedly early-branching limifossoridae within chaetodermomorpha. we performed comparative genomic analyses with other available mollusk mt genomes with the specific aim of addressing the evolution of gene order arrangements among the main lineages within the phylum. in addition, we used generated mt sequence data to infer phylogenetic relationships of mollusks, and in particular to test the validity of traditional morphology-based hypotheses that place chaetodermomorpha at the base of the mollusk tree. finally, we concatenated mt genomes with publicly available nuclear sequence data in trying to maximize statistical support of the reconstructed mollusk phylogeny.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genome organization and structural features
the complete mt genome of scutopus ventrolineatus was assembled as a 14662 bp circular molecule. like most metazoan mt genomes, it encodes for  <dig> protein-coding,  <dig> trna and  <dig> rrna genes . the major strand encodes  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes , cob, nad <dig>  nad <dig>  trnl, trnl, rrns, trnm, trnc, trnq, trny, rrnl, trnv, trng, trnw). most protein-coding genes start with the codon atg with the exception of atp <dig>  which begins with gtg. several genes show complete stop codons, either taa  or tag . the remaining genes finish with either ta  or a single t , which presumably become functional stop codons by subsequent polyadenylation of the transcribed messenger rnas  <cit> . four genes overlap with contiguous genes: cox <dig> with trnd; atp <dig> with atp6; nad <dig> with trnh; and nad4l with nad <dig>  the largest noncoding region has 47 bp, and it is located between trnw and trne genes.figure  <dig> 
mitochondrial gene order of
scutopus ventrolineatus. protein-coding , rrna  and trna  genes are shown. arrows indicate sense of transcription. genes have standard abbreviations and are not scaled to real length. s <dig>  s <dig>  l <dig>  and l <dig> designate genes for those trnas recognizing the codons agn, ucn, cun, and uur, respectively. figure modified from the output of the mitos pipeline  <cit> .



the gene order arrangement of the mt genome of s. ventrolineatus was compared with the mt genome organization in other mollusks. the unpublished mt genome of the chaetodermomorph c. nitidulum is the closest to compare, but it is 40% longer , and shows a duplication of the cox <dig> gene, as well as large non-coding regions . in addition, several trna genes ) are reordered and two ) are encoded on opposite strands when compared to the mt genome of s. ventrolineatus . since the mt genome organization of s. ventrolineatus conforms to the mollusk consensus gene order , it would be important to determine the origin of the highly divergent mt genome of c. nitidulum, and discard putative sequencing or assembly errors.

compared with other mollusks, the mt gene order of s. ventrolineatus is very similar to those of polyplacophora, cephalopoda and basal lineages of gastropoda  . there are no differences in the relative position of protein-coding genes, but the rrnl gene is translocated in scutopus mt genome with respect to the above-mentioned lineages . other differences are found in the relative position of several trna genes; in particular trnd, trne, and trnn are highly rearranged among mollusk lineages . the representative of an early-diverging lineage of bivalvia  also retains this gene order although a large inversion has occurred affecting a stretch including atp8-atp6-nad5-nad4-nad4l . hence, our results allow us to propose a consensus ancestral mollusk gene order for mt protein-coding and rrna genes . only few translocation and inversion events are required to transform this consensus mollusk gene order into the genome organizations reported for other spiralia, particularly phoronida, brachiopoda, nemertea, and entoprocta . the conversion to the genome organization of annelida requires postulating additional translocations and inversions  <cit> . in scaphopoda, the mt gene order is rather different to that of other mollusks, both in graptacme  and siphonodentalium  <cit> . in graptacme, only the nad6-trnp-nad <dig> and the nad5-nad4-nad4l arrangements are conserved, whereas gene pairs that are normally conserved in other metazoan mt genomes  are not found . new complete mt genome sequences of more  lineages within scaphopoda are needed in order to determine whether scaphopoda ancestrally conformed or not to the consensus ancestral mt gene order of mollusks. within gastropoda and bivalvia, highly derived mt genome organizations can be found due to extensive gene rearrangements  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
mitochondrial gene rearrangements between different mollusk classes. genes encoded by the opposite strand are underlined. inversions  and transpositions of protein-coding, trna and rrna genes are depicted among the different taxa. genes located in apomorphic arrangements are colored. the consensus protein-coding gene order of mollusks, and those of selected spiralian mt genomes are depicted. genes have standard abbreviations and are not scaled to real length. s <dig>  s <dig>  l <dig>  and l <dig> designate genes for those trnas recognizing the codons agn, ucn, cun, and uur, respectively.



phylogenetic relationships within mollusca
despite its popularity, phylogenetic inference based on complete mt genomes has important analytical challenges. in fact, reconstructing the monophyly and phylogenetic relationships of mollusks using solely mt genome data proved to be difficult. a first issue was finding the appropriate outgroup. most recent phylogenies of spiralians place mollusks within the clade trochozoa, which also includes annelids, nemerteans, brachiopods, and phoronids  <cit> . among available mt genomes of spiralians, we selected representatives from one non-trochozoan spiralian  and all trochozoan phyla. another important problem was lba due to among-lineage rate heterogeneity. several ingroup lineages, notably bivalvia, scaphopoda, and patellogastropoda , exhibited long branches that produced considerable inference biases , and they had to be excluded in further phylogenetic analyses. at least in several bivalves , the occurrence of doubly uniparental inheritance  of the mt genome  <cit>  has been proposed to cause higher substitution rates and thus faster saturation of the phylogenetic signal, hampering their use in reconstructing deep phylogenies. in addition, neomeniomorpha and monoplacophora could not be incorporated into the phylogenetic analyses because complete mt genomes are not available for these lineages thus far. finally, due to the relatively high substitution rates of mtdna, saturation is another major issue affecting the reconstruction of deep nodes based on mt markers. here, we opted to analyze mt data at the amino acid level to reduce the effect of saturation.

the mt data set included  <dig> and  <dig> positions before and after sites of ambiguous positional homology were discarded. the fact that 44% of the initial length of the alignments was excluded by gblocks suggests that mt genome amino acid sequence data have complex evolutionary patterns at higher levels of divergence, which would produce phylogenetic reconstruction biases if conflicting positions were not removed. ml  and bi  arrived at relatively different trees . in ml, the monophyly of mollusca is recovered with low bootstrap support whereas in bi, brachiopoda + annelida are recovered with maximal posterior probability support as sister group of chaetodermomorpha + polyplacophora, rendering mollusca non-monophyletic. within mollusks, the clades aculifera and conchifera received maximal posterior probability support in bi and low  bootstrap support in the ml analysis. the phylogenetic analyses failed to recover the monophyly of gastropods due to a lba artifact  between roboastra + micromelo  and scaphopoda, both in ml and bi. this clade is the sister group of remaining gastropods with low bootstrap support in ml or of cephalopods with maximal posterior probability support in bi .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic relationships of main mollusk lineages based on complete mt genome data. the reconstructed ml  and bi  trees are depicted, inferred from a concatenated data set of mt protein coding genes at the amino acid level . numbers above nodes correspond to bootstrap proportions  and bayesian posterior probabilities . hyphens  indicate values below 70% bootstrap support.



recently, two phylogenies of mollusca have been reconstructed based on large concatenated data sets of hundreds or thousands of nuclear gene fragments  <cit> . here, we selected nuclear genes from those matrices that minimized missing data and maximized taxon coverage to resolve the question at hand. the partial deduced amino acid sequences of  <dig> nuclear ribosomal protein genes  were aligned for  <dig> outgroup taxa and main mollusk lineages . the concatenation of ribosomal proteins yielded an alignment of  <dig> positions after removal of ambiguous sites. phylogenetic analyses under ml  and bi  recovered similar topologies that only differed on the relative position of the neritimorph theodoxus  and on the closest sister group to mollusks  . in both ml and bi, aplacophora and aculifera were recovered as monophyletic , although with low support . in contrast, both phylogenetic analyses failed to recover the monophyly of conchifera because cephalopoda was placed as sister group of aculifera  . in both ml and bi, bilvavia was recovered as sister group of scaphopoda + gastropoda in agreement with  <cit> . interestingly, scaphopoda and lottia showed relatively long branches, which clearly classify them as rogue taxa, showing extremely fast evolutionary rates for both mt and nuclear genes;  <cit> . the reconstructed trees based on the nuclear data set improved previous results obtained from ribosomal nuclear protein  <cit>  and the 18s rrna gene  <cit> , which recovered cephalopoda as the sister group of chaetodermomorpha or neomeniomorpha, respectively. however, our reconstructed trees resemble those based on housekeeping genes  <cit>  that also placed cephalopoda a sister group to aculifera. the odd placement of cephalopoda here and in the above-mentioned studies  <cit>  contradicts the general agreement placing cephalopods within conchifera  <cit> . this might be a tree reconstruction artifact produced by lba biases generated by the inclusion of relatively distantly related spiralian phyla in the outgroup.figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic relationships of main mollusk lineages based on nuclear ribosomal protein data. the reconstructed ml  and bi  trees are depicted, inferred from a concatenated data set of nuclear ribosomal proteins. numbers above correspond to bootstrap proportions  and bayesian posterior probabilities . hyphens  indicate values below 70% bootstrap support or  <dig>  bayesian posterior probabilities. since our phylogenetic analyses were focused on the order level or above, and in order to maximize the completeness of the nuclear data set, sequences from related species/genera/families/superfamilies  were merged in some instances.



although with a different lineage sampling and species representation, the mt and nuclear data sets rendered rather congruent trees with several nodes in common. therefore, we concatenated the nuclear and mt data sets. the phylogenetic analyses of the combined  data set  under ml  and bi  arrived at very similar topologies that only differed in the relative position of bivalvia and scaphopoda . the monophyly of aplacophora, aculifera and conchifera were recovered both by ml and bi . the corresponding nodes received relatively high support except conchifera in ml and aplacophora in bi . in ml and bi, cephalopoda and cephalopoda + scaphopoda were recovered as sister group of the remaining analyzed conchiferan classes, respectively . in ml, gastropoda was recovered as sister group of bivalvia + scaphopoda, whereas in bi bivalvia was placed nested within gastropoda, rendering the latter non-monophyletic . these results agree with most recent phylogenomic studies  <cit>  in the basal position of cephalopoda within conchifera, and favor either a close relationship of gastropoda and bivalvia to the exclusion of scaphopoda  <cit>  or the classical diasoma hypothesis uniting bivalvia and scaphopoda  <cit> . it is noteworthy that the reconstructed phylogeny based on the combined data set differs from the nuclear-based tree indicating that addition of mt data has a significant  contribution to the overall phylogenetic inference. furthermore, previously encountered lba artifacts when mt data was analyzed alone  were ameliorated in the combined analysis.figure  <dig> 
mitochondrial and nuclear combined evidence on mollusk phylogeny. the reconstructed ml  and bi  trees are depicted. numbers above nodes correspond to bootstrap proportions  and bayesian posterior probabilities . hyphens  indicate values below 70% bootstrap support or  <dig>  bayesian posterior probabilities. since our phylogenetic analyses were focused on the order level or above, and in order to maximize the completeness of the combined data set, sequences from related species/genera/families/superfamilies  were merged in some instances.



CONCLUSIONS
reconstructing the monophyly and internal phylogenetic relationships of mollusca based on molecular data has been challenging over the years. earlier studies were mostly based on partial gene sequences with insufficient informative characters to reconstruct robust and resolved trees  <cit> . recent phylogenomic studies  <cit>  based on concatenated nuclear genes have produced well-resolved trees. however, comparison of these trees showed some contradicting but highly supported nodes. another alternative is to investigate phylogenetic information contained in complete mt genomes. a first attempt to use whole mt genome data for clarifying the relative phylogenetic position of mollusks within bilaterians was not satisfying  <cit> . our phylogenetic analyses reveal that the use of mt genome data for reconstructing the internal phylogenetic relationships of mollusks is flawed by the existence of high heterogeneity of evolutionary rates among lineages. in particular, the mt genomes of bivalvia and lottia introduce detrimental lba biases. after removing taxa that exhibit long branches in the phylogenetic analyses, mt data are capable of recovering the monophyly of each aculifera, and conchifera, in agreement with nuclear data . moreover, our analyses indicate that the phylogenetic performance of mt and nuclear data improves when both are combined. at present, the complete mt genomes of several important mollusk lineages  are still missing, and the possibility of finding mt genomes with lower substitution rates in bilvalvia and patellogastropoda needs to be further explored. it is foreseeable that the addition of these additional mt genomes will improve phylogenetic analyses. in parallel, gapped regions in nuclear genomic data sets will be increasingly reduced allowing in combination with mt data the reconstruction of a robust tree of mollusca. such a robust phylogenetic hypothesis has been long-needed as the framework for evolutionary comparative studies within this highly diversified metazoan phylum.

