BACKGROUND
apple scab caused by the hemi-biotrophic ascomycete venturia inaequalis  wint. is one of the most serious diseases of apple  worldwide, causing huge economic losses. scab infection leads to deformation in the shape and size of fruits, premature leaf and fruit drop, and enhances susceptibility of the tree to chilling and freezing injuries  <cit> . currently, multiple applications of fungicides are required for effective control in commercial orchards planted with susceptible cultivars. depending on the year and region, as many as  <dig> to  <dig> fungicide treatments may be necessary in one season to control the disease. for apple orchards in france, pesticide treatments costs account for about 10% of the fixed production expenses, representing a substantial cost per kg of apple   <cit> . this intensive use of fungicides in orchards raises ecological problems and human health concerns in addition to the economic cost.

an effective alternative to chemical control is the use of scab-resistant apple cultivars. phenotypically, the effect of resistance genes against v. inaequalis has been showed to cover a continuum from complete immunity to near-susceptibility depending on genetic background, pathogen and environment  <cit> . despite the great deal of gray area between the extremes  <cit>  hampering the classification of some genotypes, apple scab resistance is often qualified either as complete, when the pathogen growth is fully inhibited , or partial, when the resistance allows limited but significantly reduced pathogen growth as compared to a susceptible genotype . based upon the extent of pathogen growth and nature of symptoms, chevalier et al.  <cit>  classified the macroscopic foliar symptoms into four classes; classes from  <dig> to  <dig> are categorized as resistance responses while class  <dig> is considered to be a susceptible response. it is usually referred that complete resistance is determined by major resistance gene  while incomplete resistance involved multiple genes or loci of partial effect .

r genes, typically providing high levels of resistance, are relatively easy to manipulate. for these reasons, they were extensively used in both basic research and applied breeding programs. to date, at least  <dig> major scab resistance genes have been identified and mapped across nine linkage groups of the apple genome  <cit> . for more than 50 years, one of these r genes, the rvi <dig>  gene from malus floribunda  <dig>  has provided effective resistance against apple scab by allowing a reduction of 75% in the number of fungicide treatments  <cit> . nevertheless, the use of single r gene-mediated resistance for crop protection is hampered by a lack of durability, particularly with pathogens having high evolutionary potential, as with v. inaequalis <cit> . this ephemeral nature of r gene-mediated resistance is highlighted by the recent emergence of some races of v. inaequalis that are virulent on cultivars carrying the widely-deployed rvi <dig>  gene  <cit> . in contrast to major genes, the performance of partially resistant cultivars in the orchard is a function of the gene effects and spectra, which is thought to be more durable than single r gene-mediated resistance  <cit> . this durability could be explained by the smaller effects of partial resistance that result in a lower selection pressure on the pathogen and/or its presumed broader spectrum. also, because partial resistance is controlled by multiple genes, pathogen isolates that overcome one of the genes would gain only a marginal advantage  <cit> . in apple, partial resistance has been mapped as qtls to  <dig> out of the  <dig> linkage groups of the genome .

extensive efforts have been made to clone and characterize major scab r genes, and the downstream responses that they trigger have become better understood. r genes typically encode proteins that recognize pathogen effectors or modifications of plant proteins that are targets of those effectors  <cit> . in this respect, the rvi <dig>  resistance locus revealed the presence of a cluster of four resistance gene paralogs , similar to the tomato cf resistance gene, encoding leucine-rich repeats receptor-like proteins   <cit>  and the rvi <dig>  was reported to contain three tir-nbs-lrr genes  <cit> . the function of all these genes was analyzed and only two of them, hcrvf <dig> <cit>  and vr2-c <cit>  for rvi <dig> and rvi <dig>  respectively, were proven to be functional against v. inaequalis. literature is not in agreement on vf1a  function  <cit> . recognition of v. inaequalis by these proteins triggers downstream defense reactions involving putative lrr receptor-like protein kinases  <cit>  and several defense-related proteins, such as b- <dig> -glucanase, ribonuclease-like pr- <dig>  cysteine protease inhibitor, endochitinase, ferrochelatase, and adp-ribosylation factor  <cit> . methallothionein may also play a role in plant defense against v. inaequalis as it is present in large amounts in the apoplast of the rvi <dig> cultivar ‘remo’. finally, recent publications explored the network of defense response triggered in rvi <dig> -transformed apple plants using wide genome expression techniques, such as the pcr-based suppression subtractive hybridization and the dhplc for cdna- amplified fragment length polymorphism  transcript profiling  <cit> . these studies gave new insight into the understanding of the plant pathogen-interaction that results in complete scab resistance. nevertheless, the function of genes underlying the qtls for partial apple scab resistance remains unknown. they are believed not to be based on pathogen recognition systems, as it is the case with most major r genes, but the possibility cannot be excluded  <cit> .

the partially resistant apple cultivar ‘président roulin’ is an old belgian cultivar that is used in apple breeding programs of the walloon agricultural research center  to broaden genetic apple scab resistance, and therefore reduce the risk of resistance breakdown. under heavy scab infection, this cultivar shows typical resistance symptoms of chlorosis and necrosis with only slight sporulation . its resistance against v. inaequalis has been durable for over 25 years in scab evaluation in different orchards of the cra-w in belgium without any fungicide treatment  <cit> . the partial resistance has been shown to be polygenic, but highly heritable  <cit> .

in this study we investigated the defense response of ‘président roulin’ by identifying genes differentially expressed between this cultivar and the susceptible ‘gala’ cultivar after pathogen challenge. for this purpose, cdna-aflp technology was chosen as it allowed a survey of transcriptional changes with no prior assumptions about which genes might be involved in the plant response  <cit> . this technique constitutes a robust solution for differential display, detecting changes in gene expression between samples, and it has been successfully applied in several quantitative expression studies in apple . the genes identified in this study were annotated and sorted into gene ontology  categories. comparisons were then made with various malus x domestica libraries: two est libraries from uninfected young expanding leaves  <cit>  and a cdna library from an apple susceptible line transformed with the major scab r gene rvi <dig>   <cit> . common as well as different defense pathways were revealed and are discussed. finally, we checked for co-localizations of our differentially expressed genes with resistance gene analogues , qtls and mapped r genes for apple scab resistance published in the literature.

RESULTS
fungal development across post inoculation time points
microscopic observations revealed no significant difference between ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’  for pathogen development at the early stages of infection. this comprises conidia germination, formation of appressoria and cuticle penetration . on both cultivars, conidia germination began within 4 hours post inoculation , and at  <dig> hpi most of the conidia had produced germ tubes. at this time, the rudimentary germ tubes had bulged at the tip to form characteristic appressoria adhering to the cuticle. at the end of the 24 hour period, the process was further advanced. shortly after the formation of the appressoria, infection hyphae appeared and penetrated the host. at  <dig> hpi, 80% of the appressoria were formed and invasion of the host plant started with the expansion of the primary stroma. with the staining method used in this study, the subcuticular growth of the fungus was difficult to observe because it was poorly stained. nevertheless, we can assume that, when the stroma was visible, at  <dig> hpi, subcuticular development on the susceptible host, ‘gala’, had significantly exceeded that of the partially resistant ‘président roulin’ . this difference in the extent of colonization of the fungus between the two cultivars remained throughout the whole infection cycle of the fungus. between  <dig> and 12 days after inoculation, apple scab symptoms became macroscopically visible on ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’. after 21 days, 90% of the leaf surface of ‘gala’  was covered by sporulating apple scab lesions   <cit> . however, typical chlorotic and necrotic lesions with slight sporulation were observed on leaves of ‘président roulin’ , covering less than 15% of the leaf surface. these symptoms were considered as resistance responses and were classified in the class 3b, as described by chevalier et al.  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
kinetics of
v. inaequalis
conidial development on ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’ leaves. germination of conidia and formation of appressoria were observed under light microscopy over time post inoculation. fungal tissues were stained on whole leaves with periodic acid-basic fuchsin according to the method of preece  <cit> .



cdna-aflp fingerprints: optimization and identification of differentially expressed transcripts
we used the aflpinsilico application to choose the optimal restriction enzyme combination for the cdna-aflp experiments. the results of the different parameters for each enzyme pair combination are shown in table  <dig>  enzymes with 4- or 5-base recognition sites yielded the highest number of transcript derived fragments , although these were generally relatively short and highly redundant, with up to  <dig> cleavage sites per cdna. in opposite, the ecori/msei recognized cleavage sites on less than half  of the apple full-length cdna tested, but this combination of restriction enzymes generated more informative tdfs than all the other enzyme pairs tested. in fact, ecori provided the longest tdf  with the lowest redundancy  and derived at least partially from coding regions  + tail). this enzyme was therefore the most appropriate and it was chosen in combination with msei for cdna-aflp analysis.table  <dig> 
suitability of restriction enzymes for use in cdna-aflp analysis in apple


enzyme
a
b
c
d

sau3a

taqi

ddei

ecorii

apoi

ecori

a <dig> full length cdna from malus x domestica were analyzed in silico for patterns of cleavage by different restriction enzymes in combination with msei.


bpercentage of cdnas that yielded a tdf of a size that could be resolved on a 5% polyacrylamide gel  after cleavage with the particular enzyme in combination with msei.


caverage distance between the last recognition site and the polyadenylation site.


dmean size of restriction fragments, expressed in base pairs.



the cdna-aflp analysis using  <dig> primer combinations in ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’ resulted in  <dig> to  <dig> tdfs per primer combination, depending on the number of additional bases used for the selective amplification step, and a total of about  <dig>  tdfs in each cultivar . tdfs ranged in size from  <dig> to 800 bp. figure  <dig> shows a typical cdna-aflp profile of the two apple genotypes challenged by v. inaequalis or water. considering that  <dig> primer pairs with two additional selective nucleotides  were tested out of the  <dig> possible primer pair combinations, and taking into account that about 40% of the apple cdna could potentially be visualized with the restriction enzyme ecori and msei, we estimated that we analyzed a representative sample of approximatively 19% of the apple genes expressed in the tissues.figure  <dig> 
expression patterns of apple genes displayed by cdna-aflp fingerprints. the cdna-aflp compares transcriptional profiles from ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’  mock-inoculated or challenged by v. inaequalis at  <dig> hpi. the  <dig> samples are arranged in  <dig> groups according to the different specific primers tested during the selective amplification step of the aflp procedure. e and m refer to the ecori and msei primers, followed by the selective nucleotides used. within each of the  <dig> groups samples are ordered as follows: ‘président roulin’ infected  and mock-inoculated , and ‘gala’ infected  and mock-inoculated . differentially expressed tdfs were classified into  <dig> categories: genotype-specific tdfs  and pathogen-responsive tdfs , further divided into two sub-groups; pathogen-responsive tdfs expressed in common by both genotypes  and pathogen-responsive and genotype specific tdfs . illustrations are given.



at the stringent threshold used, only  <dig> % of all the  <dig>  generated fragments exhibited significant differences in intensity among the different genotypes or treatments. according to their banding patterns, the differentially expressed tdfs were classified into two groups:  genotype-specific tdf, for all banding patterns differing between the genotypes but not affected by fungal infection and  pathogen-responsive tdfs representing all the tdfs showing differential expression during infection. group ii was further divided into two subgroups:  pathogen-responsive tdfs, representing the tdfs with differential expression upon pathogen challenge in both genotypes and  pathogen-responsive and genotype-specific tdfs, representing the tdfs showing differential expression induced by the pathogen in one of the two cultivars.

the first group  accounted for about  <dig> % of all generated fragments . in contrast,  <dig>  and  <dig> tdfs , respectively, were identified in ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’ as significantly differentially expressed after fungal infection . these pathogen-responsive tdfs  accounted for about  <dig> % of all the  <dig>  tdfs analyzed for both cultivars. among them,  <dig>  overlapped between the two genotypes . the remaining  <dig> and  <dig> tdfs, for ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’, respectively, displayed differential expression after fungal attack that depended on the genotype. they were classified into subgroup iib  and represented about  <dig> % of the fragments. from our point of view, these bands differentially expressed in ‘président roulin’ only, are the most interesting as they could be involved in specific plant defense reaction against v. inaequalis. in fact, genes that showed only a genotype effect may reflect the effect of the genetic background, whereas genes exhibiting only a treatment effect may represent a general plant response to pathogen challenge that does not determine the final different phenotype.figure  <dig> 
venn diagram showing number of pathogen-responsive tdfs in ‘président roulin’  and/or ‘gala’ . group ii of tdfs was classified into two sub-groups: pathogen-responsive tdfs expressed in common by both genotypes  and pathogen-responsive and genotype specific tdfs . ‘+’ and ‘-’ represent up- and down-regulation, respectively.



we then considered the amplitude and direction of expression changes for all pathogen-responsive tdfs . we plotted the log <dig> transformed expression ratios of ‘président roulin’ against ‘gala’ and distinguished the tdfs that were differentially expressed in only one of the two lines  from those being differentially expressed by both cultivars . this graph showed the overall similarity and specificity of gene expression in the tdfs differentially expressed in common by ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’: most of these tdfs were differentially regulated in the same direction  by both cultivars. fold-changes from  <dig> to  <dig> were observed, with the majority of the tdfs showing a difference in expression less than 7-fold.figure  <dig> 
scatter plot of log10-gene expression fold changes of pathogen-responsive tdfs from ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’. fold changes are relative to mock inoculation. colour-coded plots represent tdfs differentially regulated in one of the cultivars  or in both cultivars . log ratios > <dig> or < <dig> indicate up- or down-regulation, respectively, dashed lines set at  <dig>  and − <dig>   correspond to the threshold of a two-fold change in gene expression that was used as the cut-off value for biological significance.



sequences annotation
two-hundred and fifty nine tdfs out of the  <dig> pathogen-responsive tdfs from the resistant cultivar and part of the genotype-specific tdfs  were excised from the gels, re-amplified and cloned . no bands belonging to the susceptible cultivar ‘gala’ were excised and a priority was given to tdfs of sufficient length , to facilitate their functional characterization. two clones were sequenced for each re-amplified tdf and for 38% of them  a different sequence between the two clones was found, leading to a total of  <dig> sequences. to limit redundancy, sequences were clustered using the software egassembler  <cit>  and then compared to the whole apple genome sequence assembly in order to identify the unigenes  <cit> . this returned  <dig> unique sequences  from 53 bp to 803 bp that were annotated and submitted to the ncbi database with accession numbers assigned .

among the  <dig> sequences, 69%  were similar to known expressed sequences in public databases , while  <dig> sequences had no matches in the ncbi database. with the exception of  <dig> sequences similar to genes belonging to the apple stem pitting virus , all tdfs were similar to sequences from model plants, with vitis vinifera, ricinus communis and populus trichocarpa being the three most represented species. as expected, most tdfs  were found to be similar  to malus x domestica sequences derived from the whole genome sequence of apple  <cit> . the aspv is a widespread pathogen of pome fruit usually transmitted by the rootstock and frequently latent in the host  <cit> . as the cdna encoding for aspv coat proteins was found in both inoculated and controlled plants and as no symptoms of aspv were observed in apple trees used for the experiments we believe that the virus was latent and did not interfere with gene expression data.

putative functions of the apple tdfs were then classified according to the go vocabulary. figure  <dig> shows the percentages of apple genes assigned to the biological processes. about 27% of the annotated sequences have metabolic roles  and 24% are involved in cellular processes. other relevant groups, accounting for  <dig>   <dig> and 7% of the tdfs, respectively, include single-organism process, response to stimulus  and biological regulation. in addition to tdfs related to plant defense response according to the go classification, we also found tdfs showing similarities with genes encoding for proteins reported to have a potential role in the general defense response pathway through careful analysis of the scientific literature. these tdfs are also potential candidate genes for partial resistance of ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis. these tdfs encoded proteins involved in the recognition of the pathogen, signal transduction, oxidation reduction process, photosynthesis, transport, response to environmental stress, metabolism, transcription, and cell wall organization . expression of tdfs of interest was further investigated by qrt-pcr and putative functions of some of these proteins in the partial resistance against v. inaequalis are discussed.figure  <dig> 
distribution of differentially expressed tdfs within the go categories of biological processes. go annotations were made according to the international gene ontology consortium using the automatic bioinformatics software blast2go.


tdfs associated with plant defense response, response to oxidative stress and response to wounding


a
b

1au61′

37du41

43cu118

43du149

43du149′

44au9

51hu129′

56 au33′

14gu213

33fu130′

34eu#2

34cu81′

34fu145′

41cu29′

42au1

46cu57′

47cu77′

54du58

55bu33

34du#2

43bu45

43cu113′

43hu225

44cu85

44hu193′

45cu49

52bu9

atdf expression pattern according to the cdna-aflp  at  <dig> hpi by v. inaequalis: genotype-specific tdfs , pathogen-responsive tdfs expressed in common by both genotypes  and pathogen-responsive and genotype specific tdfs .


bgo annotations were made using the automatic bioinformatics software blast2go.
gene expression analysis of selected tdfs by qrt-pcr in ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’ 


a
defense response
signal transduction
transporter
oxidation reduction process
photosyntesis
response to environmental stress
metabolism
transcription factor
cell wall organization
unknown functions

aexpression pattern according to the cdna-aflp. group iia represents pathogen-responsive tdfs expressed in common by both genotypes and group iib pathogen-responsive and genotype specific tdfs. “+” = induced and “–” = repressed tdf.


bmeans and sd of fold induction  or repression  calculated by the ΔΔct method applied using qrt-pcr. significant fold changes were judged considering the following criteria: statistical significance of individual Δct values at p < <dig>   and biological significance at fold change ≥ <dig> 

gene enrichment analysis
the gene enrichment analysis revealed that genes accounting for the different functional go categories were similarly represented  in two subsets of our cdna-aflp: the tdfs being up- or down-regulated in ‘président roulin’ after pathogen attack . nevertheless, when compared to two different collections of ests  <cit>  from uninfected expanding apple leaves , some biological pathways appeared to be significantly over-represented  in the ‘président roulin’ cdna-aflp library . in both comparisons, it was notably the case for genes involved in photosynthesis and in response to stress. additionally, other go categories were significantly over-represented in ‘président roulin’ but depended on the library being compared: e.g. oxidation reduction process, regulation of gene expression in the aela library, and homeostatic process in the mdstw library. all these genes could be involved in the general defense response pathway of ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis. no biological pathways appeared to be significantly under-represented in our collection.figure  <dig> 
over-representation of go categories in ‘président roulin’ cdna-aflp library compared to non-infected est apple libraries. the comparison has been made by gene enrichment analysis for biological process go categories between our cdna-aflp library from scab-infected leaves of ‘président roulin’  and two est libraries from uninfected actively growing shoot of:  cultivar ‘royal gala’ in the library aela  <cit>  and  cultivar ‘wijcik’ in the library mdstw  <cit> . gene enrichment analysis was conducted with the software blast2go using fisher’s exact test at a p-value < <dig> . no go categories were shown to be under-represented.



in order to assess if mechanisms leading to partial resistance against v. inaequalis might involve biological pathways different to a complete resistance response, we compared by gene enrichment analysis our ‘président roulin’ tdfs dataset to the ssh library from rvi <dig> -transformed ‘gala’ line challenged by v. inaequalis <cit> . some biological processes were over-represented in our partial resistance compared to the complete resistance mediated by rvi <dig>  gene . this was the case for genes involved in the plant response to dna damage stimulus, particularly dna repair, and those involved in the regulation of hydrolase activity. a significant over-representation of differentially regulated genes classified as ‘regulation of defense response’ was also found in ‘président roulin’. again, no under-representation of any biological pathways was found.figure  <dig> 
over-representation of go categories in ‘président roulin’cdna-aflp library compared to
rvi6
-’gala’ transformed library. the comparison has been made by gene enrichment analysis for the biological process go category between our cdna-aflp library  compared with a cdna library from completely resistant rvi <dig> -transformed ‘gala’ lines challenged with v. inaequalis <cit> . gene enrichment analysis was conducted with the software blast2go using fisher’s exact test at a p-value < <dig> .



quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase pcr
to validate the reliability of our cdna-aflp analysis, qrt-pcr was performed on  <dig> pathogen-responsive tdfs representative of almost all functional categories identified, with a preference for defense-related genes and genes possibly involved in pathogenesis. table  <dig> presents separately the qrt-pcr results carried out on the same rna samples used for the cdna-aflp analysis and on a biological replication of the experiment. results were expressed as fold-change of ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’  after pathogen attack, in respect to mock-inoculated leaves. in general, expression data provided by qrt-pcr were in good agreement with profiles detected by cdna-aflp. when performed on rna samples used for cdna-aflp, qrt-pcr confirmed the pattern of gene expression of  <dig> tdfs . expression of  <dig> of these rna samples was then further verified by qrt-pcr on a biological replicate of the experiments, and the pattern of expression of  <dig> of these samples was confirmed . tdfs that were not in accordance with the cdna-aflp showed no significant changes in expression in ‘président roulin’ . for three tdfs, strong changes in gene expression  were detected in infected leaves of ‘président roulin’ in both experiments . two different tdfs  cloned from the same band and showing a significant increase in intensity after pathogen challenge were both confirmed to be up-regulated after pathogen attack. in most cases, no significant changes of expression were detected in infected leaves of the susceptible ‘gala’ cultivar.

co-localization of the tdfs with rga, qtl or apple scab major r genes
approximatively, 40% of the tdfs anchored in silico on one of the  <dig> chromosomes of apple were localized in the proximity  of rgas clusters, qtls or major r genes for apple scab resistance . nevertheless, this frequency was not significantly greater than those calculated for random ests derived from an uninfected apple leaves library  <cit> . so co-localization could have occurred purely by chance. however, considering separately the three classes of tdfs , we found that group i and iib of tdfs mapped at a greater frequency in the vicinity of major r genes than est from aela library .table  <dig> 
frequency of co-localization of tdfs from ‘président roulin’ with rgas, qtls and major apple scab r genes


b
c
d
d
tdfsa

atranscript-derived fragments  at 48 hours after inoculation by v. inaequalis: genotype-specific tdfs , pathogen-responsive tdfs expressed in common by both genotypes  and pathogen-responsive and genotype specific tdfs . frequencies of co-localization of tdfs were compared to frequencies observed with an uninfected apple library aela  <cit>  using a χ <dig> test. p values are indicated as follows: ***= p < <dig> , **=  <dig>  < p < <dig> , and *=  <dig>  < p < <dig> .


bnumber of cdna mapping onto the apple chromosome with a threshold e-value <  <dig>  by blast analysis against homologous apple genomic sequences with known chromosomal locations  <cit> .


cclusters of resistance gene analogues   <cit> .


dquantitative trait loci  and major r genes for apple scab resistance  <cit> .



discussion
plant disease resistance and susceptibility are governed by the combined host and pathogen genotypes, and depend on a complex exchange of signals and responses occurring under given environmental conditions. during the long process of host-pathogen co-evolution, plants have developed various elaborate mechanisms to ward off pathogen attack  <cit> . in addition to constitutive defense, it has been postulated that a key difference between resistant and susceptible plants is the timely recognition of the invading pathogen, and the rapid and effective activation of host defense mechanisms. such induced resistance mechanisms have been demonstrated at transcriptional level in numerous studies on plant-pathogen interactions involving either complete  or partial disease resistance  <cit> . in both types of resistance, pathogen attack was accompanied by activation of host plant response genes and accumulation of corresponding gene products. based on these findings, our cdna-aflp study attempted to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying partial resistance against apple scab by the identification of differentially expressed transcripts between ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’  after pathogen attack.

effective identification of differentially expressed transcripts after scab infection requires the determination of the stage of pathogen development at which it is first affected by the host’s defense mechanisms. this is important particularly in investigations built upon the hypothesis that resistance involves the induction of defense pathways. to identify the appropriate time-point for the extraction of rna, we compared the kinetic of pathogen development on leaves of ‘président roulin’  and ‘gala’ . light microscopic assessment identified  <dig> hpi as the critical time-point when the pathogen is first affected by the host’s responses during formation of appressoria and stroma. in fact, whereas the early stages of pathogen growth occurred at the same rate in both cultivars, significant differences were observed in later stages, when development of subcuticular stroma subsequent to cuticle penetration was reduced by greater extent in the partially resistant cultivar compared to the susceptible one . these differences are concordant with the literature with various susceptible and resistant apple cultivars  <cit>  and led to a reduced disease severity and sporulation on ‘président roulin’ 21 days after infection. this also suggests that no particular pre-formed chemical or structural defense barriers are present at the leaf surface of ‘président roulin’. the choice of  <dig> hpi as the key time for our gene expression study is further motivated by the fact that in various plant-pathogen interactions the accumulation of defense-related transcripts in the host is often concomitant to the formation of appressoria and the development of the intracellular hyphae . when this cytological event occurs, the molecular dialog between the pathogen and the host presumably begins. the host detects the pathogen and initiates defense-related transcriptional responses  <cit> .

as for any transcriptome study, a genome-wide screen for differentially expressed genes based on cdna-aflp requires that as many transcripts as possible are analyzed in a unique way, and that the data obtained are informative enough to allow characterization of the transcripts. considering criteria such as the genomic region of the restriction sites , the redundancy and the length of the tdfs being produced, we showed in silico that the restriction enzyme pair ecori/msei was the most appropriate for our cdna-aflp analysis. this restriction enzyme combination was successfully used in similar experiments on apple  <cit> . in our study, this enzyme combination yielded a very high informative content  with limited redundancy .

the cdna-aflp method has the advantage that all treatments, time points and genotypes under investigation can be concurrently compared  <cit> . in our study, we estimated that we analyzed a representative sample of approximatively 19% of the genes expressed in the leaves of ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’ in response to v. inaequalis infection at  <dig> hpi. our estimation corroborates with the data from the recent sequencing of the apple genome project since our  <dig>  bands would represent about 18% of the  <dig>  putative genes in apple  <cit> . we highlighted that the differences between partially resistant and susceptible responses to v. inaequalis, were more quantitative  than qualitative , and that quantitative differences mainly involved up-regulation of genes . as similarly demonstrated in the literature  <cit> , we can argue that, despite the very clear phenotypic differences observed between the partially resistant and susceptible responses, the timing and amplitude of gene induction could have a greater influence on the disease resistance status of the plant than the identity of genes activated. under-representation of down-regulated tdfs has also been reported in apple - v. inaequalis interaction  <cit>  and in other pathosystems  but it has been suggested that such under-representation could be mainly due to the two-step pcr of the cdna-aflp method  <cit> . the overall similarity of transcriptional signature between ‘président roulin’ and ‘gala’ is further demonstrated by the observation that genes were regulated in the same direction in both cultivars: when a tdf was up-regulated in one cultivar, up-regulation was also observed in the other one  . finally, all ‘président roulin’ pathogen-responsive tdfs were also found to be expressed in the mock-control from high, to intermediate or low levels, supporting the idea that many genes involved in the defense reaction were already expressed in resistant genotype before pathogen challenge  <cit> .

the potential presence of multiple sequences in one band cut from the gel is the major disadvantage of cdna-aflp fingerprinting. in our study, this mis-cloning has been observed for 38% of the excised bands and could be an underestimate of the multiplicity of sequences per band since only two clones per band were analyzed. each restriction enzyme pair may in fact result in different fragments of the same size which are visualized as a single band on a cdna-aflp gel autoradiography. therefore, confirmation of gene expression by an independent technique is required, as for hybridization-based assay like microarray. in this study, expression profiles observed by cdna-aflp were confirmed by qrt-pcr in 83% of the  <dig> tdfs under examination . results were similar to those reported by baldo et al.   <cit>  and paris et al.   <cit> . the percentage of confirmation decreased when using an independent biological replication . according to these results it can be assumed that the modulation of about 83% of the observed tdfs is confirmed; however extending data to at least a biological repetition is highly recommended to further confirm that gene modulation strictly depends on the biological system under study . this consideration is valid not only for cdna-aflp but for all transcriptional analysis as modulation of gene expression can be influenced by other factors . however, in our opinion, two or more sequences from one band can contribute to the change of band intensity observed on the autoradiography, as suggested by the fact that two different sequences cloned from the same band were both confirmed to be up-regulated after pathogen attack .

the go analysis of differentially expressed tdfs revealed that they are represented by a high diversity of functional categories . this is not surprising since, with the emerging of genome-wide gene expression profiling technologies, it is now clear that plant response to pathogens is associated with massive changes in gene expression. for example, in an arabidopsis microarray, more than  <dig> genes  involved in a broad range of biological responses were regulated in response to the bacterial pathogen pseudomonas syringae <cit> . in our study, the annotation of ‘président roulin’ pathogen-responsive tdfs indicates that they may act in early events of plant defense response such as pathogen recognition  proteins  <cit> ), or in signal transduction  kinase  <cit> ). other tdfs identified may play a role in the later stages of the ‘président roulin’ defense response with the induction of genes aiming to stop or reduce the invasion of the host by pathogens. in plants, this often leads to the hypersensitive response, a form of localized programmed cell death orchestrated by the oxidative burst. tdfs involved in such reactions encoded for gluthatione-s-transferase  <cit> , peroxidase  <cit> , e <dig> ubiquitin protein ligase  <cit>  and cysteine protease/cysteine protease inhibitor  <cit> .

in order to understand the global molecular pathways involved in partial resistance, gene enrichment analysis were conducted to statistically determine whether specific go terms were enriched in different sets of cdna. first we demonstrated that the same functional categories were involved in our up- and down-regulated set of tdfs . these results differ from the findings of paris et al.  <cit>  who found that tdfs similar to genes putatively involved in defense responses were generally up-regulated in r gene-mediated resistance , while those putatively involved in general metabolism were down-regulated. in contrast, we demonstrated that genes involved in stress response  and in photosynthesis were preferentially regulated in the partially resistant cultivar ‘président roulin’ after pathogen attack, as compared to two published est libraries from malus x domestica uninfected young expanding leaves  <cit>  . when stress response genes could participate in the partial resistance of ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis, regulation of genes of the photosynthetic pathway might be the first step towards the appearance of chlorotic spots on infected leaves, which in the apple - v. inaequalis incompatible interaction appear about 8– <dig> days after inoculation  <cit> . it is also well known that defense responses is energy intensive  <cit>  and requires transcriptional activation of genes  <cit> . these could be the reason why we found in ‘président roulin’ an over-representation of genes involved in different catabolic/metabolic processes, that might ‘fuel’ the implementation of downstream defense response, and in the regulation of gene expression. nevertheless, as these later go categories appear to be significantly over-represented in only one of the two libraries being compared, their involvement in the resistance of ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis still has to be confirmed. finally, our comparison between the ‘président roulin’ cdna library with the completely resistant rvi <dig> -transformed ‘gala’ lines  <cit>  revealed both similar events , and differences in some biological process categories . among the differences  we noticed an over-representation in ‘président roulin’ of genes involved in  the regulation of defense response  proteins involved in the regulation of hydrolase activity, also recognized to be key enzymes in the regulation of programmed cell death in incompatible plant-pathogen interactions ;  proteins involved in the response to dna damage stimuli. this latter category is thought to be involved in the plant response to abiotic stress such as uv-b  <cit>  and osmotic stress  <cit> , but to our knowledge, these proteins were not yet known to be involved in quantitative disease resistance.

beside these slight differences between complete and partial resistance, large parts of the transcriptional signatures did not demonstrate enrichment for genes in particular functional categories. this finding is consistent with the hypothesis that partial resistance could be due in part to the same genes governing complete resistance. to illustrate this hypothesis, some classical r genes encoding for the nbs-lrr family protein were found to be up-regulated in the partially resistant cultivar ‘président roulin’ after pathogen attack. in that context, partial resistance could be due to defective r genes that recognize with low efficiency pathogens and trigger weak defense response  <cit> . this may result either from mutation in the r genes themselves or at the corresponding avirulence locus of the pathogen. in fact, there are compelling lines of evidence that allelic variants of r genes account for quantitative disease resistance in plants . in the same way, when a pathogen strain overcomes an r gene due to a mutation at the avirulence locus, it has been proved that the “defeated” r gene still has a residual effect and can act as a qtl against virulent strains of the pathogen. this phenomenon has been observed for the major resistance genes rvi <dig>   <cit>  and rvi <dig>   <cit>  in the v. inaequalis - apple interaction, and also in rice bacterial blight  <cit> , wheat stem rust  <cit>  and powdery mildew pathosystems  <cit> . likewise, in the same way as major resistance genes, several qtls have been shown to be isolate-specific  <cit>  and co-localization of qtls and r genes has been noted in several species including apple . another evidence suggesting that genes controlling partial resistance in ‘président roulin’ could share structural and functional similarities with r genes resides in the fact that some subsets of our cdna library mapped at greater frequency in apple genomic regions known to carry major scab r genes  <cit>  . the co-localization of ests with genomic regions carrying disease resistance factors  has been already reported in various genome-wide analyses studies . no significant co-localization of our cdna library with apple scab qtls  <cit>  nor apple rgas  <cit>  has been found. obviously, we could only check for co-localizations with r genes and qtls that have been detected so far. moreover, information on the genomic loci that can regulate the expression level of the tdf of interest is still lacking from this analysis. in fact, the measured mrna levels can either be the product of regulation of the parent gene or of another gene, mapping somewhere else in the genome   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study provides a wide transcriptional profile analysis for the comprehension of key events in partial resistance of ‘président roulin’ and highlights possible candidate resistance genes. we found altered gene expression in resistant and susceptible plants in response to v. inaequalis that involved many functional categories. genes acting in pathogen recognition  as well functioning downstream of the initiated defense signaling pathways were identified. biological processes related to stress response and photosynthesis were found to be over-represented in infected leaves of the partially resistant cultivar compared with two published libraries of uninfected apple leaves. in addition, through comparison between partial and complete resistance, the pathogen-responsive cdna library revealed common physiological events, but differences in regulation of defense response, in the regulation of hydrolase activity, and in response to dna damage stimuli. finally, tdfs from ‘président roulin’ mapped more frequently in the vicinity of major r genes for apple scab resistance, suggesting that quantitative and complete resistance could be governed by the same types of genes. a functional analysis of the differentially expressed genes will allow more insights into their possible role in the quantitative resistance reaction of ‘président roulin’ against v. inaequalis. for example, an assessment of the differential expression of candidate resistance genes over different time points after infection could be investigated to find out how resistance is regulated by quantitative and/or kinetic enhancements. also, analysis of candidate gene expression data in a segregating population could infer causal relationship between the differential expression of the genes and the resistance phenotype of the progeny. finally, these candidate resistance genes might be at the basis of the development of molecular marker tools to be used in a genome-informed breeding program to speed-up the selection process of resistant plants.

