BACKGROUND
most animals possess an oxygen delivery system to fulfil the demands of their metabolically active organs. the architecture of respiratory organs is surprisingly similar throughout the animal kingdom, with branched tubules as repetitively used entities. our own lung is made of a complex network of branching tubes that terminate in alveoli, where oxygen diffuses into the blood. in drosophila larvae, the tracheal system consists of approximately  <dig>  interconnected tubes. these very simple tubes are built from an epithelial monolayer that wraps around the central, gas-transporting lumen  <cit> . oxygen enters through two pairs of spiracular openings and passes through primary, secondary and terminal branches, reaching all tissues in the body. although of much simpler organization, the fly's airway system shows striking similarities with our own lung regarding its architecture but also its physiology  <cit> . the simplicity of its organization has made the drosophila airway system to the most informative model for studying the genesis of tubular organs such as the lung or the kidney, and at the same time for complex processes such as angiogenesis  <cit> .

one major characteristic of most, if not all epithelia, is the ability to launch an immune response if confronted with pathogens such as bacteria, fungi or viruses. this cell-autonomous response, where all parts of the innate immune system, comprising pattern recognition, signal transduction and effectuation, reside in the epithelial cells themselves. even men depend on this evolutionary most ancient immune system in the fight against infections  <cit> . in addition, defects in the innate immune system of the epithelial cells may be one of the major causes underlying inflammatory diseases of barrier epithelia such as crohn's disease or chronic asthma  <cit> . a detailed analysis of the inventory of immune-competent epithelial cells has always been obstructed by the complexity of the epithelia of interest. usually, a number of different cells constitute the epithelia. in addition, infection and a primary immune response of the epithelial cells recruit the entire armamentarium of leucocytes to the site of infection. amongst all immune competent epithelial organs, the insect airway epithelium is presumably the simplest one. it comprises only one type of epithelial cells, organized in an epithelial monolayer, thus representing a "cell culture" in the intact animal  <cit> .

drosophila has served over decades as a tremendously useful model to study basic mechanisms in almost every area of modern biomedical research. this holds also true for innate immunity that has experienced a revival following pioneering work in drosophila  <cit> . numerous studies performed in this field gave us a comprehensive picture of the fly's immune response towards invading microorganisms. in contrast, our knowledge about the epithelial immunity is only fragmentary so far. we know that various epithelia respond to pathogen encounter with the expression of antimicrobial peptide genes  <cit> . in addition, the imd-, but not the toll-pathway is of central importance for this reaction  <cit> .

to improve the prospects of this surprisingly simple model epithelium that has been and will be used in numerous research areas, we performed an extensive transcriptome study with the aim to better understand different lung diseases such as asthma, copd or acute lung injury  <cit> . therefore, we have focuses on three areas, innate immunity, response to reactive oxygen species and signalling.

RESULTS
the airways of the fruit fly's larva show a very simple organization. a hierarchic organization of this oxygen transport system of tubes is made of primary, secondary and terminal branches. in all these regions, this organ is built of only a single layer of epithelial cells covered by a cuticular intima . if confronted with bacteria , this epithelium is able to launch an immune response, visualized by the expression of the gfp gene, which is under transcriptional control of the drosomycin promoter, an important antimicrobial peptide of the fly . the hypothesis that all airway epithelial cells are homogenous in terms of their immune reaction is supported by the observation that all these cells, even those that build the finest tracheal endings on the target organs, show an activation of the drosomycin gene transcription following an infection .

immuno-transcriptome of the airway epithelium of the fruit fly
to uncover the architecture of the tracheal epithelial cell's immune system, we looked at the presence of all known constituents of the fruit fly's innate immune system. manual isolation of trachea from third instar larvae was performed prior to rna isolation. the material was thoroughly purified from attached, non-tracheal material. it was checked for contamination with fat body or hemocyte material by rt-pcr with primers derived from genes exclusively expressed in either of these tissues . only if these controls revealed negative results, the material was used for downstream experiments. we looked at the pattern recognition receptors, the molecules that constitute different signalling pathways involved in innate immune responses as well as at relevant transcription factors.

pattern recognition receptors
three different groups of pattern recognition receptors are known to be relevant for the fly's immune response, namely the toll-receptors, the gram-negative binding proteins  and, most importantly, the peptidoglycan recognition receptors . we tested for the expression of all members of these families. among the  <dig> toll receptor genes of the fruitfully, four, namely toll itself,  <dig> wheeler, toll- <dig> and toll- <dig> are expressed in the airway epithelium . two out of three gnbps, gnbp  <dig> and  <dig> are also present in the tracheal tissue . most notably, a variety of different members of the pgrp gene family are expressed in this organ. the members of the family can be subdivided into two major groups, small pgrps that are soluble and large ones, where some members are thought to be membrane bound. among the small representatives, only pgrp sb <dig> and sb <dig> are not expressed in the airway epithelium. in addition, all members of the large family of pgrps, namely pgrp la, lb, lc, ld, le, and lf, are present in the tracheal epithelium .

signaling pathways
four major signaling pathways are believed to mediate the effects in drosophila innate immunity. these are the toll-, the imd-, the jak/stat-, and the jnk-pathways. we looked for expression of all relevant constituents of these four major signaling pathways in the airway epithelium by rt-pcr. regarding the toll-pathway, we found that only a fraction of members of this pathway is present in the airway epithelium. among the genes expressed are the cytokine spätzle, toll itself, its adapter protein myd <dig> and the nf-κb homologues dorsal and dif, but also their repressor cactus. other essential parts of this pathway  are obviously not expressed in the tracheal epithelial cells .

regarding the second, major signaling pathway, the imd-pathway, a different scenario emerged. all members required for proper function of this pathway are expressed in the airway epithelia. starting with the mentioned above pgrps, imd itself, tak <dig>  fadd, dredd, kenny, ird <dig> and relish are present. this confirms that the imd-pathway is functional in the airway epithelium meaning that bacterial patterns can be recognized and this information transformed into a suited physiological response .

the jnk pathway is relevant for the control of immune responses in the fly. its exact role for the activation of a proper immune response is still matter of debate. apparently, it is a discrete pathway  <cit>  that may have an inhibitory effect on the imd pathway  <cit> . key components of this pathway including tak <dig>  hemipterous, basket, d-jun and dfos, are expressed in the airway epithelium, indicating that this pathway is also functional . the fourth pathway associated with immune responses, the jak/stat pathway, consists of only a very limited number of elements. the ligand upd  binds to the receptor domeless, which activates the janus kinase hopscotch  and finally the stat transcription factor. all members of this pathway are present in the larval airway epithelia . these results are summarized schematically in figure  <dig>  in addition, stat-dependent transcription can be visualized using transgenic flies, where gfp-expression is under the control of stat-responsive elements  <cit> . larvae of these flies show a pronounced gfp-expression in the tracheal endings, the spiracles up to early l <dig> stages .

transcription factors of the immune system
transcription factors are of central importance for the execution of immune related signaling pathways. in addition to the entire set of drosophila nf-κb factors , three out of five gata factors, namely pannier, grain and dgata-d, are also present in the airway epithelial cells. in contrast to them, serpent and dgatae could not be detected .

all three functional signaling pathways are part of the airways epithelial immune system
material derived from larval trachea infected with pseudomonas aeruginosa was used to evaluate if the three signaling pathways the imd-, the jnk-, and the jak/stat-pathway are functional in the airway epithelium and that they participate in orchestrating the immune response. diptericin  as a typical imd-pathway gene, punch and tetraspanin 42e  as typical jnk-pathway genes and turandotm  and ventral veins lacking  as typical jak/stat-induced genes were tested with this material. semiquantitative rt-pcr with equal amounts of cdna  showed that expression of these representative genes was increased whereas expression of the housekeeping gene rpl  <dig> was not .

transcriptome of the airway epithelium
the identification of genes that are expressed and of those that are preferentially expressed in the airway epithelium was achieved using dna-microarray studies. tracheal tissues were isolated from early third instar larvae and purified from contaminating tissues. in addition, we excised trachea from larvae of the same age and used the remaining material  as control. this experimental setup gave us two different types of results, 1) the airway epithelial transcriptome and 2) the genes that are preferentially expressed in these cells. using a relatively stringent set of criteria , we identified a list of  <dig> genes. this is definitely not the complete set of genes that are expressed in these cells, especially because low abundant transcripts might have escaped our criteria, but we can be relatively sure that the corresponding transcripts are present . here, we focused on three aspects only: 1) immune effectors, 2) response to oxidative stress, and 3) signaling through g-protein coupled receptors. 1) in non-infected animals, some antimicrobial peptide genes show a basal level of expression. these are defensin, metchnikowin, drosomycin, attacin a and diptericin. in addition,  <dig> out of  <dig> lysozymes, namely lyss, lysb and lysx, are present in these cells. 2) regarding the capacity to cope with different oxidative stressors, the airway epithelium has a tremendously diverse armament of antioxidant enzymes. detoxification of reactive oxygen species can be done with either of the two superoxide dismutases ,  <dig> out of  <dig> peroxiredoxins  and an impressive number of glutathione-s-transferases . hydrogen peroxide can be converted to water through catalase activity. in addition, duox, a dual oxidase is present, an enzyme known to produce reactive oxygen species in response to an infection in the gut  <cit> . signaling through g-protein coupled receptors is the most important way to adapt cells to different physiological situations. only a very limited number of g-protein coupled receptors are present in higher amounts in the airway epithelial cells, namely a methusaleh receptor , two neuropeptide receptors  as well as an octopamine receptor . whereas we have no information regarding the relevance of the first three receptors, it is known from studies using larger insects, that the biogenic monoamine octopamine modulates the activity of airway epithelium, presumably mediated via the octß-2r receptor  <cit> .

the set of genes that show a predominant expression in the tracheal epithelium was identified by comparing the expression data from the airway epithelium with those of the remainders of the animals. all genes showing an at least  <dig> fold higher expression in the trachea compared with the remainder of the larvae were chosen, yielding a total list of  <dig> genes . we selected  <dig> out of them randomly and used quantitative rt-pcr to verify the tracheal-specific expression, which was successful . three of them, namely cg <dig>  cg <dig> and cg <dig>  showed a very high degree of specificity with negligible expression in the remainder of the larvae. a small number of the genes with trachea specific expression, scilicet the top  <dig> annotated genes are summarized in table  <dig>  remarkably, transferrin  <dig> is among the genes showing highest specificity for the airway epithelium, pointing to a vital role of this iron catching molecule for the airway epithelial physiology. high concentrations of transferrin will result in an iron-depletion of the epithelial surface environment, therewith inhibiting growth of most bacteria  <cit> .

list of genes with a significantly higher level of expression in the tracheal tissue compared with larval tissues minus trachea. the  <dig> annotated genes with highest specificity for tracheal expression are listed.

a comparison between the two sets of genes , using the fatigo+-tool  <cit>  revealed some interesting aspects. gene ontology analysis of the molecular function of annotated genes revealed a surprisingly high number of ion binding  and especially metal ion binding proteins . differences between the two sets of genes are especially seen for structural constituents of ribosomes and rna binding  as well as oxidoreductase, hydrolase, peptidase and polysaccharide binding .

discussion
airway epithelia are characterized by common architectures throughout the animal kingdom. efficient gas exchange requires maximized surface areas and minimized epithelial thickness. these features are directly opposed to the needs of an immune response that favors minimization of surface areas and robust design of the epithelia. this conflict of interest has to be attenuated by very effective immune responses inhibiting bacterial colonization and growth rapidly and effectively.

the repertoire of these epithelial cells with immune related proteins defines their potential defense response. infection with different bacteria can obviously induce a pronounced immune response in the airway epithelia of the fly. apparently, this reaction relies on the imd-pathway, a feature that is presumably common to all epithelial tissues  <cit> . the molecular rationale behind this focus on the imd-pathway might be very simple; all vital members of the imd-pathway are present in the airway epithelial cells. this allows a cell-autonomous activation of this pathway, finally leading to expression of antimicrobial peptide genes. in contrast, the other immune-relevant pathway leading to activation of nf-κb factors, the toll-pathway is not complete in the airway epithelial cells. some vital members of this pathway are simply not present in these cells, obviously obstructing activation of the entire pathway. present are the receptor toll, the ligand spätzle, the adaptor myd <dig> and the complex of both nf-κb factors dorsal and dif as well as their repressor cactus. especially the presence of the entire nf-κb complex may ensure that dorsal or dif are not activated. setting the toll-pathway aside in epithelial immunity might be a reasonable if not an essential strategy. epithelial responses are first and foremost local responses to prevent the epithelium from unwanted immune reactions. the toll-pathway is on principle an organ systemic signaling system, because the recognition steps occur within the extracellular space and if the recognition cascade is activated, all responsive cells having contact with this extracellular space are activated. in case of the airway epithelium this would mean a reaction of all airway epithelial cells if the toll-pathway is activated locally in this structure. expression of the drosomycin gene, which is known to be a classical toll-pathway dependent gene, is hard to understand, but this seemingly paradoxical situation has been reported earlier  <cit> . regarding the pattern recognition receptors, a great variety of pgrps  and gnbps  are present in this tissue. especially all membrane bound pgrps are present, presumably allowing sensing a great variety of different pathogen associated molecular patterns . although this tissue expresses this wealth of pattern recognition receptors, the response should be relatively stereotype, simply because all these receptors converge onto a single signal transduction pathway, namely the imd-pathway. nevertheless, two other immune-relevant pathways that reside in the epithelial cells, the jnk- and the jak/stat-pathways, may shape the response towards an encounter with pathogens. both pathways are present in these cells, suggesting that they are functional. regarding the terminal parts of the signal transduction pathways, we observed an unexpected complexity. all three nf-κb factors, relish, dorsal and dif are present in this tissue. this is insofar puzzling as it is generally agreed that dorsal and dif are devoted to the toll-pathway, which is not functional in the airways. in addition,  <dig> members of the gata-family of transcription factors are also present in the airways, presumably playing an important role in the control of immunity, as it has been shown for other tissues  <cit> . the basal expression of a number of antimicrobial peptide genes as well as of lysozymes indicates that this armament against microbes can be used in the airway epithelium. another, complementary part of the immune response may be seen in the constitutively high expression of the transferrin <dig> gene. it is at position  <dig> of the genes with highest specificity for the airway epithelium . in the mammalian airway epithelium, transferrin is known to play an important role not only in the capture of fe2+-ions, but even more importantly, it deprives the airway liquid from fe2+, thus inhibiting bacterial growth  <cit> .

very impressive is the unforeseen complexity of antioxidative enzymes serving the airway epithelial cells. as this structure is directly exposed to high oxygen pressure and environmentally produced reactive oxygen species , it simply might be imperative using the almost complete antioxidative armament to protect this very delicate structure. alternatively, ros production by e.g. the duox may be a strategy to fight against pathogenic bacteria entering the airways, thus urging to protect the own cells against these endogenous ros production. ros species that might be generated by diverse sources such as pollen are believed to represent major mediators of inflammatory responses in the airway epithelium  <cit> . impairments of central antioxidative enzymes such as sods are therefore of central importance for the development of long lasting airway inflammatory responses  <cit> .

signaling in the airway epithelium is not yet understood at all. it is known that adrenergic signaling has an important impact on the development of asthma, with the epithelial cell being in a central position. nevertheless, we have no idea, what is regulated in the airway epithelial cells in response to this stimulus  <cit> . in insects, octopamine, the invertebrate adrenaline, increases camp in the trachea  <cit> , similar as in the vertebrate system, but so far, the physiological relevance of this hormonal modulation in not understood.

CONCLUSIONS
airway epithelial cells have to cope with a multitude of problems. they come into contact with an unpredictable diversity of airborne bacterial and fungal spores. presumably to deal with this problem, the innate immune system of the fly's airway epithelial cell has a very peculiar architecture. the almost complete set of pattern recognition receptors, especially the membrane bound ones, should enable to detect the vast majority of these airborne pathogens. they converge onto only one nf-κb activating signalling cascade, the imd-pathway. omitting the second signalling cascade that converges onto nf-κb factors, the toll-pathway, may be a necessity of epithelial immune systems to restrict the response locally. shaping of the immune response may occur through additional signalling systems such as the jnk- and the jak/stat-pathway. epithelial cells obviously contain the almost complete set of enzymatic antioxidants, including both sods,  <dig> out of  <dig> peroxiredoxins, the catalase and various glutathione-s-transferases, presumably to cope with exogenously generated reactive oxygen species. the great potency of airway epithelial cells to fight pathogens and to cope with reactive oxygen species and the willingness to launch the corresponding responses may represent a major reason why these structures are prone to various inflammatory diseases such as asthma or copd .

