BACKGROUND
microarrays provide the opportunity to study the transcriptional output of a genome. the most common application of microarrays at present is to perform comparative studies, looking for relative changes between two conditions. the aim of calibration is to minimise as much systematic and experimental variation in the data, whilst retaining the biological variation. the calibration of microarrays, combined with statistics of the changes, underpins what can be inferred from these studies.

in this paper we focus on the calibration of oligonucleotide genechip arrays produced by affymetrix. the calibration process for genechips can be considered to have three parts: background correction; normalisation; expression measure. background correction is needed to remove the proportion of intensity that is not due to hybridisation of the target. the normalisation of an array is needed before it can be compared against other arrays, correcting for differences in overall mrna levels and scanner settings. an expression measure is needed to transform the fluorescence from an array into a measure of the mrna abundance.

the aim of differential expression statistics is to highlight which genes show the most significant changes between two conditions. z-scores can be used to measure the significance of a gene's fold change with respect to the population of changes seen elsewhere on the array  <cit> . the use of t-statistics is also commonly used to report genes that are differentially expressed. throughout this work we refer to background correction, normalisation and expression measure as calibration and assessment of differential expression as statistics.

the preprocessing of genechips is an active research field with a number of different algorithms being developed  <cit> . this has led to comparative studies of the differences between different protocols , with  <cit>  noting the importance of background correction. other work has compared the relative importance of differential statistics and normalisation and concluded that normalisation was the limiting factor in determining a set of genes  <cit> . however, it has been reported  <cit>  that calibration methods that differ only in normalization result in practically identical expression measures. a full calibration includes several other steps as well as normalisation, and is usually followed by estimations of differential expression between two conditions. given the uncertainty in the literature we therefore chose to study all the calibration steps in order to shed light on which of normalization, background correction or expression measure has the biggest effect on the sets of genes reported to be differentially expressed. we also wished to determine whether our conclusions about the dominant step depended on the choice of statistics used to infer differential expression.

a further complication is that some of the probes in a probeset may map to more than one transcript, and may not even map to the transcript of interest  <cit> . moreover, information about probe mapping can be derived from several online resources, and not all of these will be in agreement  <cit> . a further complication with mapping is that some probes map to transcripts that undergo alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation  <cit> .

a full calibration protocol can be devised from one of the choices for each of the various strategies for normalisation, background correction and expression measures. each of these protocols will produce a list of genes that are measured to be significantly differentially expressed. however, different protocols can produce different lists and the end-user biologist may worry that the wrong choice of protocol is producing misleading conclusions. we have sought to identify the calibration step which results in the biggest cause of change.

RESULTS
1) sensitivity of different calibration protocols
the package affy allows a choice for each of the three primary calibration steps: three options for background correction; five choices for normalisation; three different expression summaries. in total, there are  <dig> different permutations for calibration . after data has been calibrated, a comparison between two conditions allows genes to be identified as differentially expressed. we have used the z-score method  <cit>  as our statistical measure, and have collated the genes whose absolute measure of z is the largest, i.e. we produce one list that includes both and up down regulated genes.

in order to assess the agreements in gene lists identified between different protocols we explored various strategies. we ultimately decided to compare the total amount of genes common to two lists as being our measure of consensus. for such a comparison we do not care if gene x is found to be the most significantly changing gene for protocol a and is found to be the 100th most significantly changing gene for protocol b, just as long as gene x is found somewhere in both lists.

in order to provide a visual aid in assessing consensus between different protocols we have transformed percent overlap onto a greyscale: 0% overlap between two lists is coloured black, 100% overlap  is coloured white and in between  <dig> and  <dig> are different shades of grey. the resulting matrix and corresponding overlap image is diagonally symmetric.

for a given expression measure, the choice of background is more important than the choice of normalisation. inspection of figure  <dig> shows that along the diagonal, collections of boxes of size  <dig>  all appear to have similar values. the average overlap in gene lists between protocols sharing the same expression measure and background subtraction is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  indicating that background information makes some improvement in consistency.

there exist collations of the information about transcripts and probes from different online resources  <cit> . different probes from within a probeset may map to more than one transcript, and may be assigned erroneously to a gene to which they do not map. there are chip definition files  using mappings to unigene, refseq, entrez gene and ensemble transcript amongst others  <cit> . furthermore, affymetrix provide a cdf produced from their original mapping. we have assessed whether the gene lists are strongly affect by the use of different probe mappings, through analysing gse <dig> using the 8th build of the cdfs from  <cit>  and the original affymetrix cdf, figure  <dig>  our results show that irrespective of which cdf is used, the dominant cause of discrepancy between different gene lists remains the choice of expression measure. if two calibration protocols share a common expression measure then the average percent overlap in their gene lists in the gse <dig> experiment is 88% for the affymetrix cdf, 87% for the ensembl transcript cdf, 88% for the entrez gene cdf, 86% for the refseq cdf and 87% for the unigene cdf.

the mas <dig> algorithm makes present/absent calls for each probeset. in order to assess whether these calls made a difference to our conclusions, we made a very conservative study of gse <dig>  only sampling the genes which had been called present in all the chips. this was true for  <dig> of the  <dig> probesets. figure  <dig> shows how the choice of expression measure is still the dominant cause of discrepancy between the gene lists for different protocols.

we wished to assess whether our findings are dependent upon the intensity of the genes. we broke the probesets for gse <dig> into three groups, those whose average intensity across the chips, when run with the standard rma protocol, is either <  <dig>  , ≥  <dig>  and <  <dig>  or ≥  <dig> . figure  <dig> shows the genes with the highest intensity have the highest overlap between calibration protocols and those with the lowest intensity have the least overlap between calibration protocols. irrespective of intensity, the choice of expression measure provides the biggest cause of discrepancy between gene lists produced from different calibration protocols.

we wished to determine whether our choice of z-scores, rather than t-tests, was biasing our conclusions about the importance of expression measure. we calculated the most significantly changing genes for each of the five experiments, evaluated using the standard t-test formalism. figure  <dig> shows that the typical discrepancy between calibration protocols using t-tests is much greater than found using the z-score formalism. when an experiment contains only a few replicates, estimates of the mean and variance are noisy.

in order to confirm our hypothesis that z-scores will provide a cleaner diagnostic than fold change, we calculated the largest fold changes for each of the five experiments. figure  <dig> shows that for a given choice of background and expression measure, there is little difference in the gene lists for different normalisation choices. however, unlike the results for z-scores, background choice and expression measure have a similar effect on the discrepancies between different calibration protocols.

discussion
our results indicate that the calculation of the expression measure is the dominant cause of discrepancies between genelists produced from different calibration protocols. the expression measure calculation brings together data from multiple probes, and each of the probes may have a systematic error associated with it. although great progress has been made, through the developments of mas, mbei and rma, there are still inherent complications associated with calibrating affymetrix data.

the mas expression measure treats cross-hybridisation differently to rma and li-wong and this difference will lead to discrepant estimates in the probe specific background. ideally each probe would only map to a specific part of the sequence of interest, but in reality different mrna fragments from various genes can stick to the same probes. in order to measure such cross-hybridisation affymetrix introduced mismatch probes to their chips. however, physical models of this process are now becoming available and it is now clear that a significant fraction of the mismatch signal arises from hybridisation to transcripts with the perfectmatch sequence  <cit> . one model of this process  <cit>  ignores the order of the base composition, whereas another model of hybridization  <cit>  explicitly accounts for the sequence order. currently, there is no consensus on the dominant contributions to the hybridization physics, nor the most appropriate models in which to describe the effects. it is hoped that the increasingly detailed physical models of this process,  <cit> , will shed light on this matter.

the li-wong and rma expression measure used in this study both explicitly ignore cross-hybridisation and the only difference between the li-wong and rma genelists arise from the two ways in which the model of a probe-set are constructed. rma provides statistically robust averaging methods whereas li-wong fits a model that allows probe-specific binding affinities. also, li-wong calculates expression on the original probe intensity values rather than the log-transformed ones used by rma. however, the differences in gene lists between these different expression measures is still greater than 20% which shows the importance of the choice for a model and fitting paradigm. our results agree with  <cit>  in that we find from studying fold change , good agreement between methods that do not correct for background.

in line with other work, e.g.  <cit> , we find that the lowest intensity genes result in a bigger discrepancy between calibration protocols, than those genes found with a larger intensity. although our evidence from this study is weak, this is to be expected if the genes reported to be differentially expressed from the lowest intensity genes contain a larger number of false positives due to noise.

there is an ongoing debate over whether measures of differential expression based on either t-statistics  <cit>  or fold-change  <cit>  formalisms provide the most sensible way in which to generate gene lists. microarray experiments typically contain small numbers of replicates, which means that any t-test formalism will attempt to calculate the mean and variance of a distribution from only a small number of values. the large numbers of probesets means that this approach will necessarily result in false positives when the numbers of replicates is small. indeed, figure  <dig> is consistent with an experiment in which two lists are compared, when each list contains a small number of common genes and a large set of random genes. we agree with  <cit> , that the use of small sample sizes can lead to frustration amongst biologists chasing false leads. our, somewhat brutual, advice to biologists is that such frustration is to be expected if your search is based around following genes identified by t-tests when you only have a small number of replicates.

we favour the choice of z-score, rather than fold change, because we predict this should maintain the advantages of fold-change, namely reproducibility, as well as explicitly correcting for the non-linear response curves of microarray data. there are a number of expression measures that are affected by bias in the lowest and highest intensity ranges  <cit> , and for each of these measures we recommend the use of z-scores over fold change. however, the field of expression measure development is evolving and the work of irizarry and colleagues is leading to measures in which the bulk of the biases are being removed. in the absence of intensity-dependence of ratio data z-score and fold-change will result in the same ranking order of gene lists. similarly, in the limit when the sliding window is set to 100% of the genes on the array, z-score and fold change will result in the same ranking order. we hope that future work, based around following a similar approach to previous studies  <cit> , also include an analysis of z-scores in comparison to other statistical tests.

irrespective of whether we use fold change or z-score, our results agree with  <cit> , in that we find the choice of normalization measure has little effect on the results compared to modifying the choice of background or expression measure. however,  <cit>  suggested that normalization has a profound effect on differentially expressed genes from affymetrix microarrays. the analysis of  <cit>  used three statistical tests, namely parametric anova, nonparametric anova and sam  <cit> , each of which uses the small number of replicates for any gene to estimate statistical significance. whereas, we have used z-scores, which ignores the calculation to estimate variance in one gene, and instead only deals with its mean values in each condition, and estimates statistical significance based on comparing this difference with a population of hundreds of measurements of differential expression for different genes. we believe this approach is safer because there are usually not enough replicates to reliably estimate both the mean and variance of a single gene in standard microarray experiments.

the mas <dig> algorithm  <cit>  provides present/absent calls. we find that including only genes found to be present in every single chip provides a slight increase in the overlap between different calibration protocols.

affymetrix annotate their genechips by aligning the probes to databases of genomic and transcript sequences  <cit> . if at least  <dig> of the  <dig> probes in a probe set match perfectly to a transcript, the assignment is considered a high quality assignment and is referred to by affymetrix as a matching probes assignment . affymetrix  claim that over  <dig> percent of the probesets on the latest human and mouse genechips have grade a annotations. however, this leaves almost  <dig> percent of probe sets which contain three or more probes that do not align to transcripts for which they were designed. moreover, the latest rat chip has only one third of its probe sets classified as a. furthermore, on the older releases of genechips, there is much greater use of est information, and hence more likely sources of errors. thus many probes on genechips will not align to the transcripts to which they are assigned and there is a need to identify and remove such spurious probes  <cit> . another complication is that some probes are found to match to more than one place in the genome, and so are particularly prone to cross-hybridisation. using the dai et al. cdfs tailored to specific annotation resources  <cit> , we show that, irrespective of the annotation source, the biggest cause of discrepancy between gene lists from different calibration protocols is the choice of expression measure.

CONCLUSIONS
we have systematically examined permutations of different calibration protocols for the analysis of affymetrix genechips. our results show that the lists of significant genes identified by sliding z-scores show a clear demarcation between the different expression summaries. the overlap in significant genes for a given expression measure, chosen with either different backgrounds or different normalisations, is high, typically greater than 80%. these findings apply irrespective of which annotation resource has been used to assign probe mappings. our results highlight that the major uncertainty in the calibration of affymetrix microarray data is the choice of method in transforming the multiple probe intensities into one measure of expression.

