BACKGROUND
similar to the intensively studied animal microbioma, plants harbor a wide range of diverse bacteria forming a complex biological community, which includes pathogens, mutualists , and commensals  <cit> . depending on the colonized compartment, these bacteria are rhizospheric , endophytic  and phyllospheric or epiphytic . in recent years plant-associated bacteria  have been widely studied, mainly as promising tools for biotechnological applications  <cit> , but investigations have also been carried out on the ecology and taxonomy of plant-associated bacterial communities  <cit> . despite a high taxonomic diversity, only few bacterial taxa have been found characteristically associated to the majority of plant species, notably members of the alphaproteobacteria class  <cit> . consequently, the generally accepted idea is that the ability to colonize a plant is not a common, widespread feature present in the soil bacterial community, but preferentially resides in specific taxa which may be considered more ecologically versatile or genetically prone to the association with plants. this last hypothesis has recently been supported by the finding that, at least in the class of alphaproteobacteria, a common gene repertoire seems to be present in all of its plant-associated members  <cit> .

medicago sativa l.  is one of the most important legume crop in temperate areas throughout the world, commonly used as forage or in crop rotation practices to contribute organic nitrogen to the soil via its symbiosis with the nitrogen fixing bacteria  <cit> . moreover, it is important also for bioenergy production  <cit>  and is one of the most suited plant species for land restoration  <cit> . finally, this species, and the diploid relative m. truncatula gaertn. , are among the most studied model species regarding the molecular aspects of plant-bacteria symbiosis, particularly in relation with the alphaproteobacterium sinorhizobium  meliloti <cit> . concerning s. meliloti, this species is present in most temperate soils, and, when conditions are suitable, it forms specialized structures, called nodules, in the roots of alfalfa plants where it differentiates into bacteroids  <cit> . it is assumed that a fraction of bacterial cells is released from dehiscent nodules to soil, giving rise to new free-living rhizobial clones  <cit> . in the last years s. meliloti has been found able to also endophytically colonize the aerial part of other plant species, as rice  <cit> , suggesting the presence of several ecological niches for this species .

while the plant-associated bacterial flora of m. sativa has never been investigated at the community level, s. meliloti population genetics have been extensively studied in the past  <cit> , but only on strains isolated from nodules, with a few early studies performed on bacteria directly recovered from soil  <cit> , due to the lack of efficient selective culture media. no data have been reported on the presence in natural conditions of s. meliloti as endophytes in other plant compartments  and no comparison of soil vs. plant-associated populations has been done.

based on the above mentioned considerations, there is a need to characterize the bacterial community associated with m. sativa in relation to both the potentially important role the class of alphaproteobacteria seems to have as main component of a “core plant-associated bacterial community” in several different plant species  <cit> , and to the relationships of soil vs. plant-associated populations of the symbiotic alphaproteobacterial partner s. meliloti.

in this work we investigated the bacterial communities associated with the legume m. sativa, focusing on both the total bacterial community composition and on the presence and populations structure of the symbiotic partner s. meliloti in soil and plant tissues.

the analysis was conducted by cultivation-independent techniques on alfalfa  plants grown in mesocosm pots. the bacterial community associated with m. sativa and that of the surrounding soil were analyzed at high  and low  taxonomic levels by employing terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism  profiling  <cit> ,  <dig> s rrna library screening and s. meliloti-specific markers  <cit> . these approaches allowed us to explore for the first time the bacterial community composition of such important plant species and the populations of s. meliloti without cultivation.

RESULTS
ribotype variability of the bacterial community
the ribotype variability of bacterial communities present in soil and associated to plant tissues  was investigated by t-rflp analysis. a total of  <dig> samples was analyzed: in particular one pooled soil sample for each one of the three pots, one pooled sample from all the nodules found in each pot and four plants per pot . t-rflp profiles on these samples produced  <dig> terminal-restriction fragments  or ribotypes after the restriction digestion with two restriction enzymes, hinfi and taqi.  <dig> s rrna gene amplification and t-rflp profiling was also performed on dna extracted from surface-sterilized seeds, but no bands of  <dig> s rrna gene amplification were recovered , suggesting a very low bacterial titre in seeds.

interestingly, stem and leaf communities showed a significant , though small  separation . moreover, amova on stems and leaves community revealed a statistically significant differentiation between the three pots , irrespective of possible grouping , suggesting a pot-effect over the taxonomic shaping of the leaf-associated community and no effect of plant genotypes. these data confirmed a previous long-term experiment only addressing s. meliloti species  <cit> .

taxonomic composition of bacterial communities in soil, nodules and plant aerial parts
t-rflp analysis has shown that bacterial communities clustered in three groups . in order to elucidate which taxa are mainly represented in the bacterial communities of these assemblies, three  <dig> s rrna gene clone libraries were constructed pooling together the dnas extracted from the samples of each environment; additionally, leaves and stems samples were also pooled together due to their high similarities as mentioned above. pooled samples did conceivably result in an enrichment of the more shared taxa possibly preventing the detection of taxa associated only to a few individual samples. dna was used as template to construct three  <dig> s rrna libraries; a total of  <dig> clones  were sequenced. sequence analysis revealed, as expected, that the soil community was the most diverse , while the nodule-associated community was less diverse , . as a consequence, the library of nodules showed a coverage  higher than those of stems + leaves  and soil .

the percentages of taxonomic classes detected in the sequences of the clone libraries are reported in figure  <dig>  seven classes were represented in both soil and stem + leaf communities, and  <dig> of them were also found in nodules. alphaproteobacteria were dominant in nodules  and in stems + leaves. also in soil alphaproteobacteria were highly prevalent, but acidobacteria and crenarchaeota were also abundant. flavobacteria were found only in nodules, however a low presence in the other environments cannot be excluded, especially in relation to the lower coverage of the respective libraries. beta- and gammaproteobacteria and actinobacteria were found in all three libraries.

concerning alphaproteobacteria, only members of the rhizobiaceae family were found in nodules, with all sequences assigned, as expected, to the sinorhizobium/ensifer genus . alphaproteobacteria present in soil belonged to the rhizobiaceae, bradyrhizobiaceae, methylocystaceae, hypomicrobiaceae and caulobacteraceae families. rhizobiaceae, aurantimonadaceae and methylobacteriaceae, all belonging to the rhizobiales, plus taxa of the order sphingomonadales, were found in the stem + leaf library. the absence of sequences assigned to the sinorhizobium/ensifer genus from stem + leaves and soil libraries, though this species was found by qpcr in both these environments , could be due to its low abundance and to the relatively low coverage of clone libraries.

detection and diversity of sinorhizobium meliloti in soil and plant tissues
aiming to analyze presence and diversity of s. meliloti, we firstly estimated the population size by qpcr, using two species-specific primer pairs which amplify chromosomal  and megaplasmidic loci , respectively  <cit> . the obtained results are reported in table  <dig>  relatively higher titers of s. meliloti dna were detected in root nodules, while lower values were obtained in soils, leaves and stems. interestingly, nodule titers of s. meliloti dna detected by rpoe marker were higher than those estimated by nodc marker . the viable titers of s. meliloti cells from crushed nodules of m. sativa plants usually ranged from  <dig> x <dig> to  <dig> x108cells/g of fresh tissue , suggesting that the titers from nodc marker are a better proxy of the number of bacteria involved in the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing process.

§titers were estimated by qpcr  <cit>  with rpoe <dig> and nodc markers and are expressed as n. of gene copies/g of tissue or soil; ± standard deviation from triplicate experiments. asterisks indicate significant differences between estimates based on rpoe <dig> and nodc markers .

then, to inspect the genetic diversity of s. meliloti populations present in the different environments, the amplification of the  <dig>  kbp long  <dig> s- <dig> s ribosomal intergenic spacer  which proved to be an efficient marker for the study of s. meliloti populations  <cit> , was attempted. only dnas from nodules and soil gave a pcr product, probably as a result of the low bacterial titers and high content in inhibitors present in dna extracted from stems and leaves. consequently, nodule tissue was taken as representative of the plant environment and was compared with soil. a total of  <dig> different igs-t-rfs  was detected after digestion with four restriction enzymes  in the six dna samples , after igs amplification and t-rflp profiling . most of the  <dig> detected igs-t-rfs  were detected in one sample out of  <dig>  while  <dig>  igs-t-rfs were present in all six samples . moreover, from  <dig>  to  <dig> % of igs-t-rfs present in soil were also detected in nodules and from  <dig>  to  <dig> % of igs-t-rfs present in nodules were detected in the respective soil sample. figure  <dig> shows the similarity relationships between igs-t-rflp profiles. non-metric mds plot of igs-t-rflp profiles  showed a possible separation of nodule and soil populations on the second dimension. in particular, the nodule population in pot  <dig> was more separated from the soil population of the same pot and from the populations of the other pots. on the contrary, nodule populations of pots  <dig> and  <dig> were the closest ones, with soil population of pot  <dig> in the same cluster , suggesting a possible effect of plant genotype as previously shown  <cit> . however, in agreement with the high number of single-sample haplotypes detected, an amova carried out to evaluate the variance contribution to a hypothetical differentiation of soil and nodule s. meliloti population showed that  <dig> % only of variance was attributed to a soil-nodule separation, the remaining  <dig> % of variance being due to among-nodules and among-soil differences. additionally, no statistical significant separation  was detected for groupings based on the two plant genotypes present in the mesocosms.

discussion
in recent years there has been an increasing interest in exploring the bacterial flora associated with plants  <cit> . a recent field survey indicates  <cit>  that plant aerial parts  harbor complex, but highly variable, bacterial communities, and that only a small number of bacterial taxa  are plant-specific. in the experiments reported here, as in the majority of the reports on endophytic microflora, we refer to endophytic and epiphytic bacteria indicating all those that are inside the plant tissue or strongly adhering to the plant surface, such as they resist washing and sterilization , therefore a more correct definition could be “plant-associated bacteria”.

the present study shows that root nodules and aerial parts of medicago sativa plants grown in mesocosm conditions, harbor distinct bacterial communities with specific signatures at the class, family and species levels and that these communities do not mirror soil bacterial communities.

initially, t-rflp profiles allowed us to show that bacterial communities present in the different environments  were strongly differentiated and in particular that a large heterogeneity was present between leaves of individual plants, though soil profiles were highly similar. moreover a clear separation between above-ground  and below-ground environments  was detected. an analysis of the clone libraries, prepared from above-ground and below-ground pooled samples, revealed an uneven distribution of bacterial classes, with a marked pattern highlighting the class of alphaproteobacteria as the more abundant in plant tissues . the same uneven pattern was then observed, at lower taxonomic ranks, within the alphaproteobacteria, with sequences of clones belonging to members of the methylobacteriaceae and sphingomonadaceae families being more abundant in stem than in soil and nodules. methylobacteria and sphingomonadaceae have been found as endophytes in a number of plants  <cit>  and it is believed that this group of bacteria may take advantage from living as plant-associated, thanks to its ability to utilize the one-carbon alcohol methanol discharged by wall-associated pectin metabolism of growing plant cells.

concerning root nodule bacterial communities, obtained data indicated that very diverse bacterial taxa are associated with nodules, the most represented being the specific rhizobial host of m. sativa, the alphaproteobacterium s. meliloti. however, additional taxa have been found, including members of actinobacteriaflavobacteriagammaproteobacteria and betaproteobacteria, which may have some additional plant growth-promoting activities .

in soil, acidobacteria was one of the most important divisions  and was present exclusively in the soil clone library, in agreement with many previous observations  <cit> . a relatively high presence of archaea  was also found. checking the  <dig> s rrna gene sequences present in the ribosomal database for 799f/phr primer annealing, we found that pcr amplification from thermoprotei was theoretically possible with this primer pair . the presence of archaea in the soil is not unexpected  <cit>  and could be linked also to the anoxic or nearly anoxic conditions present in the bottom of the pot. however, since the low coverage of soil clone library, the presence of many other additional taxa, as well of different proportions of those found here cannot be excluded. in addition, it should be mentioned that differences between soil and plant-tissues bacterial communities could also be ascribed to the different dna extraction protocols we were obliged to use, since a unique protocol  failed in a successful extraction of dna from both soil and plant tissues . a similar technical need was encountered by other authors also  <cit> , which renders the study of the relationships between plant-associated and soil bacterial communities still at its beginning.

at the lowest taxonomic rank here investigated, within the species s. meliloti, we detected the presence of this species in all environment analyzed . this finding is confirming earlier reports on the ability of s. meliloti to behave as an endophytic strain, colonizing all plant compartments, besides being a root symbiont of legumes  <cit> , and suggest a potential higher genetic variability of s. meliloti population, and, from the other side, potential new ecological and functional roles for this species, not investigated so far <cit> . unfortunately, the low population size of s. meliloti in stems and leaves and the possible presence of pcr inhibitors  did not permit the amplification of  <dig> s- <dig> s rrna intergenic region from plant aerial parts to obtain information about the genetic diversity and structure of s. meliloti population resident in plant aerial part. no hypothesis could then be drawn about the relationships between this population and those of soil and nodules. concerning s. meliloti populations present in soil and nodules, similar values for diversity were detected in nodules and in soil, suggesting that both environments harbor a consistent fraction of the population’s genetic diversity. interestingly, most of the t-rfs were detected in one sample only, and a very small fraction of t-rfs was shared among all samples, though the original soil material was homogeneous and should, in theory, contain the same s. meliloti haplotypes. therefore, s. meliloti populations from all the three mesocosms investigated were highly differentiated between each other and, as expected from previous studies on s. meliloti <cit>  and on bradyrhizobium <cit> , no statistically significant plant genotype- related haplotypes were detected.

a possible explanation of such findings could be linked to the relatively low titers of s. meliloti in soil , which is roughly 1/ <dig>  of the total bacterial community of soil . such estimated s. meliloti titers were similar to those previously observed in other soil and plant tissues  <cit>  and in line with those normally found in soil with viable  estimates  <cit> . as a consequence of this low population size, founder effect and genetic drift are likely to be among the main shaping forces of s. meliloti population in this experimental set-up, perhaps permitting the fixation of sample-specific haplotypes by simple chance  <cit> . regarding the nodule-soil relationships, though our experiments did not directly address this issue, the reported s. meliloti population analysis suggests the presence of somewhat nonoverlapping soil and nodule population fractions, even if no specific patterns of soil and nodule populations were detected. the presence of different rhizobial haplotypes in nodules and soil was previously found in chickpea  <cit>  and clover  <cit> , though no simple conclusion could be drawn, because of limited sampling. however, as for total bacterial community analysis, it should be mentioned that the use of two different dna extraction protocols for soil and plant dna may have produced some bias in the proportion of the different haplotyes detected.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we show on m. sativa that its associated microflora, though highly variable, is mainly related to the presence of alphaproteobacteria. this class has an uneven presence of families in stems + leaves, nodules and soil. we then speculated that a sort of “pan-plant-associated bacterial community” may be composed of a large plethora of “accessory” taxa, which are occasionally associated with plants, and a small number of “core” taxa  which, on the contrary, are consistently found in the plants. moreover, within alphaproteobacteria the specific alfalfa symbiotic species s. meliloti, abundant as symbiont in root nodules, was also detected in soil and in leaves, with potentially different populations, suggesting a more complex interplay of colonization of multiple environments  by this species.

