BACKGROUND
several microsporidians have been reported as pathogens of penaeid shrimp  <cit> . of these, two species have been reported to infect cultivated shrimp in thailand. one of these is a species of agmasoma previously called thelohania that infects muscle tissue and connective tissue in the giant tiger shrimp penaeus  monodon and the banana prawn penaeus  merguiensis <cit> . it resembles morphologically the microsporidian agmasoma penaei reported to infect penaeus  setiferus and penaeus  duorarum <cit>  in the americas. more recently in thailand it has been reported to also infect the same tissues in penaeus  vannamei <cit> . spores from an unidentified microspridian have also been reported in muscles of p. monodon from madagascar  <cit> .

the other microsporidian reported from thailand was a newly described species enterocytozoon hepatopenaei <cit>  restricted to tubule epithelial cells of the hepatopancreas of p. monodon. in  <dig>  e. hepatopenaei was also reported from p. monodon exhibiting white feces syndrome  in vietnam  <cit> . here we report widespread infections of a microsporidian conspecific with e. hepatopenaei that was found in thai-cultivated, exotic whiteleg shrimp p. vannamei exhibiting wfs. in addition, a nested pcr detection protocol is described together with its use in examining whiteleg shrimp from culture ponds and from oral challenge tests using hepatopancreatic tissue from shrimp with microsporidian infections.

RESULTS
small subunit ribosomal rna gene fragment analysis
when the mf primers designed from the ssu rrna sequences of enterocytozoon species  <cit>  were used with template hepatopancreatic dna extracts from p. vannamei infected with the microsporidian, a  <dig> bp amplicon was obtained . this was within the range of the expected size of approximately 900– <dig> bp, based on conserved regions of enterocytozoon ssu rrna sequences listed at genbank  and the previous amplicon of  <dig> bp obtained from p. monodon infected with enterocytozoon hepatopenaei <cit> . cloning and sequencing of  <dig> clones revealed 100% identical sequences for  <dig> clones and only  <dig> variable nucleotides for a third clone. a consensus sequence was concluded from the two identical clones and a  <dig> bp portion of the amplicon sequence  was subjected to a general blastn search that yielded hits only for microsporidian sequence records. the top hits from the blastn search included enterocytozoon isolated from p. monodon  at 96% identity, nucleospora salmonis  at 89% identity and e. bieneusi  at 89% identity. the mf <dig> and mr <dig> primers were also used to amplify the ssu rrna gene target from archived material of infected p. monodon used in previously published work  <cit>  that gave rise to the genbank record fj <dig>  a consensus sequence was established from  <dig> clones also of  <dig> bp each and named pm-entero . clustal alignment of our  <dig> bp sequence from p. vannamei with our  <dig> bp sequence from p. monodon revealed 99% identity, indicating that infections arose from the same microsporidian species .

pcr and in situ hybridization detection of the microsporidian in p. vannamei
with a preliminary field sample of  <dig> shrimp taken from one wfs pond and  <dig> from a nearby normal pond, pcr tests using primers specific for e. hepatopenaei  revealed that 10/ <dig> shrimp from the wfs pond were positive while all  <dig> from the normal pond were negative . however, a later set of samples  gave less clear-cut results, in that some ponds without signs of wfs gave a high prevalence  positive for e. hepatopenaei by pcr , while other ponds with gross signs of wfs gave a low prevalence of pcr positive shrimp . in addition, one recovered pond with no signs of wfs  had a high prevalence of shrimp  with extensive infections as determined by in situ hybridization. this constituted a poor correlation between gross signs of wfs and severity of e. hepatopenaei infection.

* histology of shrimp in these ponds showed no signs of microsporidian infection but  <dig> showed signs of severe bacterial infections of the hp that may have masked any microsporidians present. the remaining  <dig> samples looked normal with no signs of microsporidian infection.

detection of microsporidia by pcr and in situ hybridization in  <dig> normal and  <dig> wfs ponds. hyb ++ indicates extensive positive in situ hybridization reactions in hp tissue while hyb + indicates light focal positive reactions and hyb – indicates no reaction. nd not done.

using the digoxygenin  labeled probe to confirm the validity of the pcr test, most  of the extensive in situ positive samples were 1st-step pcr positive . specimens that showed light positive in situ hybridization reactions  were either 2nd-step  positive only  or gave negative pcr reactions , while one gave a 1st-step positive result . of the  <dig> specimens that gave negative in situ hybridization test results,  <dig> gave negative pcr test results and  <dig> gave 2nd-step positive pcr results.

histopathology and in situ hybridization of infections in p. vannamei
as previously reported for infections of e. hepatopenaei in p. monodon, the number of hepatopancreatic cells showing spore formation in p. vannamei  was small, giving a superficial impression that the extent of the infections was very limited. the size of the spores  and cytoplasmic location were also similar to those previously described for e. hepatopenaei in p. monodon. however, differences in p. vannamei included spore formation exclusively in b cells  and extensive infection of the medial and proximal tubule epithelial cells of the hepatopancreas in the absence of spores, as revealed by in situ hybridization . this was not the situation for previous reports on e. hepatopenaei in p. monodon, where relatively few cells produced spores or showed recognizable plasmodia, and only those cells were positive by in situ hybridization  <cit> . the cells giving positive in situ hybridization reactions in p. vannamei were restricted to the central region of the hp and did not extend to the distal region composed of e-cells. in the transitional zone between the medial and distal cells, pinpoint positive in situ hybridization reactions suggested that early infection stages occurred as the hp cells differentiated from e cells into b, f and r cells. negative control slides using the gfp-dig-labled probe gave no positive in situ hybridization reactions . at low and medium magnification by h&e staining , there were no distinctive cytoplasmic features that revealed the microsporidian elements giving rise to positive in situ hybridization reactions in adjacent tissue sections. at the highest magnification by h&e staining , basophilic, cytoplasmic inclusions of highly variable, shape, size and number  were present in the h&e stained cells and some of these may have been of microsporidian origin but they could not be unequivocally distinguished from other normal, basophilic cytoplasmic structures of the host. because of this phenomenon, histopathological evaluation of the severity of these infections by h&e staining might be misleading, if the criterion used was the number of cells showing spores or other easily recognizable microsporidian structures.

laboratory challenge tests
because of the association of enterocytozoon infections with wfs in p. vannamei  and p. monodon <cit> , a preliminary laboratory challenge test was carried out to determine the possibility of direct transmission using normal p. vannamei fed with hepatopancreatic tissue of shrimp that originated from a shrimp pond experiencing a wfs outbreak. control shrimp were fed hepatopancreatic tissue from normal shrimp. upon sampling the control shrimp on days  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> after challenge, it was found that  <dig> in  <dig> sampled shrimp on each day gave weak microsporidian amplicons for the 2nd-step pcr , indicating that approximately 1/ <dig> of the stock shrimp had already acquired light microsporidian infections before the experiment was initiated. similarly, in the test group, one of the  <dig> sampled shrimp gave a weak 2nd-step microsporidian amplicon on day  <dig> after challenge, while stronger reactions were obtained on days  <dig> and  <dig>  with two of these giving 1st-step positive results . none of the shrimp in either the test or control group showed gross signs of wfs or any mortality over the 7-day test period. these results indicated that e. hepatopenaei could be transmitted horizontally in p. vannamei by cannibalism, and this contrasted with agmasoma penaei where transmission to shrimp is indirect from an alternate host  <cit> .

discussion
because of identical tissue specificity, identical spore size and a sequence identity of 99% obtained in comparison of ssu rrna gene fragments of  <dig> bp, we concluded that the microsporidian newly found in p. vannamei was identical to e. hepatopenaei previously reported from p. monodon. however, we sequenced only  <dig> clones  from each shrimp species to obtain the consensus sequences we used for phylogenetic comparison. thus, according to veterinary sampling tables  <cit> , could have missed sequences of other copies of the ssu rrna gene that might have been present below the level of 64% prevalence in the template dna and that might have differed from our consensus sequences by more than  <dig> or 2%. thus, a more detailed genetic analysis of the whole, small and large subunit rna genes, its regions and perhaps other genes would be needed to fully confirm our conclusion that e. hepatopenaei infects both of these shrimp species.

we have no explanation regarding the discrepancy between a strong 1st-step positive pcr test result despite the appearance of a light in situ hybridization reaction for one of the specimens from pond  <dig> bap. of particular importance was a third set of samples from a recovered wfs pond where most of the shrimp  showed heavy e. hepatopenaei infections by in situ hybridization  despite the absence of white feces. unfortunately none of the hp samples of these latter shrimp were prepared for pcr. overall, these results and those of the oral challenge test indicated an unlikely causal association between wsf and infection with e. hepatopenaei. on the other hand, it is possible that the severity of e. hepatopenaei infections could be increased by the unknown underlying causes of wfs, giving a superficial impression of causation.

the extensive nature of the e. hepatopenaei infections in many of the specimens examined suggests that there would be a high energy demand for the developing parasite and that this would have a negative effect on host growth. given the difficulty in assessing the severity of infection by normal h&e staining, it would seem prudent to monitor ponds for e. hepatopenaei by pcr, especially if growth rates are lower than predicted in the absence of other more obvious causes. we have anecdotal information that one thai farming operation has now adopted a policy of terminating and restocking culture ponds that show a high prevalence and severity of e. hepatopenaei infection indicated by one-step pcr positive reactions within the first month of cultivation, since their records show that these ponds exhibit uneconomic shrimp growth.

our tests  have revealed that e. hepatopenaei is not present in the post larvae that originate from spf stocks of p. vannamei and are used to stock cultivation ponds in thailand. this indicates that infections found in the cultivation ponds occurred after the ponds were stocked, and it suggests that they resulted by transmission from a natural pond source such as an unknown local reservoir species. this contention is supported by the fact that e. hepatopenaei was discovered in thailand in indigenous p. monodon long before it was found in exotic p. vannamei <cit> . thus, our results indicate that the best strategy for controlling its infections in cultivation ponds would be to focus on identification of the reservoir species and on eliminating them from the shrimp cultivation system. this approach has been successful for the control of agmasoma penaei in cultivated shrimp in thailand. it would also be worthwhile  to determine whether or not its residual spores in a disease outbreak pond are eliminated by current procedures for preparation of ponds between cultivation cycles.

CONCLUSIONS
although we have shown that the microsproidian e. hepatopenaei is often found in cultivated p. vannemei exhibiting wfs, it is unlikely that the parasite is causally associated with wfs, although the severity of e. hepatopenaei infections may be exacerbated by the underlying causes of wfs. since this microsporidian is not present in thai spf stocks, pond infections are probably initiated by transmission from one or more local reservoir species. thus, the most effective control strategy would be to identify the reservoir species and exclude it  from the shrimp production system. the pcr method and in situ hybridization method developed here will be useful in identifying reservoir species.

