BACKGROUND
the membrane-associated guanylate kinase  family in mammals consists of  <dig> members, which vary in size and domain organization . despite these variances, the maguks share a well conserved core structure, which is comprised of one or multiple pdz domains, a src homology  <dig>  and a guanylate kinase  domain. the sh <dig> and gk domains surpass their canonical counterparts by interacting with each other to form a super domain. this characteristic is also remnant of voltage-gated calcium channel beta subunits that lack pdz domains. the large maguk family, as already implied by their assortment of different gene architectures, encodes for a heterologous group of proteins with very diverse biological functions .

molecular studies essentially have established a wide variety of cellular functions for different maguks. examples include regulation of cellular processes including such as: establishment of cell polarity, tight junction formation, cell proliferation or apoptosis, cell differentiation and neuronal synapse transmission  <cit> . mutations or changes in expression have often been found to cause defects in cell-cell adhesion, cell polarity, cell proliferation and subsequently development  <cit> .

the domain architecture of the maguks enables interaction with receptors, the actin-cytoskeleton and ion channels, but also allows for tethering of different maguk subfamily proteins together  <cit> . maguk proteins may contain up to six pdz domains, two l <dig> and two ww domains . in addition to these domains, all maguks, expect for the magi subfamily, contain a sh <dig> domain. the gk domain of the maguks shares homology with guk1of yeast but appears to have lost gmp binding capacity and catalytic activity  <cit> . additionally, the sh3- and gk domain form an intermolecular interaction which renders the gk domain catalytic inactive and can function as a separate binding interface  <cit> . the understanding of the biochemical role and regulation of this super domain is limited, but it is intriguing that a similar sh3-hook-gk motif is present in voltage-gated calcium channels beta subunits  <cit> .

structural and molecular studies have shown that pdz domains are pivotal features of scaffolding proteins and localize maguks and their interaction partners to specialized membrane domains of neuronal and epithelial cells  <cit> . pdz domains have a compact and modular structure, and allow maguk proteins to bind to c-terminal recognition sequences. although originally identified in metazoans, the domain has been found to be spread through bacterial, fungi and plant lineages as well  <cit> .

to date, phylogenetic analyses have been carried out only for individual members, such as zo <dig> and the magis  <cit> . through our extensive phylogenetic analysis of the entire maguk family presented here, we were able to divide the maguks into  <dig> subfamilies and to infer a probable evolutionary sequence of events that gave rise to the maguk domain architectures. we used a domain-by-domain analysis in order to determine that the pdz-sh3-gk structure evolved only once in the course of evolution. in addition, we confirm our phylogenetic data by molecular modeling and provide evidence for the hypothesis that the maguk gk domain originated from a catalytically active gk domain and gradually lost its enzymatic characteristics when new subfamilies emerged.

RESULTS
taxonomic distribution and phyla-specific architectures
many important biological roles have been described for members of the maguk family . however, only very limited information is available about their evolutionary history. to analyze the phylogeny and molecular evolution of the maguks, we initially gathered protein sequences for species of all major metazoan phyla, ranging from porifera to chordata, by using human, fruit fly, sponge and hydrozoan sequences as seed. some sequences were readily available in genbank and in helpful automated databases like pfam  and superfamily  <cit> . many sequences were assembled from ests and genomic data. sequences for all functional domains were identified  and categorized .

no maguk homologs or maguk-like structures, represented by combinations of a gk domain with a sh <dig> and/or pdz domains were found in protozoans, fungi and in plants. our data shows that most canonical maguk family members are present throughout all animal phyla investigated . basal metazoans, represented here by the sponges, oscarella carmela and suberites domuncula, and the cnidarians, hydra vulgaris and hydra magnipapillata, encode for several different maguk subfamily members . this was previously recognized when a magi homolog was characterized in s. domuncula  <cit>  and a zo member was described for h. vulgaris  <cit> . here, we are able to add three new members to this list in basal metazoans, which now includes homologs of mpp, dlg and a dlg <dig> encoding genes .

the protein architectures, with respect to the domain combinations, appear largely consistent and conserved throughout all metazoan phyla investigated. however, some lineage-specific differences can be found for example the c. elegans dlg <dig> gene, lacks the sequences for the gk-, the sh3- and the fourth pdz-domain. the m. musculus and h. sapiens dlg <dig> genes show variations as well, since they encode additional duf <dig> or card domains . these domains are not present in all other species investigated.

we observed several species specific gene duplications within the maguk family for example several additional zo homologs are present in the t. nigroviridis genome, compared to other vertebrates. a tetraodon zo <dig> gene can be found on both chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> and duplicated sequences for zo- <dig> are positioned on the same two chromosomes . gene duplications in teleosts have been described for the hox clusters  <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis of guanylate kinase domains
to elucidate the evolution of the maguk family genes and their gene architectures, we performed an analysis of the centrally positioned approximately  <dig> amino acid long gk domain. it has been suggested that the maguk gk domain evolved from other, enzymatically active, gk domains. the latter include domains like those present in the homologs of the s. cerevisae guk <dig> gene, which shares approximately 40% homology at the protein level  <cit> . enzymatic gk domains can be found in most eukaryotic phyla, including plants, fungi, protozoa and metazoa, and are encoded by guanlylate kinase homologs . the domains are also present in bacteria and certain viruses . our assembly  illustrates that the maguk protein subfamilies form a specific clustering pattern. of particular interest is the clustering of the cask subfamily with the mpp subfamily and very close to mpp <dig>  indeed, the mpp and cask subfamilies are the only proteins in the maguk family that share an architecture containing two l <dig> domains   <cit> . the guk and cacnb sequences clustered in separate clades.

on the basis of the aligned gk sequences that we used to construct the dendrogram we generated a phylogenetic tree . guk family sequences  were used to root the tree. judging from the gk phylogenetic relationships, the gk tree suggests that the mpp subfamily split of first from an active gk precursor closely followed by the magi and the cacnb subfamilies.

the phylogenetic analysis of the sh <dig> domains , which may be 60– <dig> amino acids in length, showed the same basic evolutionary relationships as the gk domain-based phylogeny, which suggest that the two domains co-evolved along the same path. it must be noted that the magi subfamily is not present in the sh <dig> phylogeny since its members do not contain a sh <dig> domain.

comparison of gk 3d structures
to substantiate our above described phylogeny, we created models of the gk and the super domain sh3-hook-gk, which is present in each maguk subfamily member, except the magis. canonical gk domains catalyze the reversible phosphoryl transfer from atp to gmp . like other nmp kinases, gk proteins contain three essential, dynamic regions: the core domain, the lid domain and nmp-binding pocket   <cit> . unique for the gk is that its gmp-binding domain is comprised of four β-sheets and a short helix, whereas others are purely α-helical  <cit> .

consistent with our phylogenetic analysis, it is apparent that the mpps show the most extensive structural similarity with the active gk. the other subfamilies show less structural resemblance, but it is clear that the dlg and zo subfamilies are more related to one another, than to the other subfamilies. this was also apparent from our phylogeny.

indicated in the lowest two panels of figure  <dig>  the sh3-hook-gk structures of representatives of the mpp and cacnb subfamilies are shown. members of the dlg and zo subfamilies adopted a structure largely similar to the mpp model, which places the cacnb subfamily by itself. this may be explained by the different biological role that cacnb is involved in, which requires a different structural organization compared to the scaffolding role of the canonical maguks. the carma subfamily gk or sh3-hook-gk sequences could not be superimposed on any annotated structure in de database used. the pdb files and sequences used for the superimpositions, as well as their expect values, are listed in additional file  <dig> 

insertion of the ww domains in the magi subfamily
the magi proteins are different from the other maguk members as they lack a sh <dig> domain between the core gk and pdz domains. they contain, however, two ww domains , which have been suggested to function in a similar fashion as the maguk sh <dig> domain, i.e. facilitating oligomerization  <cit> . from sequence alignments and annotation of the protein-protein interaction domains on these alignments we observed overlapping regions of the gk domain range and ww domains in the sequences of invertebrate species . these overlaps were not present in the mammalian sequences, most likely because a larger, not well conserved, amino acid stretch was present between the two domains. our alignment of the magi sequences revealed that there is a partial conservation of the proper gk domain  and indeed this area could also be reliably modeled . these observations suggest that early in metazoan evolution, the two ww domains inserted into the c-terminal part of the magi gk domain, which thereafter resulted in a loss of this part of the domain.

diversification of the maguk architecture
we assumed that a thorough analysis of the pdz domain  would provide more insight into the architectural evolution of the maguk family. all c-terminally positioned pdzs of the dlg1- <dig> subfamily, the zo1- <dig> subfamily and dlg <dig> are intimately related . within the dlg1- <dig> subfamily the three pdz domains in these proteins are also clustered together very closely, which suggests rapid domain duplications. in the dlg <dig> subfamily, the fourth pdz domain seems to have arisen from a domain duplication of the third dlg <dig> pdz domain.

the first magi pdz is closely related to the pdzs of the zo, dlg subfamilies, which was expected from the gk phylogenetic tree. interestingly however, all other magi pdzs  are more related to one another and the mpp/cask then to the most n-terminally positioned pdz. these results suggest that the magi core structure is not due to an inversion of the gk domain as commonly assumed and reflected in the name .

discussion
the goal of the present study was to gain insight into the general and structural evolution of the maguk family. we further wanted to prove that it is possible to derive a supported evolutionary model by analyzing the phylogeny of individual domains found in multidomain protein families, like the maguks. in order to map the general evolutionary history of this gene family we assembled a large dataset of sequences for all major metazoan phyla, and phylogenetically and structurally analyzed the core domains present.

choanoflagellates may be closely related to metazoans and based on phylogenetic analyses and the observation that these protists have a collar of feeding tentacles reminiscent of sponge feeding cells, both had been suggested to form a monophyletic group called the opisthokonta, . other protozoan species like giardia intestinalis  were also suggested to be close to basal metazoans  <cit> . we attempted to identify maguk proteins and closely related structural homologs, which are vital for metazoan processes such as cell to cell communication, in these species as well, however, none could be found in protozoans. in addition, maguk sequences were not found in the genomes of bacteria, fungi and plant species. this suggests that the formation of the maguk structure, with its characteristic and centrally-positioned, non-functioning gk domain is essentially of metazoan origin and we speculate that the maguks initially played important roles in cell to cell communication. the absence in plantae can be explained by the late evolution of the maguks, but it is tempting to speculate that cell to cell communication in plants is fundamentally different due to additional cell walls and thus might require different  modules than the maguks.

our search for maguk homologs has however, let to the identification of three new members in the most basal metazoans, which now includes homologs of mpp, dlg and a dlg <dig> encoding genes . these findings imply that all canonical maguk family members arose very early during metazoan evolution. the carma genes are a likely exception and no homologs were identified in species more basal than the deuterostomia. it is important to note that while this is a reasonable assumption at this time, not all genome projects have yet been completed. thus, after completion they should be revisited.

we initiated our phylogenetic analysis with the gk and sh <dig> domain, and compared their evolutionary histories as they are both present in most maguk subfamilies. indeed, the gk and sh <dig> domain show a similar phylogeny . furthermore, these findings are supported by molecular modeling of the  <dig> dimensional structures of the gk domain and not contradicted by the phylogenetic analysis of the pdz domains . this is an important finding, showing that the analysis of the independent domains of different sizes renders a similar evolutionary scenario.

in regard to the maguk family, we found that the ca2+ channel beta-subunit family seems to have evolved together with the maguk family. the cacnbs are commonly not considered to belong to the maguks, but our phylogenetic results show that they are related, share a common ancestor and may thus represent a maguk subfamily.

our analysis of the pdz domains showed a bifurcated evolution , with the magi pdzs linked to both groups . additionally, we describe here that the ww domains likely inserted into the magi gk domain and then moved toward the c-terminus, leaving the gk domain deprived of its essential core and lid domain. at present, we do not have a good explanation for these events, but our findings are evidence against a complete inversion of the magi structure as was suggested earlier  <cit> .

based on our domain-by-domain analysis we propose a model to describe the structural evolution of the maguk family, including the cacnb family . evolving from an enzymatically active gk encoding gene, the family arose by obtaining both a pdz and sh <dig> domain. then the mpp subfamily split off, taking up l <dig> domains. the cacnb and magi subfamilies arose through domain loss of the pdz and sh <dig> domains, respectively. the maguk core structure, consisting of a pdz, sh <dig> and gk domain evolved further and gave rise, after duplication of the n-terminal pdz domain, to the dlg, zo and, lastly, the carma subfamily. duplications of pdz domains happened twice during evolution of the maguks and are illustrated in our model .

in summary, we have derived here a highly supported evolutionary model for the maguk family by analyzing the phylogeny of individual domains. the results of our analysis provide strong evidence that other complex multidomain families and also larger superfamilies can be investigated in a similar way. additionally, we provide evidence that places the calcium-channel beta-subunit proteins within the maguk family from an evolutionary perspective.

CONCLUSIONS
to elucidate the origin and the evolutionary history of the maguk family, we investigated full-length cdna, est and genomic sequences of species in major phyla. these data indicated that maguks are present only in metazoan species and not encoded in protozoans, bacteria or plants. phylogenetic analysis of our sequence data showed a matching evolutionary history for the central protein interaction domains of the maguks. supported further by structural evidence, we postulate that the maguks evolved first as a gk-sh <dig> structure from an active gk enzyme, which is present in protozoa and plants. then the pdz domain was added to this structure, thereby completing the maguk core structure. new domains were subsequently added or duplications of the pdz were made in order to give rise to the maguk assortment now present in vertebrates. additionally, we provide evidence that places the calcium-channel beta-subunit proteins within the maguk family, based on the evolutionary perspective of our research. our results show that it is possible to derive a supported evolutionary model for important multidomain families by analyzing encoded protein domains. we suggest here that larger superfamilies can be analyzed in a similar manner.

