BACKGROUND
cannibalism is ubiquitous in the animal kingdom  <cit>  and probably occurs in almost all major vertebrate and invertebrate groups  <cit> . it is particularly common in arthropods  <cit> , notably in generalist predators, where it is seen as an extension of their normal predatory behaviour  <cit> . one common feature of cannibalism in arthropods is that victims are preferentially defenceless life stages such as eggs, young larvae or quiescent pupae  <cit> . the extent of cannibalism is highly variable between, but also within species  <cit> . significant genetic variation in cannibalism rate has been shown within several species  .

native to asia, h. axyridis was introduced to north america and europe as a biological control agent against aphids, and later turned invasive. its rapid worldwide spread followed a complex invasion history involving admixture events and a prominent role of the eastern north american outbreak  <cit> . in europe, there is evidence for admixture between eastern north american founders and individuals from the european biocontrol laboratory population, used locally to control aphid populations   <cit> . h. axyridis is an appropriate model for studying cannibalism in the particular context of biological invasion, as well as in that of laboratory-reared biocontrol populations. firstly, cannibalism appears to play an important role in the population dynamics of h. axyridis <cit> . in its native area, field studies indicate that egg cannibalism may be a major mortality factor regulating population densities  <cit> , and account for up to 60% of egg mortality  <cit> . although egg cannibalism is most often performed by larvae, adults can also eat conspecific eggs  <cit> . cannibalism in h. axyridis has been shown to provide nutritional benefits when other prey are scarce  <cit> , nutrients are deficient, or toxic  <cit> , and to increase survival and reduce development time  <cit> . significant genetic variation in cannibalism rate has been demonstrated between individuals within population  <cit> . notably, there is a strong genetic basis for the expression of cannibalism in a low food environment, whereas heritability is not significant in a higher food environment  <cit> . h. axyridis displays cannibalism behaviour on both sibling and non-sibling eggs. in aphidophagous coccinellids, including h. axyridis, sibling egg cannibalism is frequently associated with the presence of bacteria such as wolbachia and spiroplasma, which kill males early in their development  <cit> . male-killer infected females obtain a substantial indirect fitness benefit from consuming the undeveloped male eggs from within their clutch  <cit> . here, we chose to focus on non-sibling egg cannibalism to avoid any confounding effects of male-killer infection. moreover, larvae are less likely to cannibalize related than non-related eggs  <cit> . finally, we found, using the same two population transects used in this study, a marked heritable increase in flight speed of h. axyridis adults from the core to the front of the invasion range in western europe . as a theoretical study has recently showed, we could expect that this increase of dispersal may have affected the evolution of cannibalism during the spatial expansion.

the main goal of this study was to investigate whether the propensity for cannibalism in h. axyridis differs both between native and invasive populations and between invasive populations from the core and from the front of the invasive area in western europe. we were also interested in assessing possible change in this trait in laboratory-reared biocontrol populations of the same species. finally, we examined whether the norm of reaction of cannibalism to individual density has shifted during the invasion and/or laboratory rearing processes. to address these issues, we collected ladybirds from three types of population: 1) two populations from the native area, 2) six invasive populations sampled along two transects going from the core to the front of the invaded area in western europe and 3) two european biocontrol strains. we assessed cannibalism of eggs by unrelated first instar larvae and adult females of h. axyridis at two different individual densities, in laboratory-controlled conditions.

RESULTS
 spatial expansion in western europe
we did not find any significant difference in cannibalism rates by first instar larvae and adult females between populations located on the core, intermediate and front of the expanding range . population identity within western europe did not have a significant effect on cannibalism by first instar larvae or adult females .
h. axyridis


note: analysis 1- focuses on spatial expansion in western europe , and analysis 2-compare different types of populations, i.e. native, invasive and biocontrol. significant p-values at the 5% threshold are shown in bold.

cannibalism by first instar larvae was globally 43% higher in the high-density treatment compared to the low-density treatment . cannibalism by adult females was globally 31% higher in the high-density treatment compared to the low-density treatment . we did not find any significant interaction between the individual density and the core, intermediate and front populations . this means that reaction norms according to individual density did not evolve during the spatial expansion, at least in the studied area.

 native versus invasive versus biocontrol populations
we compared the cannibalism rates among the three types of population . cannibalism by first instar larvae differed significantly between population types . larvae from invasive populations displayed a 37% higher cannibalism rate compared to those from native populations  and displayed twice the cannibalism rate of larvae from the biocontrol populations . the native larvae cannibalized 55% more than those from the biocontrol populations . there was no significant interaction between population types and density level . in contrast to the results obtained on first instar larvae, cannibalism by adult females did not differ significantly between population types neither alone  nor in interaction with density level .

considering the three types of populations together, we found that higher density significantly increased cannibalism by 41% in first instar larvae  and by 27% in adult females . the factor population identity was again not significant considering the three types of populations .

discussion
we provide the first evidence that cannibalism behaviour may differ between native and invasive populations of a given species. more specifically, we found that larvae from invasive populations of h. axyridis in western europe have a higher propensity for cannibalism than larvae from the native range and from commercial laboratory-reared biocontrol populations. cannibalism behaviour has been suggested to facilitate the colonization of marginal new environments by rescuing individuals from nutritionally poor situations  <cit> . an evolutionary increase in cannibalism linked to natural selection in such a nutritionally poor environment has been experimentally demonstrated in laboratory experiments  <cit> . a possible hypothesis is thus that upon entry into the new environment of the invasive area, h. axyridis larvae may have faced a nutritionally stressful situation . h. axyridis mostly feeds on tree-dwelling hemipteran insects such as aphids, psyllids, and scale insects. it is known that aphid fauna differ between asia and europe  <cit> , with however some species which are common between both areas. plants, that may be used by ha to find its preys, also differ much between the two areas. identifying the environmental differences that have selected for the observed change in cannibalism propensity would require additional work on ha foraging behavior in both areas.

although h. axyridis is a generalist predator, first instar larvae tend to stay on the leaves on which they hatched  <cit>  and their efficiency in capturing prey is very low even on prey encounter  <cit> . our results, together with those of wagner and colleagues  <cit> , who found a higher heritability for larval cannibalism in low food environments as compared to high food environments, support the hypothesis that larval propensity for cannibalism in h. axyridis responds to selection in nutritionally poor situations, another potential explanation for this higher cannibalism rate in invasive larvae could be linked to the presence of defensive alkaloids produced by predatory ladybirds against intra- and interspecific egg predation. kajita et al.  <cit>  showed that the amount of alkaloids could vary significantly between egg clutches within and among females in h. axyridis. it could thus be interesting to test whether the amount of alkaloids in eggs of invasive populations is lower than that in native ones and whether this corresponds with the higher cannibalism rate in invasive populations.

we also found that larvae from laboratory-reared biocontrol populations showed a lower propensity for cannibalism than larvae from wild native or invasive populations. this difference may result from the particular conditions of captive rearing. during mass rearing, biocontrol larvae have been fed ad libitum on highly nutritious unnatural prey  over numerous generations. such feeding regimes may have suppressed the selective pressure for cannibalism, which therefore substantially declined. it is also possible that cannibalism has been purposefully counter selected during the mass rearing process, with ladybirds displaying the cannibalism phenotype being discarded from the rearing. although these selective explanations are attractive, we cannot at present exclude the possibility that the observed shift results from genetic drift, which is also common under laboratory rearing conditions  <cit> , particularly as biocontrol populations are often characterized by low effective population sizes. in agreement with this, substantially lower genetic variation was found at microsatellite markers in biocontrol populations when compared to both native and invasive populations  <cit> . it has to be noted, however, that captive rearing has already been shown to significantly impact several other traits in biocontrol populations of h. axyridis, including a higher male reproductive success, a lower survival rate at lower temperatures  <cit>  and a lower resistance to pathogens  <cit> . altogether, it may indicate that adaptation to laboratory rearing conditions involves important reallocation of resources and energy, which is likely to affect other life history components of h. axyridis like fecundity and survival. interestingly, although western european invasive populations display a contribution of biocontrol genes estimated around 40%  <cit> , these invasive populations showed a significantly higher propensity for cannibalism than biocontrol populations. this result indicates that the low propensity for cannibalism of biocontrol individuals has not been retained in the field but was rather counter-selected during the genetic introgression process.

our experiments also shed light on the difference in cannibalism evolution with respect to life stages. in contrast to larvae, invasive adults do not show any significant difference in the propensity for cannibalism compared to native and biocontrol ones. in agreement with our laboratory-based results, most of the descriptions of egg cannibalism in the field involve larvae  <cit> . contrary to young larvae, which often stay on leaves on which they hatched  <cit> , adults are able to fly long distances searching for food and may thus suffer much less from local resource scarcity. moreover, the energetic advantage of cannibalism could be much greater for larvae than for adults.

a further aim of our study was to test whether the level of cannibalism differs between invasive populations from the core and from the front of the invaded area in western europe. a theoretical study has shown that higher dispersal rates can increase the probability of cannibalism but also that cannibalism itself can have important evolutionary consequences and select for increased dispersal rates  <cit> . our study did not reveal any significant difference in cannibalism rates from the core to the front of the invasion range in either larvae or adults. for adults, the absence of difference along the expanding range might be explained by the same reasons as those detailed previously. for larvae, however, we suggest that the evolutionary increase of cannibalism between native and western european invasive populations might have eroded the genetic variance at this trait, preventing a further increase in cannibalism rate along the expanding range. this is even more plausible given that western european invasive populations correspond to a secondary introduction from a previously invaded area in western usa  <cit> . this result indicates that cannibalism has not evolved conjointly with dispersal during the expansion of western europe. rather, as it has been theoretically shown  <cit> , the increased cannibalism rate in the invasive area compared to the native one may have helped the rapid increase in dispersal along the expanding range in western europe  <cit> .

finally, individuals often have to face recurrent bottlenecks  during the invasion process, both at the time of the introduction and during the spatial expansion  <cit> . because a reduced population density found at an expanding front may potentially reduce the selective advantage of cannibalism, one could have predicted a change of the norm of reaction of cannibalism to individual density during the spatial expansion of an invasive area. for both larvae and adults, we detected a higher individual rate of cannibalism at higher densities. this result is congruent with cannibalism rate being higher at higher densities in the majority of taxa  <cit>  and confirms that population density is a key factor in the expression of cannibalism  <cit> . we did not find however any significant interaction between the density and the tested populations . this means that reaction norms according to density did not change during the course of invasion . interestingly, a similar result was observed for biocontrol populations of h. axyridis, which also endured recurrent and severe bottleneck events during their rearing in the lab.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to provide evidence for a higher propensity for cannibalism in natural invasive populations compared to native ones. however, we are still at an early stage in understanding the underlying mechanisms and several research perspectives seem appealing. for instance, since h. axyridis now has a worldwide distribution   <cit> , the study of cannibalism behaviour in invaded continents other than europe would allow to determine whether the higher propensity for cannibalism in invasive populations is a general feature of the invasion process at the worldwide scale. in addition, it has been suggested that enhanced cannibalism might be a transient phenomenon in the new environment, with cannibalism rates increasing initially and then declining as physiological adaptation to new prey increases and the nutritional benefits of cannibalism thereby diminish  <cit> . it would hence be interesting to test whether higher cannibalism rates are maintained in the european invasive populations in the long term.

