BACKGROUND
proteins from thermophilic organisms are not only stable at higher temperatures, but are also generally more stable than their mesophilic counterparts. therefore they are scientifically valuable, e.g. for biochemical and structural studies, and have multiple applications in industry  <cit> . however, many proteins exclusively occur in eukaryotes, and only a few of the latter are thermophilic  are filamentous fungi of the class sordariomycetes  <cit>  which can be found in ‘unnatural’ habitats like compost. their natural habitat seems to be in soils such as in semi-arid grasslands in new mexico  <cit> . they are common in multiple microhabitats in this region, where high summer temperatures in combination with episodes of substantial precipitation provide favourable conditions  <cit> . chaetomium thermophilum is a widely distributed soil-inhabiting fungus and a thermophile in accordance with its lifestyle in self-heating composting plant material  <cit> . it can also be found in composting urban solid waste  <cit>  and wood-chip piles  <cit> . c. thermophilum is a member of the large genus of chaetomium, also within the sordariomycetes, that are found in soil, air, and plant debris  <cit> . close relatives of these thermophilic fungi are the mesophilic mould fungus chaetomium globosum , a frequent indoor contaminant that produces mycotoxins and acts as an allergen  <cit> , and neurospora crassa, another mesophilic filamentous fungus of which the genome has been published  <cit> .

due to their thermostable nature, proteins from thermophilic fungi have recently gained considerable attention in industry and structural biology. several crystal structures of proteins from these thermophilic fungi have been determined such as those of two beta  <dig> -galactanases from t.heterothallica <cit> , a glycoside hydrolase from t. terrestris <cit> , and get <dig>  get <dig> and beta  <dig> -xylanase from c. thermophilum <cit> . the paper-industry utilizes members of the beta  <dig> -xylanase family for bio-bleaching of kraft-pulp  <cit> . the biotechnological potential of c. thermophilum is also illustrated by the purification and characterization of its thermostable superoxide dismutase   <cit> , an enzyme which is utilized in cosmetic products to reduce free radical damage to the skin. furthermore, the genomes of c. thermophilum, t. terrestris and t. heterothallica provide a source of thermostable cellulolytic enzymes, such as the glycoside hydrolases that can be used in the production of third-generation biofuels  <cit> .

here, we identify commonalities and differences of thermophilic adaptation between eukaryotes and prokaryotes and exploit the close relationship of the thermophilic to mesophilic fungi to gain detailed insight into the molecular evolution of thermophily. by comparing the genomes of thermophilic fungi to each other and to mesophilic relatives we can clarify the evolutionary trajectory that has been obscured by inconsistent naming conventions  <cit>  and determine whether there are independent events of gain of thermophily in these fungi. we further use the observed adaptation biases to predict mutations that can increase the thermostability of proteins and verify them experimentally.

RESULTS
taxonomic position of thermophilic fungi within chaetomiaceae
to determine the phylogenetic relationships between thermophilic and mesophilic fungi of the sordariomycetes, we searched for the presence of  <dig> phylogenetic marker genes  <cit>  in published and unpublished genomes of this clade using hidden markov models , and used bootstrapping and maximum likelihood to calculate a phylogenetic tree . despite the different naming, the three thermophilic species closely group together, implying that the most parsimonious scenario is a single invention of thermophily. however, chaetomium globosum, the closest mesophilic neighbour of these three thermophilic species is monophyletic within the thermophiles with 97% bootstrap support and most likely lost thermophily. as this was surprising, we also generated phylogenetic trees using  <dig>  universal single copy orthologs established specifically for the sordariomycetes using the eggnog pipeline  <cit> . we indeed could confirm the taxonomic positions implying loss of thermophily .thus, by studying this lineage we can gain insight both in the gain and loss of thermophily.


genome reduction in thermophiles
the genomes of c. thermophilum , t. terrestris  and t. heterothallica  are significantly smaller than their close mesophilic relatives such as chaetomium globosum  and neurospora crassa . in agreement with previous studies of prokaryotic thermophiles, the genome size reduction is due mainly to fewer protein coding genes , but also to shorter introns and shorter intergenic regions  and  <cit> . since c. globosum is derived from the ancestor of these three species, there are two possibilities. either, this ancestor had a small genome and c. globosum has gained genes by duplications or horizontal transfers or the three thermophiles have independently lost genes in a parallel adaptation process. although larger genomes in the outgroups makes a loss and gain scenario more likely, we investigated all orthologous groups from the complete genomes of  <dig> members of the sordariomycetes  to clarify the gene content evolution of eukaryotic thermophiles. firstly, we analysed the phylogenetic presence/absence patterns of these sornogs. in total,  <dig>  protein coding genes are present in equal copy numbers in each of the four species cth, tte, tht and cgl. present in one copy but absent from either of the four are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  orthologs, meaning that lineage specific loss alone does not account for the differences in genome size. c. globosum specific duplications are responsible for ca.  <dig> extra genes. it must be noted that some lineage specific losses may also be accounted for by difference in genome quality, but the tendencies will remain.

on the other hand, there are  <dig> orthologous groups covering  <dig>  genes of c. globosum that are absent in all three others. these numbers are  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  orthologous groups  for cth, tte and tht. the difference in genome size can thus partly be assigned to these orthologous groups. a large number of these are related to transposable elements, including  <dig> transposases,  <dig> reverse transcriptases,  <dig> dna helicases. the lack of these elements in the thermophilic fungi may indicate that transposition is unfavourable at higher temperatures.

oxygenases and enzymes hydrolyzing complex sugars are in particular frequently lost in the thermophiles. this does not always mean that metabolic capabilities are completely absent; often multigene families in n. crassa and c. globosum have only one counterpart in c. thermophilum, but also non-homologous isoforms are reduced to one enzyme, implying a reduction in robustness. proteins that are completely missing in c. thermophilum but not in the two thielavias include wc <dig>  wc <dig> and frq which are involved in the regulation of the circadian clock  <cit> . we hypothesize that due to the localization far inside the compost away from light  the day-night rhythm does not play a role for c. thermophilum.

there are no major gene family expansions in the thermophiles compared to their relatives, only a few orthologous groups have been slightly expanded against the reductionist trend. the majority of them are uncharacterized, but some indicate life style adaptation such as a cellobiose dehydrogenase of which c. thermophilum has three copies and c. globosum and n. crassa only two, reflecting an increased wood degradation capacity. t. terrestris has five copies of a s-adenosyl-l-methionine  dependent methyltransferase that is likely to employ arsenite as substrate where its relatives have only one or two. the largest lineage specific expansion in t. heterothallica is an orthologous group with three copies of a scytalone dehydratase involved in fungal melanin biosynthesis. melanin provides resistance to uv radiation, drought and high temperatures  <cit>  and thus this expansion likely represents a thermophilic adaptation. the lack of major expansions suggests that the metabolisms of the thermophilic fungi have not undergone major niche adaptations requiring additional functionality, and that the dominating adaptation was indeed the one to higher temperatures.

convergent evolution of thermophily across all domains of life
it has been previously shown that the amino acid frequencies vary with the ogt, specifically the summed frequency of the amino acids ivywrel shows the highest correlation with ogt in both bacteria and archaea  <cit> . in these domains of life, the ancestor was likely a thermophile and adaptation happened to colder environments  <cit> .

we therefore investigated whether the molecular principles of thermostability in fungal proteins are similar. in alignments of the  <dig>  single copy orthologs universal in sordariomycetes , we find that the total frequency of ivywrel amino acids as in thermophilic archaea and bacteria is significantly higher in c. thermophilum compared to the other sordariomycetes but not in t. heterothallica and t. terrestris . this is explained mainly by the extremely high frequencies of isoleucines, tryptophans and tyrosines in c. thermophilum . addition of these large hydrophobic amino acids is likely to play a role in filling the hydrophobic cores of proteins . only part of this signal, the increased levels of arginine and tryptophane are present in all three thermophiles. specific to the two thielavias is an enrichment in alanine. furthermore, consistent differences between the three thermophilic and the mesophilic fungi are lower frequencies of aspartic acids and lysines in the thermophiles . the more extreme reduction of genome size together with the ivywrel bias in c. thermophilum leads us to hypothesize that this fungus might survive at higher temperatures than the two thielavias for which optimal growth temperatures have not been published yet.


analyzing the amino acid frequencies from bacterial  and archaeal  clades with thermophilic members, we observe a striking difference with eukaryotes; an overrepresentation of cysteines in c. thermophilum proteins ; in total 15% of cysteines in aligned positions are unique to c. thermophilum. the major categorized roles of cysteines are in catalytic residues, disulfide bridges and metal binding , whereby the latter two contribute to folding and stability. cysteines have also been shown to contribute to thermal stability in their free form, when they form interactions inside the core of a protein  <cit> . this unique adaptation of c. thermophilum may be another indication that its proteins are better adapted to high temperatures than the other two thermophilic sordariomycetes. another difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes that we observe is that glycines are strongly depleted in c. thermophilum whereas they are enriched in c. globosum compared to the complete clade of sordariomycetes. the exchange of alanines with glycines has been shown to destabilize alpha-helices, particularly in the center of the helix  <cit> . it seems as if c. globosum has indeed used this strategy to make proteins less thermo-stable, and c. thermophilum has evolved in the opposite direction, lowering its glycine content.

we verified the generalizability of these trends by examining two more unpublished thermophilic fungal genomes, thermomyces lanuginosus and talaromyces thermophilus of the subclass eurotiomycetidae, a different fungal clade that also includes aspergillus fumigatus and emericella nidulans. compared to their mesophilic neighbours, these species both have a significantly higher total frequency of ivywrel amino acids . they also show a depletion of glycines and significant enrichment in arginines and alanines  consistent with the biases in the thermophilic sordariomycetes. this shows that some of the trends are indeed universal between different clades of fungi.

mutational paths towards thermophily
in contrast to thermophilic prokaryotes, the genomes of thermophilic fungi have very close, known mesophilic relatives and thus, for the first time, we can trace and quantify the mutational paths by which the differences in amino acid composition arise . we therefore have quantified the mutation biases between pairs of amino acids in all branches of the sordariomycetes tree and determined how different they are in one branch compared to the rest of the tree . this is similar to but more specific than a previous analysis on biases between pairs of prokaryotic thermophiles and mesophiles  <cit> . in the prokaryote study the mesophile-thermophile species pairs were much more dissimilar than our mesophile-thermophile relatives and thus there would be a large effect of multiple substitutions at each site resulting in  <dig> out of  <dig> amino acid pairs showing a bias. likely because of the difference in evolutionary distance we observe a smaller number of significantly biased amino acid pairs  in the branches leading to thermophilic fungi . we observed that mutation bias between several small amino acids and prolines has led to higher frequency of prolines already in the ancestor of the thermophilic sordariomycetes . analyzing the amino acid frequencies from bacterial  and archaeal  clades with thermophilic members we also found that proline frequency is increasing with higher ogt  which is significant in bacteria but not in archaea; prolines make the protein structure more rigid and less likely to unfold as has been shown before in case studies  <cit> . this strengthens the hypothesis that the ancestor of the thermophilic sordariomycetes and c. globosum was also thermophilic. furthermore, there are significantly more mutations from lysine to arginine than vice versa; the replacement of lysine by argnine has been shown to lead to less fluctuations in side groups  <cit> . this lysine to arginine bias is present in four out of five branches leading to thermophily in sordariomycetes   <cit> . other consistent biases are between aspartic and glutamic acid as well as between threonine and alanine, where we observe the opposite trend in the branch where the thermophily is lost, leading to c. globosum. the increased level of lysine to arginine mutations as hallmark of eukaryotic thermophilic adaptation was confirmed in two out of three branches in eurotiomycetidae leading to the two monophyletic thermophilic species t. lanuginosus and t. thermophilus. moreover the strong bias of serine to alanine is also present in these species. apart from these consistent biases, there are also unique, individual biases in the branches. as in prokaryotes it seems to be also the case in eukaryotes that increased thermostability can be achieved in many ways depending on the context.


considering the consistent biases, we analysed particular residues in orthologous groups shared between sordariomycetes and eurotiomycetidae. we found that where the same biases exist, the overlap between positions where e.g. arginines have been introduced instead of lysines is significant but small, i.e.  <dig> out of a total of  <dig>  positions that are changed from lysine to arginine in any of the thermophiles are shared between all five. this leads us to believe there are some positions that are more likely to increase stability and may even be essential; however mutations at many other positions can contribute independently.

in contrast to prokaryotes where gc content has been found to cause a bias in amino acid frequencies of lysines and arginines  <cit> , as previously reported in these fungi the gc content does not differ significantly between mesophiles and thermophiles  <cit> . there is an elevated gc content at the third codon position as reported by  <cit> , however the frequencies of g at c and the third codon position do not differ between lysine and arginine. therefore, in thermophilic fungi the lysine-arginine bias has arisen independently of the gc content.

scoring scheme for adaptive mutations
based on our observations, we developed a scoring scheme to give weight to individual mutations for their contribution to thermophily . we used the mutation bias between pairs of amino acids in the branches leading to the thermophilic ancestor as well as to c. thermophilum to arrive at these scores . we predict that those positions with a high score are responsible for the thermophilic adaptation of individual proteins. in this way, we can distinguish which thermophile specific mutations are likely to be adaptive and which are likely to be neutral. since the thermophilic nature of proteins has been lost in c. globosum, we can also predict which mutations have been responsible for this loss. in this way we predicted  <dig>  thermophilic adaptive mutations in  <dig>  single copy proteins for which we could trace the ancestral amino acid sequences.

mutations important for thermophilic stability
to validate some of these predictions experimentally, we applied them to a protein from c. thermophilum, which is homologous to yeast pre-ribosomal export factor arx <dig>   <cit> . c. thermophilum arx <dig>  is thermostable  up to 53°c at a concentration of  <dig> mg/ml, whereas the arx <dig> from the mesophilic c. globosum  precipitates already at 35°c , corresponding to the ogts of both organisms. circular dichroism  spectra showed that ctarx <dig> began to unfold in vitro at 55°c and reached complete unfolding at ~70°c . to test whether the predicted adaptive and neutral mutations have an effect on the thermostability of our model protein, we generated two mutant ctarx <dig> proteins with either five predicted adaptive or five predicted neutral positions in ctarx <dig> changed to the respective ancestral residues . the predicted non-destabilizing  ctarx <dig> mutant behaved like wild-type ctarx <dig> and remained soluble up to 53°c  and up to 55°c . however, the predicted destabilizing  ctarx <dig> mutant remained soluble only up to 49°c  and 50°c . this confirms our prediction scheme to find mutations that increase thermostability. furthermore, we identified eleven c. globosum specific mutations that we think are likely to have destabilized this protein . introducing the ancestral amino acid for all these eleven mutations indeed increased the temperature at which the protein remained soluble. thus we could turn back time and create a thermostable from an unstable protein.


structural context for adaptive mutations
to reveal mechanistic roles for adaptive residues, we determined the 3d structure of ctarx <dig> that shares the pita-bread fold with methionine-aminopeptidases  <cit>  and ebp <dig>  <cit>  . expression, purification, crystallization and x-ray structure determination of this protein was successful, supporting the value of c. thermophilum as a model system for structural studies. the two selected adaptive proline mutations  indeed occur in loops of ctarx <dig>  preventing unfolding as mentioned above  <cit> . another fundamental concept in thermo-adaptation of proteins is an increased bulkiness of hydrophobic amino acids within the protein core. according to some models, unfolding is due to the transfer of water into the protein hydrophobic core that progressively breaks hydrophobic contacts and swells the protein interior  <cit> . direct sequence comparison of ctarx <dig> with cgarx <dig> indeed shows that 80%  of the hydrophobic amino acid exchanges lead to increased bulkiness. several of these adaptive bulky hydrophobic residues in ctarx <dig>  together with v <dig> form an extended hydrophobic cluster, which together with adaptive c <dig> leads to a tight packing of helices α <dig> and α <dig> to the central beta-sheet . acquired electrostatic interactions are found between the imino-group of w <dig> and d <dig>  linking β <dig> to α <dig> more tightly  and between adaptive r <dig> in β <dig> and e <dig> stabilizing β <dig> with respect to helix α <dig>  mutation of f <dig>  w <dig> and r <dig> reduces the thermostability of ctarx <dig> by about 2°c to 51°c . in addition, mutation of the two hydrophobic residues  on top of the five adaptive mutations leads to a further decrease of ctarx <dig> thermostability to 47°c . taken together, these examples of adaptive mutations in the context of the 3d structure of ctarx <dig> illustrate how individual residues and their interactions contribute to a thermophilic adaptation.


CONCLUSIONS
here, we show that the principles of thermophilic adaptations in fungi are similar to that in prokaryotes, with the notable exception of cysteines that are enriched in c. thermophilum and that might contribute to thermophily in several ways. the close relation of mesophilic species allows predicting particular mutations that are directly responsible for thermo-adaptation, which we could confirm experimentally by protein engineering. by solving the 3d structure of a single thermophilic protein , we could identify three different types of adaptive mutations :  loop rigidity by increased proline frequency,  increased protein core hydrophobicity, and  increased electrostatic interactions stabilizing neighboring secondary structure elements.

by now, several structures have been determined already based on c. thermophilum, t. terrestris and t. heterothallica proteins  <cit>  and we and others have determined the thermostable nature of several other proteins  <cit> . this, together with our finding of thousands of mutations towards thermophily in this lineage, implies that the thermostability of proteins is a major contributor to the increased ogt of these organisms, in particular in c. thermophilum. c. thermophilum is, as are t. terrestris and t. heterothallica promising resources for stable proteins for industrial purposes as well as for biochemical and structural studies that rely on stable eukaryotic proteins and the assembly of complex molecular machines. with experimental tools such as genetic transformation protocols and a number of independent lineages containing thermophilic eukaryotes, a rapidly increased understanding should lead to precise predictions which particular mutation increases thermophily via which mechanisms for a vast amount of important eukaryotic proteins.

