BACKGROUND
a large number of physiological and molecular events are known to occur during grape berry ripening, but the regulatory mechanisms controlling this critical developmental phase are still poorly understood. the onset of ripening  is accompanied by significant changes, at both physical  and chemical  levels  <cit> , concurrently with the modification of the transcription rate of a large number of related genes  <cit> .

auxin, ethylene, abscisic acid  and brassinosteroids  are actively involved, throughout a complex network of interactions with other mobile signals, in the regulation of grape berry ripening  <cit> . interestingly, the highest levels of auxin are observed at early berry development, then its concentration decreases rapidly before véraison, becoming undetectable after two weeks  <cit> . on the other hand, another study showed no dramatic changes in auxin concentration during berry growth and development  <cit> . application of synthetic auxins before véraison delays ripening, as seen in several ripening-related physiological processes  <cit> , and heavily modifies the transcription of key genes involved in the sugars metabolism, cell wall turn-over and biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids  <cit> . among the latter, the expression of genes encoding chalcone synthase , flavanone 3-hydroxylase , udp-glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase , and myb transcription factors  <cit>  is negatively affected by auxin. davies et al.  <cit>  showed that treatments with the synthetic auxin btoa  were able to modify the hexose accumulation mechanisms by altering the expression of the related genes. naa applications at véraison also inhibited genes belonging to cell wall structure, such as grip <dig> coding for a proline-rich protein, and negatively affected aba metabolism  <cit> .

endogenous levels of ethylene, aba and brs increase at véraison, and exogenous applications of these hormones accelerate the initiation of the ripening phase, concurrently stimulating the accumulation of anthocyanins, most likely by enhancing the transcription of chs, f3h, ufgt, and myb <dig> genes  <cit> . these treatments can also induce the uptake and storage of sugars by berries  <cit> . in addition, low doses of ethylene at véraison stimulated grape berry expansion, enabling cell elongation in pulp and skin, and inducing genes encoding aquaporins  and cell wall hydrolase/esterase, such as polygalacturonase , expansin , and pectin-methyl esterase   <cit> .

since mutants with impaired ripening are not available in grapevine, the best alternative way to investigate the role of hormones during berry development consists in altering the specific process by means of exogenous applications of plant growth regulators. transcriptome studies dealing with the effects of exogenous hormone treatments in grapevine have focused on ethylene  <cit> , referring to the pivotal role of this hormone in the transcriptional regulation of its biosynthesis and signal transduction during grape berry development. in particular, ethylene treatments were shown to induce the transcription of arf <dig>  and nced  genes, the latter encoding a key enzyme of aba biosynthesis  <cit> . auxin treatments were also investigated, showing an increase in ethylene due to the stimulation of the expression of genes encoding its biosynthetic key enzymes  <cit>  and signal transduction elements  <cit> .

in order to shed light on the hormone interactions occurring at véraison, a specific transcriptomic study was carried out on naa treated berries. this study confirms the capacity of naa to delay grape berry ripening at the transcriptional level. the duration of this delay may be associated with the recovery of a steady state of auxin concentration. in the presence of altered levels of auxin, the crosstalk between hormones involves diverse specific mechanisms, acting at both the hormone response and biosynthesis levels, thus creating a complex network of transcriptional responses.

RESULTS
biochemical analyses
physical  and chemical  parameters were assessed in both control and naa-treated berries , in order to verify the actual efficacy of the treatment.

untreated berries showed an increase of volume after the time of the treatment  until reaching a temporary lag phase  during which this parameter did not vary significantly. thereafter, it increased and reached its maximum at harvest . the volume of naa-treated berries showed a significant increase up to  <dig> dafb, when their lag phase began. at this time, the volume of treated samples was about half that of the control. moreover, the lag phase of naa-treated berries was more than 50% longer  with respect to the control. thereafter, the volume increased, until reaching, at harvest , a value similar to that observed in untreated samples .

anthocyanins content of whole berries in control samples increased very rapidly up to five days following the lag phase, and then gradually decreased until harvest . the accumulation of anthocyanins was significantly inhibited in naa-treated berries to almost undetectable levels up to  <dig> dafb. thereafter, a constant increase was observed until harvest , finally reaching a level similar to that measured in the control .

soluble solids concentration  of control berries constantly increased throughout the whole experiment, especially during the lag phase of berry growth. naa treatment showed an inhibitory effect also on this parameter, similar to that of anthocyanins. in fact, no increase of ssc was observed up to  <dig> dafb, whereas a constant rise was measured thereafter, reaching at harvest the same values as the control .

in control berries, a constant decrease of titratable acidity, well correlated with both malic and tartaric acid degradation, was observed during ripening evolution. on the other hand, naa-treated berries always showed significantly higher levels of total acidity than the control, except for samples at harvest, whose acidity was similar to that assessed in untreated samples. however, in treated berries a clear correlation was observed only between titratable acidity and malic acid content. additionally, a significant increase of tartaric acid was observed immediately after the naa treatment , followed by a constant but less rapid decrease compared to control fruit .

differentially expressed genes and enrichment analysis
three comparisons were carried out by means of microarray experiments. the samples to be compared were chosen in order to achieve as much information as possible about the effect of the auxin treatment at the transcriptional level, its duration, and the implications in terms of physiological changes and technological relevance . the first comparison was carried out between naa-treated and control fruits at  <dig> dafb  in order to identify genes differentially expressed at  <dig> days after the auxin treatment, in correspondence with the onset of véraison in the control. the second comparison was made on naa-treated and control berries at  <dig> dafb  in correspondence of the harvest of untreated berries, to point out the effects of the treatment on ripening evolution. the third comparison  highlighted transcriptional differences present in treated berries, which had biochemical and phenotypic parameters similar to the control at harvest.

among the three comparisons, genes with significant  differential expression were  <dig>  in n1/c <dig>   <dig>  in n2/c <dig>  and  <dig>  in n3/c <dig> . among the genes differentially expressed in n1/c <dig>  n2/c <dig>  and n3/c <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  genes, respectively, showed a fold-change variation of at least 2-fold in terms of down- or up-regulation. it is noteworthy that treated samples at harvest  showed an almost complete transcriptional recovery with respect to the control at  <dig> dafb.

microarray data were validated by means of qpcr experiments performed on a subset of selected genes, revealing similar expression patterns as confirmed by the significant correlation  pointed out between them .

in order to functionally classify the genes affected by the auxin treatment, gene ontology  term enrichment analysis was performed, as described by blüthgen et al.  <cit>  and botton et al.  <cit> , in each of the three comparisons against the whole array background. a complete list of the enriched go terms resulted from fisher’s exact test can be found in additional file  <dig>  additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  in the first comparison , no significant enrichment was found when a q <  <dig>  was considered as a threshold value, although go terms related to protein synthesis  were significantly over-represented . it is noteworthy that also the terms “protein transport” and “establishment of protein localization” were those with a higher significance and shown to be under-represented. at the second comparison , few terms showed a significant q. however, considering the p <  <dig> , terms related to the cell wall  appeared to be over-represented . in the last comparison , go terms related to development  were significantly over-represented with q <  <dig> . it is worthy to note that among the terms with a significant p value, particularly enriched are those related to  <dig> -β–glucan . among the hormone-related terms, the “jasmonic acid mediated signaling pathway” was over-represented.

mapman analysis
to investigate the main metabolic pathways affected by the naa treatment, a mapman analysis  <cit>  was performed on n1/c <dig> comparison based upon differentially expressed genes chosen according to p <  <dig> , which was shown to be an acceptable threshold according to array validation analyses carried out with qpcr. this specific threshold was chosen in order to enlarge the number of genes to be used as input data for the mapman software.

mapman pointed out that several metabolisms were down-regulated in naa-treated berries, such as those involving cell wall metabolism, carbohydrates, lipids, secondary metabolites, and amino acids, with the only exception of the light reactions pathway that showed a general up-regulation .

the cell wall and secondary metabolism bin categories, which were linked to the above described biochemical parameters, were investigated. the cell wall category included genes coding for pectin methyl esterase, endo-transglycosylase, polygalacturonase, and expansin-like protein , whereas the secondary metabolism included genes encoding alcohol dehydrogenase, phenylalanine ammonium lyase  and chalcone synthase . within this secondary metabolism category, genes coding for ß-carotene hydroxylase  and cynnamoyl-coa reductase  showed an up-regulation in naa-treated berries . expression patterns of key genes involved in cell expansion and phenylpropanoids pathway were validated in qpcr experiments carried out in all samples . this validation analysis pointed out that the expression profiles of selected genes , paralleled the kinetics of anthocyanins content and berry volume , showing an early inhibitory effect of the auxin treatment, followed by a recovery at harvest, when the treated samples showed transcripts levels similar to the control.

a detailed list of genes with the respective bin codes belonging to each mapman category is reported in additional file  <dig> 

hormonometer analysis
to understand the hormone-related transcriptional response of the berry to the auxin treatment, a hormonometer analysis was carried out relying upon putative hormone indexes whose transcript levels were measured by means of the microarray. this tool allows to describe, in terms of correlation , the similarity  between a query transcriptional response and a transcriptional response typically assessed upon a certain hormone treatment as defined by known hormone indexes in arabidopsis. separate runs of this tool were carried out with different subsets of genes as input, as performed by bonghi et al.  <cit> . the subsets are: i) all the hormone indexes , ii) genes with hormone-specific responsiveness , iii) hormone-responsive genes encoding tfs , and iv) genes encoding tfs with hormone-specific responsiveness . along with this analysis, mean log ratios  of genes belonging to biosynthesis , metabolism , transport , perception , signal transduction  and hormone-responsiveness  categories were calculated for each of the eight hormones considered by the hormonometer. the categorization was made according to the arabidopsis hormone database  <dig>   web site . both analyses were carried out in the three comparisons made with microarrays and the resulting heat maps were focused on hormones involved in grape berry ripening with a primary role  .

the proportion of hormone responsive genes in arabidopsis ranges between  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the whole transcriptome  according to the hormone considered, whereas in grape the percentage ranges between  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the whole gene set . as far as the grape microarray is concerned , the proportion of hormone responsive genes are similar to that of arabidopsis, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> % with values for each hormone comparable to those calculated for arabidopsis . a minimal bias may therefore be assumed to exist when grape expression data are used as input for hormonometer, as hypothesized in a recent work on peach  <cit> .

within the ahd subcategories related to auxin, significant variations in genes encoding tr and st elements were observed. in the first comparison , the auxin treatment repressed the transport of the hormone, at least at the transcriptional level, along with the significant up-regulation of its st elements. the other ahd subcategories did not show any significant variations. these data were paralleled by a substantial correlation in the hormonometer results, more significant when only the tfs were considered in the analysis, especially the auxin-specific ones . the second comparison  reflected a situation typical of an auxin-related transcriptional response. the ahd subcategories indicated that the bs elements were slightly repressed and that both the tr- and st-related genes were significantly up-regulated. this may be interpreted as a typical homeostatic response, confirmed by the hormonometer results, which indicated a general unspecific correlation between auxin target expression and the typical auxin-related transcriptional response. in the last comparison , the ahd categories were very stable and the hormonometer analysis still pointed out an active transcriptional response to auxin, with a significant correlation for the tfs and stfs subsets, suggesting that the response to the hormone may have involved mainly auxin-specific transcription factors.

as concerns ethylene, interesting data were observed regarding both the ahd subcategories and the hormonometer results. as far as the biosynthetic genes are concerned, a strong up-regulation was found in the second comparison , whereas data in the other two cases were less significant. the st-related transcription showed a significant variation in all comparisons, being stimulated in the first and second , and repressed in the third . significant variations were observed also in the hr genes, which were down-regulated in all cases except the n3/c <dig> comparison. the hormonometer analysis showed a strong and broad anti-correlation in all situations when all genes and the ethylene-specific ones  were considered. an almost reversed situation was observed in the other subsets , except for the first comparison  that still showed an anti-correlation and no correlation, for tfs and stfs, respectively. in n2/c <dig>  a stronger correlation was found for stfs than for tfs, whereas in the third comparison no correlation was found for the hormone-specific tfs.

genes coding for bs elements of abscisic acid , were down-regulated at n1/c <dig> comparison, while in the n2/c <dig> comparison they were up-regulated. a weak transcriptional repression was found for genes encoding per elements in the first comparisons, although with low significance. a stimulation of transcription was found in st-related genes that paralleled that of bs. the hormonometer showed a general correlation in all subsets and all situations, without, however, any aba-specificity.

the brassinosteroids category showed significant data in both the analyses . bs-related genes varied significantly in all three comparisons, with a down-regulation trend in all cases. slight, but not significant, variations were also observed with respect to the genes encoding met elements. a down-regulation was reported for genes coding for per elements in the third comparison . genes related to st were down-regulated in n1/c <dig> and clearly up-regulated in all the other cases. finally, the hormonometer analysis evidenced an extensive anti-correlation, with the only exceptions of all tfs and stfs in the second and third comparisons, respectively. in particular, the latter case pointed out a significant correlation.

expression of auxin-, ethylene-, and abscisic acid-related genes
expression patterns of selected auxin-, ethylene-, and aba-related genes were validated by qpcr experiments. as far as the former genes are concerned , the naa treatment negatively affected the expression of tryptophan synthase beta-subunit  <dig> , a gene involved in the biosynthesis of tryptophan, an auxin precursor. the treatment also induced the accumulation, up to  <dig> dafb, of transcripts of genes responsible for auxin perception , polar transport  and irreversible conjugation . concerning the signal transduction, two aux/iaa genes  and auxin response factor  <dig>  were up-regulated in treated berries one week after naa application , whereas later on and up to harvest the accumulation of their transcripts was higher in control berries.

acc synthase  and acc oxidase  genes, encoding the key enzymes of ethylene biosynthesis, were strongly up-regulated in treated berries during véraison . two genes encoding ethylene receptors, i.e. ethylene insensitive  <dig>  and ethylene response sensor  <dig> , had similar expression levels in both control and naa-treated fruits until the inception of ripening in the control , when a significant increase was registered earlier in untreated berries than naa-treated ones . three ethylene response factors genes , involved in the regulation of ethylene response, were all positively affected by the naa treatment, although with different timings .

since the hormonometer analysis showed some significant variations also in the expression of abscisic acid  targets, two aba-related genes were also investigated. the 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase <dig> , which is a key gene involved in aba biosynthesis, was significantly down-regulated in naa-treated samples one week after the treatment   and abscisic acid insensitive  <dig> , involved in aba perception, was down-regulated in naa-treated berries up to  <dig> dafb. thereafter, its mrna levels in naa-treated samples reached those observed in untreated samples .

discussion
a ripening delay caused by the application of auxins has been previously recorded both in climacteric and non-climacteric fruits  <cit> . in grapevine, a ripening delay induced by the application of natural or synthetic auxins, including naa, to berries before véraison was observed in a large range of cultivars  <cit> . results presented in this study confirmed that naa, applied at the pre-véraison stage, strongly delays ripening inception in cv. merlot . all the parameters used to monitor the ripening progression , with the exception of the initial delay occurring in the treated berries, showed overlapping kinetics in both treated and untreated fruit. these data suggest that the auxin treatment caused just a shift in the initiation of ripening, as already hypothesized by böttcher et al.  <cit> . this observation is also confirmed by the microarray data analysis, which showed a decreasing number of differentially expressed genes throughout the experiment . at the véraison of control fruit , mapman analysis clearly shows that naa application down-regulated genes involved in cell expansion  and secondary metabolism, in particular those responsible for flavonoids biosynthesis , consistently with the biochemical analyses. this repressive effect remained well evident up to  <dig> dafb, whereas a partial recovery was observed thereafter, as already reported by davies et al.  <cit>  and jeong et al.  <cit> . at harvest of naa-treated berries , the transcription level of genes involved in the flavonoids biosynthetic pathway was still enhanced with respect to the control fruit at harvest, while a full recovery was observed for those involved in cell wall metabolism and water uptake . these observations show that naa is more effective in counteracting the accumulation of flavonoids rather than berry expansion, as demonstrated by böttcher et al.  <cit> .

both in control and treated fruits there is a clear coordination of the transcriptional regulation of genes determining cell expansion  and turgor , in agreement with the model for cell expansion proposed by cosgrove  <cit> , especially during the early post-treatment phases and up to  <dig> dafb. during this phase, the naa treatment clearly repressed the genes involved in both processes, which was consistent with the berry volume measures and thus reflecting an almost exclusive transcriptional control of berry expansion. an inversion of this trend and a complete recovery to the levels of the control was observed thereafter , although not correlated with the faster volume increase occurring in treated berries to reach a final volume at harvest equal to that of the control fruits. this may be due to different mechanisms controlling berry expansion other than the auxin-controlled transcription, most likely at post-transcriptional level, as previously demonstrated for aquaporins whose gating behaviour can be affected by phosphorylation, heteromerization, ph, ca2+, pressure, solute gradients and temperature  <cit> . regulation of aquaporin trafficking may also represent a way to modulate membrane water permeability. taken together, these data indicate that the berry expansion process is under the control of multiple regulatory pathways, involved according to a well-defined developmentally-programmed chronological sequence.

to shed light on the role of auxin and its cross-talk with other hormones in the regulation of berry ripening, a specific analysis was carried out on hormone-related genes by using the hormonometer bioinformatic platform  <cit> . this was paralleled by a merged analysis of specific gene categories . this approach allowed to set up a hypothetical model describing what happened in terms of auxin-related response after the naa treatment . the application of naa caused an excessive availability of auxin, most likely counterbalanced by homeostatic mechanisms involving synthesis, breakdown, conjugation and transport  <cit> . however, at  <dig> dafb auxin biosynthesis and metabolism gene categories did not differ significantly between control and treated samples, transport was generally repressed, and an auxin-specific transcriptional response was seen along with a general activation of signal transduction elements. therefore, it is likely that the homeostatic mechanisms had already been activated within the first  <dig> days after the treatment. this hypothesis is supported by qpcr expression data, especially those related to gh3-like, iaa4-like, and iaa31-like genes . in naa-treated berries at  <dig> dafb, the first of these three auxin-related genes was expressed 6-fold higher compared to the control, then its expression decreased to just  <dig> -fold at  <dig> dafb, followed by a constantly decreasing trend leading to the same levels measured in the control at  <dig> dafb. gh <dig>  genes, specifically those belonging to group ii  <cit> , encode enzymes that conjugate iaa to amino acids. interestingly, it has been recently shown that gh <dig>  plays a role in the formation of iaa-aspartate at the onset of grape berry ripening, and it positively responds to the combined application of aba and sucrose, and to ethylene, linking it to the control of ripening processes  <cit> . nevertheless, both the iaa genes showed well-correlated diverging trends from  <dig> up to  <dig> dafb, with the highest differences pointed out in the latter time point, coinciding also with the highest level of their expression in naa-treated berries. also the arf8-like gene showed the largest divergence at  <dig> dafb and the hormonometer data indicate a very active transcriptional control compatible with an auxin-specific response. the expression patterns of these four genes along with the hormonometer data and the overall physiological response indicate that biologically active concentrations of auxin were achieved throughout a homeostatic recovery occurring within  <dig> days after the treatment, during which the physiological response is mainly unspecific and due to a likely pharmacological effect of naa. during this period, conjugation and transport may contribute to a decrease in the auxin levels, leading to the same range of concentration that can be found before ripening inception, thus generating a developmental block. this block is most likely mediated by a primary auxin signaling, whose main players include the iaas and the arfs, as their expression patterns indicate. at  <dig> dafb, an overall repression of biosynthetic genes along with a stimulation of those coding for tr and st elements was observed in naa-treated samples. the hormonometer indicates the activation of specific gene targets that were not auxin-specific, although they were compatible with still biologically active auxin levels. in this phase, a likely secondary homeostatic response was occurring, mainly at the level of biosynthesis as shown by the repression of upstream auxin bs genes such as tryps-like. the primary transcriptional response achieved within  <dig> dafb triggered the recovery cascade that was active also thereafter, as demonstrated by biochemical parameters. however, at this stage the biological meaning of the homeostatic recovery is different from that occurring before  <dig> dafb. it is likely that the early homeostatic reaction was just aimed at detoxifying from high auxin concentrations, whereas that occurring at  <dig> dafb was a symptom of a normal ripening progression resembling the natural ripening inception during which auxin levels were shown to decrease  <cit> . some auxin-specific targets, mainly tf-encoding, were shown to be active up to  <dig> dafb, most likely triggering the transcriptional regulation of genes, such as chs <dig> and f3h that were shown to be down-regulated . at this stage, however, the overall transcriptional response was scarce since berry ripening was definitely accomplished, as shown by the physiological and biochemical parameters.

fluctuations in auxin levels and response were shown to be correlated with ripening progression and a possible mechanism was hypothesized to explain how the berry reacts to the naa treatment, but how does auxin action link to other hormones, such as ethylene, aba, and brassinosteroids, that are known to regulate the same developmental processes?

the hormonometer analysis may help to explain this aspect, especially considering the first comparison , in which the existence of a strong antagonistic effect between auxin and ethylene and, to a lesser extent, a substantial ‘synergism’ between auxin and aba were shown. both these aspects were quite marked for both the whole subset of transcriptional indexes  and the specific ones . the transient positive effect of naa on the transcription of acs <dig> and aco <dig> genes , already measured in other fruits  <cit> , may be interpreted as a part of the secondary homeostatic reaction to the auxin treatment, as described above. as such, the transient increase of ethylene biosynthesis specifically induced by biologically active auxin concentrations would counteract the excess of auxin by activating downstream mechanisms, in this case related to the biosynthesis of the hormone , thus releasing the berry from the developmental block.

according to the arabidopsis model of ethylene signaling, reduced expression and activity of receptors increase sensitivity to ethylene, whereas increased receptor expression and activity decrease sensitivity  <cit> . it is also known that ethylene receptors act in cooperation, according to mutual, but often unique roles, thus differentially regulating ethylene responses and giving diverse outputs according to the receptor complex combination  <cit> . furthermore, in arabidopsis, ein <dig> was shown to have a unique role in ethylene signaling  <cit>  and a synergistic effect on ers <dig> function, as it is required to maintain ethylene insensitivity in an ers <dig> background  <cit> . taking into account these data, a relevant role during grape berry ripening may be played by the putative atein <dig> orthologue, as the corresponding gene was expressed in a ripening-dependent manner, with increasing levels after véraison, measured both in the control and naa-treated samples . also an ers1-like gene showed similar expression patterns, although shifted ahead . similar transcriptional behaviors were reported also by deluc et al.  <cit>  and chervin and deluc  <cit>  along with a peak of ethylene biosynthesis, and may be consistent with a higher sensitivity to the hormone at véraison , which decreases thereafter throughout ripening.

the effect of auxin on genes involved in ethylene response was very weak, as seen in both the ahd and the hormonometer analyses , with the exception of an erf5- <dig> gene, which was significantly up-regulated at  <dig> dafb . a significant correlation was observed between the expression patterns of this gene and acs <dig>  leading to the hypothesis that erf5- <dig> may mediate the auxin-induced up-regulation of ethylene biosynthetic genes in grape. this hypothesis is currently being investigated with dedicated experimental trials in order to shed light on the crosstalk between these two hormones, which is crucial for grape berry development and ripening.

although the naa treatment caused a general stimulation of ethylene biosynthesis and action, a negative effect on the transcription of genes involved in flavonoids biosynthesis, cell wall metabolism and water uptake, previously shown to be ethylene-related  <cit> , was observed. several studies have examined the interactions between auxin and ethylene at the transcriptional level and different models were proposed  <cit> . taking into account this information, the effect of naa may have bypassed the primary level of crosstalk between the two hormones, resulting into the activation of only some targets in common with ethylene that may belong to the secondary crosstalk. consistent with this possibility, the upstream regulatory regions of many genes induced by auxin and ethylene were shown to contain putative auxin response element  and ethylene response element  sequences, which are sites for arf and ein3/eil binding, respectively  <cit> . future studies should specifically address this aspect.

the existence of a synergism between auxin and aba was unexpected taking into account the opposite roles previously claimed for these hormones in the regulation of grape berry ripening  <cit> . these data, however, may indicate that the hormometer analysis is able to reveal a previously unappreciated selectivity of auxin towards the regulation of aba-related processes, as already reported by volodarsky et al.  <cit>  for salicylic acid and auxin. in fact, data presented here pointed out that auxin down-regulated the genes involved in aba biosynthesis , while the signal transduction pathway elements were substantially unaffected or stimulated . these ambiguous outcomes were already pointed out in previous studies revealing that aba and auxin signaling pathways belong to a very complex regulatory network with unexpected features  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
taking into account the available data concerning the hormonal regulation of the ripening syndrome in grape and tomato, a putative model was herein assembled to better understand the hormonal cross-talk occurring during our experiments . according to this working model, which is currently being validated, brassinosteroids  may start the cascade of events leading to ripening by increasing ethylene levels, as reported in tomato  <cit> . it is known that a dramatic increase in endogenous br levels occurs at the onset of fruit ripening in grape  <cit>  and that also an ethylene peak is measurable just before véraison  <cit> . moreover, ethylene seems to repress br-regulated genes once ripening is triggered , thus indicating a possible feedback mechanism allowing a time progression of the syndrome through the coordination of the downstream events. according to this view, ethylene may play a central role in ripening inception. on one hand, it acts independently and directly on the activation of ripening-associated processes, such as those related to cell wall modifications  <cit> , and on the other hand it cooperates with aba to indirectly trigger several biochemical changes associated with ripening, such as berry coloration  <cit> . it also represses auxin biosynthesis, thus releasing the berry from the developmental block exerted by this hormone  <cit> . when the naa treatment was performed, the berry was most likely undergoing this developmental shift controlled by ethylene, which was still reversible. therefore, the transient increase in auxin levels imposed by the exogenous treatment caused a reversion by counterbalancing the developmental control exerted by ethylene, thus leading the berry back to the pre-véraison stage with a consequent delay of the ripening progression.

