BACKGROUND
feather pecking and cannibalism are concerning welfare problems in poultry farming, and a major topic of welfare research in laying hens  <cit> . severe feather pecking compromises the victim’s welfare through physical pain and chronic fear, but also signals that the welfare of the perpetrator is being compromised, leading to the development of this maladaptive coping mechanism  <cit> . recently, a line of laying hens was produced following sibling selection for low premature mortality in addition to production characteristics  <cit> . this line shows low mortality due to feather pecking and cannibalism, and differs from animals selected for production characteristics only for a number of physiological and behavioral measures which may be related to fear or stress, including altered whole-blood serotonin levels, plasma corticosterone  levels and open field behavior, while leaving cognition intact  <cit> . altered brain development has been proposed as a potential “biomarker” for welfare states in animals  <cit> , and can provide more insight into the underlying processes involved in feather pecking. based on the above findings the question is raised whether genetic selection, which has produced a reduction in feather pecking, has altered the neuroanatomy of the animals, particularly the brain areas involved in stress responses.

introduction of  maternal care has been proposed as a potential intervention to reduce feather pecking in laying hens. maternal deprivation has been reported to affect the neuro-endocrine response to stress  <cit> . rat pups raised by low care giving mothers show increased cort responses following an acute restraint test  <cit>  and different cfos activity patterns in the paraventricular nucleus  of the hypothalamus after a shock probe stressor test  <cit>  compared to pups raised by high care giving mothers. moreover, an increase in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis response correlates with maternally deprived animals’ fearful reactions to novel situations  <cit> . in young chicks, vocalizations of a mother hen appear to positively affect learning and memory  <cit> , and a maternal odorant lowers stress response in chicks when faced with isolation and novelty  <cit> . maternal care in chicks also promotes exploratory behaviors  <cit> . both fearfulness  <cit>  and knowledge about potential threats is communicated from  mother hens to chicks  <cit> . our previous studies also demonstrated that genetic selection against early mortality produced alterations in levels of tyrosine hydroxylase , the rate-limiting enzyme in synthesis of catecholamines including dopamine , in the nidocaudolateral pallium  <cit> , decreased levels of noradrenaline  and the da metabolite  <dig> -dihydroxyphenylacetic acid  and a trend to decreased da and its metabolite homovanillic acid  in the arcopallium, and increased da turnover in the hippocampus  <cit> . furthermore, providing maternal care caused alterations in differences in cell size between the two hemispheres in the hippocampus  <cit> .

the hpa axis is the major brain circuit involved in stress responses in many different species, including avians  <cit> . male broiler hens that experienced a social stressor had high cfos immunoreactivity in the pvn, implicating the involvement of the hpa axis in the stress response of poultry  <cit> . furthermore, co-administration of corticotropin releasing hormone  and arginine vasotocin  in the periphery produced a strong cort release  <cit> , indicating that avt is a fundamental part of the hpa axis circuitry, as vasopressin is in mammals  <cit> . avt  has also been strongly implicated in social behaviors, possibly through its interactions with mesotocin, the oxytocin avian homologue  <cit> .

catecholamines, such as da, along with the glucocorticoids are released in stressful situations and act on the hippocampus and amgydala, affecting emotional states  <cit> . da projected from the ventral tegmental area to the pvn stimulates the hpa axis and increases corticotropin-releasing factor  release in response to a stressor  <cit> . belda and colleagues  <cit>  further demonstrated da stimulation of the hpa axis by blocking da signaling, resulting in a reduced level of adrenocorticotropic hormone  and cortisol  release in rats recently exposed to a chronic stressor.

these previous results, and the necessity to further explore the potential of characterization of brain areas for use in animal welfare research, led to the question of whether stress-related brain areas could be altered by genetic selection for low early mortality and/or maternal care in laying hens. da has also been implicated with a role in the expression of feather pecking behavior  <cit>  and, as mentioned above, th is altered in laying hens from a low mortality selection line  <cit> . both avp and da neural circuitry have roles in control of social behaviors as well as in the stress response  <cit> , which may link to maternal care.

the present study investigated whether genetic selection against early mortality, or early life exposure to a mother hen, are associated with alterations in th or avt in subareas of the adult laying hen hypothalamus, and whether this correlates with behavioral measures taken in an open field in early life.

RESULTS
results of th and vasotocin neuron counts in the hypothalamus are summarized in table  <dig>  areas and nuclei that were affected by genetic line or rearing condition will be discussed further.

total count for each brain was divided by the number of sections containing a brain area. results presented as average ± sem; analysis was performed on ranks with a friedman's two-way nonparametric anova. * is the average result per treatment group but not by the dividing number of sections containing neurons in the papc.

abbreviations:papc parvocellular area of the paraventricular nucleus, pamc magnocellular area of the paraventricular nucleus, whole pvn all areas of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, mpo medial pre-optic nucleus, mpa medial pre-optic area, ampo anteromedial pre-optic nucleus, lpo lateral pre-optic nucleus, whole poa all preoptic nuclei, son supraoptic nucleus, ah anterior hypothalamic nucleus, lh lateral hypothalamic nucleus, vmh ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus, ph posterior hypothalamic nucleus, dm dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus, hsod hypothalamic nucleus of the supraoptic decussation, pe periventricular area, ml/mm medial and mediolateral part of the mammillary nucleus, rm retromammillary area, bnst bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, mavta mammillary part of the ventral tegmental area. na not applicable as neuron type not found in that area. significant effects  are indicated in italics.

tyrosine hydroxylase 
more th containing cells were counted in the periventricular area of the hypothalamus  in the lml compared to the cl hens . there was no effect of rearing condition on the number of th immunoreactive cells in the pe . in the dm, more th immunopositive neurons were found in hen-reared chickens compared to those reared without a hen , although the average number of neurons counted was low . no effect of genetic line was seen in the dm .

selection line and rearing condition did not affect the number of th-ir cells in any other areas of the hypothalamus.

vasotocin
rearing condition affected the number of avt-ir cells in the medial pre-optic area of the hypothalamus , as chickens raised with a hen and receiving maternal care in early life had more avt-ir cells in the mpa compared to the hens raised without a mother hen .

the chickens raised with a mother hen also tended to have more avt-ir cells in the lateral pre-optic area of the hypothalamus  compared to the chickens raised without a hen .

correlations with behavioral data
correlations were observed between several behavioral measures with other behavioral measures, such as between latency to stand and latency to walk, between latency to stand and number of steps, and between latency to stand and number of distress calls. correlations were also found between neuron counts with other neuron counts, for instance between th positive neurons in vmh and th positive neurons in dm. however, no significant correlations were found between any of the variables from the previously conducted open field test rodenburg et al.  <cit>  and the hypothalamic areas showing significant groups differences in the present study .

for all cells in table, correlations are listed as rho value, p value, and n. see table  <dig> for abbreviations of hypothalamic areas. significant correlations  are indicated in italics.

discussion
the hypothalamic brain areas and nuclei of adult laying hens selected for low mortality  were examined and compared with adult laying hens not selected for specific behavioral traits . the effect of mother hen rearing on the two genetic lines and their hypothalamic morphology was also investigated. both th- and avt- positive neurons were found in hypothalamic areas and nuclei consistent with previous reports in both avians and mammals . we demonstrated an increase in the number of th-positive neurons in the pe of the hypothalamus in the lml hens compared to cl hens. hen-reared chicks showed more avt-positive neurons in the mpa compared to the hens raised without a hen. an interaction of genetic selection and hen rearing was observed in the parvocellular part of the papc, though none of the groups differed significantly in post-hoc testing. no correlations were found between behavior in an open field at 5– <dig> weeks of age, and the histology of the same hens at adulthood.

genetic selection against feather pecking linked to more th-positive neurons in periventricular area
th is a well-established indicator of catecholamine neuron types. the distribution of th-ir cells in this study matches with previous reports of dopamine neuron distribution, strengthening the reliability of using this rate-limiting enzyme  <cit> . moreover, previous studies have shown that while noradrenergic fibers and receptors are present in the hypothalamus, when enzymes used to define noradrenergic neurons , β-hydroxylase or phenylethanolamine-n-methyltransferase  are examined, perikarya of these neuron types are not found in the hypothalamus of mammals  <cit>  or are sparsely found, but only in neurons that do not express th  <cit> . these observations indicate a high probability that the neurons stained by th are indeed dopaminergic neurons.

the lml hens had more th immunopositive neurons in the pe of the hypothalamus compared to the cl line hens originating from the same commercial breed . there is evidence for involvement of pe da  neurons in stress responses. in macaques it was found that the daa <dig> neurons of the pe area are co-localized with and activated by crf neurons  <cit> . secondly, the pe area includes part of the magnocellular division of the pvn   <cit> . the pamc was recently demonstrated as an integral part of the stress response by releasing peptides peripherally that feedback and activate the hpa axis  <cit> . moreover, moons and colleagues  <cit>  described the dopaminergic cells of the pe zone as in contact with the pvn region. dopamine is postulated to play a role in feather pecking, as chickens administered da receptor antagonists showed reduced feather pecking behavior  <cit> . in line with these reports, the fourth generation of the same lml hens was shown to have lower corticosterone levels than the control line, and expressed less fear in behavioral testing  <cit> .

given the connection between feather pecking and a heightened stress response, it is possible that the present data reflect a role for da neurons of the pe in the stress response and feather pecking behavior. if differences in pe brain neuroanatomy are involved in an altered stress response, as hypothesized by previous researchers  <cit> , and are linked to selection against feather pecking as suggested by the present study, pe da neuron number may be a useful welfare biomarker in poultry farming. if so, an increase in da neuron number in the pe may reflect a propensity to decreased welfare.

more th-ir cells were found in the pe of hens from the lml line than in those from the cl line. our previous studies showed reductions in th in the nidocaudolateral pallium  <cit> , decreased levels of noradrenaline  and the da metabolite  <dig> -dihydroxyphenylacetic acid  and a trend to decreased da and its metabolite homovanillic acid  in the arcopallium  <cit> . more cells in an area increase the likelihood of increased peptide synthesis and release to efferent brain areas, though more immunopositive cells does not strictly mean more neurotransmitter release. however, the increase in th positive neurons found in the pe in the present study may be more related to the reproductive role for this area, than feather pecking per se. hens from lml start egg production later and gain weight more slowly than hens from the control line  <cit> , indicating a change in rate of reproductive maturity as a result of genetic selection. in mammals, the pe is known to be rich in gonadal steroid receptors  <cit>  and is well innervated by growth hormone-releasing hormone from the arcuate nucleus and ventromedial hypothalamus. furthermore, the th cells of the periventricular pre-optic area are colocalized with gnrh and thought to be involved in reproductive physiology  <cit> . in avians, hypothalamic th has been correlated with nesting and brooding behavior, with high numbers of th-positive neurons in nesting  thai hens  <cit> .

maternal care and the medial pre-optic area
avt is a key neurotransmitter of brain systems controlling social behavior , making it an interesting neuron type to investigate the control of bird-to-bird feather pecking behavior and maternal care in chickens. in the present study, the chickens that had been reared by a foster hen had markedly more avt neurons in the mpa of the hypothalamus as adults compared to the hens that never experienced maternal care. considering the 45 week gap between last being housed with a mother hen and euthanasia, this represents a long-lasting effect. our previous studies in this same group of hens also demonstrated that maternal care alters the difference in cell size between the left and right hippocampus when measured in adult hens  <cit> , supporting the long-lasting effects of maternal care on brain development in laying hens.

the mpa is heavily involved in expression of maternal behavior, and the presence of pups increases the activity of the mpa in female rats  <cit> . maternal behavior in commercial laying hen breeds has disappeared- indeed, broodiness is considered a problem  <cit> . the data from the present study show that experience of maternal care increases cell number in this area, suggesting that although they do not show maternal care, chicks are still receptive to the effects of maternal care. maternal care also had clear effects on the behavior of the birds in the present study, as they were less fearful during early life compared with non-brooded birds and showed less cannibalistic toe pecking as adults  <cit> . testing aspects of maternal care, such as broodiness, of hen reared and non-hen reared chickens would be interesting to see if receiving maternal care positively affects future maternal care giving, as has been established in rodents  <cit> , although this would have to be tested in non-commercial lines, since commercial lines show such low levels of maternal care. if so, it would indicate the importance of maternal care experience on brain development in chickens and have welfare implications for current chick raising methods.

correlations with behavioral studies
we did not find any significant correlations between behavior as measured in an open field at 5– <dig> weeks of age, and histological analysis of th and avt in the hypothalamus. although both measures are related to the hpa axis, the lack of a one-to-one relationship between behavior and histology is not surprising, especially given the amount of time which passed between the  behavioral study and the time that the animals were sacrificed for histology. future studies examining correlations with histology should include more animals and/or behavioral measures closer in time to the point reflected in histology.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the number of th-ir neurons in the hypothalamic regions involved in the stress response was altered in animals selected for lower mortality by severe feather pecking. the differences may contribute to behavioral and physiological fear and stress differences observed between the lml and the cl animals.

in addition, differences of avt neuron number in hypothalamic regions involved in social behavior, specifically maternal behavior, coincided with whether the hens had been raised by a mother hen. this long term and profound anatomical difference is impressive and warrants further investigation into whether the development of feather pecking can be reduced or avoided by rearing production chicks with mother hens or providing aspects of maternal care, such as shelter, warmth, or darkness.

