BACKGROUND
after harvest, apples  are typically stored under a controlled atmosphere  with reduced o <dig> and increased co <dig> levels to extend their commercial storage life. a major problem of several apple cultivars during ca storage is the development of internal browning disorders. depending on the disorder, incidence can be aggravated by low storage temperatures and ca conditions, either high co <dig>  low o <dig>  or a combination of the two. the ‘braeburn’ apple cultivar is particularly susceptible to flesh browning, and at least two different expressions of the disorder have been identified. one is a dark discoloration that is initiated in the cortical flesh  <cit> , while the other usually develops in the area near the seed cavities and may extend from the inner region near the core to the outer cortex   <cit> .

internal browning disorders have been extensively studied in pears  <cit> , and apples  <cit> . besides the various symptoms which may vary between species, cultivars, or ca conditions, browning can be associated with membrane damage resulting from stresses caused by low temperature, low o <dig> and/or elevated co <dig> concentration during ca storage  <cit> . in gas-related disorders, oxidative stress can also be aggravated by the fruit geometry that induces additional gradients within the fruit, resulting in increased hypoxia towards the centre of the fruit  <cit> . this oxidative stress may in turn cause a shift of the cellular metabolism from the respiratory to the far less efficient fermentation pathway. as a result, less energy may become available to maintain membrane integrity under the constant stress of reactive oxygen species . eventually, the loss of membrane integrity can lead to the disruption of cellular compartmentalisation, as has been shown by the leak of cellular liquid into the intracellular spaces, hence impeding diffusion of gases through tissue  <cit> . the release of phenolic compounds from the vacuole, and polyphenol oxidases  from the plastids, results in the enzymatic oxidation of phenols by ppos to o-quinones and the formation of the brown-coloured pigment melanin  <cit> . a protective role for l-ascorbic acid  has also been proposed, due to its ability to reduce quinones back to precursor phenols  <cit> .

the apple consensus genome  has a relatively small size of ∼ 750 mb and  <dig>  predicted genes  <cit> . several rna-sequencing  studies have been recently reported on apple, investigating tree architecture  <cit> , pathogen infection  <cit> , and co <dig> injury during postharvest storage  <cit> . the goal of this study was to explore the apple transcriptome changes associated with flesh browning during storage of ‘braeburn’ apple. based on recent studies  <cit> , gas gradients at the currently applied ca storage conditions indicate that the main trigger for browning development is likely the very low oxygen concentration in the inner cortex , and not the high co <dig> concentrations as observed in other apple browning disorders.

in this manuscript, the rna-seq technology was used to explore transcriptomic events after four months of ca storage. based on a visual browning index , the inner and outer cortex of the stored apples was classified as healthy or affected tissue. reads obtained were mapped against the malus consensus coding sequence  set and browning-related differentially expressed genes  were identified using multivariate statistical tools. based on associations between expression levels of the candidate genes and browning incidence in fruit stored at various other storage conditions, potential biomarkers were suggested for assessing the risk of browning development.

RESULTS
to obtain an overview of the browning-related transcriptomic changes, cdna libraries of inner and outer cortex samples from four individual fruits collected at harvest and from  <dig> individual fruits collected after four months storage were designed for illumina rna-seq. over  <dig> million short single-end reads were generated , with each cdna library containing on average  <dig> million high-quality reads . the mean reads mapping rate was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % , of which  <dig>  ±  <dig> % mapped uniquely against the predicted gene set  <cit> . only  <dig> % of the reads were not counted in the rna-seq mapping process. this reads mapping rate is considerably higher than those reported by other authors working with malus . the total number of expressed genes was on average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  per sample or around  <dig> % of the malus predicted cds set . a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  expressed genes were found in all inner and outer cortex samples, respectively, with a total of  <dig>  genes found in common .

transcriptomic differences between healthy and affected tissues
the initial ‘partial least squares discriminant analysis’  model containing all genes revealed poor discrimination between healthy  and affected  fruit cortex. however, the final reduced models after jack-knifing, were able to explain 96% and 84% of variance between the two classes  in the inner  and outer  cortex, respectively. these sets of degs were filtered for fold change between healthy and affected tissues of either > <dig>  or < − <dig> , resulting in  <dig>  and  <dig>  degs. finally, the degs were filtered to exclude those genes significantly up- or down-regulated with time independent of the incidence of browning . these were identified by comparing fruit at harvest to the healthy fruit after storage under the assumption these degs were more generally related to ripening. this resulted in the final set of  <dig> and  <dig> browning-specific degs in the inner and in the outer fruit cortex, respectively . only five genes were in common when comparing degs from the inner and the outer cortex. specifically, a disease resistance protein , a cyclin kinase , and an eukaryotic translation initiation factor  were induced in both cortex tissues of affected apples, whereas a nac domain-containing protein  and an uncharacterized protein  were repressed in the affected tissues. this limited overlap in transcriptomic events is indicative of the spatial differences in the regulation of browning potentially related to the spatial variation in gas conditions inside the fruit  <cit> .

geneontology  analyses returned a blast hit for over  <dig> % of the genes, and go terms could be assigned to over 70% of these genes . over-representations of go terms in the set of degs in affected tissues were evaluated to indicate which biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components were mostly affected by the disorder . several significantly induced go terms representing cellular components were associated with plastids and membranes for both affected inner and outer cortex . this comes to no surprise as plastids in fruits are involved in fatty acid  and isoprenoid synthesis, and in the generation of non-photosynthetic atp and reducing power  <cit> . the biological processes significantly enriched in the set of induced degs in the affected inner cortex were the cellular  and metabolic processes . other over-represented categories of biological processes included the biosynthetic , and carbohydrate metabolic processes , and stress responses . a significant set of degs were also related to the lipid metabolic process , signal transduction  and the generation of precursor metabolites and energy . similar results were obtained for the outer cortex, with the main difference being the lower percentage of degs related to carbohydrate metabolic processes . the go terms for molecular function up-regulated in affected inner and outer cortex included genes coding for proteins with catalytic or hydrolase activity, and for binding proteins . the set of degs with hydrolase activity included several genes involved in the hydrolysis of membrane-related lipids/phospholipids .figure  <dig> 
go functional classifications of the apple transcripts. cellular component, biological process, and molecular function classifications of degs in the inner  and outer  cortex that are induced  or repressed  in affected tissues.
browning-related genes induced or repressed in the affected inner cortex of ‘braeburn’ apples


rpkm

malus
id
gene description
function
p-value
healthy
affected
fold change

energy-related pathways

lipid metabolism

redox state

secondary metabolism

cell wall
p-values for degs between healthy and affected apples were calculated using pls-da, where gene expression values  were used as predictor variables and the two class distinctions as response variables. blast2go and mercator web tools were used for gene description and gene function analysis.

*genes that have been assigned to more than one metabolic pathways.
browning-related genes induced or repressed in the affected outer cortex of ‘braeburn’ apples


rpkm

malus
id
gene description
function
p-value
healthy
affected
fold change

energy-related pathways

lipid metabolism

redox state

secondary metabolism

cell wall
p-values for the differentially expressed genes between healthy and affected apples were calculated using pls-da, where gene expression values  were used as predictor variables and the two class distinctions as response variables. blast2go and mercator web tools were used for gene description and gene function analysis.

*genes that have been assigned to more than one metabolic pathways.



under the cellular component category, many repressed degs in affected tissues were categorized as nucleus  or plastids , but in contrast to the set of induced degs, several differences were observed between the inner and the outer cortex . in particular, genes associated to membrane, cytosol or vacuole seemed to be more repressed in the affected outer than the affected inner cortex. the top most abundant biological process categories significantly down-regulated in affected tissues included the cellular process , the biosynthetic process  and transport . the most notable down-regulation of molecular functions in affected tissues were the numerous go terms related to kinase activity.

the overall distribution of degs in the  <dig> mapman bins/pathways is summarized in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  whereas an overview of the metabolic changes occurring in affected apple cortex is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  the most abundant degs were involved in stress , signalling , transport , cell , lipids , energy , and redox state  pathways. the discussion of these results focuses on pathways expected to be involved or influenced by browning development at ca conditions, such as energy-related, lipid metabolism, cell wall modifications, redox state, and secondary metabolism . furthermore, a close correlation  was observed between log2-fold changes measured by rna-seq and real-time quantitative pcr  on a selection of  <dig> degs , indicating that fold-change values obtained from sequencing are accurate.figure  <dig> 
mapman overview of degs from selected pathways between healthy and affected tissues
. induced genes in affected tissues are indicated in red and repressed genes in green. the scale bar displays changes in gene expression as fold change that were significant  between the two class distinctions as indicated by pls-da. aba: abscisic acid, tca: tricarboxylic acid.
correlation between rna-seq and qrt-pcr . the relative expression levels of the selected genes  were obtained by rna-seq data and by qrt-pcr. the pearson correlation coefficient is shown.



candidate genes for browning development
the different transcriptomic responses in the inner and outer cortex should be interpreted against the spatially different gas conditions inside the fruit. due to the fruit’s geometry and the properties of the different fruit tissues , internal gas gradients will develop  <cit> . as a result hypoxic stress will increase when moving from the outer towards the inner cortex. based on the work presented by  <cit> , simulations were performed for a typical ‘braeburn’ apple exposed to the currently applied ca storage conditions  indicating that the expected o <dig> levels at the position of the outer and inner cortex were around  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively . additionally, the expected co <dig> levels at the inner and outer cortex were around  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively , suggesting that co <dig> was not the trigger for the development of the disorder. given these expected gas gradients, the identified degs are discussed separately to highlight tissue-specific responses to low o <dig> stress.figure  <dig> 
proposed model for browning development in apples during ca storage. a. distribution of o <dig> for a typical ‘braeburn’ apple exposed to ca storage conditions  as simulated by  <cit> . b-c. transcriptomic changes in the affected inner  and outer  cortex related to the gas gradient and energy potential. induced genes in affected tissues are indicated in red, repressed genes in green, and unchanged genes in grey. asa: ascorbic acid; acd: aconitase dehydratase; act: acyl coa thiolesterase; acx: acyl coa oxidase; adh: alcohol dehydrogenase; ao: ascorbate oxidase; apx: ascorbate peroxidase; cesa: cellulose synthase; cat: catalase; cdase: ceramidase; coq: coenzyme q10; cs: citrate synthase; dha: dehydroascorbate; dhar: dehydroascorbate reductase; exp: expansin; fum: fumarate; gpp: m-galactose-1-phosphate phosphatase; hmgr: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coa reductase; ldh: lactate dehydrogenase; mal: malate; mdh: malate dehydrogenase; mdha: monodehydroascorbate; me: malic enzyme; mdhar: monodehydroascorbate reductase; oaa: oxaloacetate; pae: pectinacetylesterase; pdh: pyruvate dehydrogenase; pep: phosphoenolpyruvate; pepc: phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; pmg: phosphoglyceratemutase; pk: pyruvate kinase; pmei: pectin methylesterase inhibitors; ppo: polyphenol oxidase; pyr: pyruvate; sdh: succinate dehydrogenase; sod: superoxide dismutase; spt: serine-palmitoyltransferase; suc: succinate; xet: xyloglucanendotransglucosylase/hydrolase. ldh and mdh are followed by a question mark as mdp <dig> encodes a putative lactate/malate dehydrogenase protein.



genes involved in energy-related pathways
plant cells synthesize energy-rich molecules like atp and reductive power  via pathways such as photosynthesis, glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, and the mitochondrial electron transport chain . an inhibition or a deficiency in one or more intermediates of these pathways may cause a wide range of metabolic disturbances leading to postharvest disorders. in this study, several degs between healthy and affected tissues were linked to the energy-related pathways. this may be related to the loss of membrane integrity due to the prolonged exposure to low o <dig> levels at low temperature . under such circumstances, cells need to synthesize protective compounds to maintain their cellular compartmentalisation, and to detoxify metabolic intermediates accumulated. indeed, the rna-seq results provided evidence of changes in all parts of the respiratory pathways of affected tissues , with the different cortex locations balancing their energy needs in a different manner.

apart from the synthesis of atp and nadh, glycolysis also serves to supply pyruvate to the mitochondrial tca cycle. overall, rna-seq data reveals a putative induction of glycolysis only in the affected inner cortex. given the inner cortex of the fruit is exposed to lower o <dig> levels as compared to the outer cortex , this is in agreement with recent findings from ampofo et al.  showing a clear up-regulation of the glycolysis in tomato cells when lowering o <dig> levels. this was interpreted as a cellular effort to maintain the overall energy supply in spite of the hypoxic stress limiting the atp yield of the etc. phosphoglyceratemutase , previously proposed as the key gene controlling glycolysis in potato  <cit> , showed significant induction in both the affected inner  and outer cortex . no other glycolytic genes were changed in the affected inner cortex, whereas the expression of an abundant pyruvate kinase  was increased in the affected outer cortex. nevertheless, two other members of the same gene family  were significantly repressed, indicating the complex regulation of the pathway in different organelles. the highly abundant glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  was only repressed in the affected outer cortex. putative fermentation-related genes were induced  in the affected inner cortex , but repressed more than  <dig> -fold in the affected outer cortex . this is in agreement with the expected o <dig> profiles in apple with the stronger hypoxia in the inner cortex triggering anaerobic metabolism.

under aerobic conditions, the respiratory mechanism continues with the tca cycle reactions in two ways. first, pyruvate produced in glycolysis can be transported to mitochondria where it is irreversibly oxidized to acetyl-coa and co <dig> by pyruvate dehydrogenase . this gene is thought to be the key step to regulate fluxes through the tca cycle  <cit> . secondly, phosphoenolpyruvate is converted to malate and/or pyruvate by cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase , and then transferred to mitochondria. in the affected inner cortex, pdh  was significantly induced and pepc  repressed, suggesting an induction of the first path towards the tca cycle. although none of these genes changed significantly in the outer cortex, a putative dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase , which is part of the pdh complex, was repressed. acetyl-coa enters the tca cycle by condensation with oxaloacetate to form citric acid, which is ‘recycled’ back to oxaloacetate in a series of successive reactions, with the concomitant production of flavin adenine dinucleotide  and nadh. with lowering o <dig> levels, tca slows down, and glycolysis becomes the sole source of energy until the activation of fermentation. indeed, the results suggested a down-regulation of the tca cycle, particularly at the outer cortex . specifically, aconitase hydratase  was significantly repressed at both cortex locations. as this enzyme is assumed to be sensitive to oxidative stress and regulated by iron availability  <cit> , it could serve as a 'stress marker'. on the other hand, malate dehydrogenase , and citrate synthase , were only repressed in the outer cortex. both mdh and cs can be inhibited by oxidized lipids such as polyunsaturated fas generated under oxidative stress  <cit> .

the reducing power produced through the previous steps can be used in the etc. to drive atp synthesis. succinate dehydrogenase  plays a dual role in both the tca cycle and the etc. knock-out mutations in plants resulted in far-reaching perturbations in organic acids levels, photosynthesis, respiration rates and mitochondrial ros generation  <cit> . an abundant sdh  was significantly induced in the affected outer cortex , but remained unchanged in the inner part. kinetic results indicated that sdh depends on the ubiquinone reduction levels, and is activated by atp  <cit> . an ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase  was indeed induced in the affected outer cortex, whereas another two genes from the mitochondrial etc.  were also up-regulated . by contrast, the etc. in the affected inner cortex was possibly down-regulated , suggesting that less energy was available to maintain membrane integrity.

genes involved in lipid metabolism
during long-term ca storage, fruits need sophisticated mechanisms to tolerate oxidative stress, to guarantee ample energy production and to maintain membrane integrity. in total,  <dig> lipid-related degs, most of them encoding key enzymes of lipid degradation pathways, were identified in the affected tissues . changes were more severe in the inner cortex as indicated by the higher fold-change . this confirms the membrane lipid alterations in the affected tissue similar to pears  <cit> .

phospholipids serve as signal transduction molecules under stress conditions, such as cold and hypoxia  <cit> . phospholipase a <dig>  and phospholipase c  were among the top up-regulated genes, with affected tissues having  <dig> - or  <dig> -fold higher expression than healthy tissues, respectively. alterations in the expression of phospholipases may have activated phospholipid signalling in response to ca-induced stress. additionally, alpha/beta-hydrolases  were induced in the affected inner cortex, probably indicating the more extended alterations in membrane integrity occurring there.

peroxisomal fa beta-oxidation has multiple roles in plants, generating the substrate  for the synthesis of isoprenoids, flavonoids, and fas, as well as providing the respiratory substrate under carbohydrate-depleted stress conditions  <cit> . an acyl-coa thioesterase  was induced in both tissues , whereas an acyl-coa oxidase  was only induced in the outer cortex. these results indicate a possible induction of the peroxisomal fa oxidation in the affected tissues at ca storage affecting lipid turnover.

two other lipid-related genes, involved in fa synthesis  and in phospholipid synthesis  were significantly up-regulated in the affected inner cortex. by contrast, two genes involved in the sphingolipid metabolism  and a gene of the steroid biosynthetic pathway  were significantly induced in the affected outer cortex. sphingolipids comprise a major class of lipid signalling molecules in all eukaryotic cells having roles in mediating programmed cell death associated with plant defence  <cit> . only few genes were down-regulated in the affected tissues, including a diacylglycerol kinase  in the inner cortex, as well as an enoyl coa hydratase  and a sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase  in the outer cortex.

genes involved in redox state
internal browning in apple involves multiple oxidation-reduction processes and accumulation of various antioxidant enzymes to cope with the overproduction of ros induced by the low o <dig> stress. seven degs were assigned as ros scavengers in the inner cortex, including large families such as thioredoxins , glutaredoxins , and ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductases , and five in the outer cortex, including glutathione peroxidase .

one of the most intriguing deg in the inner cortex was a chorismate mutase , which, apart from functioning in the aromatic amino acid synthesis, also has ascorbate peroxidase  activity. ascorbate peroxidase participates in the ascorbate-glutathione cycle scavenging h2o <dig> and recycling asa in the cells  <cit> . here, the expression of apx was high in the affected inner cortex, suggesting that the defence path has been triggered by the ros burst. nevertheless, if the asa recycling pathway does not work efficiently, once oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid , asa is no longer available. the current results showed a significant decrease in seven  or five  out of the ten malus dehydroascorbate reductase  genes with the rest remaining unchanged , indicating the malfunction of the cycle, and thus the incapacity to properly recycle asa. dhar has been identified as the key gene linked to susceptibility to flesh browning after cut  <cit> . consequently, asa content is expected to be low in both cortex locations. low fruit asa content has been associated to an increased susceptibility to browning in apples  <cit>  and pears  <cit> . the importance of the asa metabolism is further supported by the enhanced l-galactose-1-phosphate phosphatase  in the healthy outer cortex. this gene is involved in the main asa biosynthetic pathway via l-galactose, and is considered as a key step of the pathway under stress in tomato fruit  <cit> .

superoxide dismutase  is an important antioxidant enzyme catalysing the dismutation of superoxide to o <dig> and h2o <dig>  meanwhile, h2o <dig> can be either indirectly scavenged by the asa recycling pathway, or it can be directly reduced to water and o <dig> by catalase . here, the expression of the abundant sod  and cat  was significantly up-regulated in the affected outer cortex to withstand the high ros burst, dissimilar to the inner part where browning has already progressed and cell death processes may have been irreversibly triggered. recent proteomic studies on apple ripening also demonstrated that sod may have a major role in the redox state system during ripening and senescence  <cit> . when considering the whole fruit, the up-regulated degs in the affected outer cortex may be good indicators of browning incidence in the inner part of the fruit.

genes involved in secondary metabolism
secondary metabolism  plays a key role in the protection of plants against biotic stresses. several genes related to sm showed differential expression during storage , suggesting a shift from the primary to the sm and possible perturbations in the overall fruit metabolism and signal-transduction. genes related to the major sm classes  were differentially expressed in affected tissues , but the induction was higher in the inner cortex . through the phenylpropanoid pathway, several defence-related metabolites can be produced, including flavonoids, and lignins. a 4-coumarate: ligase , which catalyses the last step of the phenylpropanoid pathway leading either to lignins or to flavonoids, was significantly induced  in the inner cortex. by contrast, an abundant cinnamoyl-reductase  from the lignin biosynthetic pathway was induced in affected outer cortex. although the link between an induction of lignification and internal browning is poorly understood, a negative correlation between lignin content and browning incidence of apple fruit infected by penicillium expansum has been reported  <cit> .

the first committed and rate-limiting step in the mevalonate pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis is catalysed by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coa reductase , and modulated by many endogenous and external stimuli  <cit> . the abundant hmgr  was significantly induced in the outer affected cortex, whereas another one with low expression  was repressed . it has been reported that the induction of hmgr during storage can be involved in the accumulation of α-farnesene in apple skin, a compound related to the post-harvest disorder of superficial scald  <cit> . other gene expressions altered in the affected tissues were related to flavonoid, glucosinolates or alkaloid synthesis , although their exact function is still poorly understood. the overexpression of genes related to flavonoid accumulation can be explained as the effort of affected tissues to balance out the oxidative stress synthetizing compounds with antioxidative properties, as already reported during the development of apple superficial scald  <cit> .

genes involved in cell wall modifications
a clear interaction between fruit softening and browning development was indicated in this study, such that a higher up-regulation of the cell wall modification paths occurred in the affected inner cortex . ascorbate oxidase  is an apoplastic enzyme linked to cell wall modifications, controlling the redox state of the apoplastic asa pool and regulating stress perception and signal transduction  <cit> . an abundant ao  was significantly induced  in the affected inner cortex, suggesting a role in browning. the product of apoplastic oxidation of asa by ao, dha, is transported to the cytosol, where it can be recycled by the ascorbate-glutathione cycle  <cit> . given that dhar was down-regulated , it is suggested that asa may be irreversibly oxidized, enabling browning to occur.

several genes involved in cell wall loosening were induced in affected tissues. xyloglucanendotransglucosylase/hydrolase , that is involved in the breakdown of hemicelluloses  <cit> , was induced in the affected inner cortex. the activity of this enzyme coincides with the initial slow softening phase of postharvest apple fruit softening  <cit> . alpha-expansin  also showed high expression in the affected outer cortex. an increased expression of both xets and exps has been implicated in aril breakdown of longan  fruit stored at low temperature  <cit> . two cell wall pectin esterases, an auxin-repressed pectin-lyase  and a pectinacetylesterase  were induced in the affected outer cortex. pectatelyases catalyse the eliminative cleavage of de‐esterified pectin, and have multiple functions, not only in pathogen attack, but also in various developmental processes including ripening and softening  <cit> . apart from cell wall loosening related genes, a fasciclin-like arabinogalactan  and an arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase  were also induced in the affected inner cortex. fasciclin-like arabinogalactans are genes involved in cell adhesion and cell expansion, and are highly expressed in immature fruit  <cit> , while the function of arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase in eukaryotes is still poorly understood.

genes involved in cell wall synthesis, and in particular cellulose synthesis , were repressed in both affected inner  and outer  cortex. it was demonstrated that a decrease in the expression of cesa in the early developmental stages of fruit growth, together with an increase in the expression of exps, are key regulators of cell wall biosynthesis during apple fruit development  <cit> . additionally, two pectin methylesterase inhibitors  were down-regulated in the affected inner cortex, suggesting their putative role during abiotic stress exposure . pmeis are cell wall proteins that regulate the activity of pectin methymesterases, and control the spatial distribution of esterified pectins in fruit  <cit> .

genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis
in agreement with previous studies in pear  <cit> , a 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase  was down-regulated in the affected inner cortex as compared to the healthy tissue. aco catalyses the last step in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway, in a reaction that needs both o <dig> and asa as substrate. a reduced aco expression in ‘golden delicious’ apples during ca storage has been reported  <cit> , while high levels of h2o <dig> can inactivate aco activity  <cit> . as such, the low expression of the specific aco gene copy observed in this study only in the affected inner cortex, can be explained by: 1) the severe hypoxic conditions in the inner part of the fruit compared to the outer part, 2) the possible increased amounts of h2o <dig>  and/or 3) the reduced asa content. the expression of aco is expected to be repressed by the treatment with 1-methylcyclopropene , as applied in this study. nevertheless, the fact that the specific aco was only repressed in the affected inner cortex, and that its expression did not change over time, suggest that the expression of this gene copy is related to the disorder, and not to 1-mcp as such. furthermore, the putative role of aco as a ‘browning-biomarker’ has been confirmed in stored apples not treated with 1-mcp . the expression of the other highly abundant aco members, mdp <dig>  and mdp <dig> , did not differ between healthy and affected outer cortex , suggesting a putative role of the mdaco presented here in the development of browning disorder in ‘braeburn’ that should be further investigated.

the role of polyphenol oxidases
regardless the cause of flesh browning , the eventual brown discolouration is usually the result of interactions between ppo activity and polyphenol contents. as discussed, the alterations in membrane permeability occurring during ca storage facilitates the release of both enzyme and substrate in the cytosol leading to the formation of brown pigments. as such, internal browning development under ca conditions could be explained by the compartmentalisation and activity of ppos. a correlation between ppo activity and the incidence of internal browning has been previously reported in pineapple  <cit> . additionally, reduced ppo activity may contribute to resistance against scald development in apples  <cit> . in this study, two ppos were induced in both the inner  and the outer  cortex . in fact, mdppo- <dig> was one of the most abundant transcripts found with rpkm values > <dig> . flesh browning in minimally processed apples has been linked to an induction of ppo expression  <cit> . although browning occurred earlier than the induction of ppo expression, the authors postulated that ppo was activated to stimulate the polyphenol signalling system playing an important role in the plant’s defence against pests and insects  <cit> . in the end, the tissue breakdown induced by the abiotic stress of ca storage is not that different of similar defects induced by insect herbivory or microbial invasions thus triggering the same universal plant defence response.

putative biomarkers for browning disorder
using multivariate statistics to compare healthy and affected tissues with various degrees of browning development , putative biomarkers to predict the incidence of browning were identified . of them,  <dig> genes  were randomly selected for verification by qrt-pcr 1) on the same sample set as the rna-seq, and 2) on another ‘validation’ set that contained fruits stored for various periods at different ca conditions to test their broader potential . of the selected genes, mdpdh  and mdaco  were the only genes that were significantly induced or repressed, respectively, across all selected time points, in the affected inner cortex . similarly, mdsdh  and mdhmgr  were induced under the various conditions in the affected outer cortex. the other selected genes were only validated in one or two experiments .figure  <dig> 
gene expression studies using qrt-pcr. relative expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase , and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase  in the inner cortex , and succinate dehydrogenase  and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase  in the outer cortex  of ‘braeburn’ apples stored for two, four, or six months under various ca conditions. qrt-pcr values were normalized against the geometrical mean of ubiquitin  and actin . the error bars represent standard deviation of five biological replications. significance of the mean relative gene expression of each group was tested with student’s t-test  using the sas software.



interestingly, all the degs identified through the rna-seq analysis in the inner cortex were validated at four month storage, except for mdcesa. the difference between the rna-seq experiment and the qrt-pcr validation set was the application of 1-mcp and the lowest co <dig> concentration in the first experiment. most of the degs were also validated at ca storage for six months , whereas only a few were verified at ca storage for two months . nevertheless, there was a clear trend in agreement to the rna-seq results, suggesting that despite the different trigger , similar metabolic pathways are altered in the affected inner cortex. by contrast, degs between healthy and affected outer cortex were not verified in the validation set. exceptions included mdpk and mdppo- <dig> that were validated as significant degs at six or four months, respectively. these findings, in combination with the observation that significant degs in the inner cortex were stable in the outer cortex , as well as the limited overlap between the different cortex locations, clearly suggest a spatial variation in the regulation of browning induction, most likely related to the spatial o <dig> distribution.

what makes apples turn brown?
prolonged postharvest storage at ca conditions can induce cellular oxidative stress by promoting ros production and accumulation, thus causing oxidation of cellular components and loss of organelle integrity. the oxidative stress is expected to be more severe in the inner cortex, where the o <dig> concentration is around  <dig> %, compared to the  <dig> -2% in the outer cortex . based on the presented rna-seq results, a conceptual model for browning development is proposed .

the changes in the redox state within affected tissues were evident in the whole fruit. in an attempt to control the excessive generation of ros, several antioxidant-related genes were induced, including apx, glutaredoxins and thioredoxins , or cat and sod . up-regulation of the ros scavenging mechanism could have served as the trigger for the changes in metabolic and energy-related pathways. to cope with abiotic stress induced by the prolonged exposure to low temperature and low o <dig>  a continuous energy supply to control ros production and maintain membrane integrity, is vital. a clear induction of glycolytic pathway occurred in the affected inner cortex , suggesting that pyruvate supply is not the rate-limiting factor, while the overall picture in the affected outer cortex was less clear with multiple degs being both induced and repressed. an increased flux to the tca cycle occurred in the inner cortex , perhaps as an attempt to restore the energy potential. the tca cycle itself was repressed in both tissues, and as such the rate of oxidative phosphorylation should be induced to maintain the energy balance. indeed, the up-regulation of the etc. in the outer cortex may have counteracted the effects of the down-regulated tca cycle. by contrast, oxidative phosphorylation in the inner cortex was disturbed presumably as a result of the ultra-low o <dig> conditions , and, therefore, an alternative energy production path via fermentation may have been activated . fermentation-related genes such as adh were repressed in the affected outer cortex. on the other hand, peroxisomal degradation of fas, mediated by the β-oxidation cycle, help produce energy and acetyl-coa. up-regulation of fa oxidation occurred in both tissues, although an induction of acetyl-coa related pathways  only occurred in the outer cortex. consequently, it is proposed that the energy status in the outer cortex may still efficiently balance the harmful effects of ros accumulation presumably via increased energy production, whereas the reduced energy generation in the inner cortex may be insufficient to adverse the damage.

less energy means incapacity to repair membranes, which, particularly in the inner cortex, are damaged as a result of induction of a/b hydrolases and phospholipases. in turn, loosening of cellular compartmentalisation allows the release of ppos and phenols to the cytosol, triggering the actual discolouration reactions. affected tissues showed higher ppo expression serving as a generic plant defence response  <cit> . the effect of increased ppo activity can be reversed by asa  <cit> . however, considering 1) the induction of asa oxidation  and 2) the repression of asa biosynthesis  in the affected tissues, as well as 3) the repression of asa recycling capacity  due to storage, it is postulated that asa content is lower in the affected fruit. the changes in the redox state of the asa pool may have served as the signal for other stress responses to hypoxic stress.

during browning development in stored apples, genes involved in cell wall loosening including ao, xet, plas and exps are mostly induced, while genes involved in cell wall synthesis or strengthening, such as ceas or pmeis, are mostly repressed. this observation suggest for the first time that susceptibility to postharvest disorders such as internal browning are somehow linked to cell wall modifications, similar to those observed during fruit softening, or the response to biotic stress. this may be also linked to the formation of cavities observed at severely affected apples. apart from the lack of overlap between the sets of degs identified in each cortex location as a response to the oxidative stress, several pathways were strongly altered in a tissue-specific manner . specifically, genes involved in lipid metabolism, sm, and cell wall modifications were highly modified in the affected inner cortex, while stress-related or energy-related genes were mostly altered in the outer cortex. this is presumably due to the spatial distribution of o <dig> induced by the fruit’s microstructure  <cit> , and the resulting gas exchange properties .

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of a complete quantitative transcriptome analysis of internal browning disorder in apples stored under ca conditions revealing numerous novel regulatory candidate genes, and confirming results from proteomic approaches in other pome fruit, such as pear. results indicated alterations in several metabolic pathways occurring during postharvest storage of apple, including the repression of the tca cycle, as well as the up-regulation of the etc. and the fa oxidation. these alterations can be seen as an attempt to control the excessive generation of ros induced by the storage conditions eventually lead to browning development in a tissue-specific manner. the rna-seq results provided here may serve as a ‘genetic’ roadmap of fruit-tissue specific changes to postharvest-induced oxidative stress, clearly suggesting spatial differences in the regulation of browning. this study can serve as starting point for additional proteomic and metabolomic screenings to create a complete view on the development of the disorder at the various ‘omic’ levels. further validation is required to assess the importance of the proposed candidate genes as potential markers to predict the risk of browning incidence in apples during ca storage.

