BACKGROUND
despite huge efforts to prevent the spread of hiv, its prevalence continues to increase. currently over  <dig> million persons are infected with hiv, and more than  <dig> million become infected and almost  <dig> million die from aids every year  <cit> . intensive treatment with antiretroviral drug combinations has substantially prolonged patient survival. however, the virus is prone to rapid mutation and drug resistant strains emerge, particularly in patients in whom the replication of the virus is only partially suppressed by treatment. the high rate of hiv mutation presents a challenging clinical problem, even a non-treated patient can host many viral variants from which drug resistant strains may evolve once therapy is instituted.

a major pharmacological target in hiv is its protease. the hiv protease is a dimeric protein composed of two identical 99-amino-acid monomers. the protease cleaves the viral gag-pol polyprotein, which is a necessary step in the generation of new virus particles. thus, the hiv protease is essential for the propagation of the virus; nine of the  <dig> anti-hiv drugs and combination regimens in current use target the hiv protease. however, soon after the introduction of the hiv protease inhibitors it was found that the virus accumulates mutations in the protease, permitting eventual escape from anti-viral therapy. as protease inhibitors differ in their resistance profiles a proper selection of the inhibitor can aid therapy in such cases of drug resistance. the phenosense susceptibility test is a widely used bioassay for measuring viral survival during specific drug treatment  <cit> , and this assay is used to develop a proper treatment strategy for individual patients.

a more straightforward and cost-effective method for formulating a therapeutic strategy would be to predict drug susceptibility directly from the hiv genome sequence. several types of modeling approaches have been developed, variously based on neural networks  <cit> , support vector machines  <cit> , and other methods  <cit> . a drawback with all of these approaches was that they treated each anti-retroviral drug separately; each inhibitor required a separate model. accordingly, none of these models can predict the effectiveness of a new drug for mutated proteases. however, such predictions are possible using our proteochemometric approach  <cit> . proteochemometrics utilizes the physico-chemical and structural properties of series of ligands and proteins to predict their interaction  <cit> . proteochemometrics has been successfully used to model various classes of g-protein coupled receptors  <cit> , antibodies  <cit> , as well as aspartate proteases' ability to cleave their substrates  <cit> . here, we show that proteochemometrics can be used to model hiv protease resistance.

RESULTS
development of a proteochemometric model for drug susceptibility prediction
we described seven protease inhibitors using six orthogonal descriptors derived from rotation- and superimposition-independent 3d structure descriptors  while the proteases were described by  <dig> z-scale descriptors representing physico-chemical properties of  <dig> varied sequence positions in the data-set . we created several models from these descriptions in order to find the one that provided the highest predictive ability and interpretability. model- <dig> used protease and inhibitor descriptors ; model- <dig> used protease and inhibitor descriptors and protease-inhibitor cross-terms ; model- <dig> used an additional  <dig>  intra-protease cross-terms . models were created from these data by state-of-the-art proteochemometric partial least-squares projections to latent structures  modeling using the log fold-decrease in susceptibility  compared to a drug-sensitive reference virus as estimated using the phenosense assay as the y variable ; table  <dig> summarizes the performances of these models.

* root mean squared errors of prediction

while all models were statistically valid, model- <dig>  which included protease-inhibitor cross-terms, performed substantially better than model- <dig>  which contained only protease and inhibitor descriptors. adding intra-protease cross-terms  provided further improvement. results from permutation testing also indicated the statistical validity of the models. thus, for none of the models did the q <dig> intercept show a positive value, ensuring that the high original q <dig> values were not obtained by pure chance.

as seen in table  <dig>  adding new descriptor blocks resulted in more positive values for the r <dig> intercepts , confirming that an increase in the number of x variables often results in better-fitted models in which part of the y data becomes explained by accumulated chance-correlations. still, the models' predictive ability and interpretability improves because q <dig> values increase  and root mean squared errors of prediction  values decrease . thus, according to this analysis, model- <dig> is the best performer. the good performance of model- <dig> was further demonstrated by its true outer cross-validation; its external predictive ability amounted to p <dig> =  <dig> .

external validation of the drug susceptibility model
in order to validate our approach further, we assessed whether our model could predict susceptibility to inhibitors excluded from the model building. we used model- <dig> to create seven different models, but only used data for six inhibitors , and used each model to predict the susceptibilities to the respective excluded inhibitor for the  <dig> mutated protease variants . table  <dig> shows the rmsep computed from all predictions in this analysis; the rmsep of susceptibility predictions is below  <dig>  logarithmic units for all inhibitors. computing the predictive ability for "new" inhibitors from all the seven models from this analysis gave the very high estimate for q <dig> inhibitors =  <dig> .

* root mean squared errors of prediction

these data substantiate the validity of model- <dig> and its modeling approach; therefore, we used model- <dig> for all subsequent predictions and interpretations.

use of the drug susceptibility model to analyze the role of individual amino acids in drug resistance
the pls algorithm we used for model building derives a linear regression equation in which the coefficients reveal the direction and magnitude of the influence of x-variables on the response variable . a large absolute value of a coefficient for a protease descriptor  indicates that mutations at this position could induce a large change in drug susceptibility. alternately, a large absolute value for a coefficient of a cross-term of protease-protease inhibitor descriptor reveals that mutations of the amino acid included in the cross-term can induce large changes in the susceptibilities for some particular inhibitors and not-so-large changes in the susceptibilities for other inhibitors. finally, a large absolute value of a coefficient for an intra-protease cross-term pinpoints mutations in the protease that regulate drug resistance in a cooperative manner .

however, there are problems associated with the use of regression coefficients for model interpretation because several descriptors represent each sequence residue  and each of these is used to compute six protease-ligand cross terms, as well as a very large number of intra-protease cross-terms. therefore, looking at the regression coefficient for one variable at a time does not provide full insight about the influence of a particular residue to the susceptibility of the protease to a protease inhibitor. one simple approach to this complex situation is to use the whole regression equation to predict the susceptibility of in silico mutated variants of the protease. we used this approach to predict changes in susceptibilities due to single point mutations in the wild-type protease . the figure presents the  <dig> most frequent mutations occurring in over 5% of viral isolates in the data set, as well as six somewhat less common mutations that we found to be important by the proteochemometric modeling . as seen from the figure, many common mutations do not negatively influence susceptibility to any of the inhibitors. many of these mutations are polymorphic, that is, they occur in untreated patients and thus reflect natural variation in the protease, such as 10i and 20r  <cit> . in contrast, the 10f and 20i mutations are non-polymorphic; they occur only in response to drug treatment. as shown in figure  <dig>  these two mutations reduce protease susceptibility to several inhibitors, and several other mutations impart high resistance to particular drugs. for example, the 30n mutation causes a large decrease in susceptibility to nelfinavir, while it has no effect on susceptibility to the other inhibitors. another example is the 48v mutation, which substantially decreases susceptibility to saquinavir while having only a minor effect on susceptibility to amprenavir. on the other hand, the 50v mutation confers major resistance to amprenavir, and to a lesser extent, to lopinavir and ritonavir, while having essentially no influence on susceptibility to the remaining four inhibitors. a large number of other mutations have distinct effects on different inhibitors; in some cases they even increased susceptibility to some inhibitors . another interesting example is the 50l mutation, which occurs in response to treatment with atazanavir and increased susceptibility to the six other inhibitors used in the model.

several different mutations  reduce susceptibility to all seven inhibitors, although there is variation in the extent of the reduction for specific inhibitors. moreover, our analysis revealed that the more recently introduced inhibitors lopinavir and atazanavir do not provide increased activity as compared to older protease inhibitors against protease variants bearing these mutations. these findings indicate the need for novel, more adaptive agents that can inhibit proteases harboring these deleterious mutations.

online prediction of susceptibility resulting from accumulated mutations
highly resistant forms of hiv protease evolve by accumulating multiple susceptibility-decreasing mutations. the good predictive abilities of models- <dig> and  <dig> indicate that the logarithmically transformed susceptibility data is, to a large extent, a function of the additive independent contributions of each mutation. however, model- <dig>  which also included intra-protease cross-terms, showed even better predictive ability suggesting that mutations may also interact cooperatively to modify drug resistance.

complete analysis of the contributions of all possible combinations of amino acid mutations and protease inhibitors to drug resistance is an extensive task and could not be presented easily in a written account such as this. therefore, we made our model available to the public in form of a web service, so that users can submit their protease sequence and receive a prediction of drug susceptibility. the use of a web service makes facilitates integration in other applications and workflows. access to the web service is available at hiv drug research centre  <cit> .

discussion
we used proteochemometrics to model susceptibilities of multiple hiv- <dig> protease variants to seven clinically used protease inhibitors, yielding a model with very good predictability and interpretability. we thoroughly validated the external predictive ability and the statistical significance of the model estimates, and conclude that our model can be reliably applied to the prediction and interpretation of the mechanisms of drug resistance. in fact, our model shows much better goodness-of-fit and predictability  than the hitherto best-performing models reported elsewhere, which, to the best of our knowledge, were obtained by the use of support vector machines applied to each protease inhibitor separately  <cit> .

our model uses physico-chemical property  descriptors of amino acids rather than encoding the mutations by letter codes or binary indicator variables. this is highly advantageous as many sequence residue positions of the hiv protease are often mutated to amino acids that share similar physico-chemical properties. our model can evaluate the contribution of each encoded property  to drug susceptibility and perform predictions for mutations to any amino acid, as long as the amino acid's properties fall within the scope of the model. in other words, the information gained from sequence positions with multiple mutations provides for predictions for novel mutations at the same position.

the model allowed us to identify the mutations that contribute most to resistance to current protease inhibitors . most of these mutations  are located in the active site of the protease . other deleterious mutations, such as 90m, are located outside the binding site. the 90m mutation is located in the dimerization region of the hiv protease. historically, such mutations have been regarded as "compensatory", compensating for the negative effects of active-site mutations on the conformation and dimerization of the protease, and its ability to cleave substrates. however, more-recent studies suggest that distantly located mutations might diminish the ability of inhibitors to bind the protease by indirectly altering the geometry of the active site  <cit> . proteochemometrics makes a powerful impact on our ability to detect, analyze, and predict the contributions of such indirect interactions to ligand binding  <cit> . effects arising from distant residues are often overlooked in drug design because they are difficult to account for using 3d docking or other methods.

besides identifying mutations that contribute to general resistance to protease inhibitors, the model also reveals the susceptibilities of particular combinations of protease inhibitors and protease mutants. thus, the model identifies specific relationships between a particular inhibitor and a particular amino acid in the protease, information that could be useful for analyzing the mechanisms behind inhibitor failure. moreover, the predictive ability of the model enables the development of targeted treatment based on the genome of a particular viral variant.

it is here appropriate to mention that an alternative way of resistance to protease inhibitors is mutations of the gag-pol cleavage sites which lead to enhancement of the processing efficiency of the substrate  <cit> . unfortunately the stanford hiv drug resistance database does not provide the full genomes of the hiv isolates, and this precludes us to linking the present data-set to complementary mutations in the cleavage sites. however, it seems unlikely that cleavage site mutations play any major role in explaining drug susceptibility in the present case. this is because our model, which was based on protease and inhibitor chemical properties alone, explained over 90% of the variation in the data, where the unexplained variation presumably essentially just represents measurement errors.

in this study we encoded the 3d structures of protease inhibitors by so called grind descriptors. these descriptors provide quantitative characterization of the ability of a molecule to form h-bond donor/acceptor and hydrophobic interactions with pharmacophoric groups located at various distance ranges around the molecule. moreover, we also used a recently-developed grind descriptor type  which describes differences in size and shape of the molecules. these descriptions thus account for all major types of interaction that may contribute to inhibitor binding within the hiv protease, as well as those that can destroy binding . pca was then applied to compress the descriptions into six orthogonal principal components, and in this case  the pca did not discard any of the information in the original descriptors. accordingly the pcas used herein allow a complete back-tracing to their origin in the original descriptors  <cit> . an advantage of using grinds is that they do not require alignments of molecules and thus are not limited to narrow series of congeneric compounds. on the other hand, difficulties may arise in model interpretations since structural modifications in the molecule often influence the values of multiple grind descriptors. a practical approach in the design of improved compounds in such a situation is to predict changes of susceptibility patterns for in-silico modified molecules. for example, such predictions suggest that the loss of susceptibility of nelfinavir to the d30n mutant should be possible to counteract by modifying the 3-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl group of the compound . in other words, according to these predictions the resistance to nelfinavir arises due to less favorable interactions of the 3-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl group with the mutated protease compared to its interactions with the wild type protease. thus our modeling approach may find use to predict susceptibilities to new inhibitors and could potentially be applied in design of new inhibitors. current susceptibility data is limited to the few clinically used protease inhibitors but proteochemometric modeling could be applied in a more general fashion and aid in the design of new agents with improved ability to withstand the development of resistance.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, proteochemometrics is well suited to the study of hiv protease drug resistance. our model predicts that relatively few of the more common mutations contribute substantially to a general loss of susceptibility, suggesting that there are limits as to how the virus can escape from the inhibitors. whether the capacity of the protease to mutate into drug resistant variants is restricted due to inherent biological factors or whether new mutations would appear in response to broader chemical diversity of protease inhibitors remains to be determined. the appearance of new mutations in response to new treatments would require repeated agglomerative modeling of susceptibility data. analysis of larger datasets  would improve the resolution and predictive ability of the proteochemometric model and consequently augment its potential application to drug design and therapy optimization.

