BACKGROUND
bidirectional promoters are the regulatory regions that fall between pairs of genes, where the 5' ends of the genes within a pair are positioned in close proximity to one another. this spacing facilitates the initiation of transcription of both genes, creating two transcription forks that advance in opposite directions. the formal definition of a bidirectional promoter requires that the transcription initiation sites are separated by no more than  <dig>  bp from one another. using these criteria we have comprehensively annotated the human and mouse genomes for the presence of bidirectional promoters, using in silico approaches  <cit> . the identification of these promoters is contingent upon the presence of adjacent, oppositely oriented pairs of genes, whose orthology assignments are quantitatively stronger than noncoding regions. this approach allows us to uniquely identify bidirectional promoters de novo  <cit>  and does not require tissue-specific epigenetic data that cannot be easily compared across tissues of different species. genomic annotations used for our identification phase include  curated protein-coding gene annotations and  spliced ests  and  5' "end-capped" transcript data, e.g., cap-analysis of gene expression database   <cit> . the annotations for protein coding genes are robust with certainty and therefore provide a high quality dataset for mapping bidirectional promoters. in contrast, bidirectional promoters supported by rna evidence alone ) have varying levels of evidence, ranging from one characterized transcript to hundreds of them. for this reason, dataset  - the cage data - provides a stringent level of validation for the start sites of the est transcripts. as a large class of regulatory sequences, bidirectional promoters exemplify a rich source of unexplored biological information in the human genome. here, we show that when compared to the mouse genome, these promoters are identifiable as truly orthologous locations, being maintained in regions of conserved synteny  that have undergone no rearrangements since the last common ancestor of humans and mice,  <dig> million years ago. these analyses represent a unique approach to identifying orthologous promoter regions with a high level of certainty.

RESULTS
bidirectional promoter identification
bidirectional gene pairs in human protein-coding genes
we first mapped bidirectional promoters in the human genome. out of  <dig>  protein-coding genes from the ucsc human genome browser , we found  <dig>  bidirectional gene pairs . cpg islands were present at  <dig> % of those bidirectional promoters  compared to  <dig> % of non-bidirectional promoter regions  from the genome. the 5' ends of genes in the bidirectional pairs were validated using riken's cage transcripts  <cit> . cumulatively, the peak position of the cage transcript annotations coincided with the annotations of transcription start sites for bidirectional promoters from human known genes .

bidirectional promoters identified by spliced ests
a richer source of bidirectional promoter evidence was present in the spliced est data. this dataset contained more abundant data than the protein-coding gene set, requiring  <dig> million transcripts to be condensed into unique, non-overlapping loci  <cit> . the complexity of this data required that we use a stringent approach of classifying potential bidirectional promoters to avoid false positive predictions. we developed and implemented a rigorous mapping procedure to identify such promoters  <cit> . using the spest data from the ucsc genome browser  we detected  <dig>  additional bidirectional promoters not detectable via the protein-coding gene annotations.

when the transcription start sites of these bidirectional transcripts were compared to the cage transcripts, they showed a similar pattern as known genes data . furthermore, using the cage data, we found that 66% of the genes in bidirectional gene pairs exhibited coordinated transcriptional activation, having a cage tag at the left and right tss in the tissues examined.

bidirectional promoter annotation in the mouse genome
we obtained  <dig>  unique protein-coding gene clusters from the mouse ucsc genome browser  and identified  <dig>  bidirectional gene pairs within the known genes annotations. furthermore, applying our methodology on spests , we found  <dig> additional bidirectional promoters were uniquely identified by that dataset. comparison of the bidirectional gene pairs in known genes annotations showed majority of ucsc genes coinciding with cage transcript annotations . the cage transcript placement relative to the annotated tss locations in the mouse spliced est dataset is shown in figure 2b. these start sites showed the most variability in the accuracy of the 5' ends of the transcripts of any annotations that we mapped.

orthologous bidirectional promoter identification
assigning orthologous regions
as coding regions have the strongest orthologous alignment signal compared with other genomics regions, we used orthology of adjunct gene pairs as anchors to assess the ancestral relatedness of the intervening bidirectional promoters. the orthology of genes was determined using chain and net data from ucsc genome browser. chains in the genome browser represent sequences of gapless aligned blocks. nets provide a hierarchical ordering of those chains. level  <dig> chains contain the longest, best-scoring sequence chains that span any selected region. subsequent levels in the net represent the results of rearrangements, duplications, insertions and deletions that may have disrupted the presence of conserved synteny derived from an ancestral sequence.

confirming orthologous genes
after determining the orthology assignments using the ucsc chains and nets data, we used the known gene annotations or spliced ests to search the identity of genes within the corresponding region. known genes represent protein-coding genes and therefore orthology can be verified by chains and nets alignments, followed by confirmation of protein identity in both species. spliced ests carry less descriptive information than protein coding genes and therefore cross-species comparisons require their presence in an orthologous position, showing conserved synteny of two transcripts forming a divergent pair and meeting the criteria of less than  <dig>  bp of intergenic distance between those transcripts. our method for mapping bidirectional promoters in the spliced est datasets is described in more detail in a previous publication  <cit> . when our program verified evidence for orthology and conserved-syntenic gene arrangement, the orthologous bidirectional promoter was confirmed. after orthologous assignments were confirmed in mouse for pairs of human genes, the reciprocal assignments were analyzed from mouse back to human.

orthology mapping of bidirectional promoters from human to mouse
within a species, annotated transcripts provide critical evidence for identifying bidirectional promoters. across species, over 90% of the human and mouse genomes can be partitioned into corresponding regions of conserved synteny  <cit> . we hypothesized that conserved synteny of bidirectional gene pairs predicts the presence of orthologous bidirectional promoters. thus missing annotations at the 5' ends of genes could be predicted from comparisons to a second species. we developed a methodology to examine orthologous locations of the pairs of genes and their intergenic promoter regions in a second species as a method of prediction, discovery and validation.

as mentioned, the bidirectional promoter sets were partitioned into those regulating protein-coding genes and those identified from the spliced est evidence. for example, the protein coding set was defined by annotations in the human ucsc genome browser annotations for known genes. this highly curated dataset provided a robust test of the hypothesis for cross-species mapping . the  <dig>  bidirectional promoters from human were classified into five categories that describe the state of the promoter in the mouse genome. these included:

 <dig>  the human gene has an ortholog in mouse and that ortholog has a bidirectional partner within  <dig>  bp that is an ortholog of the gene partner in human

 <dig>  the human gene has an ortholog in mouse and that ortholog has a bidirectional partner within  <dig>  bp that is not an ortholog of the gene partner in human

 <dig>  the human gene has an ortholog in mouse and that ortholog is missing a bidirectional partner within  <dig>  bp

 <dig>  a non-orthologous gene was mapped to the corresponding mouse location

 <dig>  no orthology was recorded in the mouse genome

orthology mapping of bidirectional promoters from mouse to human
the same procedure was repeated by comparing the mouse bidirectional promoters to the annotated human genome. figure 4a shows the results of mapping the known genes promoter set from mouse to human, where over 50% of the promoters were validated by existing annotations in the human genome. these annotations were from the human known genes  containing a  <dig>  bp intergenic limit between them, or having no limit on the intergenic distance, denoted as hg38_kg_nolimit. removing the limits identified  <dig> % of the promoters as orthologous. figure 4b shows the procedure performed using the bidirectional promoter set detected from the mouse est annotations. as also seen with figure 3b, many fewer promoters from the est predictions were validated in the second species . the number increased to 35% when the  <dig> bp limited was removed . these data show that promoter annotations identified in mouse ests can robustly validate some human promoters, and that comprehensive mapping of these promoters is aided by multiple lines of transcript evidence.

distribution of orthologous bidirectional promoters on chromosomes
on a per chromosome basis, genes regulated by bidirectional promoters were not evenly distributed in either the human or mouse genomes . however, their appearance was consistent with the allocation of genes per chromosome. for example, in the human genome, chromosome  <dig> has the lowest gene density  among sequenced human autosomes  <cit> , as well as one of the lowest numbers of bidirectional promoters. in contrast, chromosome  <dig> is the most gene-rich of all human chromosomes  <cit>  and has a high number of bidirectional promoters. chromosome  <dig> had the highest ranking, containing over 52% of bidirectional promoters in human that were confirmed as orthologous in mouse. those promoters currently showing no orthologous evidence represent either species-specific differences between human and mouse gene sets  or missing annotations from the known genes dataset in mouse . we observed a higher overall confirmation of orthologous bidirectional promoters when mapped from mouse to human , suggesting that the annotations may be more complete in human, and the mapping from human to mouse failed more often due to missing gene annotations in mouse. we will continue to update the datasets as gene annotations continue to be refined.

orthologous promoters exhibit functional correlations
the presence of orthologous regulatory regions provided an opportunity to dissect the similarity in gene expression conferred across species by bidirectional promoters. by scanning the novartis expression atlas  <dig> dataset  <cit>  for human and mouse orthologs in our set ,  <dig> genes and their confirmed orthologs were compared. figure 6a shows that human bidirectional gene pairs are more likely to be co-expressed when examined in  <dig> different tissue types. a total of  <dig> tissues of the same identity in human and mouse were also examined. figure 6b shows a shift toward correlated expression among orthologs. however, some negative correlations were also detected.

discussion
we have utilized the unique properties of bidirectional promoters to map orthologous regulatory regions. these promoters are flanked on each side by a spliced transcript. therefore the presence of the orthologous genes in the same arrangement in another species identifies the intergenic promoter region as the orthologous promoter region. we have used this approach to map promoters from human to mouse without the aid of regulatory region sequence conservation to identify the orthologous promoter elements. nevertheless sequence alignments were very important in defining the regions of orthology and conserved synteny. we show that orthologous regulatory regions can be identified using annotations of ucsc known genes or spliced ests. furthermore, the combination of these datasets reveals additional promoter regions. by validating the predictions in the second species, we confirmed that bidirectional promoters are present in orthologous positions in mammalian genomes. furthermore, we postulate that regions containing one of the genes, but not both, are likely to be missing the annotations for the partner gene. thus we anticipate that as annotations grow more populated and refined, the data shown in our heat maps will confirm orthology at even more promoters.

CONCLUSIONS
bidirectional promoters are enriched in mammalian genomes. our approach of investigating the orthology of bidirectional promoters reveals thousands of examples of this type of regulatory structure maintained through evolutionary selection. by combining spliced ests and known genese, we identified a larger and more comprehensive set of bidirectional promoters. we subsequently found that many of these spliced ests represent non-coding rnas . this is consistent with recent reports that the majority of long non-coding rna  are flanked by bidirectional promoters  <cit> . thus, understanding regulatory mechanisms of bidirectional promoters can be useful in investigating ncrnas whose functions remain largely unknown. the different types of bidirectional promoters we record based on annotation and orthology allow us to address the diversity of biological functions of these promoters.

