BACKGROUND
adaptation to different environments is postulated to play a large role in speciation and adaptive radiation  <cit> . with ecological speciation, reproductive isolation between populations evolves incidentally as a by-product of adaptation to divergent environments  <cit> . there are three potential sources of this reproductive isolation. first, the traits that are under divergent selection may indirectly reduce reproductive success by altering mate choice. second, ecological mechanisms may contribute directly to reproductive isolation among species. if two species are specialized to different environments, interspecific hybrids may have reduced fitness in both environments because they lack the full complement of adaptive factors possessed by each of the parental species and exhibit a maladaptive intermediate phenotype. third, divergent adaptation may promote reproductive isolation through genetic incompatibilities, as predicted by the dobzhansky-muller model  <cit> . when populations adapt to divergent environments, selection promotes sorting and fixation of different alleles in the alternate populations. subsequent hybridization creates novel combinations of alleles that have not been tested and approved by selection, creating the possibility of negative, genetic interactions  <cit> . under the dobzhansky-muller model, this antagonistic epistasis between incompatible alleles at interacting loci causes reductions in reproductive success. given enough time, two completely separated populations will inevitably develop genetic incompatibilities due to mutation and genetic drift. does divergent adaptation accelerate or increase the likelihood of the evolution of genetic incompatibilities, and thus speciation?

the amount of standing genetic variation in the ancestral population before speciation has a major effect on the evolution of reproductive isolation. low-diversity populations may be restricted to adaptive peaks that are proximal to that of their conspecific ancestors, thereby limiting their ability to explore alternative adaptive peaks. high-diversity populations created by interspecific hybridization may possess greater segregational variance, with the potential for significant negative or positive epistasis among genetic factors. positive epistasis may allow hybrid populations to access higher-fitness peaks elsewhere on the fitness landscape, thereby facilitating greater and more rapid evolutionary responses to novel environments. furthermore, the level of potential divergence as a result of differential sorting between lineages increases with genetic variance. hybrid speciation theory therefore suggests that the greater genetic variation associated with hybrid populations may increase the likelihood and rate of ecological speciation  <cit> .

to test these key predictions of ecological and hybrid speciation, we developed an experimental evolution system using the filamentous fungus neurospora. several attributes make neurospora ideal for this study. like other microbes, it is amenable to experimental evolution because of short generation time, and ease of indeterminate propagation and archival storage  <cit> . the amount of genetic variation in artificial populations can be controlled by crossing parents of known relatedness. also, the role of ecological specialization in promoting species divergence in this genus finds support in phylogenetic reconstructions  <cit> .

most importantly, neurospora has a well-characterized sexual system with identifiable events associated with mating and sexual development  <cit> . defects that cause reproductive isolation can be easily recognized at numerous stages in the sexual cycle  <cit> . in outbreeding neurospora, mating occurs between haploid individuals of opposite mating type . each self-sterile individual produces receptive "female" mating structures  and fertilizing "male" propagules . successfully fertilized protoperithecium enlarge rapidly and develop into mature fruiting bodies called perithecia. at this point, prezygotic isolation can be assessed by perithecial production. karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis occur to produce the haploid progeny  which are then forcibly ejected from the perithecium. at this point, postzygotic isolation can be assessed by progeny viability.

most experimental-evolution studies of reproductive isolation have focused on premating isolation and mating preference in drosophila  <cit> . this form of isolation does not play an important role in speciation in fungi and plants because these organisms do not have "behaviour" in the classical, zoological sense. here we focus on the incompatibilities that occur after mating , which are central to reproductive isolation in all eukaryotic organisms.

in a recent study of the unicellular yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae, divergent adaptation resulted in both extrinsic ecological isolation and intrinsic genetic incompatibilities  <cit> . it is not known, however, if microbes with different levels of biological complexity respond to divergent, ecological selection in similar ways  <cit> . neurospora has a filamentous rather than unicellular growth form, with more complex mating and sexual development than yeast. here we study speciation with a similar experimental approach to that of ref.  <dig> but use a multicellular microbial system. in brief, we evolved replicate lineages of neurospora in one of two sub-optimal, selective environments. the asexual fitness of lineages was then measured to test for adaptation to the selective environment and trade-offs in the alternate environment. to test for the development of reproductive isolation , the success of matings between lineages was assessed using two different measures. by varying the amount of standing genetic  diversity in the founding populations, we tested if increased variation caused by hybridization facilitates adaptation and the evolution of reproductive incompatibilities. to test if divergent adaptation increases the likelihood of the development of reproductive isolation, the effects of chance and divergent selection were differentiated by comparing the reproductive success between parallel-adapted lineages and divergent-adapted lineages.

RESULTS
evolution regimen
the founding populations for experiment l  and experiment h  were produced by an intraspecific and interspecific cross, respectively .

the average sequence divergence between the parental individuals in exp. h was  <dig> %, nearly three times greater than that in exp. l . replicate lineages of neurospora were experimentally evolved for seven cycles of propagation, with each cycle consisting of a sexual phase followed by an asexual phase . divergent selection was applied during asexual reproduction by exposing the lineages to one of two sub-optimal, selective environments: high salinity or low temperature. for exp. l, lineages evolved in high salinity or low temperature were named ln or lt, respectively. for exp. h, lineages evolved in high salinity or low temperature were named hn or ht, respectively. in total, each experimental lineage underwent  <dig> meiotic generations and ~ <dig> mitotic generations.

adaptation
at the end of the evolution regimen, we tested for adaptation by assaying the linear, mycelial growth rate of evolved lineages in their respective selective environments . all four lineage-classes  had a significantly greater growth rate than the mid-parent mean in the selective environment , with an average fitness advantage of  <dig> % . all four lineage classes also had mean growth rates that were greater than the fastest parental progenitor in the selective environment , significantly for three lineage classes . on average, lineages gained a  <dig> %  fitness advantage over the fastest parental progenitor.

to test for trade-offs, growth rate was assayed in the alternate, selective environment. the evolved lineages displayed an average fitness reduction of  <dig> % , relative to fastest ancestor. only the lt lineage class had a significantly reduced growth rate in high salinity . in the permissive environment , each lineage class had a significantly greater growth rate than the fastest parent , with an average fitness gain of  <dig> % .

in nature, the growth rate of evolved lineages in relation to each other, rather than in relation to the ancestor, is what determines competitive fitness. when assayed in the high-salinity environment, high-salinity-evolved lineages had a greater mean growth rate than low-temperature-evolved lineages . similarly, low-temperature-evolved lineages had a greater growth rate than high-salinity-evolved lineages when assayed in the low-temperature environment . when modeled with anova, the interaction between assay environment and selective environment was significant for exp. l , but not for exp. h . despite these mixed significance levels, the overall pattern suggested a negative correlation of fitness gains across environments.

sexual reproductive success – progeny viability
to monitor the effects of environmental selection on the sexual reproductive success among lineages, we assayed progeny viability during the course of evolution. assay points 1– <dig> were designated at the end of each of the seven sexual-asexual propagation cycles. progeny viability assays were performed by crossing each lineage with the five other evolved lineages and measuring ascospore germination under permissive conditions. given the reciprocity of matings regarding gender  and mating type ,  <dig> different matings were performed for each of the  <dig> pairwise combinations of lineages within each experiment. thus, each assay comprised  <dig> matings and the scoring of approximately  <dig>  ascospores.

evolution in sub-optimal conditions initially reduced progeny viability, however, regular sexual cycles subjected the experimental lineages to selection for greater reproductive success. as a response, progeny viabilities increased an average of  <dig>   and  <dig>   per successive assay point for exp. l and h, respectively. over the course of the evolution regimen, progeny viabilities had nearly recovered to the values observed for the original, parental crosses .

to test for the effects of parallel and divergent selection on reproductive success, we compared the progeny viability of matings between lineages evolved in parallel selective environments  versus those evolved in divergent selective environments . to account for variation in overall means, progeny viability was normalized over the grand mean for each assay point, allowing direct comparison of different assays. in exp. l, progeny viability of pe matings was greater than that for de matings  for some but not all assay points. in the early assays, significant differences were actually in the opposite direction than predicted by ecological speciation. however, this pattern was reversed as evolution progressed: the last two assay points showed significant differences . in exp. h, the results were clearly consistent with predictions: pe matings were significantly more successful than de matings for assays points  <dig> through  <dig> .

we then modeled the effects of mating type and selective environment on progeny viability in exp. l and h. the anova included only assay points  <dig> and  <dig>  the most derived states of the lineages . because each lineage could act as a female or a male in different matings, we analyzed these two gender roles independently. the mating type and selective environment of males were inconsequential to progeny viability . in contrast, progeny viability was significantly affected by the selective environment of the female . subsequent analyses therefore were performed separately on each lineage class as female.

sources of variation were mating type , selective environment , and their interaction. significant p values are indicated in bold. female and male gender roles were analyzed separately. in all cases, the df =  <dig> for each effect term, and df =  <dig> for the error term. all data were arcsine square-root transformed.

in general, progeny viability was greater when females were fertilized by males evolved in the parallel environment than when fertilized by males evolved in the divergent environment. these differences were significant at both assay points for one of the two lineage classes in each experiment: the lt and hn lineage classes in exp. l and h, respectively . these patterns were shared among lineages within lineage classes: pe > de matings for all three lt and hn lineages . in addition, pe matings were significantly more successful than de matings for  <dig> of the assay points along the course of evolution , demonstrating a clear trend through time.

progeny viability in selective environments
all previous assays of progeny viability were performed under permissive conditions. to examine the effects of sub-optimal conditions, we also scored progeny viability in high-salinity and low-temperature environments . if environment-specific adaptation in the asexual phase had a correlated effect on ascospore germination, a u-shaped distribution of means across the two panels in figure  <dig> is expected . in the low-temperature environment, the rank order of progeny viability for the four mating classes was consistent with such a distribution. in the high-salinity environment, ln × ln matings had unexpectedly low viabilities and did not display a correlated effect: this represented the only case where the observed rank order did not match expectations. owing to the small sample size, few significant differences were detected but notable trends did exist. in low temperature, lt × lt had significantly greater progeny viability than the other mating classes. for de matings , progeny viability was similar across both selective environments. when the assay environment matched the environment in which the female lineage had evolved, progeny viability was greater . this pattern again demonstrates environment-specific adaptation and the importance of the maternal contribution to progeny.

sexual reproductive success – perithecial production
progeny viability measures postzygotic isolation and reflects the quality of progeny produced at the completion of sexual reproduction. perithecial production measures prezygotic isolation and reflects the success of fertilization events. perithecial number also influences the quantity of progeny produced, assuming that more perithecia produce more progeny.

perithecial production was measured at assay point  <dig> and evidence for reproductive isolation was observed in exp. h but not exp. l. for exp. l, no significant differences in perithecial production were detected between pe and de matings . for exp. h, pe matings produced significantly greater numbers of perithecia than de matings, but only when ht lineages acted as the female . in ht × hn matings, perithecial production was greatly reduced compared to wild-type levels . the protoperithecia responded to fertilization by expanding and darkening slightly, the typical response seen in wild-type matings. however, the vast majority of perithecia aborted at this stage of development and never matured into the larger, black perithecia. in the reciprocal hn × ht matings, an incompatibility phenotype was not observed: nearly all perithecia developed to maturity as normal. all combinations of ht and hn lineages shared this pattern of asymmetrical reproductive isolation . the two types of matings differed only by which lineage class functioned as the female and male partner, demonstrating that the incompatibility was expressed in a gender-role-specific fashion.

genetic basis of incompatibility phenotype
the genetic basis of the interactions causing the reductions in perithecial production was investigated further. sixty f <dig> progeny were isolated from crosses between ht <dig> and hn <dig> lineages. these progeny were mated back to the ht <dig> and hn <dig> parents, in both gender roles, and perithecial production was assayed.

when the f <dig> progeny were grown as females and fertilized by the ht <dig> and hn <dig> males, perithecial production values formed a bimodal distribution . the discriminatory phenotype, defined as a female producing > <dig> times more perithecia when fertilized by ht <dig> males than when fertilized by hn <dig> males, segregated 30: <dig> . these two lines of evidence suggested that the phenotype was controlled by a single, mendelian locus. this locus was named dfe for "discriminatory female", and the alleles that confer discrimination or non-discrimination were named dfed and dfen, respectively.

when these progeny were grown as males and used to fertilize discriminatory ht <dig> females, perithecial production values again formed a bimodal distribution . the discriminated phenotype, defined as the inability of a male to activate an ht <dig> female to produce > <dig> perithecia/mm <dig>  was observed in  <dig> of the  <dig> f <dig> progeny . this segregating locus, which controls the "discriminated male" phenotype, was named dma and the alleles that confer discrimination or non-discrimination were named dmad and dman, respectively.

the inferred genotypes of the ht <dig> and hn <dig> parents were dfed dman and dfen dmad, respectively. among the  <dig> f <dig> progeny, we observed  <dig> parental  and  <dig> recombinant  genotypes, providing evidence that the two loci were genetically unlinked . we selected  <dig> f <dig> progeny  and assayed perithecial production in the  <dig> possible matings among them. all observed phenotypes matched predictions based on the female × male genotype combinations: perithecial production was reduced only for matings in which the female was dfed and the male was dmad .

each cell of the matrix contains the mean number of perithecia produced per mm <dig> . n =  <dig> . bold values indicate genotype combinations that displayed the incompatibility phenotype.

we were able to reconstitute the original, parental ht <dig> and hn <dig> genotypes, and associated phenotypes, by crossing recombinant f <dig> genotypes . among  <dig> f <dig> progeny, we obtained  <dig> parental  and  <dig> recombinant  genotypes . again, the two alleles at both loci segregated evenly in these f <dig> progeny .

discussion
the founding populations of neurospora were composed of multiple individuals with standing genetic variation. as evolution progressed, the genetic composition of these initially identical lineages could change by the sorting of pre-existing and new alleles, or by the creation of novel allele combinations through recombination. how these processes interact with the different types and strengths of selective pressures during the evolution regimen ultimately determines the phenotype of the end-point lineages. in this study, we investigated the effects of these processes on adaptive increases in asexual fitness and the evolution of reproductive isolation.

the best evidence for adaptation is when the evolved lineages have greater fitness than their most-fit ancestor . although specialization to one environment may be associated with fitness reductions in other environments  <cit> , we found only limited evidence for such fitness trade-offs . these results are fully consistent with the recent experimental study of speciation in yeast  <cit> . taken together, the mycelial growth rate data demonstrate that the negative correlation of fitness gains in the two selective environments was a result of divergent environmental selection. surprisingly, divergent selection also caused a correlated response of an increase in general growth rate in the permissive environment . furthermore, environmental adaptation in the asexual phase had a correlated effect on ascospore germination in those selective environments . this pattern is expected if ascospore germination is considered to be the first step in mycelial growth.

compared to previous experimental studies with fungi  <cit> , the levels of environmental adaptation we observed here were unexpectedly low. we used mycelial growth rate as a proxy for fitness because it was the most obvious trait under selection; the mycelial sector with the fastest growth rate was transferred as the founder for the next culture tube. other asexual traits, such as biomass accumulation, may have also been under selection, but were not measured. in addition, selection during sexual cycles may have counteracted selection during the asexual phase, causing a reduction in the net asexual fitness gains  <cit> .

another factor potentially impeding adaptation is the coenocytic growth form of this filamentous fungus. hyphae of neurospora are densely packed with nuclei that are capable of migrating between hyphal compartments. the interconnectedness of the mycelial network may have a homogenizing effect, interfering with competition among genetically different nuclei. individual nuclei have, at best, only partial control of the phenotype and are not fully exposed to selection. propagation of lineages by conidia, in which individual nuclei are more exposed to selection than in hyphal tips, may have allowed for more efficient competition and a greater adaptive response  <cit> . further comparative, experimental studies are needed to determine the relationship between growth form and adaptive potential of filamentous fungi.

when ecological speciation via divergent adaptation occurs, there are two possible underlying causes of sexual reproductive isolation. first, direct selection on the sexual phase may cause specialization to a particular environment, such that sexual reproduction is disrupted when not within that environment. in this case, reductions in reproductive success are caused by interactions between adapted genotypes and the environment . second, divergent selection during the asexual phase may cause the accumulation of negatively interacting loci, which consequently have indirect effects on the sexual phase. in this case, reductions in reproductive success are caused by antagonistic epistasis between genetic factors in the adapted genomes .

to discriminate the direct effects of divergent adaptation during the sexual phase from the indirect effects of divergent adaptation during the asexual phase, these two selective pressures were experimentally decoupled. the neurospora populations were exposed to selective, divergent environments only during the asexual phase. most organisms spend the majority of their life in the asexual phase, so adaptive evolutionary responses to environmental selection typically occur in this phase. at no point in our evolution regimen was reproductive isolation the target of selection. the sexual phase was performed under identical, permissive, conditions for all lineages. thus, any differential patterns of sexual reproductive success could be attributed to the indirect effects of divergent selection on non-sexual traits that had overpowered the unifying effects of parallel selection on the sexual phase.

our experimental design also allowed us to identify genetic isolation. when sexual reproductive success was assayed in the permissive environment, any patterns of differential reproductive success could be attributed solely to genetic isolation, and not to ecological isolation. one may argue that, in nature, genetic isolation is far more important than ecological isolation because the latter is, by definition, dependent upon the environment. incompatibilities caused by intrinsic genetic interactions may be permanent despite changing environments.

we could determine if the development of reproductive isolation was caused by random effects of chance or by deterministic effects of divergent selection. if the evolution of reproductive incompatibilities was random, these phenotypes should not be correlated with the selective environments: parallel and divergent selection should have similar effects on reproductive isolation. thus, divergent selection can be implicated as the causal factor only when greater reproductive isolation is observed between divergent-adapted lineages than between parallel-adapted lineages .

in general, the conclusion that divergent adaptation promotes the development of reproductive isolation was supported by results from progeny viability assays, particularly from the later stages of the experiments . differential progeny viability that was consistent with ecological speciation was observed in almost all comparisons made at the level of lineage class as female . the two lineage classes  that drove the trend were evolved in different environments, and were derived from founding populations with different levels and sources of genetic variation. thus, differential progeny viability was not dependent upon a particular selective environment, or particular genetic components possessed by the progenitors. rather, divergent selection in divergent environments caused the patterns of differential reproductive success.

perithecial production assays for exp. h, but not exp. l, were consistent with divergent adaptation promoting the development of reproductive isolation . for exp. h, females produced more perithecia when fertilized by parallel-adapted males than when fertilized by divergently-adapted males. when ht lineages functioned as the female, the discrepancy was quite dramatic: pe matings produced, on average,  <dig>  times more perithecia than de matings.

the incompatibility phenotype and its inheritance pattern support a two-locus, two-allele model with asymmetric, antagonistic epistasis. the two loci, dfe and dma, interact in a gender-role-specific fashion to modulate the progression through the sexual cycle. antagonistic interactions between the dfed and the dmad alleles cause major reductions in perithecial production, but only when the female possesses the dfed allele and the male possesses the dmad allele. the reciprocal pairing, and all other allele pairings, do not result in the incompatibility phenotype. this model is fully compatible with the dobzhansky-muller model.

reductions in reproductive success are compounded over the successive stages of a single life cycle. when perithecial production and progeny viability are combined, pe matings have a  <dig> -fold advantage over de matings for exp. h. for exp. l, in which the degree of differential reproductive success was much lower, pe matings have only a  <dig> -fold  advantage over de matings. although this is not a large difference, one must consider that these effects are compounded over successive generations, allowing minor disparities in reproductive success to have substantial consequences on gene flow between populations.

we are aware of only six other experimental evolution studies in which the effects of divergent selection and genetic drift could be separated. recent work with experimental populations of yeast clearly demonstrated that divergent adaptation resulted in significantly greater reproductive isolation than parallel adaptation  <cit> . the other five studies all used drosophila as the experimental system, but obtained mixed results. in four studies  <cit> , divergent selection had greater effects than parallel selection. in another study  <cit> , however, the predictions of ecological speciation were not supported.

this study revealed the strong influence that the maternal partner has on the success of a mating. these results are explicable for neurospora because the female bears nearly the whole burden of sexual reproduction. the maternal partner forms complex structures for mating, actively senses the presence of a male, and produces most of the tissue comprising a mature perithecium. in contrast, the only role of the male is to passively donate nuclei to the female.

increased genetic variance caused by interspecific hybridization allows for both negative and positive epistasis, thus expanding the fitness distribution in both directions. the dobzhansky-muller model focuses on negative interactions between heterospecific genomes that may cause less fit genotypes. hybrid speciation theory focuses on positive interactions  that may create more fit genotypes. in this sense, the two theories are opposite sides of the same coin. here we tested whether the potential benefits of positive epistasis could overpower the potential detriments of negative epistasis, regarding the overall fitness of lineages and their ability to adapt; the results of our experiment suggest they cannot. even though the multiple rounds of sex and recombination should have allowed the separation and purging of negatively interacting factors, lineages from the high-diversity exp. h did not adapt to the selective environments more than the lineages from the low-diversity exp. l. when mycelial growth rates in all three environments are considered , it appears that exp. l lineages actually had greater responses  to selection than exp. h lineages.

results from progeny viability and perithecial production assays supported predictions from hybrid speciation theory: differential reproductive success was more common and more striking in exp. h than in exp. l . exp. h was initiated from a cross between two species, n. crassa and n. intermedia, with nearly complete reproduction isolation  <cit> . the founding population likely contained considerable genetic variance for reproductive success. we hypothesize that, as variation sorted out during the course of evolution, lineages became fixed for particular combinations of compatible genomic regions. parallel adaptation during the asexual phase promoted the fixation of similar genomic regions. divergent adaptation promoted the fixation of dissimilar genomic regions, thereby increasing the likelihood of genetic incompatibilities among lineages.

identifying the genomic regions and, ultimately, the genes that interact to produce the incompatibility phenotypes is critical to understanding the causes of reproductive isolation. further research should investigate the genomic composition of the evolved lineages, and its correlation with adaptation and incompatibility. genomic regions consistently shared among parallel-selected lineages could point to the genes or mutations under selection and involved in adaptation. the most discrete differences in reproductive success were in perithecial production, so it might be possible to determine the location and characteristics of the two genetic factors . at this point, it is unclear if these loci encode single genes or sets of tightly linked genes. by genetic manipulation and controlled crosses, one could determine precisely the nature and mechanism of the antagonistic interaction that causes the dobzhansky-muller incompatibility.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated three important aspects of speciation in a developmentally complex eukaryotic microbe. first, divergent selection on a common, founding population resulted in divergent adaptation and environmental specialization. evolved populations typically had higher fitness in their selective environment than in the alternate environment in which they had not evolved. this negative correlation of fitness across environments provides the phenotypic variation upon which ecological mechanisms of isolation can act. second, divergent adaptation resulted in greater reproductive isolation than parallel adaptation. evidence for differential reproductive success was observed at two stages of the sexual cycle: perithecial production and progeny viability. the genetic basis for one of the observed incompatibility phenotypes can be explained by a two-locus, two-allele model with asymmetric, antagonistic epistasis. third, the effects of divergent adaptation on reproductive isolation were more pronounced for populations with greater initial genetic variation. interspecific hybridization may produce novel variation that allows the populations to follow previously inaccessible evolutionary trajectories. taken together, our results support the hypothesis that, given adequate standing genetic variation, divergent adaptation can indirectly cause the evolution of differential reproductive success, and eventually lead to speciation.

