BACKGROUND
the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex of escherichia coli is encoded by the operon pdhr-acee-acef-lpda. the first gene encodes the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex regulator , which functions as a transcriptional regulator in a self-regulatory manner for this operon  <cit> . the multi-enzyme complex of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex consists of  <dig> subunits of the pyruvate dehydrogenase ,  <dig> subunits of the dehydrolipoate acetyltransferase , and  <dig> subunits of the dehydrolipoamide dehydrogenase . this complex catalyses the formation of acetyl-coa from pyruvate, which subsequently enters the tca cycle  <cit> . thereby the complex regulates the metabolic flux at the pyruvate node, which connects glycolysis and the tca cycle.

the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex regulator  belongs to the gnt family of transcription factors  <cit>  and is regulated by a pyruvate-sensing mechanism  <cit> . while pdhr represses the transcription of its target genes, the pyruvate-bound state of the regulator is not able to bind dna. pdhr controls not only the transcription of the multi-enzyme complex of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, but also targets the ndh and cyoabcde operons , which leads to the hypothesis that pdhr functions as a master regulator of genes involved in energy production and the following terminal electron transport from nadh to oxygen  <cit> . furthermore, a connection between central metabolism and iron transport has been described by the regulation of the fecabcde operon  by pdhr  <cit> . the tomb-hha operon -toxin -module)  <cit>  and the genes heml   <cit> , yfid   <cit> , and lipa   <cit>  are also directly controlled by pdhr.

since pdhr plays an important role in the control of metabolic flux, we aimed to identify further targets of this regulator. for this purpose we set out to identify potential targets of regulation by pdhr in a large-scale microarray dataset of e. coli from the many microbes microarray database  <cit> . moreover, we constructed a pdhr-knockout and a pdhr-overproducing strain and studied their transcriptome on a variety of growth media. following this analysis, we identified four potential binding sites of pdhr. using chromatin immunoprecipitation  in combination with quantitative pcr and gel shift assays we discovered that the glcdefgba operon  as well as the mrazw-ftsli-muref-mray-murd-ftsw-murgc-ddlb-ftsqaz-lpxc transcription unit  are controlled by pdhr. our results thus further underline the central importance of pdhr for the control of metabolism and its involvement in cell division by providing a link to the nutritional status of the cell. in consequence, we further support the notion that pdhr is an important component of the transcriptional regulatory network of e. coli  <cit> .

RESULTS
the outline of our study is presented in figure  <dig> 

construction of a pdhr deletion mutant and investigation of the phenotype on different media
the deletion mutant lj110Δpdhr was constructed as described in methods. after confirming the genotype by pcr, the strains lj <dig> and lj110Δpdhr as well as lj110/ptm <dig> and lj110/ptm30pdhrhis were investigated regarding their phenotypical growth behaviour. for this purpose strains were grown overnight and inoculated into various fresh media. growth behaviour was observed by measuring the change in optical density. the growth rates μ  are given in table  <dig> 

strains with different genotypes regarding pdhr were grown in rich medium  and minimal medium  supplied with glucose, glycerol, acetate or pyruvate as carbon source. the growth rate was determined in the mid logarithmic phase.

when grown in complex lb medium, neither the pdhr deletion mutant nor the pdhrhis overexpression strain differed in their growth behaviour from the parental strains. in contrast, when grown in minimal media supplemented with glucose, glycerol, or acetate as carbon source, a severe growth defect of the pdhr deletion mutant was observed. this phenotype emerged regardless of the carbohydrate source. interestingly, this growth defect did not occur when cells were grown in minimal medium supplemented with pyruvate. since the transcription factor pdhr is inactivated by pyruvate, the deletion is of no consequence under these conditions. overproduction of the transcription regulator in minimal medium did not affect growth behaviour, as was observed in rich medium.

to get a more detailed insight into the effect of the chromosomal pdhr deletion and pdhr overproduction on the transcriptome, we analysed the gene-expression profiles of these strains under various growth conditions using microarrays.

elucidating further targets of pdhr in a systems biology approach
we used three different approaches to infer further targets of pdhr. firstly, we identified putative targets of regulation by pdhr through the analysis of a large-scale gene-expression data set from the many microbes microarray database .

secondly, we analysed microarray data from a pdhr overproducing and a pdhr knockout strain. thirdly, we inferred putative phylogenetically conserved binding sites of pdhr on a genome scale using a previously described approach  <cit> .

in the first approach, we determined an association score  indicating the significance of a regulation of each gene in the genome of e. coli by pdhr. these scores were determined from  <dig> gene-expression experiments, stored in m3d, using the context-likelihood of relatedness algorithm  <cit> . in the second approach, we obtained a regulatory score that corresponds to the strength of the effect of a knockout as well as an overproduction of pdhr on the expression of each gene during growth on three different media. in the third approach, we searched for putative phylogenetically conserved binding sites of pdhr in the upstream region of each gene of e. coli. we identified putative binding sites in the promoter regions of  <dig> operons containing  <dig> genes.

to identify further potential targets of pdhr, we sorted all genes in whose promoter region we identified a putative binding site of pdhr independently according to their z-scores and regulatory scores. the results of this analysis are displayed in table  <dig>  thus, we found that particular genes belonging to the dcw cluster - which is important in cell division  <cit>  - are the top-ranking targets according to their z-score. in contrast, genes of the glcdefgba operon, which are important in glyoxylate and glycolate utilisation, are enriched among the targets identified from the regulatory score. in addition to these two operons, we selected ynfm and metb as likely targets of a regulation by pdhr. we selected ynfm since it encodes a putative transport protein belonging to the major facilitory superfamily of transporters  <cit>  and displays a marked increase of expression during growth on pyruvate, thereby being a potential pyruvate transporter . moreover we identified metb, which encodes an enzyme in methionine biosynthesis, as a putative target of pdhr.

top-ranking genes with putative phylogenetically conserved binding sites of pdhr sorted according to z-scores  and regulatory scores . previously known targets of pdhr are marked with "*" and new targets confirmed in this study with "$". additionally to the new experimentally validated targets indicated in the above table, a regulation of mraz, murf, ddlb, ftsq, ftsa, ftsz and lpxc by pdhr was confirmed as they are part of the operon that forms the dcw-cluster.

verifying four predicted binding sites by chip and qpcr
the analysis of our dna microarray data combined with the data from databases, revealed new operons and pathways which might be regulated by pdhr. in the first experimental step four potential binding sites were chosen for further verification.

we tested the putative pdhr binding sites within the operator fragments of the genes glcd , mraz , metb , and ynfm  by chromatin immunoprecipitation  and quantitative pcr . therefore, a culture which expresses his-tagged pdhr was grown in lb medium. the transcription regulator was cross-linked to chromosomal dna. after cell lysis and shearing the dna, dna-repressor complexes were co-precipitated, the crosslinking reversed, and the dna purified. this dna was used as template dna in the qpcr to compare the amounts of precipitated dna fragments containing the described binding sites.

results are shown in figure  <dig>  for the tested primer pairs, the amount of pcr product for the ptsg gene that is not regulated by pdhr, served as a negative control pcr and was set as  <dig>  dna fragments of the known binding target for pdhr self-regulation in front of the pdhr gene were enriched by a factor of  <dig>  in the assay. the qpcr revealed an enrichment of dna fragments which contain the putative binding sites for pdhr in front of the genes glcd and mraz by a factor of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, that are statistically significant .

no enrichment was found for the putative pdhr target sequences in front of the genes metb  and ynfm . the applied growth conditions in complex rich medium might not be suitable for the detection of all pdhr-dna interactions, although the overproduction of pdhrhis should facilitate binding, also to dna fragments which might be bound with low affinity.

verifying three binding sites in vitro by gel shift assays
in a second experimental step, three putative binding sites were further investigated. the binding activity of pdhr towards the binding sites in front of the genes glcd, mraz and metb were also analysed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. his-tagged pdhr was purified and incubated with fluorescence labelled dna fragments. a complex formation of dna and repressor protein leads to an electrophoretic retardation and thus a shifted fluorescence signal of the dna fragment. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  the binding of purified pdhr to the known binding site of the operator region in front of the pdhr gene was observed. the same binding activity was detected for the region in front of the glcd gene, whereas the complex with the predicted binding site in front of the mraz gene was much weaker. a complex with the dna binding site of the metb gene was not detected in this in vitro approach.

assessing the global architecture of the pdhr regulon
pertaining to the large number of processes regulated by pdhr we furthermore determined its mean expression level over the mean expression levels of all transcription factors of e. coli in the microarray data of m3d. previously it was found that the number of targets of a transcriptional regulator correlates with its expression level  <cit> . the expression level of pdhr is close to the median of expression levels of all transcription factors. this suggests that while controlling distinct key cellular processes, pdhr does so by controlling a selected number of target genes rather than a large number of target genes like other global transcriptional regulators.

discussion
regulation of glcdefgba by pdhr
the glcd gene is the first gene of the transcription unit glcdefgba. this unit encodes the glycolate oxidase , a small conserved protein of unknown function , the malate synthase g , and a glycolate transporter protein . the operon is activated by glcc during growth on glycolate and transcribed as a polycistronic message. the expression also depends on the integrative host factor  and is repressed by the respiratory regulator arca-p  <cit> . glycolate and acetate are degraded via the common intermediate glyoxylate. glyoxylate is an important intermediate of the central metabolism under conditions when acetate or fatty acids are the main carbon and energy source and is metabolised using the so-called glyoxylate bypass  <cit> . there are two isoenzymes, the malate synthases a and g  that convert glyoxylate into malate. both proteins belong to the acetate  or the glycolate/glyoxylate pathway , respectively. both operons are similarly controlled by the factors ihf and arca-p and can fulfil redundant roles via cross-induction  <cit>  to avoid the toxic accumulation of glyoxylate.

the commonly assumed route for pyruvate assimilation proceeds via the phosphoenolpyruvate synthase ppsa which allows gluconeogenesis from this compound. however, in a previous study it was found that the expression level of ppsa is suboptimal for growth on pyruvate  <cit> . this suggests that alternative routes may exist for pyruvate assimilation. the glyoxylate shunt could serve this purpose as it allows gluconeogenesis from the pyruvate derivative acetyl-coa. this hypothesis is supported by the observation that the genes for ppsa and the glyoxylate shunt enzymes, acea and aceb, did not show noticeable differences in expression during growth on acetate and pyruvate . moreover, we find that several genes which encode enzymes involved in the conversion of pyruvate into acetate are strongly upregulated in pyruvate grown cultures as compared to acetate grown cultures. thus, a transcriptional regulation of the malate synthase glcb, which is part of the glcdefgba operon and also part of the glyoxylate shunt, would allow the cell to control gluconeogenesis from pyruvate via the glyoxylate shunt .

extending the results of pellicer and colleagues  <cit>  who found a cross-induction of genes required for glycolate and acetate assimilation, our findings show that this cross-induction might also extend to genes activated during growth on pyruvate. this is supported by the regulation of the glcdefgba operon by pdhr and the finding, that many genes known to be upregulated during growth on acetate show no marked difference in expression during growth on acetate and pyruvate, while genes which encode enzymes that convert pyruvate into acetate are strongly upregulated during growth on pyruvate but not on acetate.

regulation of cell division by pdhr
mraz is a protein of unknown function and is encoded in the transcription unit mrazw-ftsli-muref-mray-murd-ftsw-murgc-ddlb-ftsqaz-lpxc which represents the dcw cluster  <cit> . this unit encodes proteins involved in cell division and peptidoglycan biosynthesis. the expression of these genes is regulated in a highly sophisticated manner in order to time the cell division precisely . the gene products of this operon need to be synthesised at the correct time in the correct amount, and cell division has to be prevented when stress conditions prevail. it was shown that the mraz1p promoter leads to transcription up to the ftsw gene  <cit> . the whole unit is also postulated to be transcribed in one message from the mraz1p operator to the very distal gene lpxc  <cit> . furthermore, there are many other promoter structures described or predicted in the cluster. five transcription starts can be identified in the 5' region of the cluster. this regulation also includes repression by lexa binding to three identified sos boxes. the transcriptional repressor lexa inhibits expression of genes involved in response to dna damage and dna replication inhibition in the so-called sos response  <cit> . the repressor is inactivated by reca-dependent cleavage after dna damage  <cit> .

at the 3' end of the cluster, six promoters have been identified that contribute to the correct timing and concentration of the ftsz gene product which is essential for cell division  <cit> . their expression is balanced by the promoters being constantly expressed gearbox promoters. these gearbox promoters are σs dependent promoters for growth rate regulation, inversely growth rate dependent-, and housekeeping promoters  <cit> . additionally, an sdia  dependent mechanism is integrated, which couples expression regulation to a quorum-sensing mechanism. moreover, activation by the phosphorylated rcsb regulator  was shown.

for normal cell growth and correct division, a balance between the 5' and 3' encoded genes of the dcw cluster is required .

even though many regulatory mechanisms for the dcw cluster have already been identified, it is still not known how a link between the metabolic status of the cell and cell division is established. the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex regulator could fulfil this function, since it provides a cue to the nutritional status of the cell by sensing the pyruvate concentration. for instance, during growth on glucose, pdhr acts as a flux sensor for the glycolytic flux  <cit>  that can serve as a proxy for the nutritional status of the cell. in the case of a high glycolytic flux, indicated by higher levels of pyruvate, the negative influence of pdhr on the dcw cluster is reduced whereas it is increased by a low glycolytic flux resulting in low pyruvate levels.

the influence of the metabolic status on cell division by pdhr is reflected by a high z-score in the large-scale analysis of microarray experiments. it is also experimentally supported by the fact that we detected a statistical significant enrichment of the mraz operator binding site for pdhr by a factor of  <dig>  in the in vivo assay. up to this point we had only been able to detect very weak binding in our in vitro assays. this weak binding in vitro might be due to the complex regulation of the dcw cluster which most likely requires further interacting partners that we could not provide in our in vitro experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, we identified  <dig> new target genes contained in two operons controlled by pdhr using a bioinformatic and an experimental approach. the regulation of the glcdefgba operon and glcb in particular, as well as the comparison of gene-expression of acetate and pyruvate grown strains demonstrated that the metabolic state of the cell in both conditions is very similar. in particular, we found that in addition to the direct route to gluconeogenesis through the phospoenolpyruvate synthase, alternative pathways for the conversion of pyruvate to acetate appear to be activated and thus provide additional substrates for gluconeogenesis through action of the glyoxylate shunt.

moreover, we have identified the dcw-cluster containing proteins required for cell division as a further regulatory target of pdhr. through this regulatory interaction, we have established a plausible link between the nutritional status of the cell and cell replication which was not known to date. these results further support the hypothesis that pdhr is an important regulator of diverse processes of the cell by controlling a selected set of target genes rather than a large number of target genes like other global regulators . thus, we have also demonstrated that, apart from being a central hub of metabolic fluxes, the pyruvate node exerts control on many aspects of bacterial physiology. in consequence, pdhr represents a promising target for further studies aimed at understanding central aspects of the interplay between metabolism and other cellular processes.

