BACKGROUND
behavioral defenses are “strikingly effective” mechanisms for combating parasites but are often overlooked by studies addressing the effects of a parasite on the host immune system and related physiological processes  <cit> . for a behavior to be considered as an anti-parasite defense the parasite must impose a cost on the host and the behavior should limit or eliminate the parasite  <cit> . parasite avoidance behavior is found across animal taxa, where it manifests as behaviors such as cleaning and avoiding feces or avoiding diseased conspecifics  <cit> . for example, normally gregarious spiny caribbean lobsters shun lobsters that carry a lethal virus, even before the diseased lobster is visibly infected  <cit> . however, not all behaviors are anti-parasite, as parasites can also alter the behavior of their hosts in ways that are ultimately beneficial to the parasite or its offspring  <cit> .

living in groups can further complicate host-parasite interactions since group members can also play a role in the regulation of anti-parasite behavior. collective defenses against parasites within a social group, called social immunity, are physiological, behavioral or organizational adaptations that prevent the transmission of the parasite  <cit> . a common social defense is the removal of the parasitized individuals from the social group. indeed, in social insects, parasitized individuals can remove themselves from the group, which corresponds to an altruistic self-removal  <cit> , or nestmates can modify their interaction with those individuals to prevent parasite transmission  <cit> . for example, in honey bees, very different types of stress, including exposure to the mite varroa <cit> , the microsporidia nosema ceranae <cit> , or immune challenge  <cit>  have been shown to induce precocious foraging or forager-like physiological and behavioral characteristics. leaving the colony to perform outside activities, like foraging, limits contact in the hive, especially with castes of great importance , and thus, the spread of parasites into the colony  <cit> . however, despite parasite modification of host behavior being widespread in animals, the underlying physiological and neuronal mechanisms are poorly understood, especially in social insects.

in order to better understand this phenomenon, we analyzed how two different parasites, an ectoparasite  and endoparasite , affect the physiology and the brain neurogenomic state of honey bees. the varroa destructor mite infects the larval cell immediately before capping where it feeds on the developing pupae and completes its reproductive cycle. it weakens the honey bee by feeding on its hemolymph and transmitting viruses, such as deformed wing virus , which are correlated with its effect on honey bee survivorship  <cit> . nosema species are obligate, intracellular spore-forming fungal parasites that infect honey bee adults from emergence by spreading through the hive, most likely through the activities of cleaning and trophallaxis  <cit> . once a worker has ingested nosema spores, the spores develop in the intestine of the bee, where the germinated microsporidian infects the epithelial cell layer of the midgut and consumes the energy of the cell  <cit> . however, despite varroa and nosema infections varying greatly in their pathologies, they affect honey bee behavior and learning abilities in similar ways . for example, both varroa-infested and nosema-infected bees showed impaired orientation abilities at the hive entrance  <cit> .

since there is a robust association between brain gene expression in the honey bee and its behavioral state  <cit> , we measured the brain transcriptional changes induced by v. destructor and n. ceranae and determined whether they induce similar brain host responses. we also characterized the cuticular hydrocarbon  profiles of honey bees parasitized by v. destructor or n. ceranae and recorded nestmate interactions in observation hives in order to detect nestmate aggression toward parasitized bees. indeed, challenging the immune system of bees with lipopolysaccharides or other non-living immune stimulants changed the chc profiles of the bees, involved in social recognition, which lead to modified and aggressive conspecific contacts in a laboratory-based nestmate recognition assay  <cit> . bees infected with the virus dwv, that showed changes in their chc profiles, were also ejected from the hive at higher rates than healthy bees, notably from healthy hives  <cit> . finally, we determined whether parasitism can affect the level of production of 10-hda that contributes to social immunity of the colony. this compound, produced in the mandibular glands of bees, displays antiseptic properties in the royal jelly  <cit> .

RESULTS
experiment 1: chemical analysis of nosema ceranae- or varroa destructor-parasitized bees
cuticular hydrocarbon profiles
whether parasites induced changes in the cuticular hydrocarbon profiles  was tested in  <dig> to  <dig> bees per colony at days  <dig> and  <dig> post-emergence. the hydrocarbons were extracted from control and parasitized bees and analyzed and identified using gas chromatography  followed by mass spectrometry .

we did not find new compounds in parasitized bees  as compared to control groups. comparisons of the relative proportions of peaks corresponding to specific compounds did not reveal overwhelming differences between the nosema-infected and control groups . however, the comparison of the overall chemical profiles, via discriminant analysis, of nosema-infected bees and their control counterparts at days  <dig> and  <dig> showed highly significant differences for each colony . for each colony of origin, the squared mahalanobis distance between nosema-infected and control bees at 5 days old was not significant after bonferoni correction . conversely, mahalanobis chemical distances for older bees  were all statistically significant between infected and control bees . the cuticular hyrocarbon profiles changed also with aging in both control and parasitized bees . cuticular profiles of worker bees were quite specific as it was possible to correctly assign between 72-100% of all workers from each age and infected groups .

p-values that are significant at the 5% probability after bonferroni's correction  are indicated in bold. in the treatment column,  <dig> and  <dig> indicate the age of the bees. the experiment was repeated on bees from  <dig> different colonies.

for varroa-parasitized bees, the cuticular hydrocarbon profiles were compared with control bees on day  <dig> only . the discriminant analysis also showed significant differences overall between parasitized and non-parasitized bees . mahalanobis chemical distances between varroa-infested and control bees were highly significant and the colony of origin also had an important influence on the cuticular hydrocarbon profiles . between  <dig> and 100% of the individuals were correctly classified according to their chemical profiles .

p-values that are significant at the 5% probability after bonferroni's correction  are indicated in bold. the numbers  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> indicate the colony origin of the bees.

the relative proportion of each hydrocarbon affected by nosema and varroa is listed in . some of them were significantly affected by the parasites and age but there was no consistent effect of age and parasite on the relative proportions of each compound.

10-hda levels
we compared 10-hda levels in the heads of nosema- and varroa-parasitized bees to control bees from the same colony . for the comparison of nosema-parasitized and control bees, there was no significant difference in 10-hda levels, but for two colonies 10-hda showed a significant increase with age . levels of 10-hda did not differ between varroa-parasitized and control bees .

experiment 2: behavioral analysis of nosema ceranae- or varroa destructor-parasitized bees
in two four-frame observation hives, we quantified a suite of social behaviors  undertaken or received by nosema-parasitized  and control bees . no significant differences were observed between parasitized and healthy bees in the rate of behavioral acts or social interactions . similarly, varroa-parasitized bees did not display different behavior and were not treated differently by nestmates as compared to control individuals  . in addition, we did not see any agonistic behavior toward parasitized bees during the observation periods .

experiment 3: brain transcriptomics of nosema ceranae- or varroa destructor- parasitized bees
the brain transcriptome modifications induced by parasitism were determined in bees originating from two different colonies using digital gene expression  analysis. two dge-tag libraries were generated for each experimental group, control, nosema-infected and varroa-infested. for each library more than  <dig> , <dig> tags were produced that were then narrowed down to around  <dig>  unique gene hits for the honey bee . these distinct tags and their genomic count are available from ncbi gene expression omnibus  database with the accession number: gse <dig> 

the number of genes whose expression was affected in the bee brain by nosema- and varroa-parasitism was markedly different. in varroa-infested bees  <dig> genes changed overall  while in nosema-infected bees only  <dig> genes responded differentially  at an adjusted p-value <  <dig>  .

gene ontology analysis revealed that gene expression changes in varroa-infested brains  were most significantly overrepresented in the metallopeptidase functional group with changes in both directions . varroa-infested bees showed decreased expression of glutamate and gaba receptor-related genes , and the dopamine receptor, amdop <dig>  and overexpression of ascorbate/aldarate metabolism genes , which include dopamine and serotonin metabolism  <cit> . conversely, both glutamate decarboyxlase  <dig>  which synthesizes gaba neurotransmitter, and the gaba neurotransmitter transporter 1b were overexpressed in varroa-parasitized brains . nosema-infected brains, for which only  <dig> genes had flybase orthologs, showed no significant patterns in the classification of functional groups. several genes that are involved in immune and antioxidant activity, defensin- <dig>  peroxidase, esterase a <dig>  glucose oxidase, flavin-containing monooxygenase, were upregulated.

gene ontology biological process and molecular function categories that were overrepresented in the brain transcriptomic profile are shown .

despite the difference in overall number of genes affected by both parasites as compared to controls and the  <dig> genes that changed between varroa and nosema parasitism , nosema- and varroa- parasitized bees shared more gene changes with each other  than expected by chance . in addition, nosema parasitism caused a brain gene expression profile that was similar to the profile of bees parasitized by varroa; except for apidermin  <dig> , genes that were up- and downregulated by nosema were also up- and downregulated by varroa, giving a significant pattern . we also tested gene expression overlap with brain gene expression data from nurse/forager, i.e. genes known to be upregulated in nurse brains as compared to forager brains and the other way round  <cit> . we found respectively  <dig> and  <dig> genes affected by nosema and varroa parasites to overlap with the nurse/forager sets  but neither of these gene sets was significantly similar to nurse and forager bees .

using the dge-tag libraries, we determined whether parasites affected the viral landscape in the bee brain. we looked for presence and abundance of  <dig> viruses: chronic bee paralysis virus rna  <dig>  chronic bee paralysis virus rna  <dig>  sacbrood virus, deformed wing virus, black queen cell virus, acute bee paralysis virus, kashmir bee virus, varroa destructor virus  <dig> and israel acute paralysis virus. only two viruses were identified in the bee brains, deformed wing virus  and varroa destructor virus . varroa-infested bees had the highest levels of dwv compared to control bees and higher levels of deformed wing virus than nosema-infected bees . nosema-infected bees also had higher levels of dwv than control bees, at the limit of statistical significance. varroa destructor virus levels were not statistically different across control, varroa- and nosema- parasitized bees.

discussion
in this study, we demonstrated that two parasites, varroa destructor and nosema ceranae, with distinct, differing pathologies both modified the physiology and transcriptomic profiles in the brain of their honey bee host. parasitized honey bees exhibited changes in their chc profiles but showed no differences in behaviors between parasitized and healthy bees. in addition we observed no significant aggressive behavior towards parasitized bees, nor any change in social interactions.

a previous study found that bees parasitized by varroa exhibit a modified chc at their emergence  <cit> . our data shows that this change is lasting. however, our behavioral results differ from recent studies that observed increased general social interactions or aggressive behaviors towards immune-challenged bees, but differences in the experimental design of our study may account for those differences. in a series of studies, increased social and aggressive behaviors towards immune-suppressed workers were observed a few hours after treatment in assays that were conducted in the laboratory  <cit> . our study employed natural conditions of a four-frame observation hive using bees that had been parasitized in the days prior to the experiment, in order to understand if nestmates respond to parasitized bees within the context of general activity of the hive. moreover we chose to focus on bees that were varroa-parasitized but asymptomatic for dwv. in contrast, a second study found that dwv-infected bees that exhibited deformed wing symptoms were detected and removed from the hive by nestmates  <cit> . thus our results do not contradict previous studies but reflect the subtle nature of parasitism by varroa or nosema that, when resulting in precocious departure from the hive, is more likely due to altruistic self-removal, acting as a mechanism of social immunity. indeed, it may be less costly for the colony that sick or parasitized bees leave the colony of their own accord, rather than recruiting nestmates to exclude those bees via aggressive behaviors. in that case, bees might distinguish sick bees based on different chc profiles but not discriminate them, except in the case of extremely sick bees that cannot leave on their own, such as bees exhibiting deformed wing symptoms. we also found a change of the chemical profile with age which is consistent with previous studies . in honey bee hives, older bees segregate themselves from young bees by olfactory discrimination of cuticular hydrocarbons as they correspond to different age groups  <cit> . indeed, older bees both emit and respond to a more complex bouquet of cuticular hydrocarbons than younger bees  <cit> . since nosema and varroa-parasitized bees age faster, it is possible that they exhibited a chc profile of old bees. in addition, the chc profile is shaped by the genotype, nutrition, environment and physiological state  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that their nestmates did not respond to the parasitized bees because their chemical profiles could not be distinguished from the chemical profile of others bees of different ages, physiological status and genotypes. these results highlight the importance of testing for biological effects within the hive when trying to draw conclusions about honey bee behavior.

if parasitism by varroa or nosema induces precocious foraging, one would expect the parasitized bees to show physiological changes similar to the transition to a forager bee. levels of 10-hda increased with the age of the bee confirming the study of plettner et al. <cit> , but did not change in response to nosema or varroa parasitism. thus the production of antiseptic compounds, like 10-hda, in the food is age- or task-dependent but not regulated by the presence of parasites. however, further investigation of different type of pathogens or parasites, would give more insight as to whether antiseptic production can vary according to the infection level of the hive.

our results also demonstrate that parasites alter the brain of the honey bee host, whether they were parasitized at the pupal  or the adult stage . in addition, twenty genes, nearly one half of those detected in nosema-infested bee brains, show a shared expression pattern between varroa and nosema-infested bees. their functions are diverse but several genes stand out as interesting for their possible roles in oxidative stress, neural function and foraging behavior. flavin-containing monooxygenase fmo gs-ox-like 3-like  and torsin-like protein  are overexpressed and replication factor c subunit 5-like  is downregulated in varroa-infested and nosema-infected bees. fmo <dig> is part of the fmo family known to react to xenobiotic stress in other organisms  <cit> . in drosophila, the torp4a ortholog  is involved in dopamine metabolism and locomotion  <cit>  and the rfc <dig> ortholog  plays a role in neurogenesis  <cit> , indicating that both parasites can modify brain function. the honey bee gene, pheromone biosynthesis-activating neuropeptide  is also over-expressed in both varroa-infested and nosema-infected bees compared to controls. in honey bees, pban neuropeptide levels are significantly higher in nectar foragers than pollen foragers  <cit> . in lepidoptera, pban is linked to regulation of sex pheromone production  <cit> , where pheromone production is jh-dependent, and jh primes the pheromone gland in adult females to respond to pban <cit> . jh is also responsible for “priming” the foraging behavior in honey bees, though no link has been established between pban and jh in honey bees.

the presence of viruses may also account for similarities in gene expression between nosema and varroa-parasitized bees. we found increased levels of dwv in the brains of both types of parasitized bees and therefore cannot exclude that the observed changes are actually caused by an increase in dwv titer. dwv is a positive-strand rna picorna-like virus that has been detected and can actively replicate in the heads  <cit>  and brains of honey bees, specifically the mushroom bodies, visual and antennal lobe neuropils  <cit> . the virus is closely associated with varroa infestation  <cit>  and thus it was not unusual that it occurred in higher levels in varroa-infested brains. on the other hand, we did not expect to find an increase in dwv levels in n. ceranae-infected bees, as a negative correlation between these two pathogens in the midgut of the bee was recently reported  <cit> , which suggests that n. ceranae and dwv may compete for resources in the degenerated midgut, but not in the brain, where nosema is not found.

despite the statistically significant number of shared genes that change, varroa and nosema-infested brains demonstrate different patterns of expression that may reflect the different pathologies of the two parasites. bees that were parasitized by varroa as developing pupae exhibit more gene changes compared to controls than bees that were inoculated with nosema ceranae as one-day old adults. this apparent disparity in gene expression changes may be due to long-lasting brain developmental changes induced during pupal development that persist in adult bees. the genes affected by n. ceranae infection could not be sorted by functional group analysis but several immune-related and antioxidant genes, including defensin- <dig>  peroxidase, esterase a <dig>  glucose oxidase, were upregulated indicating that the blood–brain barrier in honey bees, although not well studied, may be compromised by a parasitic attack. genes involved in the oxidative response to stress were also upregulated in the guts of n. ceranae-infected honey bees  <cit> , suggesting a systemic response throughout the honey bee in response to the microsporidian.

the impact of varroa on the brain transcriptome suggests a decrease in learning and memory that may result from parasitism during development. this brain response would explain the actual learning impairment and losses of foragers induced by varroa <cit> . based on functional group analysis, varroa-infested bees show decreased expression of glutamate and gaba receptor-related genes, the dopamine receptor, amdop <dig>  and overexpression of ascorbate/aldarate metabolism genes. inhibition or suppression of glutamate receptors disrupts memory formation in honey bees  <cit> . gaba receptors are present throughout the mushroom bodies  <cit> , a region important for learning and memory, especially in foragers  <cit> . gabanergic interneurons also form part of the olfactory conditioned learning pathway  <cit> . yet the simultaneous increase in the expression of glutamate decarboxylase and gaba neurotransmitter transporter with a decrease in gaba receptor targets signals either compensatory mechanisms at work or a disruption in gabanergic network. analysis of the neuroanatomical changes in the varroa-parasitized brain could resolve whether decreased expression of gaba and glutamate receptors leads to a reduction in their numbers. the dopamine receptor amdop <dig> is higher in newly born cells in the mushroom body than older cells  <cit>  and in drosophila, it is required for aversive and appetitive learning  <cit> . finally, the camp pathway and its targets in the mushroom bodies are important mechanisms for learning in bees  <cit> . several genes linked to the camp and calcium signaling cascades are downregulated in varroa brains: adenylate cyclase type 10-like, ryanodine receptor <cit>  and voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit .

compared to the transcriptomic changes in the honey bee brain that accompany the switch from nurse to forager, we found relatively few genes that changed in response to nosema ceranae or varroa destructor infestation. brain expression profiles of varroa and nosema- parasitized bees bear a greater resemblance to each other than to the reported profiles of typical foragers or nurses. thus, their early departures from the hive may not be induced by mechanisms of normal behavioral development, but perhaps by an alternative mechanism that results in altruistic self-removal. indeed, certain genes that are typically upregulated in foraging bee brains  are downregulated in varroa-infested honey bee brains  <cit> . foraging activity is an especially demanding activity for learning and memory in the honey bee  <cit> , but parasitized bees seems to have deficiencies at this level . therefore, altogether these results suggest that varroa and nosema-parasitized bees seem to not be true foragers, much like co2-treated bees that left the hive, but also disappeared, at higher rates than control bees  <cit> . however, this will require confirmation in a more natural context .

neither of the parasites, varroa destructor nor nosema ceranae, attacks the honey bee brain directly, yet we observed transcriptional changes in the brains of honey bees in response to parasitism. thus, these changes, that are most likely triggered by a reaction in another tissue , highlight a link between the immune system, the brain, and perhaps, behavior in the honey bee. while parasitized bees are reported to behave like foragers, by leaving the hive, their brain transcription profiles suggest that their behavior is not driven by the same molecular pathways that induce foraging behavior. whether the transcriptional changes observed are due to host immune response, parasite protein release or viruses that propagate in the brain is not known. lps-challenged bees also behave more like foragers than same-aged bees  <cit> , even without parasitic or viral challenges, but proteomic analysis of parasitized insects, grasshopper  and tsetse fly  detected changes in the host brain  <cit>  and proteins released by the parasite that may affect host behavior  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
stress response in the honey bee to parasitism by varroa destructor or nosema ceranae shows similarities in their features; both parasites induce changes in chc profiles and similar transcriptional profiles in the brain. that these parasitized bees are not attacked by their nestmates suggests that they leave the hive voluntarily, perhaps propelled by gene expression changes in the brain, showing altruistic behavior as predicted by rueppel et al. <cit> . this social removal may be a general and conserved response to parasitism, given that it was observed with extremely different types of parasites: a mite   <cit>  and a single cell microsporidian   <cit> . as to what these bees do once they have left the hive still needs to be examined. are they normal foragers but with shorter life spans, less efficient foragers due to learning and memory deficiencies or do they leave the hive and wander aimlessly in the landscape? emerging tracking technology will allow us to answer these questions and determine the role of the parasitized honey bee within the colony. in addition, such studies that incorporate behavioral, genomic and physiological components will help us to better understand current worldwide declines of honey bee populations that are often characterized by an unusual loss of adult bees from the colony  <cit> .

