BACKGROUND
quantification of mrna abundance is a central tool in studying pathological and compensatory mechanisms in heart failure. quantitative real-time rt-pcr  has rapidly replaced other methods, allowing quantification of many gene transcripts in limited tissue samples and more sensitive detection of weakly expressed transcripts  <cit> . however, this level of sensitivity requires a careful choice of method for comparison of expression data between samples. the most common strategy is to normalize the expression of a specific gene to a single reference gene, assuming that the reference gene expression is invariant between the compared physiological states. variation in the reference gene expression between samples would therefore reflect variations in sample preparation and experimental variability. several studies have concluded that it is difficult to identify general reference genes which can be used in all experimental settings, and that validation of the chosen reference gene is important for each experimental setting  <cit> .

in the heart failure literature, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and 18s ribosomal rna are the most frequently used reference genes in quantification of gene expression, see e.g.  <cit> . in rat neonatal cardiomyocytes, it was shown that gapdh expression was invariant with different hypertrophic stimuli  <cit> , but was decreased in electrically stimulated cells  <cit> . in a recent rat post-myocardial infarction  heart failure study, the interpretation of changes in gene expression was dependent on the choice of gapdh or 18s as reference gene  <cit> . only one recent study has examined possible reference gene candidates in human myocardium by mining public microarray data  <cit> .

the aim of our study was to identify alternative reference genes to gapdh and 18s rrna for use in mouse and rat post-myocardial infarction heart failure models and in human heart failure studies. since fetal and neonatal rat cardiomyocytes are commonly used in cardiac hypertrophy and signal transduction experiments, we also evaluated a subset of candidate reference genes in neonatal and embryonic myocardium in comparison to adult myocardium. in addition we have investigated the sources of variation in gene expression quantification data in terms of rna preparation methods, technical replicates and biological sample variability.

RESULTS
total rna sample quality
each total rna sample was evaluated extensively by optical density, rna profiling   and the linearity of 18s serial dilution curves . the  <dig> nm/ <dig> nm optical density  ratios for rodent and human total rna samples were similar regardless of isolation method, with no difference between the groups within each species . the 28s/18s area ratios were consistently low , but the rna integrity number  values were consistent and comparable within each species and group: sham versus myocardial infarction  or non-failing versus failing, with an overall average of  <dig> .

interspecies variation in reference gene expression
the candidate genes arb, rpl <dig>  rpl <dig>  tbp, polr2a, hprt <dig>  pgk <dig>  ppia for each species and 18s ribosomal rna were quantified by rt-qpcr. due to the dominance of 18s transcripts compared to the other reference genes of interest, the 18s data were used only as a control of the rt reaction in addition to the rna quality control . in mouse hearts, the post-mi/sham ratio for 18s was significantly higher than one . in rat hearts the 18s post-mi/sham ratio was also above one, but with borderline significance . in the human myocardium there was no significant difference .

the overall variability in the relative abundance for each reference gene and sample group, mi/sham  or non-failing/failing  is shown in figure  <dig>  the mean assay coefficient of variation  for each species was  <dig>   <dig> and 25% for mouse, rat and human, respectively. we next estimated the factors contributing to the gene expression variability by a variance component analysis method . for mice, the relative size of the variance components for triplicate pcr reactions, rt repeats and biological samples were 1:1: <dig>  the corresponding relative variance components for rat and human myocardium were 1:5: <dig> and 1:1: <dig>  respectively. overall, the biological samples, rather than sample preparation or technical replicates, contributed the most to the gene expression variability.

we found that gene expression variability was low for most of the analyzed reference genes. however, ppia was highly variable in mice as was gapdh in humans, whereas arbp was moderately to highly variable in all species. in general, there was good correlation between the stability values generated by the genorm and normfinder algorithms for all three species , and by the variance component analysis . the overall rank order of the most stable reference for each species is shown in table  <dig>  taking into account the results from the genorm, normfinder and the variance component analysis models. stable candidate reference genes include rpl <dig>  which obtained low variability scores in all three species. the variability score for polr2a was low in mouse and rat . however, human polr2a was among the more variable genes according to both genorm and normfinder, while visual inspection  and the variance component analysis suggested low variablity also in humans. this inconsistency may have a methodological explanation, see the discussion.

reference gene rank was calculated from the combined stability results of genorm, normfinder and variance component analysis methods for each species.

to test the robustness of our findings, we evaluated the stability of a subset of reference genes in a second independent set of rat total rna from sham and post-mi myocardium . the samples prepared for dataset  <dig> differed in sample storage , rna isolation  and cdna priming methods . comparison of the same genes for datasets  <dig> and  <dig> yielded a nearly identical stability rank order by the genorm method . analysis by the normfinder method yielded also near-identical rank orders .

reference gene stability across developmental stages in rat myocardium
fetal and neonatal cardiomyocyte preparations are used as model systems for hypertrophy responses and induction of the fetal gene program. the stability of a subset of reference genes was tested across a range of late fetal and neonatal stages and in normal de novo adult rat hearts. this subset was analyzed by genorm across developmental stage , resulting in the final ranking: rpl <dig> , arbp , tbp , rpl <dig>  and gapdh . a pronounced shift in the normfinder stability values, in particular for gapdh, was observed in the transition from neonatal to adult myocardium . although none on the tested genes were very stable, normfinder considered rpl <dig> as the most stable reference gene across developmental stage, in agreement with the genorm results.

the impact of normalization to a single reference gene with low  or high  variability was evaluated in fetal, neonatal and adult stages . normalization of the serotonin transporter 5-htt  mrna to rpl <dig> suggested that 5-htt expression increased with developmental stage. in contrast, normalization of 5-htt to gapdh indicated only a transient increase in 5-htt expression.

discussion
we have identified several reference genes as alternatives to gapdh and 18s for use in gene expression quantification in heart failure studies. the most stable reference genes were rpl <dig>  gapdh and polr2a in mouse post-infarction heart failure, polr2a, rpl <dig> and tbp in rat post-infarction heart failure and rpl <dig> and pgk <dig> in human heart failure . the overall most stable reference genes across all three species were rpl <dig> and polr2a. in rat myocardium, rpl <dig> was the most stable reference gene across developmental stages.

it is generally accepted that the best normalization strategy would be to calculate the geometric mean of several reference genes  <cit> . however, this is not always feasible with limited amounts of tissue. several of the reference gene candidates identified in this study should be sufficiently stable for single-gene normalization of gene expression data when necessary. we show that gapdh is not suitable as a reference gene in human failing myocardium. a recent study using human heart failure microarray data also reached a similar conclusion  <cit> .

gene expression studies using fetal and neonatal heart material often use single reference gene normalization methods. single reference gene normalization across developmental stages may be difficult because of the wide variation in expression at different developmental stages  <cit> . we show here a marked shift in the expression stability of several reference genes in the transition from neonatal to adult rat myocardium. this effect was particularly pronounced for gapdh, which would highly influence the interpretation of results. we found that rpl <dig> and rpl <dig> were better reference gene candidates across developmental stages in rat myocardium.

to explore the significance of normalization to different reference genes we analyzed the expression of the serotonin 5-ht transporter  during fetal and neonatal development as well as in adult heart. we have previously demonstrated that the mrna encoding the 5-ht <dig> serotonin receptor is significantly upregulated in heart failure  <cit>  and late fetal and neonatal development . serotonin plays an important role in cardiac development  <cit> , and the 5-ht transporter can indirectly modulate the 5-ht <dig> response by regulating the extracellular 5-ht level in cardiac muscle. although the expression profile of 5-htt in late fetal and neonatal heart seems to be independent of the reference gene used, the estimated 5-htt expression in the adult heart differs significantly with the choice of reference gene . rpl <dig> and gapdh represent the extreme in each direction in stability, whereas rpl <dig> is the most stable reference gene when comparing fetal, neonatal and adult heart tissue.

in the datasets for mouse, rat dataset  <dig> and human reference genes, we originally included a test set of  <dig> commonly queried transcripts in the heart failure literature  to test the impact of choice of reference genes on gene expression ratios . in contrast to the fetal and neonatal rat data, the ratios and statistical significance in the adult datasets were not markedly affected by choosing between the single most stable gene, the three most stable genes, rpl <dig> alone or gapdh alone in each species . this was due to the very small differences in the stability between the most stable reference genes in our datasets.

we found a surprising discrepancy in the variability score for polr2a between rodent and human datasets by both the genorm and normfinder algorithms, being low in mouse and rat , but high in the human dataset. in contrast, the variance component analysis indicated that human polr2a was quite stable, and the polr2a expression levels were very similar in the donor and failing human myocardial samples . we therefore examined whether this could be due to differences in the mathematical algorithms. genorm uses pairwise comparisons of genes and assumes that the ratio between the expression values of two stable reference genes should be approximately equal in all experimental samples  <cit> . a gene is regarded as less stable if the pattern of variation between samples differs from the pattern observed for the majority of candidate genes, assuming that the majority are in average stable. normfinder uses analysis of variance on log-transformed expression values, and all genes and samples are used simultaneously to estimate expected expression values  <cit> . a stable gene is expected to deviate only modestly from these estimates. a stability value is computed based on intra- and inter-group variations, where calculation of the latter assumes equal average expression of the genes in the groups. thus, although in a different way from genorm, normfinder also assumes good "average" behavior of the test genes. in the human myocardial samples, the donor hearts tended to have higher relative quantities than failing hearts for most of the tested genes . polr2a expression was very similar in the donor and failing groups, thereby deviating from the majority. therefore, both genorm and normfinder classify polr2a as less stable. in contrast, the variance component model considers the small difference between groups as an advantage. in light of these considerations, we chose to include both human polr2a and rat gapdh as satisfactory reference genes. a recent report investigating gene expression variation during the estrus cycle in female rats also discussed the potential shortcomings of genorm and normfinder and used similar methods to the variance component model used in our study  <cit> .

excellent quality of total rna is vital for obtaining reliable quantification results  <cit> . the rna sample quality was comprehensively evaluated. total rna quality is traditionally estimated by the  <dig> nm/ <dig> nm o.d. ratio, even though this method has several shortcomings  <cit> . all samples included in the study were regarded as high quality using  <dig> nm/ <dig> nm o.d. ratio values. in contrast to the high 28s/18s ratios  usually obtained in cell lines, we found a low ratio  in myocardial tissue from all three species. studies in human tissues have shown poor correlation between the 28s/18s ratio and rna sample quality  <cit> . the rna integrity number  is the most recent qualitative indicator of total rna sample quality  <cit> . we found that the rin values for rat and mouse myocardial total rna  were consistent with values from solid tissues  <cit> . however, the rin values for the human myocardial samples were consistently lower and the variation in the rt-qpcr data much larger than for mouse and rat, in particular for the failing hearts. this may be due to variable states of severely failing human myocardial tissue or to differences in the human sample harvesting time compared to the rapid handling of rodent myocardial samples. even though we obtained very similar results for reference gene stability with rat datasets  <dig> and  <dig>  which had considerable differences in preparation and rt priming methods, we cannot exclude that the difference in results between the human and rodent datasets may be due to differences in rna isolation, cdna priming methods or choice of reverse transcriptase enzymes  <cit> .

in our comparison of the two independent datasets from rat sham and post-mi myocardium, we found that the stability of the selected reference genes was independent of sample processing and cdna priming method, thus strengthening our findings. we also found that the biological variation contributed the most to the overall quantification variability rather than technical steps such as reverse transcription and pcr amplification reactions. thus, for myocardial samples, increasing the biological sample size rather than number of rt reaction technical replicates is a key factor for increasing the reliability of gene expression analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
in the set of tested reference genes, the most stable reference genes were rpl <dig>  gapdh and polr2a in mouse post-infarction heart failure, polr2a, rpl <dig> and tbp in rat post-infarction heart failure and rpl <dig> and pgk <dig> in human heart failure . the overall most stable reference genes across all three species were rpl <dig> and polr2a. in rat myocardium, rpl <dig> was the most stable reference gene across developmental stages. these reference genes should be regarded as good a priori candidates, but validation of expression stability in each particular experimental setting is recommended.

