BACKGROUND
an increasing number of epidemic outbreaks caused by contamination of produce by human pathogens have been observed in the united states  <cit> . between  <dig> and  <dig>  a total of  <dig> produce related outbreaks were reported. bacterial species comprise the majority of reported disease causing agents, with pathogenic salmonella and e. coli strains implicated most frequently. lettuce and tomatoes were the commodities associated with the most outbreaks, followed by cantaloupe and berries  <cit> . in recent years, tomatoes have been one of the main products responsible for produce-associated salmonellosis  <cit> .

the phyllosphere has found itself at an intersection of food safety concerns and research that examines the microbial ecology of agricultural environments  <cit> . human pathogens find their way to this environment via diverse channels that remain poorly understood. human, animal, atmospheric, abiotic and xenobiotic conduits have all been examined for their potential to contribute to the precise factors needed to support growth or simple persistence of human pathogens of bacterial origin in agricultural commodities  <cit> . an extremely important component of agricultural management that remains to be comprehensively examined with culture-independent methods is the microbial ecology associated with water sources used in irrigation and pesticide applications.

in the united states, the tomato industry's good agricultural practices guidelines, which are focused on improving the food safety of the product, recommend the use of potable water for applications that come in direct contact with the crop  <cit> . given that large volumes of water are needed for pesticide applications and overhead irrigation of vegetable crops, water demand cannot always be met with the available potable water. consequently growers routinely use water from other sources, such as farm ponds. surface water is highly susceptible to contamination due to direct discharge of sewage and the impact of runoff. in the mid-atlantic region of the united states growers report routine visits to their farm ponds by canada geese, a potential avian reservoir of salmonella  <cit>  and white-tailed deer, a potential reservoir for e. coli o157:h <dig>  <cit> . this region is home to a large poultry industry, which also represents a potential source of salmonella contamination. groundwater sources, on the other hand, are less likely to support enteric pathogens because of the natural filtering mechanisms of soils, although poorly managed wells are susceptible to contamination  <cit> .

the type of irrigation system can influence the risk of crop contamination: overhead irrigation, for instance, is more likely to produce virus contamination than are furrow and drip irrigation  <cit> . studies conducted in california found no significant differences in coliform counts among crops spray-irrigated with two types of treated wastewater or with well water. this was found despite the fact that the treated waters used in this study showed higher levels of total and fecal coliforms than the well water  <cit> . the overall impact of using surface water for direct crop applications on fruit surface bacterial communities has not been reported to date.

denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis studies have indicated that variables such as plant species and stage of development can affect the composition of phyllosphere microbial communities. in addition, it was found that these communities are far more complex than culture-based methods used in the past had indicated  <cit> . recent studies described the bacterial diversity of phyllosphere samples from natural and agricultural ecosystems using traditional cloning and sequencing approaches, leading to the identification of many previously undescribed members of these communities. these studies also indicated that phyllosphere communities can be altered by the application of diverse agricultural materials  <cit> .

more recently next-generation sequencing technologies, including 454-pyrosequencing, have provided more comprehensive descriptions of bacterial communities in different environments due to the increased number of sequence reads obtained  <cit> . a study of bacterial diversity on tree leaves using  <dig> sequencing indicated that tree and bacterial community phylogeny are associated, and that the geographic differentiation of bacterial communities on a single tree species is minimal  <cit> . to our knowledge, no such studies have been conducted to date to describe the impact of water quality on bacterial populations in the phyllosphere of specialty crops.

we utilized 454-pyrosequencing to generate  <dig>  16s rrna gene sequences from  <dig> field samples:  <dig> tomato fruit samples that had been sprayed with either surface water , or groundwater , three samples of surface water , and three samples of groundwater . using these data, we sought to 1) compare the bacterial profile of ground and surface water that was used for pesticide applications and 2) assess the impact of water quality on the fruit surface bacterial profile of a tomato crop. a smaller preliminary dataset of  <dig> fruit surface samples generated through sanger sequencing is also included for comparison. despite the significant differences between bacterial communities in surface and groundwater, the surface communities on the tomato fruits treated with these water sources could not be differentiated by a variety of statistical methods.

RESULTS
taxonomic distributions among samples
after screening our data for poor sequences and contaminants , we recovered  <dig>  high-quality 16s rrna gene sequences with an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  sequences per sample .

we taxonomically classified all sequences  using the rdp bayesian classifier with a confidence threshold of 80%. examining the phylum level distributions across samples, we found that nearly all fruit surface samples appeared to have very similar 16s rrna profiles. in these, proteobacteria dominated the observed sequences, with smaller representations of firmicutes and actinobacteria. one surface water treated sample  was dominated by firmicutes sequences, most likely as a result of contamination with internal fruit material. while the wg samples displayed similar 16s rrna profiles dominated by proteobacteria, the ws samples had a more even representation among four dominant phyla. in addition, ws samples contained a large number of sequences that could not be classified even at the phylum level .

to compare environments for differentially-abundant taxonomic groups, we ran the metastats methodology  <cit>  on phylum, class, and genus level assignments. however, a limitation of the metastats approach for q-value  estimation is poor accuracy for datasets with <  <dig> features. to compensate, we compute the overall false discovery rate  for taxonomic groups we have called significant in our analysis using the method by benjamini and hochberg  <cit> .

results of metastats runs comparing bacterial classes among populations and accounting for intra-replicate variability indicated that five taxonomic classes are differentially abundant in the two water sources , most notably betaproteobacteria, which makes up approximately 86% of sequences on average in the wg samples, but only close to 9% of sequences in the ws samples . of the five taxonomic classes we call as differentially abundant between wg and ws samples, the fdr ~ <dig> , so we expect less than one false positive among these five. the most abundant classes in ws profiles were alphaproteobacteria, actinobacteria and the unclassified group.

betaproteobacteria was also the most differentially abundant class when pg and wg were compared , among nine differentially abundant bacterial classes . fourteen bacterial classes were differentially abundant between ws and ps , most notably clostridia, which was enriched for in ws. both fruit surface environments were enriched for gammaproteobacteria. despite the differences observed between water sources, no significant differences were found between the two fruit surface environments .

at the genus level, significant differences were found between water sources, with  <dig> genera showing differential abundance . table  <dig> lists the bacterial genera among these representing 1% or more of the sequences in either of the water sources analyzed. fruit surface environments were highly variable and no significant differences were detected for the high abundance genera, which included pantoea, enterobacter, sphingomonas, leuconostoc, pseudomonas and burkholderia . the less abundant genera paenibacillus, stenotrophomonas, bacillus and lactococcus were more abundant in pg, while frigoribacterium, herbaspirillum, rickettsia, wautersiella and cloacibacterium were more abundant in ps. none of these genera represented more than  <dig> % of the population.

average relative abundance of sequences assigned to that genus , standard error of the corresponding average  and p-value describing the significance of the differential abundance observed between the two populations, for genera representing at least  <dig> % of the sequences in either of the water sources. the computed fdr of these genera is  <dig> , thus we expect that less than  <dig> of the  <dig> represent false positives.

a statistical comparison of the  <dig> and  <dig> fruit surface samples  indicated that in both the  <dig> and sanger data, bacilli is enriched in the ps samples, and gammaproteobacteria is enriched in pg . at the genus level, pantoea showed high abundance in both years . enterobacter, pseudomonas, sphingomonas and burkholderia were more predominant in the  <dig> samples, while a larger proportion of the  <dig> sequences remained unclassified. these results indicate that we were able to detect similar bacterial populations on the tomato fruit surface in both years, despite the methodological differences, the differences between growing seasons and the fact that different tomato cultivars were sampled.

diversity analysis using operational taxonomic units
to compute estimates of species-level diversity and perform comparisons between environments, all sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units  using mothur  <cit>  and a similarity threshold of 95% . the total number of unique otus within each environment was  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . after computing rarefaction curves for each sample , we immediately observed that the surface water samples were significantly more diverse than the others, and that groundwater and fruit surface samples are indistinguishable in terms of diversity. additionally, the shannon diversity index and chao <dig> estimator were calculated for each sample, and again we see that the ws samples are the most diverse at the otu level .

to assess the diversity captured with the samples, we calculated the good's coverage estimator on the otus from each sample using mothur. results indicated that we captured between  <dig> and 98% of the species in all of the samples except for ws samples, where we only identified between  <dig> and 73% of the species.

we then examined shared otus between individual replicates and treatments. fruit surface environments shared approximately half their otus, and these represented more than 90% of the sequences in both samples. in contrast, water environments shared only  <dig> otus, which represented 2% of the otus present in surface water and 14% of those in groundwater. these shared otus corresponded to 62% of the sequences in groundwater, but only 6% of the sequences in surface water. these results again point to the greater differences between water-based microbial communities as compared to those in the treated tomato fruit surfaces.

a hierarchical clustering of all samples was performed using the jaccard index based on shared otu composition . this tree indicated that the two fruit surface communities are not uniquely distinguishable at the otu level despite the microbial differences in water sources. however, water samples did cluster with their associated environments.

alternative methodologies
to test the sensitivity of the above results to any particular methodology, we re-ran our analysis using the new automated 16s rrna pipelines provided by the clovr software package . clovr is a virtual machine designed to run large-scale genomic analyses in a cloud-based environment such as amazon ec <dig>  the clovr-16s track runs mothur  <cit>  and qiime-based  <cit>  standard operating protocols in parallel complete with alpha and beta diversity analysis of multiple samples.

after running our high-quality sequence dataset through the clovr-16s pipeline, we saw remarkable consistency with our initial results. all otu analyses confirm the enriched diversity of surface water samples as compared to all others, as well as a lack of differentially abundant taxonomic groups between pg and ps samples.

using various unsupervised approaches, water samples consistently clustered with their unique environments at all taxonomic levels . there was persistent difficulty distinguishing between fruit surface samples treated with surface or groundwater. even the unifrac metric, which arguably maintains the highest phylogenetic resolution of any method, was unable to resolve this issue . the concordance among our methodology and the clovr-16s methods suggests that our results are not sensitive to modifications in the analysis protocol.

screening for enterobacteriaceae pathogens
less than 1% of the hits in the water samples were to the family enterobacteriaceae . in fruit surface samples  <dig> to 79% of the sequences were identified as enterobacteriaceae, with higher counts in pg than in ps in  <dig> and again in  <dig>  among the enterobacteriaceae genera, pantoea was the most abundant in both years. enterobacter also showed high abundance, but only in the  <dig> samples.

number of rdp hits to enterobacteriaceae in tomato fruit surfaces and water samples and blastn hits to the different genera within the family .

we created a phylogenetic tree in order to compare the enterobacteriaceae species present in the different samples . by populating the tree with several genera we could not confidently assign sequences to pathogenic species within the family. based on our tree, the  <dig> bp segment of the 16s rrna gene used is not enough to distinguish between several members of the enterobacteriaceae family.

discussion
this study provides the first next-generation sequencing survey of the bacterial community in the tomato fruit surface. as such it has confirmed the presence of taxa previously found to inhabit the phyllosphere of this crop species, as well as identified many others not yet encountered in this environment. the three most abundant bacterial classes in the tomato fruit surface environments compared in this study were gamma, alpha and betaproteobacteria. these were also found in higher abundance in the phyllosphere of other plant species, although the relative abundances for these classes vary  <cit> . genera here found in high abundance in the tomato fruit surface, such as pantoea and enterobacter, are also abundant in the phyllosphere of certain atlantic rainforest tree species and cottonwood, indicating a wide distribution across different plant species  <cit> . bacterial genera found in our  <dig> fruit surface samples were also identified among the culturable bacteria on leaves of field-grown tomatoes, including pseudomonas, pantoea, sphingomonas, massilia, xhantomonas and curtobacterium  <cit> . two additional genera, burkholderia and leuconostoc, showed high abundance in our study. burkholderia was the most abundant genus in our groundwater samples, representing 75% of the sequences, and might have been introduced in the environment through groundwater applications. leuconostoc has been previously described as the predominant lactic acid bacteria on tomato fruit surfaces  <cit> .

similar bacterial classes and genera were found in high abundance in samples collected in  <dig> and  <dig>  with the largest differences corresponding to the unclassified sequences. several different reasons could account for this variation, including differences in dna extraction, sequencing sample preparation and primers used in both years, as well as potential growing season effects.

of special interest is the high proportion of sequences identified as enterobacteriaceae, given that this family includes important human pathogenic bacteria like salmonella and e. coli. similar representation of this family was obtained in the phyllosphere of trichilia spp. and pinus ponderosa, but not in that of campomanesia xanthocarpa  <cit> . the high adaptability of this family to the tomato fruit surface environment might be associated to the higher risk of disease outbreaks associated with this crop.

differences between fruit surface environments do not appear to be linked to the water applications, indicating that plant conditions allow for only some of the bacterial groups present in water to establish themselves. similar results were obtained when the fruit surface communities living on apple trees under conventional and organic management were compared, where only low abundance groups differed between the two environments  <cit> . similarly, no effect on the levels of fecal and total coliforms was observed when reclaimed water with higher coliform counts, and well water were sprayed on six horticultural crops  <cit> .

several factors determine whether the microorganisms arriving on the leaf surface can become established, including leaf characteristics, environmental factors and properties of the microorganisms themselves  <cit> . pesticides are known to differentially impact bacterial survival and growth. in a study conducted to determine the effect of pesticides on bacterial survival, salmonella spp. were best able to survive and listeria spp. were least able to survive in pesticide solutions, among all the bacteria tested. bravo, the fungicide applied closest to the sampling date in this study, has been found to reduce bacterial growth, although it was less inhibitory than other products tested  <cit> . the addition of pesticides to the different water sources used in this study might have reduced bacterial community differentiation in the two resulting fruit environments. the smooth texture of tomato skin may also prevent attachment and result in bacteria being washed away by rain or spray water.

although our results point to the lack of major effects of the two water sources used for pesticide applications, confirming this at the species level for human enteric pathogens such as salmonella, would be crucial for establishing the potential safety of surface water use for contact applications. in addition, our sampling depth analysis suggests that deeper sampling is needed for all the environments, but especially for the more diverse ws, to capture at least 90% of the community members

recent studies of analysis methodologies in bacterial diversity and metagenomics projects have revealed that small modifications or substitution of similar tools may potentially result in significant changes in the overall biological conclusions  <cit> . in the rapidly evolving field of genomics, there are few concrete standards, and the sophisticated computational protocols being developed certainly will always be sensitive to some uncertainty in the analysis parameters. to examine the sensitivity of our results to the methodology employed, we re-ran our analysis using two parallel 16s rrna protocols from the clovr package and found large agreement with our major results. additionally, the  <dig> platform itself has ongoing issues regarding artificial replicate generation  <cit>  and homopolymer identification errors  <cit> , both of which contribute to overestimation of species-level diversity in 16s rrna-based studies. though it is likely that our estimates of absolute species-level diversity are indeed inflated, the consistency in relative diversity differences between samples across multiple analyses is encouraging and lends support to the validity of our initial computational results and final biological and ecological conclusions.

CONCLUSIONS
our research has generated the first culture-independent next-generation sequencing data set for the bacterial microbiology associated with the phyllosphere of a tomato crop under agricultural management. there are a myriad of agricultural practices that may play a role in the contamination of tomatoes by human pathogenic bacteria. this work has provided valuable evidence suggesting that water used for pesticide applications does not represent a major modifier of the fruit surface bacterial communities composition.

as previously reported for other plant species, gamma, alpha and betaproteobacteria and bacilli comprised most of the 16s rrna sequences identified in the tomato fruit surface, while the most abundant genera included pantoea, enterobacter, leuconostoc, pseudomonas, weissella, sphingomonas and burkolderia. we suggest that the high representation of enterobacteriaceae in the tomato fruit surface might be associated with the elevated food safety risks posed by this crop.

these results represent a major contribution to the understanding of the tomato fruit surface ecology and an important step towards the establishment of science-based metrics for good agricultural practices that will ensure the safety of horticultural products. the emerging role of tomato as a model organism further emphasizes the value of a deeper understanding of the interactions between this crop species, its associated microflora and the environment.

