BACKGROUND
the degeneracy of the genetic code implies that different codon triplets encode the same amino acid. the frequencies with which these different codons are used vary significantly between different organisms and between proteins within the same organism  <cit> .

many studies have analyzed the differences in codon usage across species  <cit> . some of the main conclusions of these studies are:  in prokaryotes, archaea, and single-cell eukaryotes  <cit> , translational efficiency  underlies the strong codon usage bias discovered for highly expressed genes  <cit> . this correlation is valid as well in multicellular organisms, such as worms  <cit> , flies, and plants  <cit> , but does not hold in higher multicellular organisms  <cit> ;  there exists a strong correlation between codon usage and genomic gc content. this result was demonstrated in diverse organisms ranging from bacteria to metazoa. moreover, it was even suggested that human codon usage is determined solely by gc content and its isochores composition  <cit> . the causal relationships between gc content, codon usage, and the underlying evolutionary constraints that may have shaped them are still not fully understood.

nonetheless, several evolutionary processes have been postulated as the major factors that determine codon usage: selection, mutation, and genetic drift. however, the relative contribution of each of these factors in different species remains debatable  <cit> . for a number of different organisms, it was suggested that codon usage is best explained by selection for trna abundance, gene expression levels, and translational optimization  <cit> . in other cases, the dominant roles were attributed to mutation bias for local composition, mutation rate, mutation preference  <cit> , biased gene conversion, and recombination rates  <cit> . among other attributes considered are gene and protein properties  <cit> , including protein structure  <cit> , gene length  <cit> , and mrna characteristics   <cit> . mutation bias towards the transcribed strand  <cit> , environmental conditions  <cit> , and generation time  <cit>  were also proposed in explaining the preferred usage of codons in specific genes and some genomes.

the availability of a substantial number of complete metazoan genomes provides an opportunity to inspect the codon usage signal vis-a-vis the age of the genes that contain these codons. here, we examine the varying use of codons in different groups of genes, where the groups are defined according to their relative evolutionary age within a single organism. we show a significant coupling between the evolutionary age of a gene and its codon preferences in representative metazoan genomes. we also show that the gc content of a gene and its length are associated with its evolutionary age. however, we demonstrate that the latter two linkages provide only a partial explanation of the codon usage bias. we propose that the evolutionary history of genes has been maintained in the frequencies of their codons throughout extremely long evolutionary processes.

RESULTS
the analysis of metazoan codon usage is made possible by the availability of a large number of complete genomes. hundreds of eukaryotic genomes are currently at their final stages of assembly and genome annotation. complete high-quality proteomes of about  <dig> animal genomes are available as well. these resources have allowed us to determine with much certainty, for each of the protein sequences of a given organism, if homologues are present or absent along the evolutionary phylogenetic tree.

codon usage and evolutionary age
proteins encoding gene sequences were obtained from the ensembl database  <cit> . to avoid bias due to genome annotation quality, we focused our analysis solely on genes marked as 'known'. very short genes were also removed to avoid statistical bias in all subsequent homology searches .

we divided the set of about  <dig>  analyzed human genes into  <dig> groups according to the evolutionary age of each gene . the age of a gene was determined by the evolutionarily most distant genome containing an identified homologue to that gene. relative evolutionary distance was based on the accepted phylogenetic tree . homology relationships were extracted from ensembl and are based on an exhaustive list of  <dig> fully sequenced genome annotations that represent the main model organisms of the animal kingdom . note that despite the large variation in group sizes , even the smallest age groups contain more than enough codon appearances to make statistically robust conclusions .

*ordinal evolutionary age, relative to the reference species under analysis

partition of all genes in h. sapiens and m. musculus into  <dig> non-overlapping age groups along the evolutionary tree. for each age group, the number of genes it contains, its average gc content , and the average length of the proteins  that its genes encode  are listed. the age groups are as in figure  <dig> 

partition of all genes in d. melanogaster into  <dig> non-overlapping age groups along the evolutionary tree.  genes were divided into  <dig> age groups. the  <dig> youngest groups  are a "high-resolution" partition, enabled by the recent sequencing of  <dig> members of the drosophilidae family and  <dig> mosquito species.  for each age group, the number of genes it contains, its average gc content , and the average length of proteins  that its genes encode  are listed.

for each group of genes, codon usage frequencies were independently calculated for each of the amino acids. thus, each of the  <dig> redundant codons that account for these  <dig> amino acids were assigned a number between  <dig> and  <dig> .

the analysis of the  <dig> evolutionary age groups reveals substantial differences in their codon usage. this was observed for almost all codons of all amino acids. representative results for arginine, threonine, and cysteine are depicted in figure  <dig> . as a comparison, we show the codon usage variation for the ~ <dig>  genes within  <dig> randomly assigned age groups of similar sizes . it is evident that the randomized grouping results in a complete loss of age dependency.

to robustly test the statistical significance of our observation for each of the  <dig> analyzed codons, we measured the variance of the codon usage between the  <dig> age groups. this variance was compared to that of  <dig> randomly selected gene groups with similar sizes, and this comparison was independently repeated  <dig>  times. the variance of the codon usage among the  <dig> age groups was greater than the random groups' variance in more than 95% of the tests for  <dig> codons , and 94% for the cta codon . these tests confirm the observation that the age groups are significantly different from one another with respect to their codon usage. another noteworthy observation is that a number of codon frequencies change monotonically with the age of the gene group considered .

recent research of codon usage bias has typically employed measures such as the codon adaptation index   <cit>  or the effective number of codons   <cit> . however, since these measures are gene-focused, they were not appropriate for this study, where we characterized hundreds of genes at a time, without the use of a reference set or other simplifying assumptions. in addition, other studies have used relative synonymous codon usage  values to measure the deviation from random per-amino acid codon usage  <cit> . we did not use this measure here since we were interested in measuring the variation of the frequency for each specific codon between different age groups, without comparing between codons of the same amino acid .

previous studies have proposed that gc content is a major determinant of codon usage  <cit> . we thus examined the gc content differences between the age groups. indeed, the gc content within the coding regions of the ~ <dig>  human genes shows significant variance between the  <dig> groups  and is more variable than in randomly selected groups . thus, we report here a seemingly overlooked association between the gc content and the evolutionary age of a gene. previous studies have shown a decrease in gc-rich isochores in mammalian genomes  <cit> , as can also be noted among synonymous codons from the newest age groups .

using similar tests, we found that protein length, which has also been suggested to correlate with codon usage  <cit>  is associated  with the age group to which the gene belongs .

in order to uncouple the age dependence of gc content and gene length from that of codon usage, we tested whether genes with very similar gc content  still show a significant linkage between gene age and codon usage. we thus binned the genes into sets of similar gc content  and further divided each such set into the  <dig> age groups defined above. for each gc content , the variance among the age groups was re-tested. we found statistically significant variation between the age groups for many of the codons . thus, the coupling between age and gc content  does not entirely explain our main observation indicating age-dependent codon usage .

to additionally confirm our conclusion that gc content does not dominate the age-dependent codon usages observed, we performed the following novel information-theoretic test. intuitively, if changes in gc content were the only factor in causing aberrations from the overall codon usage of the organism, we would expect the codon usage of a particular age group to be dictated by its gc content, while deviating as little as possible from the overall codon usage of the genome. thus, for each group, we determined the codon usage expected to comply with its gc content. in detail, we calculated the usage that minimizes the kullback-leibler divergence  with the genomic codon usage, while constraining the gc content . we found the observed codon usages for each of the age groups to be significantly different than those expected based on gc alone ; this result was consistent for human, mouse, and fly .

codon usage preference by evolutionary age is a universal phenomenon
we tested whether the association between evolutionary age and codon usage preferences observed in homo sapiens carries over to other metazoa. to this end, we applied a similar analysis for the mus musculus and the drosophila melangoaster genomes . for the latter genome, we overcome the uneven full-genome sampling of the evolutionary tree from human to fly by taking advantage of the recent sequencing and annotations efforts for  <dig> species from the drosophila genus  <cit> .

for the mouse and fly species, a linkage between gene age and codon usage biases  was confirmed by applying the same tests applied for the human genome. the variance in codon usage was significantly higher than random  for  <dig> codons in mouse , ctc , cct , gcc , gtc ), and for  <dig> codons in fly  and gtc ). therefore, the linkage between codon usage and gene age is not specific to the human genome and is likely to apply to other metazoans as well.

for the fly genome, the correlation between gene age and gc content seems to be stronger than for the human and mouse genes . and, indeed, while the gc content only weakly explains the age dependency of codon usage for mouse genes , the age-related codon bias of fly genes seems to be mostly, but not entirely, dominated by the gc content . it is also worth noting that, in d. melanogaster, age-dependent monotonic behavior was observed in the gc content as well as in the codon usage for most of the  <dig> codons , perhaps implying a stronger link between these two age-dependent phenomena. furthermore, for almost all amino acids in the fly, the usage of synonymous codons is more uniform in the newer age groups relative to the old ones . this may reflect the combination of:  the gc content necessarily restricts the possible uniformity of codon usage  <cit>  ;  a potential overlap between the old age groups and slow evolving genes, which have previously been shown to possess large differences in the usage of synonymous codons  <cit> .

we now set out to test whether the coupling found between the codon usage and gene age behaves similarly in human, mouse, and fly. for simplicity, we grouped the genes of each organism into two groups representing 'new' and 'old' genes. the 'new' set contains all genes that are primate-specific , rodent and rabbit-specific , and melanogaster subgroup-specific . the 'old' ones are those that are not included in the 'new' group .

we then measured the deviation of the codon usage for the 'new' genes from that of the 'old' genes, for each of the three model organisms. the codon usage was represented by a 59-coordinate vector . hence, the deviation between the 'new' and 'old' groups in each genome is quantified as the difference of the 'new' and 'old' vectors . thus, these calculations yield three vectors, each representing the influence of age on the codon usage in each organism. when we measure the angle between the three vectors in the 59-dimensional space, a remarkable resemblance is observed. these deviation vectors have practically the same directions  for the human, mouse, and fly, with a statistical significance of p < 10- <dig> . this is particularly noteworthy, since the 'new' groups are expected to have evolved independently, since, by definition, they include genes that appeared after the separation of each pair among human, mouse, and fly.

for each of the three genomes analyzed, the deviation vector was defined as the difference of the codon usage vectors for 'old' and 'new' genes. the angle between each pair of 59-dimensional deviation vectors was measured  and the p-value of obtaining this angle was calculated .

we subsequently proceeded to quantify the level of dependence of the usage frequency on the age signal, for each of the  <dig> codons. namely, we examine the extent to which different codons  encapsulate the evolutionary age signal and ask which codons are more "sensitive" to gene age, across the three metazoan representatives examined. to this end, we ranked the codons in each organism according to their responsiveness to evolutionary age , using the variance among the  <dig> age groups. indeed, human and mouse codons showed similar patterns regarding the specific dependency of age . moreover, this pattern was somewhat conserved for drosophila . we tested the properties of the codons showing high responsiveness toward evolutionary age  according to the biochemical grouping of the corresponding amino acids. no clear correlation was found between the biochemical grouping of the amino acids and the ranks of their codons.

properties of evolutionary age groups
we further checked whether the evolutionary age groupings might be correlated with some functional classification. it is well known that certain functions are found in only specific parts of the evolutionary phylogenetic tree, e.g. those involved in morphogenesis, organ development, differences in brain function, and behavior. moreover, certain traits  were acquired late in metazoan evolution. indeed, studying the trend of development-specific genes along the evolutionary tree supports the notion that the molecular signal of evolutionary history is partially retained  <cit> .

we tested the possible enrichment of gene ontology  annotations  <cit>  in each of the  <dig> age groups of human genes. it turns out that a few functional annotations are enriched in some age groups. specifically, newer age groups were enriched with "nucleic acid binding" genes, while older groups showed enrichment with the process of "molecular transducer activity". the function that was most prevalent in the oldest age group was "catalytic activity". however, the number of genes annotated with these go terms was relatively small and thus only insignificantly influenced the group character.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we provide an unbiased measurement, in metazoan genomes, of the effect of the evolutionary age of genes on their codon usage. we adopt a critical statistical perspective that analyzes the codon usage signal on a genomic scale, rather than from a gene-centric point of view. this approach has revealed weak signals that may otherwise be masked by gene-to-gene variation.

our results are quite surprising. most correlations that were previously suggested to dominate the determination of codon usage are time-independent, thereby implying that the evolutionary history of a gene or a species is less important than its current properties. most studies that suggest selection as the major driving force for codon bias have analyzed protein structures, mrna stability, expression efficiency, and recombination mechanisms  <cit> . these studies took advantage of the availability of absolute gene expression, proteomic expression levels, and expression breadth. these features are used as appropriate approximations to selective forces. of note, none of these models include an element of evolutionary age. indeed, since it is assumed that current metazoan genomes are near equilibrium with respect to mutation and selection  <cit> , it was unexpected to find age-dependent differences in the codon usage of genes, as reported here.

we have herein reported a phenomenon relating the age of gene groups and their codon preferences. the evolutionary mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are yet to be discovered. it is important to note that our assessment of evolutionary age might be influenced by biological noise, such as rapidly evolving genes. in addition, our analysis could be confounded by cases where there is no gene homologue in the representative genomes for some branches of the evolutionary tree. thus, one should be cautious about the definition of homologues, which could lack detection sensitivity due to the uneven and somewhat biased selection of genomes that were completely sequenced. for example, an intermediate genome that is not yet sequenced can provide a missing link that will redefine the partition of an age group and will thus directly affect the assignment of a gene to its appropriate age. mechanistically, this could be the consequence of gene loss, lateral transfer of genetic material , but also through recombination and gene conversion processes  <cit> . these potential drawbacks increase the unavoidable inaccuracy of the genomic data used in this study. notwithstanding these reservations, we did find a significant degree of age dependency for codon usage. we have also reported here phenomena of the dependence of gc content and protein length on gene age, but we showed that these phenomena do not dominate the coupling of codon usage to gene age.

the age dependence of codon usage was found to apply to all three representative organisms tested. not only does this pattern remain as a general trend, but the dependence on age is in fact similar for the human, mouse, and fruit fly genomes. we conclude that the evolutionary history of an organism, over hundreds of million years, is strongly reflected in its codon usage.

