BACKGROUND
genome sequencing projects are rapidly increasing the raw data available for predicting protein function and protein interaction networks. the best established method for function prediction is based on sequence homology to proteins of known function. unfortunately, strictly homology-based predictions are of limited use due to the large number of homologous protein families with no known function for any single member  <cit> . an alternative method for predicting protein function is the phylogenetic profile method, also known as the co-conservation method, which rests on the premise that functionally related proteins are gained or lost together over the course of evolution  <cit> . this method predicts functional interactions between pairs of proteins in a target organism by determining whether both proteins are consistently present or absent across a set of reference genomes. these protein-protein interactions  are distinct from physical interactions as they capture putative functional relationships. sequence similarity is used only to identify homologs, not to infer function. since first introduced by pellegrini et al.  <cit> , phylogenetic profiling has been successfully applied to the prediction of protein function by several groups and demonstrated to be more powerful than sequence similarity alone at predicting protein function  <cit> .

currently several web-based databases compile predictions of protein-protein interactions , e.g. plex  <cit> , string  <cit>  and prolinks  <cit> . these databases either use all available bacterial genomes at the time of implementation or a select subset of bacterial genomes without focusing on how the selection of the bacteria will influence the ppis. several groups have attempted to address this issue, including a number of methods that account for genome phylogeny when scoring profile similarities  <cit> . barker et al. applied maximum likelihood statistical modeling for predicting functional protein linkages based on phylogenetic profiling  <cit> . their method detected independent instances of the correlated gain or loss of protein pairs on phylogenetic trees, reducing the high rates of false positives observed in conventional across-species methods that do not explicitly incorporate a phylogeny  <cit> . jothi et al. did a study using  <dig> different reference sets of genomes, using combinations of bacterial, archaea and eukaryotic genomes. they showed using a combination of bacterial and archaea genomes as a reference set could be enough to make accurate functional linkage predictions  <cit> . cokus et al. found phylogenetic relationships between genomes by using the first order of the genomes within profiles and then enumerating runs of consecutive matches to compute the accuracy of the probability of observing these phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . zheng et al. constructed phylogenetic profiles based upon the presence or absence of neighboring protein pairs within a genome  <cit> . they demonstrated that the inclusion of more genomes  resulted in better performance for ppi predictions, however, they did not provide a strategy for bacteria selection. sun et al. showed that accuracy of ppi predictions can be improved by using a set of genomes which are maximally distinct from one another  <cit> . we have noted the same phenomenon here, but further show that selection of groups of bacteria that are closely related either phenotypically or genotypically generates biologically relevant information that is missed when other methods for grouping bacteria are employed.

it is sensible that inclusion of genomes from organisms that exist in similar environmental niches , share certain phenotypic properties , or that are from the same species  might bias protein interaction network predictions in an undesirable manner. the challenge is that the extent of such biases remains uncharacterized, and thus methods for guiding the selection of relevant reference genomes are lacking. here, we have examined such biases and then used our studies to developed a new scoring scheme to provide guidance for the selection of reference genomes in phylogenetic profiling efforts.

RESULTS
phylogenetic profiling methods work by i) creating a phylogenetic profile vector where pij =  <dig> indicates a homolog exists between protein i in the target genome and a protein in a reference genome j, ii) calculating similarity measurements on the profile vectors for each pair of genes in the target genome, and iii) defining protein interactions in the target genome based on proteins sharing a profile similarity value greater than a threshold value. using e. coli k <dig> as the target genome, we have evaluated how changing different aspects of this process, including the use of a new metric for defining similarity, affect predicted protein interaction networks.

comparison and evaluation of protein-protein interaction
the effect of reference genome selection on interactions with proteins of unknown function
many function prediction methods rely on the assumption that functionally related proteins interact  <cit> . thus, the utility of an interaction network whether based on physical, genetic, or computationally predicted interactions can be assessed by determining the number of predicted interactions involving proteins that have unclassified functions in publicly accessible databases that rely upon homology based methods for functional assignment . for each network constructed using four sets of reference genomes , selected , proteobacteria , and motile ), we identified the total number of ppi pairs that have at least one of the proteins labeled as unclassified. our results showed the number of unclassified proteins was greatest when the reference genomes were either closely related phylogenetically  or phenotypically , regardless of the database used for assigning function. the selected set of reference genomes contains only a single representative strain from bacterial species where more than one strain has been fully sequenced . as such, this set of reference genomes can be considered the least closely related of all of the reference sets examined. protein interaction networks created from the selected set consistently contained the least number of proteins pairs involving with unknown function. it is of note that the ecocyc  <cit>  and cluster of orthologous groups  databases contained the least number of unclassified proteins, and therefore were chosen for the additional studies described next.

comparison of different combinations of reference genomes and e-value thresholds
the threshold value used to identify homologs between target and reference genomes is a key measure when assessing the effect of reference genomes on protein interaction networks. if the threshold value is low, then many homologs may be identified even among distantly related bacterial species. to assess this concern, we evaluated the positive predicted value ) for seven sets of reference genomes  for each of four different e-value thresholds across a range of similarity  requirements using ecocyc and cog functional categories . true positives  correspond to interactions where the proteins pair share the same function  or appear in the same complex, pathway, operon, or paralogous group  or are homologs. all other interactions were considered false positives . the significance of interactions between proteins with shared cog function was also evaluated using randomized data. to preserve the distribution of function assignment and network topology while disrupting the correlation among function assignments, the proteins identities were scrambled at random and the profile similarities were calculated. our results indicated that the ppv for all random sets were significantly different than when using the original data  .

the e-value chosen for non-randomized interactions did not substantially alter the trends observed among the different reference genomes except for high gc gram positive bacteria. this observation is likely explained by the relatively low number of genomes contained within the high gc gram positive reference set . ppv was the best for selected, all  and aerobic, indicating that these reference genome sets interactions commonly occurred between proteins of the same function and was worst for proteobacteria, motile, and low gc reference genome sets, with the all and high gc groups always remaining in between these two other groups. at restrictive e-value thresholds , this result reinforced those reported above stating that reference genomes of maximum diversity created the most accurate  protein interaction networks. what was surprising was that these trends were observed even at less restrictive e-value thresholds, where it might be expected that proteins of lower similarity, and thus more likely to be false positives, would presumably be added to the network. in fact, the number of co-conserved proteins was similar regardless of the e-value threshold for all reference genomes . thus, even if the number of predicted interaction pairs was altered , the number of new proteins added to the overall network was relatively constant. these observations suggest that using reference genomes of increased relatedness produces less accurate results  because the predicted networks either 1) include proteins from different function classifications that truly act together in larger coordinated process  or 2) include proteins where at least one protein is poorly characterized. moreover, these observations suggest that methods for assessing similarity might be improved by explicitly considering the relatedness of reference genomes.

pearson correlation coefficient with confidence  <dig>  and e-value of 10- <dig> were used on binary profile vectors unless noted.

pearson correlation coefficient with confidence  <dig>  and e-value of 10- <dig> were used on binary profile vectors unless noted.

network topology using different reference genome
the topology of bacterial co-conservation networks exhibited interesting similarities and differences as a function of reference genomes. the clustering coefficient is the edge density in the neighbors of a protein  <cit> . the average clustering coefficient of the network across all reference genome sets was high , indicating that there was a short path between any two proteins in a cluster, and that proteins tended to be co-conserved in highly connected groups. interestingly, different reference sets showed a large variation in the average degree of connectivity . the low gc reference set had the highest average connectivity while the aerobic and selected reference sets had the lowest average connectivity . together these results show that networks based on aerobic or selected reference sets, which are maximally distinct either phenotypically or genotypically generate many small, dense clusters. interestingly, the result in figure  <dig> for aerobic and selected suggest these small clusters are functionally homogenous, since high ppv values indicate many interactions among proteins of the same function.

pearson correlation coefficient with confidence  <dig>  and e-value of 10- <dig> were used on binary profile vectors.

comparison of different scoring schemes
pearson correlation and mutual information are two common methods for measuring vector similarity . previous phylogenetic profiling methods have either used protein vectors comprised of binary values   <cit>  or vectors normalized with e-values  <cit> . we wanted to employ a vector weighting metric that considered how related the target and reference genomes were for identified homologs. to this end, we developed the inverse homology scoring scheme, which weights each protein vector value fractionally by the inverse of the number of homologs between the target and reference genomes as a fraction of the total number of proteins in the reference genome. this metric emphasizes homologs identified in distantly related genomes relative to those identified in more closely related genomes. to evaluate this method of weighing, we applied the mutual information, pearson correlation coefficient and inverse homology scoring schemes to the all  reference genome set and assessed predicted protein interactions  . our results indicate that the inverse homology scoring scheme increases ppv across a range of confidence values when pearson correlation is used as the similarity metric . note that this trend was also observed over a range of different e-value thresholds as presented in figure  <dig>  this same trend was observed when mutual information was employed . in contrast, the topology of networks created using pearson correlation was similar regardless of whether or not inverse homology was employed but was different in the case of mutual information . specifically, the use of the inverse homology weighting criteria decreased connectivity and the number of clusters containing less than ten proteins, thus altering the topology of the predicted protein interaction network.

selection of reference genome affects protein-protein interaction predictions
our analysis of e. coli k <dig> as a target genome indicated that the selection of reference organisms had a substantial effect on the overall properties of predicted protein interaction networks. an important additional issue was the details of how such effects were manifested at the level of specific protein-protein interactions and protein interaction clusters. to investigate this issue, we assessed the extent to which unique protein interaction clusters were predicted when different reference genomes were employed . we show representative results of such comparisons for proteobacteria versus all  or motile versus all  reference genomes. many protein nodes within interaction clusters were uniquely identified when either proteobacteria or motile reference genomes sub-sets were used. these clusters ranged in size from as few as two proteins to some of the largest protein interaction clusters, clearly indicating the importance of reference genome selection on protein interaction predictions. the key question here is whether or not such unique interactions are biologically insightful.

comparison to alternative methods
we compared the performance of our method employing inverse homology weighting to the performance of prolinks and string databases both for predicting several well studied interaction networks and for overall ppv performance. our scoring scheme weights the phylogenetic profile vectors by taking into consideration the homology of the target genome versus the reference genome  while the methods employed in the prolinks and string databases do not consider the effect of the reference genome in their scoring scheme. it is of note that previously published data available from prolinks showed that prolinks had more linkages than other available sources at the time of implementation  <cit> . in that we have already demonstrated above the importance of reference genome selection, we used all as the reference genome set since almost all of the publicly accessible databases use all available bacterial genomes at the time of their implementation. in previous studies, we showed that there were several well known ppi pairs involved in flagellum or biofilm processes that were not identified in publicly available databases  <cit> . the bacteria flagellum process is a complex molecular system with multiple components required for functional motility, which extends from the cytoplasm to the cell exterior. while there are many common themes in flagellar protein control and assembly, there also appears to be variation among organisms. some of the flagellar proteins were not identified in prolinks  <cit>  such as, three ring proteins , some of the axle-like proteins  that have been shown to physically interact with flgb  <cit> , and the stator motor proteins mota and motb. when inverse homology is used in the determination of similarity, all of the above proteins were contained within the predicted protein interaction network . in addition, proteins  that are species specific are not co-conserved as would be expected  <cit> . a similar result was observed to the biofilm protein interaction clusters described above, where several proteins that have known ggdef and eal domains were missed by prolinks  <cit>  and string  <cit>  . finally, direct comparison of the total number of predicted pairs indicated that using inverse homology increased not only the number of predicted interaction pairs but also ppv over a large range of such predicted interactions .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the use of computational methods will continue to grow as more genomes are fully sequenced. here we examined how differences in key aspects of the phylogenetic profiles method affected predicted protein interaction networks. we specifically focused on aspects involving the selection of reference genomes and the measurement of similarity among protein co-conservation vector profiles.

phylogenetic profiles method offer an alternative to strictly homology-based approaches. while homology-based methods can be effective for predicting the functions of remote homologs, these methods perform poorly as the evolutionary distance between homologous proteins increases. even a sophisticated homology-based method fails to successfully assign functions to most of the proteins for a particular organism. phylogenetic profiles methods on the other hand are not strictly based on homology and assign function to a protein based on the context of its interactions with other proteins within a cluster. we designed a new system that utilizes different features of this method and showed that these features affect the accuracy of predictions.

pellegrini et al. introduced phylogenetic profiles while using  <dig> fully sequenced organism  <cit> . since more genomes have become available, the choice of reference genomes to use when constructing phylogenetic profiles has become more important. specifically, we noted that the number of unclassified proteins varied considerably depending on the reference set of genomes. this result both verified and extended previous results based on relatedness of reference genomes. we also showed that selection of all sequenced bacteria as a reference genome set may not produce the optimal ppv since the set of fully sequenced bacteria is biased towards pathogens and laboratory species  among others. we showed that different sets of reference genomes produce substantially different results in the terms of the accuracy of predicted interactions , and that such results were relatively independent of the choice of e-value threshold employed to define homologs. this specific result demonstrates the need for flexibility in choosing among reference genomes when initiating phylogenetic profiling based efforts for prediction protein interaction networks. one clear challenge here is that the selection of such reference genomes is not simple. rather, this process requires knowledge of the relevant organisms, both in terms of their taxonomy and the specific phenotypes they express. to aid in this process, we introduced a new scoring scheme  that considers the homology of the target and reference genomes, and thus places some emphasis on the evolutionary relationship of the relevant genomes. we showed that depending on the similarity metric used in combination with our inverse homology scoring scheme, either the accuracy or the topology of the predicted protein interaction network was altered.

our final studies were directed at understanding the extent to which these issues affected overall predictions and whether or not any observed differences provide new biological insights. we examined the topology of the network with various reference genomes and noted that when more closely related bacteria were selected, the clusters became larger with a higher degree of interconnectedness when compared to clusters derived from more distantly related reference genomes . in general, small and medium sized clusters tend to contained proteins of known function in contrast to large clusters that contained proteins that function in distinct but coordinate processes. as such, phylogenetic profiling-based approaches can benefit from flexibility in selecting and weighting of reference genomes as demonstrated here. we showed that such benefits do indeed generate unique biological insights. in particular, we showed that biofilm relevant protein interaction networks contained a broader range of relevant protein functions when reference genomes were selected based on a shared essential phenotype  as compared to using all available genomes. we extended this result by comparing directly the use of our inverse homology scoring scheme to the methods used by publicly available databases . the inverse homology approach predicted known protein interactions in two separate biological processes  that were not predicted by existing methods.

overall, we have presented an evaluation of several key criteria affecting the accuracy and topology of protein interaction networks predicted by phylogenetic profiling methods. we have shown that the choice of reference genome is of key importance and provided guidance, both in terms of different evaluations and the report of a new similarity scoring scheme, for future efforts seeking to further improve computational methods for predicting protein interactions as well as to use such methods for developing new biological understanding.

