BACKGROUND
the olfactory system of animals allows individuals detecting enormously diverse information from the external environment, being in most species a fundamental feature for their survival and reproduction. natural selection, therefore, likely plays an important role in the evolution of olfactory-involved genes. actually, there is compelling evidence for the action of positive selection in the evolution of these genes, both in insects and in vertebrates [e.g.  <cit> . in addition, olfactory-specific gene families might contribute to the host-specificity shifts occurring in the diversification of super-specialist drosophila species  <cit> .

the primary step in the olfactory perception is accomplished by the odorant-binding proteins . in spite of the similar global function of insect and vertebrate obps, these two protein families are evolutionarily unrelated  <cit> . in insects, obps are small globular proteins that bind odorant molecules  at the pores of the chemosensory sensilla, transporting them through the aqueous lymph, and delivering their ligands near the olfactory receptors   <cit> . in addition, obps might play a role in the olfactory coding  <cit> , as well as in the stimulus inactivation  <cit> . while some obps co-express in the same individual sensilla, some others have strikingly different expression patterns  <cit> . currently, the obp three-dimensional  structures of several insects have been determined [reviewed in  <cit> ; these proteins share similar folds, although with significant structural differences , resulting in diverse solvent access properties.

the obp repertory in the genus drosophila constitutes a multigene family composed by a moderately variable number of members   <cit> . results in  <cit>  have shown that the obp genes evolve through a birth-and-death process; the new members originate by tandem gene duplications and gradually diverge in sequence and likely in function. the os-e  and os-f  genes are the two closest paralogous obp members of the d. melanogaster genome. these genes, located in the 3r chromosome, are separated by ~ <dig> kb intergenic region and show a highly similar gene structure and protein sequence similarity   <cit> . these genes also co-express in the same specific subset of olfactory sensilla  of the d. melanogaster antennal segment  <dig>  <cit> .

dna polymorphism and divergence analyses at the os-e and os-f genes in the melanogaster  <cit>  and in the old world obscura [sánchez-gracia and rozas, unpublished data) subgroup species of drosophila have shown that these olfactory genes might have evolved non-neutrally. nevertheless, no firm conclusions regarding the precise evolutionary mechanism could be drawn; therefore, the specific role that natural selection might play in the evolutionary history of this gene duplication, and especially in the origin and maintenance of the duplicated copies, it is still unknown.

here, we investigate the mechanisms driving the evolution of the genomic cluster encompassing the os-e and os-f genes  in  <dig> species of the drosophila genus. we integrate amino acid and nucleotide-based divergence data, with the analysis of the selective constraints and information of the obp 3d structure and function, to infer the impact of positive and negative selection in the evolutionary history of these genes. we are especially interested in determining the origin and evolutionary fate of these obp genes within the context of a multigene family submitted to a birth-and-death process. we found that functional differentiation, with an active role of positive selection, might contribute to the obp family evolution across drosophila species. we also show that the evolution of the physicochemical-properties of these proteins suggests that the functional divergence might arise through changes affecting the obp conformational shift mechanisms, modifying the specificity, sensitivity or accessibility of obps to the odorants, to the ors or to other molecules required to the correct odorant perception.

RESULTS
the obp <dig> genomic region in the genus drosophila
we have identified orthologs of the os-e and os-f genes in the  <dig> species surveyed of the sophophora subgenus. in all cases, the two genes have the same orientation, well-conserved exon sizes, and show equivalent intron-exon boundary positions and intron phases; furthermore, the close physical distance that these two os genes have in d. melanogaster is also conserved across this subgenus. by contrast, the os-e gene is absent in d. virilis, d. mojavensis and d. grimshawi; these species, and also d. willistoni, have a new os-like gene, named here as os-x gene  . this new gene localizes 5' upstream  from the os-f gene, with the same orientation and a very similar gene structure. the dot-plot analyses corroborate that only d. willisoni have all these three obp related sequences . these findings, together with the high sequence similarity between the os-x and their neighbour genes , and its position in the drosophila obp phylogenetic tree  <cit> , clearly indicate that os-x is an old obp <dig> member that arose by a gene duplication event. the exhaustive search across databases allows identifying  <dig> putative members of the obp <dig> group . we did not detect any additional os-like members across other available insect genomes.

amino acid and nucleotide divergence
bayesian trees based on protein and nucleotide divergence indicate that the os-e and os-f genes existed before the split of the sophophora and drosophila subgenera; later, the drosophila subgenera lineage lost the os-e gene . even using an algorithm more sensitive than blast  <cit> , we did not find any vestige of the os-e gene in the genome of the three drosophila subgenus species suggesting, therefore, that this gene has been completely erased. in agreement with previous results  <cit>  the distribution of nucleotide substitutions across the dna sequence is not homogeneous: both genes are highly divergent in the so called heterogeneous region , and in the first  <dig> amino acids of the n-terminal part of the mature protein .

selective constraints and functional divergence
gene duplication-specific changes in the substitution rates  might reflect variations in selective constraints after gene duplication  <cit> . we detected evidences of type i functional divergence between os-e and os-f proteins , and between os-f and os-x proteins ; namely, there are some amino acid sites with discrepancies in their evolutionary rate between these paralogous pairs. the os-e/os-x comparison was not significant . as expected, most amino acids have very low posterior probability  values and, therefore, they would not be involved on the hypothetical functional divergence . specifically, we detected nine and seven amino acid positions  in the os-e/os-f and in the os-f/os-x comparisons, respectively. besides, five of these functional divergence candidate positions are the same in the two comparisons. we repeated the analysis removing positions with the highest score values, until θλi was not significantly different from  <dig>  using this strongly conservative criterion, the firm candidates to be involved in the functional divergence reduce to two  and one  positions, in the previous comparisons. type i functional divergence may be driven by either site-specific functional constraint relaxations, or by the acquisition of new functions in the one of the duplicated copies. to discriminate between these two hypotheses we infer the functional constraint levels before the gene duplication event by examining the pattern of variation either at the os-x or the mosquito homologous proteins. we found that unambiguous sites are always more compatible with the relaxation  of the functional constraint scenario , and that all three drosophila obp proteins would exhibit functionally diverged relaxed positions. interestingly, the putative functional diverged positions shared between the two comparisons always involve relaxations in os-e or os-x, but not in os-f protein. on the other hand, although there are some radical replacements differently fixed between paralogs, we failed to detect any significant type ii  functional divergence.

the analysis of the nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution rate ratio can also be used to detect functional differentiation; for this purpose, we used the unrooted tree in figure  <dig>  estimates of the overall ω ratio from the os-e/os-f msa  indicates that purifying selection has been the predominant force acting on the evolution of these drosophila obps. selective constrains, however, are unevenly distributed across the phylogeny . these differences across lineages, however, are not explained by differences between the duplicated copies . we also detected a significant heterogeneity in the ω values across sites . nevertheless, the test fails to detect evidences of positive selection across the whole msa; since positive selection will likely affect a few amino acids at specific lineages on the phylogeny, models estimating ω ratios averaged by codons or by lineages are certainly highly conservative. therefore, we applied an ad hoc branch-site approach , to assess whether molecular adaptation occurred in the evolution of the os-e and os-f genes in drosophila. since we had detected, using a polymorphism to divergence comparative analysis, departures from the standard neutral model in the evolution of os-e gene in d. melanogaster and in d. guanche , we first evaluated whether the heterogeneity in the selective pressures detected across lineages might be attributed to episodic positive selection events acting on specific positions of these lineages . in spite that null hypothesis of the test  <dig>  was not rejected, the d. guanche os-e gene  exhibits several positions with evidence of relaxed selection  ; interestingly, many relaxed amino acid positions are located in the highly variable het <dig> region. on the contrary, we did not detect site-specific selective-pressure changes along the d. melanogaster os-e branch . likewise, we also searched for the specific signature that positive selection associated to the birth-and-death process might leave on coding dna sequence data. for this purpose, we chose internal branches involving gene gains or losses as the foreground in the branch-site analysis . the analysis shows significant evidences  that positive selection might act on specific positions in the early stages after the os-e/os-f gene duplication , but also on os-e gene concomitantly with the lineage-specific loss of the os-x gene .

results of the branch-site analysis.

a lineages defined as foreground in the branch-site analysis . b the number in parenthesis indicates the p-values under the one-sided test with the asymptotic null distribution  in  <cit> . c amino acid position numbering according to the msa in figure  <dig>  amino acid positions involving changes in the physicochemical properties influenced by positive selection are highlighted in bold. beb, bayes empirical bayes results  <cit> .

the molecular adaptation processes occurred after the gene duplication event were also investigated by comparing the magnitude of the physicochemical changes produced by the observed amino acid replacements with those expected at random  <cit> . the null hypothesis  was rejected  for six physicochemical properties: coil tendencies , equilibrium constant , mean r.m.s.  fluctuation displacement , solvent accessible reduction ratio , total non-bonded energy  and turn tendencies , and involves only the os-e protein. that is, some amino acid replacements altering these physicochemical properties in the os-e protein accumulated more  often than expected by chance . moreover, for each physicochemical property, the distribution of the z-scores across  <dig> magnitude classes  <cit>  indicates that, for some properties, there is a significant excess of non-synonymous substitutions at the most extreme magnitude-classes ; these os-e protein properties, therefore, are likely evolving under positive selection. the os-f gene, on the contrary, seems to evolve under strict neutrality, or under strong purifying selection. interestingly, the position of some os-e amino acid replacements contributing to the significant excess observed at individual physicochemical magnitude categories match with positions identified in the branch-site analysis .

since the os-e and os-f genes are phylogenetically closed and share gene expression patterns  <cit> , they might exhibit a coevolving pattern. indeed, we found statistically significant amino acid covariation between these obps , which might reflect functional or structural constraints. again, most predicted coevolving positions involve amino acids located in  the het <dig> region . outside this variable region, amino acids at positions  <dig> and  <dig> of the os-e protein would be excellent candidates to have co-evolved with amino acids of the os-f het <dig> region.

sequence variation on the obp 3d structure
to determine the functional meaning of the relevant amino acid replacements identified in previous analyses we studied their location in the predicted obp 3d structure . we first built an energy-minimized model using a homology modelling approach  <cit> . the pdb entry with the highest sequence similarity -identified in the psi-blast- corresponds to the a. gambiae obp <dig> . we used this entry as a template for the modelling. the in silico stereochemical quality analysis  <cit>  indicates that the generated model has a very good quality , with no residues in disallowed regions. as expected, the modelled structure is roughly similar than the template, with the six helices typical of the obp family in equivalent positions and with a similar predicted folding .

we first determined the location of the variable regions in the 3d structure; the het <dig> region lies at α-helices d and e with their connecting loop, while the het <dig> variable region is at the n-terminal part of the protein, encompassing the complete first α-helix. figure  <dig> also shows the location in the 3d structure of the relevant positively selected amino acid positions and those inferred to contribute to type i functional divergence . interestingly, most of the selectively relaxed amino acid sites inferred in d. guanche os-e protein and some of the positions responsible of the positive selection are located in the het <dig> region, and therefore nearby in the 3d protein structure. this suggests that this part of the protein has an important functional role. since the first α-helix and the c-terminal end of the protein also appear to be the target of positive selection, molecular adaptation should have affected different obp protein domains. otherwise, amino acid positions candidates to be under type i functional divergence are more homogeneously distributed along the 3d structure : two of the tree positions with high pp values, however, are also in the functionally important predicted protein domains.

discussion
origin of the os-e/os-f gene duplication
the os-e and os-f genes encode the two phylogenetic closest odorant binding protein members of the d. melanogaster genome  <cit> . we have identified orthologs of the os-e gene only in the sophophora subgenus species, with no evidence in d. virilis, d. mojavensis and d. grimshawi . the analysis in  <cit>  led to the same result in d. virilis but they detected two os-e like genes in scaptodrosophila lebanonensis, a basal species of drosophila genus. in fact, in  <cit>  authors proposed that the two os-e and os-f genes have orthologous copies in a. gambiae. our phylogenetically-based analysis support the hypothesis that the os-e and os-f gene duplication predates the drosophila and sophophora subgenera split, but does not agree with  <cit>  findings. most likely, the anopheles homologous sequences are in fact co-orthologs of the drosophila os-e and os-f genes, i.e. the drosophila gene copies arose by a gene duplication event after the split of the nematocera and brachycera taxa . we have to notice, however, that the different evolutionary rates of os-e and os-f genes might constitute a confounding factor. the duplication might have occurred after the drosophila-sophophora subgenus split, followed by evolutionary rate acceleration. this scenario would be consistent with the  <cit>  analysis; these authors, nevertheless, only surveyed a very short fragment , which -in addition- we have found that might have evolved by positive selection. consequently, the most plausible scenario would indicate that obp <dig> genomic region had the os-x, os-e and os-f genes before the sophophora-drosophila subgenera split ; nevertheless, further experimental analyses using more distant drosophila species would be required for a complete assessment.

functional divergence between os-e and os-f genes
results in  <cit>  have shown that the obp gene family has evolved following a birth-and-death model  <cit> . under this model, contrarily to the concerted evolution model, new functional genes often evolve through regulatory or functional differentiation. accordingly, a number of obp family members differ in gene expression patterns  <cit>  or in functional constraints  <cit> . in the  <cit>  classical view, the functional diversification of duplicated copies is driven by positive selection . otherwise, gene duplicates might also differentiate by acquiring independent sub-functions, being all of them required for carry out the original function. this functional subdivision might be promoted by positive selection  <cit>  or be the result of the accumulation of degenerative mutations   <cit> . this later model is, nonetheless, usually considered into the evolution of cis-regulatory elements.

in d. melanogaster, the os-e and os-f genes have the same temporal gene expression pattern  <cit> . in fact, os-e, os-f and lush proteins co-localize not only in the sensillar fluid, but also in the same intracellular compartment of the supporting cells before endocytosis  <cit> . therefore, it seems unlikely that os-e and os-f genes might differ on the regulatory temporal or spatial pattern of gene expression. nevertheless, these genes might differ on their quantitative gene expression patterns . it has been shown that gene expression levels are negatively correlated with evolutionary rates  <cit> . here we found that the os-e evolves more rapidly than os-f. the highly conserved large first intron  in all os-f genes might contribute to explain this result. this intron is absent in the os-e genes and has two highly conserved fragments , which might contain regulatory regions. this feature, that has been associated with reduced evolutionary rates and high gene expression levels  <cit> , might explain the evolutionary rate differences between os-e and os-f and perhaps putative differences in the gene expression levels.

if the functional diversification between os-e and os-f genes was promoted by changes on the coding region these genes might have evolved with asymmetric evolutionary rates. the os-e and os-f gene duplication is recent enough to allow studying the evolutionary forces acting at the early stages after gene gains in the obp family. here, we have found that os-e and os-f genes evolved with different substitution rates; nevertheless, the overall functional constraint level  is high and very similar in the two genes. although relatively ancient duplicates can exhibit similar functional constraint levels  <cit> , they might have differed in a short period of time after the duplication event. in this sense, we have detected both significant type i divergence among obps, likely resulting from site-specific relaxations, and the footprint of positive natural selection in the early stages after the os-e/os-f gene duplication. hence, these two forces would affect the evolutionary fate of new obp family members, initially originated by tandem gene duplications. since the shifts in the evolutionary rate  occurred in different and complementary positions of each duplicated pair, this would point to some functional subdivision, perhaps with a complementary loss  of function at different protein domains. likewise, we found that positive selection might also act concomitant to some lineage-specific losses of members from the same cluster, suggesting that these within-cluster obps should be functionally connected. this functional connection might arise through the formation of obp dimers at physiological conditions . natural selection might promote heterodimers via the increase of the combinatory potential of the obp  and maintaining, therefore, the co-localization of different obps in the same cells. interestingly, we did not find evidences of functional divergence between os-e and os-x proteins, which share a similar functional divergence behaviour with respect to os-f. moreover, all extant species  only have one of these two genes. it is possible that os-f dimerize with either os-e or os-x in the sensillar fluid generating quaternary structures with an equivalent functional role. although, it is unknown whether in the past os-e and os-x really co-expressed in the same cells, it would be very attractive to investigate the expression pattern of the three obp genes of d. willistoni . the analysis of gene expression data and of the functional quaternary structure might give critical insights into the role of dimerization on the molecular evolution of the obp genes.

positively selected sites in the obp structure
we have detected several sites that likely evolved by positive selection. one of these positions , placed in the helix a of the obp, might alter the size and shape of the binding cavity by modifying the position of the first disulfide bridge  <cit> ; for instance, d. melanogaster lush, which has the first α-helix in a more internal position than in a. mellifera asp <dig>  has also a small binding cavity. we also detected putative positive selected sites located in the c-terminal end of the protein . in asp <dig> this domain folds inside the protein forming one binding cavity wall and contains residues that interact directly with the ligand; conformational changes in this part of the protein trigger the ligand release close to the odorant receptor  <cit> . moreover, in lush, amino acid substitutions in this part of the protein have also been related with the pheromone-induced conformational shift that triggers the firing of pheromone-sensitive neurons  <cit> . interestingly, the structure of this region is the most divergent among the  <dig> obps with resolved 3d proteins: it presents different lengths, secondary structure, or it is even missing. likely, replacements in these two regions can significantly affect the conformational and the ligand-binding properties of the obps, being therefore a major target for adaptive changes.

the third protein region that might be shaped by molecular adaptation comprises the α-helices d and e . this region includes both hydrophobic residues covering the binding cavity and exposed amino acids that might be involved in protein-protein interactions. noticeably, most of the residues  detected in the coevolution analysis  lies in this part of the protein and are exposed to the solvent. indeed, in the proposed a. gambiae obp <dig> homodimer, the dimeric interface primarily engage the fourth and fifth helices  <cit> . moreover, in this same region also localize many d. guanche replacements with a distinctive evolutionary pattern . several authors suggested  <cit>  that the very small effective population size of this insular-endemic species would increase the fixation probability of slightly deleterious mutations . under this scenario, the amino acid replacements detected in the os-e protein of d. guanche would be slightly deleterious mutations fixed by genetic drift and, therefore, would indicate a functional constraint relaxation rather than positive selection. moreover, the selective relaxation might be related with a ecologically driven speciation, as has been suggested in other drosophila species  <cit> . actually, discriminating between positive and relaxed negative selection is not an easy task; even so, since the het <dig> region is functionally important we cannot completely discard that positive selection might in fact also drive the evolution of d. guanche os-e gene.

physicochemical evolution and molecular adaptation
the evolutionary analysis of the physicochemical properties might provide insights into the functional divergence occurred across obps. we show that os-e/os-f duplicates have a markedly different behaviour. while the os-f protein has been largely affected by purifying selection, both stabilizing and adaptive positive selection was inferred for the os-e. indeed, we identified the footprint of the positive-destabilizing selection on two physicochemical properties . pα is a conformational property  <cit>  related to the length and flexibility of alpha helices and, therefore, to the accessibility of specific amino acids . obps are small globular α-helical proteins and, therefore, could be largely affected by these changes. pk' influences the association and disassociation constants of amino acids, affecting the protein-protein or protein-ligand interactions characteristics. thus, positive selection might promote functional divergence modifying the binding specificities, or altering the conformational changes involved in the obp functional mechanism . additionally, our results also indicate that positive stabilizing selection has acted on the os-e protein evolution. it has been shown that in globular proteins two  of the three physicochemical properties related to positive stabilizing selection are highly-negatively correlated with protein compressibility  <cit> , and would be essential in maintaining the globular structure and the buried nature of the binding-cavity. in spite that the radical changes detected in our study likely produce important functional changes between the os-e and os-f proteins, we cannot discard that other detected conservative replacements also have an important adaptive role . indeed, some of the conservative changes contributing to the excess of amino acid replacements detected in the os-e protein might cause weakly but relevant functional changes in either the obp binding-activity or in ligand-specificity suggesting, therefore, the action of adaptive instead of stabilizing selection.

CONCLUSIONS
the comparative genomic analysis of the obp multigene family in drosophila  <cit>  has revealed that a birth-and-death model could explain the differences in the number of obp members across species. here we found that molecular adaptation can also play an important role in the evolution of this olfactory gene family. indeed, positive selection was likely involved in the functional differentiation of new copies in the early stages after the gene duplication event; likewise, it might shape variation of some members of the family concomitantly with the loss of functionally related genes. the stochastic gene gain/loss process coupled with the impact of natural selection would determine the observed family size . nevertheless, further functional experiments would be required to demonstrate the adaptive character of the amino acids inferred as positively selected. the analysis of the non-coding flanking regions is also critical; particularly the putative regulatory sequences of the os-e and os-f genes to investigate putative fine-tuning differences in their gene expression patterns. all these studies and experiments will certainly contribute to better understand the precise role of natural selection and molecular adaptation in the evolution of chemoreception.

