BACKGROUND
messenger rna  encodes functional information with linear nucleotide sequences for amino acids in a cell. in addition to mrna primary linear structure, base pairing of local nucleotides in mrnas creates specific secondary structures, such as stems and loops. it has been reported that mrna structures encode several regulatory information in different biological processes  <cit> , including dna transcription  <cit> , pre-mrna splicing  <cit> , microrna  mediated gene regulation  <cit> , gene translation  <cit> , and cellular localization  <cit> . experimental profiling of mrna structure at genome scale both in vitro <cit>  and in vivo <cit>  has confirmed regulatory roles of mrna secondary structure in various organisms. given the essentiality of rna structure in regulating gene expression, it is important to perform mrna structure analysis from the perspective of evolution.

current evolutionary studies on rna structures can be largely classified into two groups. the first group focuses on the conservation level of rna structures in a genome. the basic method is to compare rna structures within species in a phylogenetic tree. a set of functional rnas  with conserved structures have been identified in human  <cit> , drosophila <cit> , and yeast  <cit> . although different algorithms were applied among these studies, the consensus conclusion of these studies is that rna structures experienced widespread purifying selection in organisms. unlike the studies we mentioned above, the main issue addressed in the second group of studies is the effect of rna secondary structure change caused by a single-point mutation. some snps in mrna coding  <cit>  and non-coding  <cit>  regions can cause aberrant gene expression by affecting mrna secondary structures. also, a point mutation in or close to mirna target sites would disrupt normal gene regulation by affecting local mrna accessibility  <cit> . a more recent study investigated accumulated mutations in escherichia coli  genes over  <dig>  generations of evolution, and found mutations that may disrupt mrna secondary structure are selectively filtered out in the course of evolution  <cit> .

as rna secondary structure is conserved among species and the fitness of structurally disruptive mutations is low, it is reasonable to hypothesize that selection on rna secondary structure should lead to less nucleotide sequence divergence in the genome. however, little is known on this topic so far. the only study, to our knowledge, was performed by warden et al. <cit> . they predicted frnas in coding region of yeast genes and found significant effects of rna secondary structure on protein evolutionary rates  <cit> . notably, rna structures are selectively conserved in protein coding regions in many organisms, such as drosophila <cit> , yeast  <cit>  and human  <cit> . in a recent study, smith et al. <cit>  proposed that the relative enrichment of conserved rna structure was the highest in protein coding region than that in any other genomic region. to understand the effect of rna structure conservation on coding sequence evolution, we systematically investigated the relationship between nucleotide conservation level and mrna secondary structure in four model organisms, including one prokaryote and three eukaryotes, e. coli, saccharomyces cerevisiae , drosophila melanogaster , and mus musculus . we define structurally sensitive sites in mrna as those with putative local structure-disruptive mutations. we first assess whether structurally sensitive nucleotide sites are more conserved than non-sensitive sites. next, we compare the above effect between genes with different expression level and codon usage bias, respectively. to further elucidate sequence constraint in different local regions along mrna, we analyze the effect in translation initiation and elongation regions. our analyses present a deep view of structure-associated nucleotide divergence in coding region. this study extends our understanding on the evolutionary process of coding sequences and helps develop a better model for coding sequence evolution.

RESULTS
structurally sensitive sites in mrna are more evolutionarily conserved
we first assessed whether the mrna nucleotide sites with putative structurally disruptive mutations are more evolutionarily conserved. according to the table of genetic code, most substitutions at the first codon position and all the substitutions at the second codon position are nonsynonymous. the conservation level of nucleotide at the first and second codon position is inevitably governed by strong purifying selection against amino acid replacement. to avoid the confounding factors caused by the selection on nonsynonymous sites, only the 4-fold degenerate sites in coding sequences were investigated in this study, which means we focused on the synonymous sites without any nonsynonymous mutational opportunity.

we evaluated the conservation level of each 4-fold degenerate site by weighted entropy , which was calculated by multiple sequence alignment of widely diverged orthologs . lower ew means higher conservation level and ew =  <dig> means the no variation in nucleotide type in the alignment column. here, we considered sites with ew <  <dig>  as conserved. for comparison, we also computed phylop score  <cit>  for each nucleotide site, which is a conservation score based on a model of neutral evolution . higher phylop score means higher conservation level. we found a very strong negative correlation between ew and phylop score, with the mean of pearson correlation coefficient < − <dig>  across all the genes in each species .

we used rnasnp  <cit>  program to assess the effect of single-point mutation on local mrna secondary structure. rnasnp helps screen the putative structure-disruptive mutations in rna sequences by estimating the structural changes of all three possible substitutions at each nucleotide site. the structural distance  between wild-type and mutant sequences was calculated from base pairing probability matrices  <cit> . we measured the structural sensitivity for a 4-fold degenerate site by the mean dmax for all  <dig> possible mutations at this site, assessing the likelihood that a mutation at this site is structurally disruptive. we considered a nucleotide site as structurally sensitive if the structural sensitivity was larger than  <dig> .

for each gene, we constructed a 2 ×  <dig> contingency table by categorizing each 4-fold degenerated sites as structurally sensitive/non-sensitive and as evolutionarily conserved/non-conserved . we employed mantel-haenszel procedure  <cit>  to determine whether structurally sensitive nucleotide sites are more evolutionarily conserved. a joint odds ratio  was computed for each species by combining the odds ratios of each individual contingency table. ormh greater than  <dig>  signifies that structurally sensitive nucleotide sites tend to be more conserved than non-sensitive sites. mantel-haenszel procedure reveals that, in all organisms, the ormh was significantly larger than  <dig>   . the 95% confidence interval of ormh is  for e. coli,  for yeast,  for fly, and  for mouse. these results were not strongly dependent on the cutoff choice for weighted entropy and structural sensitivity . a different choice of cutoffs only led to slightly different results.

to investigate the reason why e. coli shows the most significant signal while yeast shows the least significant signal, we counted the number of structurally sensitive sites for each gene within each species. e. coli shows the highest fraction of sensitive sites, while the proportion in yeast was significantly lower than that in the other species . since the power of mantel-haenszel test is affected by the number of sensitive sites, the lowest number of sensitive sites in yeast may partly explain the least significant signal in this species.

to determine whether the conservation level at structurally sensitive sites was affected by expression level, we calculated the ormh separately for the genes with the highest 50% and the lowest 50% expression level. in all the species except fly, the ormh for the highest-expressed genes tended to be higher than that for the genes with the lowest expression level . the corresponding p-values were also more significant in highly expressed genes in all species except fly .

we also tested whether gene codon bias could affect the conservation level at structurally sensitive sites. effective number of codons  is usually used to measure gene codon usage bias  <cit> . here, we used an improved version of enc, enc’, which takes background nucleotide composition into account  <cit> . lower enc’ values indicate stronger codon bias. by comparing the bottom 50% of genes with the lowest enc’ to the top 50% of genes with the highest enc’, we found that, in all the species with the exception of fly, the p-values for the genes with stronger codon bias tended to be more significant than those for the genes with the lowest codon bias .

in addition, we repeated the above analyses using phylop score as the measure of nucleotide conservation level . we considered sites with phylop score >  <dig> as conserved. side-by-side comparison between figure  <dig> and additional file 4: figure s <dig> indicated that the results generated based on phylop score mirrored what we found when using weighed entropy as the measure of conservation level.

stronger association between conservation level and structural sensitivity at translation initiation region
a general feature of depletion of strong secondary structures has been found in mrna translation initiation region in viruses  <cit> , prokaryotes  <cit> , and eukaryotes  <cit> . to further elucidate regional constraints along mrna sequence, we checked the relationship between nucleotide conservation level and structural sensitivity at the 5′ end of the coding region in each species. mantel-haenszel procedure was conducted along the mrna sequence using a sliding window of  <dig> nucleotides in length, moving from the start codon to the 109th downstream nucleotide in step of  <dig> nucleotides . figure  <dig> shows the odds ratio and corresponding p-value of each window. in all species except yeast, we observed an increased odds ratio and significance level for the windows close to the translation start site , comparing with the downstream windows .

to investigate whether window size affected our results, we redid our analysis for the four species using sliding windows of  <dig> nucleotides. results for the alternate window size were compatible to those obtained with a window size of  <dig> nucleotides .

to address why there is an exceptional pattern in yeast, we checked the composition of structurally sensitive sites for each window. similar to the results mentioned in the previous subsection, the fraction of sensitive sites of the 5′ sliding windows was lower in yeast compared with the other species . the lowest number of sensitive sites in yeast may interpret the least significant signal in this species. also, we observed a trend that there are more structurally sensitive sites in the 5′ end windows, comparing with the downstream windows from the same species .

weighted entropy correlates negatively with structural sensitivity
all above analyses were based on categorized data, such as a classification of all nucleotide sites into conserved/non-conserved or structurally sensitive/non-sensitive. weighted entropy and structural sensitivity are continuous quantities. lower weighted entropy denotes higher conservation level while higher structural sensitivity indicates more severe structural constraints. therefore, if forcing both variables into dichotomous categories, we may lose statistical power.

to make use of the continuous values of structural sensitivity and weighted entropy for each nucleotide site, we calculated the pearson correlation coefficient between structural sensitivity and weighted entropy of the 4-fold degenerate sites in each gene. as test statistic, we used the mean of all these correlation coefficients. we calculated the sampling distribution of this statistic by randomly permuting weighted entropy of 4-fold degenerate sites with identical nucleotide within each gene. since we expected weighted entropy to decrease with structural sensitivity, we calculated one-tailed p-values for the left tail of the sampling distribution of the mean correlation coefficient. our alternative hypothesis was that the mean correlation coefficient should be more negative than expected by chance if structural sensitive sites are more evolutionarily conserved.

we found that, for e. coli and yeast, we could reject the null hypothesis of no significant association between weighted entropy and structural sensitivity  . however, there is no significant association between the two quantities for fly and mouse  .

to test whether there is difference between translation initiation and elongation regions, we carried out the same continuous test for the regions between the 1st and 60th nucleotides  and between the 91st and 150th nucleotides , respectively. interestingly, we could reject the null hypothesis of no significant association between weighted entropy and structural sensitivity at translation initiation region for all the species with the exception of yeast  . however, there is no significant association between the two quantities at translation elongation region for all the species  .

discussion
we examined the relationship between the conservation level of 4-fold degenerate sites and the corresponding structural sensitivity in the mrnas in four model organisms. using both categorized and continuous analyses, we found that the conservation level is increased for the nucleotide sites with putative structurally disruptive single-point mutations. in e. coli, yeast, and mouse, the association is stronger in highly expressed genes than in genes with low expression level. also, we found that the association is stronger at 5′ translation initiation region comparing with downstream elongation sequence. all these findings suggest that structurally important sites tend to experience stronger purifying selection at the nucleotide level from prokaryotes to eukaryotes.

in mantel-haenszel procedure, we used a cutoff to categorize the 4-fold codon sites into two groups: structurally sensitive vs. non-sensitive. it was suggested by the authors of rnasnp that roughly 8-9% single-point mutations in rna are structurally disruptive  <cit> . because there are three possible mutations at a nucleotide site, we can reasonably expect that, on average, there are less than ~25% nucleotide sites in mrna with potentially disruptive mutations. in our study, the proportion of structurally sensitive site in most mrnas was lower than 25% , which suggests that we chose a reasonable cutoff for structural sensitivity. in addition, less stringent cutoffs for structural sensitivity only slightly changed the results , which suggest that our results were independent of the cutoff choice.

protein functional and structural constraints govern the evolution at nonsynonymous sites in coding sequences. therefore, we didn’t take the first and second codon positions into account. we only focused on the 4-fold degenerate sites. however, it is important to note that 4-fold degenerate sites are not essentially free of selective constraints. several mechanisms have been reported, which cause selective pressure on synonymous sites, such as selection for accurate and fast translation  <cit> , selection for rna global stability  <cit> , selection for mirna binding  <cit> , selection for splicing efficiency  <cit> , and selection for protein co-translational folding  <cit> . all these factors may weaken or bias the association between local structural sensitivity and site conservation level. in the resampling test, we kept the amino acid sequence, codon usage bias, and nucleotide composition for each gene, which helps avoid some of the confounding selective factors acting on synonymous sites.

there is a general observation that evolutionary constraints appear to increase with gene expression level  <cit> . our results also indicate that highly expressed genes seem to exhibit a stronger association between conservation level and structural importance than genes with low expression level. the exception of fly may be due to the fact that the fly dataset with available expression information was extremely shrunk. given the fact that codon bias somewhat reflects gene expression level  <cit> , the effect of enc’ largely mirrors our findings on gene expression.

we found a stronger association between nucleotide conservation level and structural sensitivity at 5′ translation initiation region comparing with downstream elongation region, which is likely due to the enhanced importance of mrna secondary structure for translation initiation. several recent studies have demonstrated various structure-related regulatory mechanisms in mrna translational process  <cit> . especially, a universal selection on reduced rna stability at translation initiation region has been reported from prokaryotes to eukaryotes by in silico studies  <cit> . experimental studies also confirmed the key role of rna structure near the start codon for translation initiation  <cit> . some regulatory structures are also observed near the translation initiation region, such as internal ribosomal entry sites  in some eukaryotic genes  <cit>  and pkr activating structure in inflammation-related genes  <cit> . unlike translation initiation, codon usage and corresponding trna abundance, rather than rna secondary structure, are the more important factors that regulates translation elongation and the final output of gene expression  <cit> . therefore, it’s not surprising that the association of rna structural sensitivity with nucleotide conservation is stronger at translation initiation region.

our results suggest a universal trend of increased nucleotide conservation at structurally sensitive nucleotide sites. but, the statistical significance is weakest in yeast, which may be due to the lower fraction of sensitive sites in yeast. both global and sliding window analyses indicate that the proportion of structurally sensitive sites was significantly reduced in yeast compared with the other species . the relatively low number of sensitive sites could decrease the statistical power of our analysis, which may partly explain why the signal in yeast is kind of blurred.

although this study is not the first to provide the evidence that protein-coding sequences are under evolutionary selection in keeping functional rna secondary structure, we found a relatively strong and pervasive signal that structurally important sites tend to be more evolutionarily conserved from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, which is stronger for highly expressed genes and for translation initiation region.

CONCLUSIONS
our results highlight the importance of local rna secondary structure in coding sequence evolution, and suggest that mrna sequences are experiencing purifying selection in keeping functional rna secondary structures. the inclusion of local rna secondary structure information in a codon model should be beneficial for the detection of purifying/positive selection in coding sequences.

