BACKGROUND
codon usage bias has attracted attention for several decades. since the 1970s, the unequal use of synonymous codons has been confirmed in many organisms. to date, the codon usage patterns in many organisms have been interpreted for diverse reasons. for instance, there have been some different influence factors proposed by researchers: the abundance of isoacceptor trna <cit> , amino acid composition <cit> , mrna secondary structure <cit> , the efficiency of translation initiation <cit> , gc content <cit> , gene length <cit> , protein structure <cit>  and so on. although there is still no final verdict on the formation mechanism, codon bias has been widely used to estimate and compare the expression level of endogenous genes, change the efficiency of expression of exogenous genes <cit> , identify horizontal transfer genes from other organism <cit> , judge the relationship of evolution <cit> , and confirm the coding sequences.

from early investigations in escherichia coli <cit> , it was found that usage of preferred codons in genes was positively correlated with their respective major isoacceptor trna levels, and this was explained as an adaptation of highly expressed genes to translational efficiency. since then, extensive studies on codon usage bias have been performed in other organisms such as s. cerevisiae <cit> , drosophila <cit>  and c. elegans <cit> ; and the results of this research have supported the dominant theory above. one long accepted principle of this theory is that highly expressed gene must show high codon usage bias. however, with the development of high throughput technology for gene sequencing and expression level detection, doubts over this theory have increased gradually <cit> .

in order to describe and measure the degree of codon bias, a series of indices have been developed and applied to codon bias analysis over the past thirty years. a survey of the literature indicated that in some prokaryotes, many indices exhibit a positive correlation with the gene expression level, such as cai  <cit> , cbi  <cit> , and fop  <cit> . however, in some eukaryotes, especially for higher eukaryotes, the correlation between codon bias and expression level is extremely weak <cit> . therefore the balance between translational selection and mutational bias has been used to account for the codon bias observed in these organisms. these paradoxical results remind us there must be a more complicated mechanism for forming codon bias in different species beyond what this correlation suggests.

in recent years, codon pair preference has also become a popular topic in the field of codon bias when attention is turned to the context in which a codon lies. the existence of codon pair preference has been confirmed by many investigations in several organisms <cit> . the exploration of the mechanism for driving the formation of codon bias attracts more attention on the level of protein. for example, whether translation optimization might be a primary selective pressure or translation apparatus could inflict selective pressure <cit> . seldom researchers care about the level of dna or mrna.

escherichia coli are frequently used as host cells in the study of expressing exogenous proteins efficiently. according to previous gene engineering operations, many genes of eukaryotes can not be expressed smoothly in escherichia coli; and one effective method to improve the expression level or to avoid the frame shift mutation is to replace the usage of "rare codons" with synonymous codons. to search for clues for explanation, the stability of genes, on the level of dna or mrna, should be taken into consideration so as to play a role in determining gene expression  <cit> .

in this paper, we introduced a novel computational method to identify rare codons of escherichia coli. moreover, as a new index based on this method, frare was developed to measure codon bias objectively.

RESULTS
the analysis of codon usage pattern by codonw
from the analysis of genes in escherichia coli by codonw, we derived the codon usage patterns and the ranked results of synonymous codons . in addition, extreme similarity between essential genes  <cit>  and whole genes in escherichia coli was found, which implies that there should be a basic "rule" for codon usage patterns in escherichia coli . if expression efficiency on the protein level cannot serve effectively as the "rule" <cit> , perhaps further research should focus on the contribution of selective pressure to the stability of genes.

**. correlation is significant at the  <dig>  level 

identification of rare codons of escherichia coli based on codon pairs preference
 <dig>  we calculated the occurrence frequency of each kind of different six-nucleotide strings in  <dig> sequences of escherichia coli k <dig> in two ways . using the criterion derived from statistical analysis, the "rare codon pairs" and "normal codon pairs" were defined. as a result, we obtained  <dig> "rare codon pairs" and  <dig> "normal codon pairs" .

 <dig>  thirteen rare codons  were identified by the statistical test method for hypergeometric distribution, which was used to evaluate the contribution of the sixty-four codons to the rare codon pairs. it is exciting to find that these "rare codons" were the very codons which have been regarded as limiting factors of exogenous gene expression by experimental verification over a long period of time <cit> .

frare  was developed as a novel index of codon bias
 <dig>  we can calculate the frare value of genes based on the rare codons identified by the method mentioned above. the strong inverse correlation between frare and cai suggests that experiments for deriving expression information are dispensable for quantification of codon bias.

 <dig>  using the rank sum test, it was noted that the frare values of essential genes were lower than those of nonessential genes. we can thus conclude that the essential genes avoid the use of rare codons because the essential genes are indispensable for sustaining cellular life.

a. grouping variable: group

exploring the factors related to stability of genes in rare codon pairs
 <dig>  some relationship between the rare codon pairs and stability of gene could be found from the references and database  searching. there are nonsense codons  and recognition sites of restriction enzymes or methylases in some rare codon pairs. for instance, many of the rare codon pairs in the "rare group" are involved in affecting the stability of gene .

 <dig>  we noticed that there are also some rare six-nucleotide strings present in the "normal groups". the common characteristic of these strings is that they contain "nonsense codons"  which is proved to be an important element of mrna's instability <cit> . additionally, we have found the appearance of "tag" in rare codon list and it can support that "tag" is the most inefficient stop codon in escherichia coli.

discussion
compared with the results of experiments, we suggest that it is feasible to identify rare codons of escherichia coli based on codon pair's preference. from the identification consequence, not all seldom used synonymous codons are "rare codons" that can limit the expression level of heterologous genes.

in recent years, there has been some debate over the significant difference of the codon usage patterns existing in different kinds of genes in the same species <cit> . in our study, the codon usage patterns of essential genes were selected to compare with those of the whole genes in escherichia coli. these essential genes are very important for maintenance of the basal cellular function, so they are likely to be common for all cells and not be horizontal transfer genes from other organism. therefore, the extreme similarity of codon usage patterns between essential genes and whole genes in escherichia coli, would suggest the existence of a common rule that can control the pattern.

the expression level may be affected and controlled by many factors. thus it seems unimaginable that the expression level in dynamic change could control the codon usage pattern. furthermore, to our knowledge, the abundance of isoacceptor trna, which could be a powerful evidence to support the classical theory of ikemura <cit> , cannot be precisely measured until now. instead, we focused on the relationship between codon usage and gene stability. this relationship is important for the connection between gene and protein in the translation control system of escherichia coli.

in the study of codon bias, cai <cit> , cbi  <cit> and fop <cit>  were commonly used for analysis. although these indices have been revised  <cit>  several times, it is still necessary for researchers to obtain a reference dataset containing gene expression abundance data in calculating them. in addition, though the high correlation between gene expression abundance and codon bias index has been found in prokaryotes <cit>  and some eukaryotes <cit> , there isn't enough evidence to support it in homo sapiens <cit>  and other eukaryotes. frare value, which didn't depend on the reference dataset, was developed in this study to compare and scale the codon usage pattern basis on the identified rare codons. the strong inverse correlation between frare and cai indicates that the usage of rare codons affects the process and consequence of translation.

the essential genes are expected to be stable because of their function as foundations of life. thereby essential genes dislike rare codons and possess lower frare values. as we know, many genes of homo sapiens introduced in escherichia coli directly cannot express well. we argue that this might be the result of mass occurrence of rare codons of escherichia coli, which can induce instability to these genes. from this, we foresee that in order to improve the expression level in the operation of heterologous gene expression, we should modify and replace the identified rare codons to avoid the appearance of rare strings. we could also estimate the stability of exogenous genes by calculating the frare value using the rare codons of the host.

CONCLUSIONS
we introduced a novel computational method to identify rare codons in escherichia coli based upon the codon pair's preference. by comparing the thirteen identified rare codons with the results of published experiments, we have proved that our method would be helpful to the study of heterologous gene expression operation. for description of the codon usage pattern by considering the rare codons, frare was developed as a new index without requiring expression level information.

