BACKGROUND
pertussis or whooping cough is a severe respiratory disease resulting from colonisation of the upper respiratory tract by the causative organism bordetella pertussis  <cit> . vaccines have been available for decades, comprising killed whole cells of b. pertussis that are chemically detoxified and formulated with diphtheria and tetanus antigens. they are administered as a trivalent diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis combination, or in newer combinations with hbv and hib, providing additional immunity against hepatitis b and haemophilus influenzae type b invasive disease, respectively  <cit> . the use of whole-cell pertussis vaccines has been reduced, discouraged, or even banned in a few countries, due to the whole-cell vaccine's questionable safety profile, resulting from high level of endotoxin and other bacterial toxins associated with killed whole cells  <cit> .

acellular pertussis vaccines , were introduced in japan in  <dig>  <cit> . the higher purity of the component antigens in acellular pertussis vaccines provided an improved clinical safety profile. these vaccines were introduced in the mid  <dig> s in other industrialized countries after extensive clinical trials that demonstrated their safety and efficacy  <cit> . a broader introduction by the who into the expanded program of immunization was, however, hampered by the significantly higher cost of acellular pertussis vaccines.

a major virulence factor of b. pertussis is pertussis toxin   <cit>  and pertussis toxoid  is still the principal antigen in acellular vaccines  <cit> . unlike diphtheria and tetanus toxins , pt proved more difficult to be inactivated by chemical means  <cit> . at present, different inactivation processes are in use for commercial manufacture of acellular pertussis vaccines. unfortunately, all of them cause extensive denaturation of pt by their chemical treatments.

two candidate vaccines have been tested using a genetically-inactivated toxin   <cit>  and one of these candidates was included in a field efficacy trial  <cit> . this vaccine was obtained by introducing two mutations into the catalytic subunit s <dig> of pt, causing abolition of the enzymatic activity of s <dig> and thus providing complete absence of toxicity of native pt. this vaccine was formulated with  <dig> μg rpt,  <dig>  μg fha and  <dig>  μg prn and was compared with another vaccine manufactured using classical chemical inactivation, comprising  <dig> μg ptd,  <dig> μg fha and  <dig> μg prn. the two vaccines had identical safety and efficacy results in this trial  <cit> . it was understood that the efficacy obtained with a lower dose of rpt and the other antigens was a result of using native antigens that included native fha and prn as the latter also required chemical treatment to inactivate residual traces of toxin when the antigens were derived from wild type b. pertussis.

unfortunately, the vaccine described above, containing rpt, is not currently available due to unresolved intellectual property issues at the time of planned commercial introduction. nevertheless, it is clear that the genetically-engineered approach to detoxification of pertussis vaccine antigens is an essential element for the design of affordable acellular pertussis vaccines, as intellectual property rights are expiring.

the vaccines referred to above contained three purified antigens derived from b. pertussis cultures: ptd or rpt, fha and prn. pt and even more so prn are limiting antigens in b. pertussis cultures, while fha is naturally overproduced. alternative expression systems exist for increasing level of limiting b. pertussis vaccine antigens. prn was expressed in high yield from recombinant escherichia coli or from the recombinant yeast, pichia pastoris  <cit> . pt subunits were expressed in e. coli, but unfortunately these failed to assemble into the mature toxin and were insufficiently immunogenic to be considered as potential vaccine candidates  <cit> . it is now understood that assembly and secretion of the mature toxin requires several auxiliary genes that were discovered more recently, and these genes are part of the ptl section of the ptx-ptl operon  <cit> .

in this publication, we report the construction of recombinant b. pertussis strains expressing increased levels of rpt or rpt and prn. these strains were generated by a multiple allelic- exchange process: insertion of the mutations that abolish the catalytic activity of subunit s <dig>  insertion of a second copy of the ptx cluster of the five pt structural genes of the ptx-ptl operon with their promoter and terminator into an abandoned gene elsewhere on the chromosome, then insertion of a second copy of the prn gene into a second inactive gene locus. the organization of ptl auxiliary genes present in the ptx-ptl operon was not modified. enhanced production of rpt and prn by manipulation of gene copy number has been largely used with multi-copy plasmid vectors and reported to enhance the production of bacterial toxins  <cit> , in particular pt  <cit> . however, genes tandemly repeated in this way may have significantly negative consequences on strain genetic stability in a gmp-regulated, vaccine-manufacturing environment. in addition, prn expression could also be increased by manipulation of the prn promoter  <cit> .

the allelic-exchange vectors used in earlier b. pertussis recombinant strains require mutations on the chromosome, particularly the mutation affecting rpsl that results from selection of spontaneous streptomycin-resistant mutants as required in earlier allelic-exchange procedures  <cit> . such mutations affecting housekeeping genes may impair virulence, hence the expression of virulence factors including pt, fha and prn. in contrary, pss <dig> used in this study harbours streptomycin resistant gene from tn <dig> which is functional in b. pertussis but not in e. coli, hence streptomycin was used to select against e. coli donor cell and i-scei nuclease activity in the plasmid was then functioned as the counter selectable marker in the recombinant b. pertussis through subsequent homologous recombination and does not require or leave auxiliary mutations. the strains reported here produce unaltered levels of the other antigens in particular fha. these constructs will prove useful for the manufacture of affordable human acellular pertussis vaccines.

RESULTS
mutation of the s <dig> gene in the b. pertussis chromosome
to introduce the two mutations r9k and e129g into the s <dig> subunit, a two-stage approach was used to avoid the possibility of recombination in the region between the two mutations that would cause the loss of one of the mutations. this approach also allowed selection of the desired colonies by simple replica plating on selective media. firstly, two e. coli vectors were constructed in pbluescript ii sk + where the wild-type s <dig> gene was replaced by a chloramphenicol resistance gene   or by a modified s <dig> gene including the desired mutations ; both flanked by  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb of the s <dig> upstream and downstream regions, respectively. these vectors were then processed and their inserts were introduced into pss <dig>  these derivatives were transferred into e. coli sm <dig> for conjugative transfer and allelic exchange into b. pertussis strain tohama. the plasmid pss5cm <dig> generated a replacement of the s <dig> gene by the cmr marker . the plasmid pss5s13- <dig> k- <dig> g restored the s <dig> gene into its original location, now with the two desired mutations . after selection of isolates on selective media, integration of the cmr and modified s <dig> genes at the expected position was confirmed by pcr amplification . the integration of the mutated s <dig> gene at the designated position was confirmed by pcr with specific primers that could hybridize the upstream  <dig> and  <dig> prime downstream flanking regions and internally in the s <dig> gene . the mutations in the s <dig> gene of the clone selected for further manipulation was confirmed by dna sequencing. the new strain was designated as bp-wwc.

insertion of a second integration site for a second set of pt structural genes
initial attempts to increase pt expression by inserting the whole ptx-ptl operon into a multi-copy plasmid compatible with b. pertussis failed to deliver useful strains suggesting that the over-expression of pt is potentially toxic and must remain within certain limits to obtain viable strains. in order to increase the pt toxin yield, a second set of pt structural genes was introduced into the bp-wwc chromosome. to identify an insertion target site, the sequence of the b. pertussis tohama genome  was scanned and many pseudogenes were identified. the dna sequence  between a putative ammonium transporter gene and a putative auto-transporter gene was selected for insertion . these genes each carry frameshift mutations which ruin their functionality . the general strategy outlined in the preceding section was followed. first, the e. coli vector pskpd5cm <dig> was constructed by inserting the cmr gene within the regions flanking the selected integration site . after insertion of the sequences of interest into pss <dig>  allelic exchange was selected by the cmr marker. integration of the cmr gene at the designated position was confirmed by pcr . in the second vector, five pt structural genes with mutated s <dig> were inserted between the ptx-ptl operon promoter and terminator  to generate the vector pskptxter . allelic exchange into the selected target integration inserted a second copy of the functional cluster of the pt structural genes into bp-wwc strain. the new strain was designated as bp-wwd. this strain harboured two copies of ptx operon with mutated s <dig> gene. the result of integration was verified by amplification of the upstream, downstream, and internal regions of the ptx operon, that all showed the expected integration without disruption of the regions where recombination had occurred.

sequencing of the s <dig> gene and identification of the r9k and e129g mutations
automated sequencing was applied to confirm the presence of the desired mutations. in the case of strain bp-wwd that has two integrated copies of the s <dig> gene, pcr amplification yields, in principle, a mix of the copies of the two genes. an unexpected point mutation in one of the inserts would appear as a double-nucleotide assignment at the corresponding position. the single peak of fluorescence signal at the r9k and e129g positions indicated the correct sequence on bp-wwc and that of the two copies of s <dig> in bp-wwd had identical mutations. the sequence around the two desired mutations is reported in figure  <dig> that shows the sequencing records for strain bp-wwd and the sequence alignments for wild-type tohama, bp-wwc and bp-wwd.

insertion of a second copy of the prn genes into the bp-wwd strain
due to the low level of prn expression, a second copy of the prn structural gene  was introduced into the bp-wwd chromosome  between the two pseudogenes of putative exported dehydrogenase  and a putative aspartate racemase  . the pskpd2cm <dig> e. coli vector was constructed where the cmr gene was inserted between the upstream and downstream regions flanking the selected insertion site. another vector was constructed using the same flanking regions and the prn gene under control of the fha promoter . after insertion of the cmr marker in the desired location, the cmr gene was replaced by the prn functional block using the usual allelic-exchange selection and screening procedures.

the b. pertussis strains isolated from this construction exercise did not express prn and the expression level of the other  antigens was not detectable . it was tentatively concluded that the prn product is toxic if overproduced under control of the stronger fha promoter and only escape mutants having lost the capacity to produce prn or all virulence factors were viable. it was, therefore, decided to introduce the natural prn promoter in place of the fha promoter. the plasmid pskpd25fpprn <dig> was used to replace the fha promoter by the original prn promoter to generate a functional cassette with its own natural promoter and terminator . this functional cassette was inserted at the selected site by the usual allelic-exchange procedure to obtain a strain with a second non-tandemly-repeated copy of the prn gene under control of its own promoter. the expected insertion was confirmed by pcr amplification with primers binding to the flanking regions internally in the prn gene. this strain was normally viable and was designated as bp-wwe.

genetic stability of pt and prn constructs in bp-wwe
the strain bp-wwe was cultured and serially sub-cultured in modified stainer-scholte  medium to reach approximately  <dig> generations. the last culture was diluted and plated onto mss agar. thirty isolated colonies were randomly picked, and analyzed for their s <dig> and prn genes by pcr . the results showed that all colonies contained two copies of s <dig> and prn genes at the expected positions.

expression of pt, fha and prn in shake flasks
the production of pt and fha in shake flask cultures was analyzed by elisa. shake flask cultures were all performed in mss medium containing heptakisβ-cyclodextrin  <cit> . at  <dig> h, the production of pt was about doubled in strain bp-wwd , compared with bp-wwc  and wild-type tohama  , demonstrating that the level of pt expression was a function of the number of copies of the structural gene cluster. fha in all three recombinant strains was about the same . the production of prn in shake flask cultures of bp-wwc, bp-wwd and bp-wwe in mss medium was analyzed by densitometry analysis of western blot results. prn amount in the clarified culture supernatants and extract of the separated cells at 60°c was assayed. the amount of prn in cell extract of bp-wwc and bp-wwd was similar . a two-fold increase was found in bp-wwe , again showing a good correlation of the level of prn expression to the gene copy number. in all three recombinant strains, the fraction of prn found in the supernatant fraction in these flask cultures was small or negligible .

*nd = not determined **the amount in cell extract

the values were the mean of  <dig> independent experiments with standard deviation except the data for pt of tohama wt was obtained from two independent experiments

assessment of pt inactivation
pt was purified from culture supernatants using a modification of the process published by ozcengiz  <cit>  where the initial ammonium sulphate precipitation was replaced by ligand exchange chromatography  <cit> . the toxicity of the pt toxin from wild type b. pertussis and bp-wwc  was analysed and compared by the chinese hamster ovary  cell clustering assay  <cit> . this assay has a much higher sensitivity than other functional assays reported for pt. the native toxin purified from strain b. pertussis tohama demonstrated a clustering endpoint at  <dig>  pg per well. the genetically-inactivated pt did not promote clustering at the highest concentrations of  <dig> - <dig>  μg per sample obtained in this test . this assay can, therefore, detect toxicity reduction by a factor of  <dig> ×  <dig> to  <dig> ×  <dig>  despite limitations imposed by the low solubility of pt. this result demonstrated that pt toxin purified from bp-wwc was successfully inactivated by insertion of five nucleotide replacements resulting in two amino acid replacements in the pt subunit s <dig> 

discussion
unmarked gene insertion and replacement were successful, using pss <dig> as vector in b. pertussis. after a second homologous recombination to excise the plasmid, no antibiotic gene marker nor any scars were left in the chromosome when compared with the cre-lox system  <cit>  or earlier allelic-exchange procedures used in bordetella  <cit> . overproduction of genetically-deactivated pt toxin was reported in  <dig>  <cit>  by using tandem repeats of ptx genes or another copy inserted into the fha gene. the resulting recombinant b. pertussis strain overproduced pt up to  <dig> mg/l. tandemly-repeated genes are a known potential cause of genetic instability. for this reason, the genome sequence of b. pertussis was scanned to look for suitable integration sites. the dna position between two terminators of pseudo-genes  was selected as integration sites for the ptx cluster. the copy number for the pt structural cluster was limited to two, as overproduction of these virulence factors places a burden on cell metabolism, resulting in slower growth and potentially genetic instability, as shown by preliminary results.

over-expression of prn gene by the fha promoter to drive higher expression was apparently toxic to growth of b. pertussis, possibly in resulting from higher pt expression. our results showed that replacement of the prn promoter with a stronger one did not provide increased prn expression  <cit> . therefore, increasing the gene copy number under the control of the native prn promoter was the approach selected. the fha promoter of the second gene copy was replaced by the native prn promoter to generate a strain with a second copy of the prn gene and its native promoter inserted into another location on the chromosome. the toxicity of prn to the host cell was also reported in e. coli  <cit> . the fha promoter was then replaced by the native prn promoter, then the resulting strain exhibited normal growth in shake flasks and expressed twice the amount of prn. the distribution of prn between culture supernatant and cell extract was modified - a larger fraction of total prn was found in the supernatant although in shake flasks, the quantities of prn spontaneously released into the supernatant were minimal. the presence of either two copies of mutated pt gene alone or together with two copies of prn in wwc, wwd or wwe did not show any genetic instability as evidenced by serial-subculture experiment. all recombinant strains showed the presence of two copies of corresponding genes and corresponding amount of pt and prn. hence, homologous recombination among the homologous copies was not so far found in these strains.

although bacterial growth in shake-flask culture is limited due to rapid ph rise and intoxication from release of ammonia by metabolism of the glutamate carbon source  <cit> , shake-flask culture provides a useful indication of the strain's potential under optimized fermentor conditions. the construction of stable strains with enhanced expression of pt  or of the two limiting antigens pt and prn  was demonstrated. with enhanced production of pt alone, bp-wwd could not generate sufficient quantities of prn, therefore in this case, the use of an independent supply of prn in recombinant e. coli or p. pastoris would be required. as the expression level of both pt and prn has been equally increased in strain bp-wwe, it would be expected that matching quantities of the two antigens would also be obtained in higher-density cultures, thereby simplifying vaccine manufacturing operations.

CONCLUSIONS
b. pertussis strains that contains genetically-inactivated s1::r9k-e129g subunits of pt were constructed without leaving any markers or scars in their chromosomes. an about two-fold increase in expression of pt toxin was found in shake flasks by integrating the  <dig> structural genes  under the control of the ptx-ptl operon promoter and terminator between two pseudo-genes on the chromosome. the presence of detoxified pt was confirmed by the cho cell clustering assay. in addition, prn production was increased by integration of a second copy of the prn gene between other pseudo-genes located elsewhere on the chromosome. the strains were found to be genetically stable in shake flask sub-cultures at higher generation numbers than would be required to reach large-scale fermentations . these recombinant strains, in particular, strain bp-wwe , should enable production of affordable acellular pertussis vaccines. the lower cost of goods  is provided by the lower dose of native antigens required for adequate immunogenicity and the higher productivity the two limiting antigens pt and prn.

