BACKGROUND
temperature has profound effects on cellular and organismal biochemistry  <cit> , with enzymes functioning best at specific temperatures  <cit> . the effects of temperature on physiology and fitness have been particularly well-studied in the fruit fly, drosophila melanogaster, which can survive transient exposures to a wide range of temperatures, from −10°c to 40°c  <cit> . early studies found a strong negative correlation between survival rate and chronic exposure to high temperatures, while showing that transient exposure to extreme temperatures could increase survival   <cit> . molecular studies have shown that this effect is due, in part, to both heat- and cold-shock inducing the expression of heat shock proteins , which help cells to counteract the deleterious effect of thermal shock through multiple mechanisms  <cit> .

over the past several years, researchers have begun to dissect the underlying molecular mechanisms of temperature responses beyond hsps, with numerous studies in d. melanogaster looking at the effect of temperature on the transcriptome, the proteome  <cit>  and the metabolome  <cit> .

the value of studying metabolomic changes in response to temperature shifts in d. melanogaster has been demonstrated by numerous studies. for example, it has recently been shown that long-term cold acclimation and heat hardening alters the metabolomic profile of d. melanogaster larvae  <cit> . other studies have sought to identify temperature-associated metabolomic signatures of inbreeding in d. melanogaster  <cit> . these metabolomic studies have led to a better understanding of the global effects of the temperature stress response in d. melanogaster, moving beyond earlier studies that focused on just a very small number of metabolites in the d. melanogaster temperature stress-response  <cit> .

here we extend these analyses in three ways. first, we take advantage of recent advances in high-resolution mass spectrometry  <cit> . this approach allows us to greatly increase the number of metabolites and metabolic pathways that we can assay for effects of temperature.

second, we incorporate recent developments in differential network analysis  <cit> . numerous gene expression studies have shown that in some cases, perturbations can have limited effects on the magnitude of transcripts while causing substantial changes in the correlations between transcripts . more recently, researchers have brought this approach to the study of metabolomic networks  <cit> . in light of these results, here we explore not only the structure of the metabolomic network  <cit> , but more specifically, how temperature changes the structure of specific modules within the larger metabolomic network. in particular, we are able to identify modules whose structure is highly constant in response to temperature, as well as modules that change their structure dramatically in response to temperature. our focus on modules that maintain correlation structure, or alter that structure, in response to temperature, can pave the way to a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying robustness and plasticity of networks in response to environmental changes  <cit> . to our knowledge, this study is the first to identify temperature-dependent constant and plastic modules in the metabolome, and suggests novel approaches to better understand how poikilothermic organisms might adapt to a changing environment. moreover, the approaches we use here could lead to important insights into network evolution and the role that network structure plays in the ability of organisms to cope with stressors in general  <cit> .

finally, by studying the effect of developmental and adult temperature on high-resolution, untargeted metabolomic profiles, we identify novel associations between rearing conditions and metabolites and metabolic pathways.

RESULTS
our dataset consisted of data from technical duplicates for  <dig> samples across four drosophila genome reference panel  genotypes  <cit> . these included  <dig> male and  <dig> female samples, with  <dig> samples per genotype except for dgrp  <dig> which contributed only  <dig> samples to our analysis. after applying quality control procedures , our dataset included  <dig> features from a c <dig> column, and  <dig> features from an ae column. we were able to assign putative matches to  <dig> metabolites from the c <dig> column and  <dig> metabolites from the ae column. we thus had data for a total of  <dig>  features with  <dig> putatively identified features from both columns, noting that some features overlap between the two columns.

pathway enrichment analysis using mummichog
for this analysis, we investigated the effects of developmental temperature and adult temperature on male and female flies separately.

developmental temperature effects
for developmental temperature treatment, after controlling for adult temperature and genotype, in adult males we observed  <dig> and  <dig> significantly differentially expressed metabolites in the c <dig> and ae columns, respectively . in female samples, we observed  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed metabolites in the c <dig> and ae columns, respectively . using mummichog  <cit> , we found that metabolites that changed significantly in response to developmental temperature were enriched for six metabolic pathways in male flies, and for seven pathways in female flies . two of these pathways, glycogen degradation and trehalose biosynthesis, were found to be affected in both sexes. specifically, we found higher levels of numerous polysaccharides  in flies raised at lower developmental temperature .table  <dig> 
metabolic pathways altered by developmental temperature in males



pathway 
overlap size 
pathway size 
overlap features  
metabolic pathways  identified as enriched in the set of metabolites affected by developmental temperature in adult male flies. the number of metabolites in the input list that overlapped  with the reference list of all metabolites after quality control , along with the identification of these metabolites  is shown.
metabolic pathways altered by developmental temperature in females



pathway 
overlap size 
pathway size 
overlap features  
metabolic pathways  identified as enriched in the set of metabolites affected by developmental temperature in adult female flies. the number of metabolites in the input list that overlapped  with the reference list of all metabolites after quality control , along with the identification of these metabolites  is shown.
effect of temperature on sample metabolite intensities for males  and females . metabolite intensities are plotted for each of the four metabolites. all four metabolites had fdr-adjusted p values below  <dig> .



adult temperature effects
for adult temperature treatment, in males we observed  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed metabolites in the c <dig> and ae columns, respectively , and in females,  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed metabolites in the c <dig> and ae columns, respectively . we found that in male flies, adult temperature affected metabolic pathways involved in degradation of purine nucleosides . increased adult temperature in female flies was associated with down-regulation of pathways mediating arginine, 4-hydroxyproline degradation, and nad biosynthesis.table  <dig> 
metabolic pathways altered by adult temperature in males and females



pathway 
overlap size 
pathway size 
overlap features  
metabolic pathways  identified as enriched in the set of metabolites affected by adult temperature in adult male , and female flies. the number of metabolites in the input list that overlapped  with the reference list of all metabolites after quality control , along with the identification of these metabolites  is shown.



warm and cool temperature effects
we further limited the analysis to flies that had experienced the same temperature  at both developmental and adult stages. using the linear model shown in equation  <dig>  and carried out separate analyses for male and female flies. we identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  metabolites in males and  <dig>  and  <dig>  metabolites in females whose concentrations were significantly changed by this temperature treatment. mummichog analysis pointed to temperature-dependent changes in three pathways .table  <dig> 
metabolic pathways altered by developmental and adult temperature in males



pathway 
overlap size 
pathway size 
overlap features  
metabolic pathways  identified as enriched in the set of metabolites affected by developmental and adult temperature in male drosophila. for this analysis, we pooled together metabolomics data from flies exposed to cold  developmental and adult temperatures, and compared them with data from flies exposed to hot  developmental and adult temperatures. the number of metabolites in the input list that overlapped  with the reference list of all metabolites after quality control , along with the identification of these metabolites  is shown.
metabolic pathways altered by developmental and adult temperature in females



pathway 
overlap size 
pathway size 
overlap features  
metabolic pathways  identified as enriched in the set of metabolites affected by developmental and adult temperature in female drosophila. for this analysis, we pooled together metabolomics data from flies exposed to cold  developmental and adult temperatures, and compared it with data from flies exposed to hot  developmental and adult temperatures. the number of metabolites in the input list that overlapped  with the reference list of all metabolites after quality control , along with the identification of these metabolites  is shown.



genotype effects
we were also interested in identifying metabolites whose intensities were affected significantly by genotype, i.e., metabolites whose levels differ among genotypes. in males, we identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  metabolites, while in females we detected  <dig>  and  <dig>  metabolites that exhibited significant differential abundance. significantly enriched metabolic pathways in these sets of metabolites were identified using mummichog . seven and five metabolomic pathways were detected as being significantly affected by genotype in female and male flies respectively.

by contrast, we found very few metabolites whose temperature response was genotype-dependent. specifically, we detected less than six metabolites each from the interaction analysis between different factors .

diffcoex analysis
among metabolites whose concentrations were not affected by temperature, we found many pairs that showed changes in correlation coefficients between temperature treatments . to systematically investigate the correlation effects, we carried out a metabolome-wide analysis of differentially co-expressed metabolites. using the r package diffcoex  <cit>  for differential network analysis, in male flies, comparing the two developmental temperatures, we detected  <dig> differentially co-expressed modules from a network of  <dig> metabolites . for the female fly metabolome, we identified  <dig> such network modules from a total of  <dig> metabolites . after permutation tests for significant differences  in correlation structure between temperature, ten of the  <dig> male modules and seven of the  <dig> female modules showed statistically significant change in response to developmental temperature .figure  <dig> 
correlation and main effects for a pair of metabolites from male  and female  fly metabolomics data.
top panel: correlation between two metabolites at 18°c  and 27°c . lines are least-squares regression. bottom panel: effect of temperature on each of these two metabolites.
differentially co-expressed  and preserved  metabolite modules of metabolites in males  and females  in response to developmental temperature. the heat maps consist of an n x n grid of n metabolites, and each pixel represents the correlation coefficient across samples between any two metabolites . the metabolites are ordered such that groups of highly correlated metabolites  are clustered together. the top left represents correlations between pairs of metabolites at developmental temperature of 18°c., and the bottom right at 27°c. to identify modules that change or are preserved significantly between the two conditions, we used the r package diffcoex . modules of metabolites are depicted as black squares along the central diagonal, and also as colored boxes on the bottom and on the left. a correlation color scale is shown on the right, with red corresponding to r =  <dig>  and blue to r = − <dig> 



using a slightly modified approach with diffcoex, we identified nine male modules and seven female modules whose structure was markedly preserved  between the developmental temperature conditions .figure  <dig> 
preserved module in female fly metabolome. architecture of the brown module, a highly preserved module in the female fly metabolome between 18°c  and 27°c . nodes represent metabolites and edges represent correlations between the node pairs. only correlation values of r ≥  <dig>   or r ≤ − <dig>   are shown. the location and relative order of each node in the module are the same across the two temperature conditions.



for illustrative purposes, we visualized representative diffcoex and similarity matrix modules in cytoscape  <cit> , choosing the smallest of the detected modules for each sex. comparison of the magenta module  from the male fly metabolome reveals that this module becomes much more tightly correlated when developmental temperature changes from 18°c to 27°c. in contrast, a visual comparison of the red module  for female samples suggests that this module loses a large proportion of its correlations when developmental temperature becomes warmer. cytoscape based network visualizations for the most striking of the similarity matrix modules for the male and female metabolomes are shown in figure  <dig> 

for each diffcoex and similarity matrix modules, we used mummichog to test for metabolic pathway enrichment. we found significant enrichment in six out of  <dig> diffcoex modules in the male fly data, and in three out of  <dig> diffcoex modules in the female fly data . several novel pathways not detected by differential expression analysis were detected as significant in the network analysis, including glycolysis, lipoate biosynthesis and n-acetyl-glucosamine degradation. we did not detect any enriched metabolic pathways among the preserved models.

discussion
in this study, we have carried out two levels of analysis. the first level of analysis allowed us to identify main effects of temperature on metabolite levels. the second level of analysis, focused on the metabolomic network, enabled us to ask questions about network invariance and plasticity.

we investigated metabolomic thermal responses to moderate temperatures . in contrast to earlier studies that have focused on the effects of stressful or extreme temperatures on the fly metabolome, here we focus on longer term exposure to temperatures that are considered to be relatively benign for this organism  <cit> . thermal responses have been extensively investigated in d. melanogaster, mostly looking at the effects of stressful temperatures during both development and adulthood on fly physiology  <cit> . the metabolomic effects of heat-shock, rapid cold hardening, long-term cold acclimation, and of benign and stressful temperatures on inbreeding, have all been previously studied in d. melanogaster  <cit> . in addition to these metabolomic studies, molecular mechanisms of many thermal responses in the fly have been investigated at the level of the transcriptome, and more recently, the proteome  <cit> . one benefit of focusing on less extreme temperatures is that we can gain insight into ways that the metabolome responds to natural variation in temperature specifically, rather than response to stress.

main effects of temperature on the metabolome
several metabolic pathways are known to be affected by temperature in d. melanogaster, and our analysis looking at main effects of temperature recapitulated many of these earlier findings while extending them in new directions.

from previous studies we know that brief exposures to stressful temperatures, including cold stress, can cause accumulations of polysaccharides in d. melanogaster  <cit> . mechanisms by which maltose and trehalose protect cells during stressful conditions have been described previously  <cit> . stressful temperatures can also cause accumulations of proline in flies  <cit> .

cold acclimation in d. melanogaster is also known to be associated with significant metabolic changes involving sugars , polyamines and a few metabolic intermediates  <cit> . while that study used targeted metabolomics, results from our untargeted metabolomics approach also point to altered trehalose biosynthesis in both male and female flies reared at a lower developmental temperature. our results suggests that these pathways play a role not only in the response to acute, potentially lethal stressors, but also to the range of temperatures a fly is likely to encounter from day to day.

a recent study implicated dopamine in modulating behavioral response to temperature changes in d. melanogaster  <cit> . we also observed changes in dopamine metabolism with thermal responses in d. melanogaster. the agreement between our study and the earlier study supports a role for dopamine in thermal responses in the fly, which warrants deeper investigation in future studies. specifically, future work should examine the effect of up- or down-regulation of dopamine  <cit>  on temperature-dependent fitness.

earlier studies have observed that cold acclimation can alter the glycerophospholipid composition of biomembranes  <cit> . in line with these earlier findings, our results suggest that membrane sphingolipid metabolism might be important in how flies respond to changes in developmental temperature. taken together with earlier studies, it seems likely that temperature has a major effect on cell membrane biochemistry. interestingly, the role of sphingosine might go beyond membrane structure, as it is also involved in diverse signaling processes  <cit> .

we also observed a significant effect of developmental temperature on zymosterol metabolism. while zymosterol is a key intermediate in cholesterol  <cit> , it is likely that zymosterol in flies was bioaccumulated from yeast in fly media  <cit> . this suggests that in d. melanogaster, developmental temperature modulates bioaccumulation of zymosterol from fly media, a hypothesis one could test by adding zymosterol to yeast-free holidic fly medium  <cit> .

in contrast to developmental temperature, the effect of adult temperature on the metabolome was more modest . this might be because adult flies were not exposed to the different temperatures for the same duration nor over different developmental stages, and developing fly larvae might be biochemically more malleable than adults. in our comparison of lifetime temperature exposure , we observed changes in several metabolic pathways , at least one of which is of potentially interesting biological relevance. spermine is a polyamine formed from spermidine and has been shown previously to mediate stress resistance in drosophila  <cit> .

these findings come with an important caveat. as with all metazoan species, the fruit fly metabolome has yet to be fully curated. we do not know how many metabolites are in the fly, and of those we have measured, most have unknown identities. mummichog uses a metabolic pathways and network-based approach to find enriched pathways and annotate metabolites  <cit> . for the majority of metabolites in the enriched pathways calculated by mummichog, we were able to find independent confirmation of their identities by mining the metlin database using their m/z values   <cit> . while validation of all putative matches is an important goal, it is beyond the scope of this current study, but highlights the need for a curated fly metabolome.

the fact that we confirm previous findings allows us to place greater confidence in our non-targeted, high-throughput analysis, as well as in the novel biological insights gained from our study. we report developmental temperature effects on several pathways not previously associated with temperature response. these include salvage pathways of adenine, hypoxanthine and their nucleosides, and acyl carrier protein metabolism. these findings suggest novel hypotheses for temperature adaptation that one could test through knock-down of fly genes coding for enzymes used in these pathways.

effect of genotype
we were primarily interested in investigating the effects of developmental and adult temperature in the fly metabolome. while we found strong effects of temperature on the metabolome, genotype proved to affect an even greater number of metabolites than temperature. interestingly, most of the pathways affected by genotype do not overlap with those modified by temperature. to our surprise, very few metabolites showed significant genotype-by-temperature interactions. thus, our data suggest that the effect of temperature on the metabolome is consistent across genotypes. the lack of genotype-by-temperature effects might be due, in part, to the fact that we only included four genotypes in this study. studies on a broader array of genotypes are needed to rule out the effect of genotype on temperature effects both on absolute metabolite levels and metabolite network structure.

effect of temperature on network structure
to go beyond the identification of main effects, we performed a second level of analysis, examining the effect of temperature on the structure of metabolite co-expression networks and carrying out detailed analysis on such networks in response to temperature.

differential co-expression analysis of metabolomic data is relatively novel  <cit> , and until now has not been used to identify pathways associated with environmental perturbations. our analysis has allowed us to develop novel hypotheses for metabolite modules that respond to temperature. our network analysis identified both highly invariant as well as highly plastic metabolite modules. our discovery of metabolite modules that were significantly preserved across the two temperature conditions suggests that there are not just individual metabolites, but large modules whose coordinate function is invariant in the face of at least mild temperature changes.

importantly, we do not know whether the invariant correlation structure among modules is an adaptation that facilitates homeostasis, if the correlations are neutral, or if, in fact, the failure of those correlations to change in the face of different temperatures is actually maladaptive  <cit> . to distinguish between these hypotheses, one would need to compare temperature-dependent fitness in groups in which the correlation structure was broken, either through dietary or genetic manipulation of two or more metabolites simultaneously, or by comparing genotypes  in which levels of two or more metabolites deviate to a greater or lesser extent from that predicted from these correlations.

while the preserved modules found in this study cannot directly answer questions about network robustness, they can serve as a foundation for carrying out further experimental and computational studies to glean deeper insights into network robustness in response to temperature changes.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results demonstrate that high resolution metabolomic profiles coupled with differential co-expression network analysis provides a powerful tool to understand the molecular response to shifts in temperature. transcriptomic studies have used different methods to detect and quantify differentially co-expressed genes in a wide variety of settings, from cancer tissues  <cit> , to alzheimer’s disease  <cit> , to cardiovascular disease  <cit> . here we show that network correlation analysis developed for gene expression data  <cit>  can successfully be extended to analyze metabolomic data to address important biological questions.

others have already noted that the metabolome offers a powerful intermediate step to link genetic and environmental variation to downstream phenotypes  <cit> . this study illustrates how network approaches can further increase that explanatory power, suggesting novel hypotheses to be tested in future. of course, we still have far to go—only a fraction of all metabolites are known, even in humans. as metabolomics catches up with genomic and proteomic technology, network analysis is likely to tell us much about organismal function.

