BACKGROUND
major depression is an increasingly prevalent mood disorder that afflicts millions of people worldwide  <cit> . while a number of medications is available for managing the disease symptoms, the mechanism of action of current antidepressants is not well understood  <cit> . it is known, however, that antidepressant medications generally increase the synaptic levels of the monoamine neurotransmitters serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine in discrete brain regions  <cit> . the monoamines are then thought to activate their cognate postsynaptic receptors and modulate the activities of downstream signaling cascades to produce the antidepressive effect  <cit> .

monoamine receptors coupled to diverse signaling cascades, including those mediated through adenylyl cyclase, phospholipases, and map kinases  <cit> . aspects of each signaling system have been investigated as potential downstream targets of antidepressive mechanisms with multiple and sometimes divergent findings  <cit> . as examples, acute or chronic treatment with various antidepressant compounds can lead to changes in basal or drug-induced activities of brain adenylyl cyclase  <cit> , phospholipase a <dig>  <cit> , creb  <cit> , phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase c   <cit> , inositol phosphates   <cit> , phosphatidylinositides   <cit> , protein kinase c   <cit> , extracellular signal regulated kinase  <cit> , ion channels  <cit> , neurotrophins  <cit> , and various neuropeptides  <cit> . antidepressants can also enhance neurogenesis  <cit> , modulate neuronal excitability  <cit> , and alter the gene expression of various signaling components including neurotransmitter transporters, receptors, transducers, and effectors  <cit> . while these observations suggest that changes in postsynaptic signaling cascades may constitute an integral component in the mechanisms that underlie depression or its treatment with antidepressant medications, no signaling cascade has been identified that adequately explains the behavioral and clinical data.

the pi-related observations in particular have been corroborated by clinical studies showing that depressed persons may have reduced cortical levels of the pi precursor myo-inositol  <cit> . moreover, oral ingestion of bolus doses of myo-inositol could elicit antidepressive responses in rodents  <cit> , and enhance the recovery of clinically depressed patients  <cit> . consistent with these findings, chronic administration of antidepressant agents has been associated with increased levels of the pis in human platelets  <cit> . these observations suggest that alterations in the pi signaling pathway may be implicated in the pathophysiology of depression and/or the mode of action of antidepressant agents  <cit> .

several past studies examined ip signaling, but not the status of diacylglycerol  production or signaling, as a potential target of disease pathology or pharmacological treatment with antidepressants  <cit> . diacylglycerol signaling is important because this lipid is the endogenous regulator of pkc activity, and the latter is one of the indices shown to be altered in depressed persons  <cit> . moreover, plc-stimulating receptors show differences in their capacity to generate diacylglycerol  from phospholipid hydrolysis  <cit> . therefore, to the extent that pi signaling or pkc activity may be involved in antidepressant drug action, it should be important to clarify the specific effects of the agents on diacylglycerol production as a potential basis for their therapeutic efficacy. following our previously reported preliminary observations  <cit> , we have now examined antidepressant drug effects on cellular diacylglycerol production and metabolism, including the resynthesis of the pi substrates. the results show that antidepressants belonging to diverse chemical and pharmacological classes acutely increase the formation of cdp-diacylglycerol , a metabolic derivative of diacylglycerol, and that this effect does translate to enhanced resynthesis of the pis. the latter are physiologically critical not only as substrates for plc signaling but also as mediators in the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase /akt signaling cascades. it is conceivable, therefore, that an acute molecular action of antidepressant agents that conserves or supplements cellular pis could ultimately contribute to the therapeutic mechanism of these medications in depression.

RESULTS
chemically diverse antidepressant agents increase cdp-diacylglycerol production
diacylglycerol released from phospholipid breakdown is normally rapidly phosphorylated to produce phosphatidic acid. in the presence of cytidine-labeled ctp, however, the phosphatidic acid is converted to radiolabeled cdp-dg, which can be extracted and separated away from other labeled metabolites and subsequently quantified. in the present study, rat brain cerebrocortical, hippocampal, and striatal slices prelabeled with cytidine were incubated with various concentrations of selected antidepressant agents in the presence of licl, and the yield of cdp-diacylglycerol analyzed. data for each drug were separately analyzed before they were normalized and collated together for graphical presentation as shown. the classical antidepressants imipramine and desipramine, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors fluoxetine and paroxetine, and the atypical agents maprotiline and nomifensine, each significantly and dose-dependently enhanced the accumulation of cdp-dg in rat hippocampal, prefrontal cortical, and striatal slices . while concentrations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> μm were tested, only those concentrations lying between the minimal that gave statistically significant effects for any agent  and the maximally effective concentrations  are shown. statistically significant effects were obtained at concentrations as low as 3– <dig> μm in the hippocampus or prefrontal cortex, while maximal effects were achieved at the  <dig> μm concentration of fluoxetine or  <dig> μm concentrations of most other agents. for all agents, test concentrations greater than  <dig> μm resulted in cdp-dg effects that were either statistically similar to, or significantly lower than, the effects observed at  <dig> μm for fluoxetine or  <dig> μm for the other agents. this reduction in response with increasing concentration after attaining maximal responses was more apparent with the ssris, fluoxetine and paroxetine, than with the tricyclic agents.

among the brain regions, the hippocampus appeared to be more sensitive , whereas the striatum gave slightly more robust  effects. the drug responses were statistically dose-dependent for all effective agents in each tissue, but there were noticeable differences in potency or efficacy among the compounds as shown in the data. thus, diverse antidepressant agents can acutely induce cdp-dg synthesis in depression-relevant regions of the rat brain.

antidepressant-induced cdp-diacylglycerol formation translates into increased pi synthesis
to test if the antidepressant-enhanced cdp-dg translates into increased synthesis of the pis, brain slice preparations were labeled with  inositol and incubated in the presence of various antidepressant agents. results of the subsequent uptake and conversion of  inositol into inositol phospholipids are shown in figure  <dig>  imipramine, desipramine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and maprotiline each significantly increased inositol labeling of pis in the tested brain regions . thus, the increased mobilization or recapture of cdp-dg by the antidepressant agents translates into increased regeneration of pi signaling substrates.

effects of monoamine oxidase inhibiting agents cdp-diacylglycerol formation and pi synthesis
similar to the effects exhibited by the classical antidepressant agents, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors , phenelzine and hydralazine, produced robust effects on cdp-dg accumulation in frontal cortex slices , while tranylcypromine had statistically significant but rather modest effects . while the effects of phenelzine achieved significance at  <dig> μm , those of hydralazine became significant at the  <dig> μm and higher concentrations. conversely, no significant effects were observed with several other tested maois, namely, pargyline, selegiline, quinacrine, or clorgyline .

maois that were effective in inducing cdp-dg production also showed enhanced effects on pi resynthesis , whereas other maois that were ineffective on cdp-dg were equally ineffective in increasing pi resynthesis . the maoi data  also depict the significantly greater relative accumulation of pis compared to the accumulation of cdp-dg, implying the conversion of cdp-dg to pi may be a dynamic or cumulative process.

we also tested a range of other psychotropic compounds in order to estimate the extent to which the cdp-dg response may characterize compounds with antidepressive activity. neither the antipsychotic agents sulpiride, chlorpromazine and haloperidol, nor various other psychotropic compounds induced any significant effects on cdp-dg production .

antidepressant agents generally enhance inositol phosphate accumulation
to test if resynthesized pis might contribute to enhanced ip accumulation, agents tested for effects on cdp-dg were also tested in a standard ip assay. across a concentration range of 3– <dig> μm, imipramine, desipramine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and maprotiline significantly and dose-dependently stimulated the accumulation of ips in each brain region . significant drug effects were generally evident at concentrations of 3– <dig> μm, while maximal effects were observed at 100– <dig> μm. with imipramine tested in the hippocampus and striatum as the only possible exceptions, test concentrations greater than  <dig> μm resulted in ip effects that were either statistically similar to, or significantly lower than, the effects observed at the corresponding  <dig> μm concentration. in general, drug concentrations greater than 300– <dig> μm were associated with ip levels that were significantly lower than effects at 100– <dig> μm concentrations, possibly reflecting toxicity from excessive stimulation.

antidepressant-induced cdp-diacylglycerol formation partially depends on pi hydrolysis
phosphoinositide hydrolysis is a major source, but not the only possible source, of diacylglycerol in the cell. to estimate the extent to which antidepressant-enhanced cdp-dg may derive from pi breakdown, we blocked pi hydrolysis and then measured the consequent effects on the ability of antidepressant agents to induce cdp-dg accumulation. first, we tested the effects of the general pi metabolism inhibitor, neomycin, against the maximally effective concentrations of the selected antidepressant agents. neomycin concentration-dependently blocked the effects of imipramine, desipramine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, maprotiline, or nomifensine on cdp-dg production , pi resynthesis  or ip accumulation  in hippocampal or prefrontal cortical brain slices. increasing concentrations of neomycin produced complete blockade of both cdp-dg and pi responses. we next tested the effects of the selective plc inhibitor, u <dig>  on the drug responses. as shown in figure  <dig>  u <dig> by itself did not significantly alter basal cdp-dg production  or ip accumulation , although a slight increase in ip was consistently noted. at concentrations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> μm, u <dig> significantly reduced, but was unable to completely block, antidepressant drug effects on cdp-dg production. conversely, the plc inhibitor completely blocked ip stimulation by  <dig> μm fluoxetine or  <dig> μm concentrations of imipramine, paroxetine, maprotiline, or nomifensine in hippocampal or cortical slices. to validate the effects of u <dig>  we also tested the compound against the action of skf <dig>  a d <dig> receptor agonist that is known to induce pi hydrolysis in these brain tissues  <cit> . skf38393-induced ip accumulation was blocked by u <dig> with similar efficacies to the inhibition of the antidepressant responses . moreover, u <dig>  an analog of u <dig> that is ineffective in blocking plc activity, was without effect on any of the cdp-dg or ip responses . the effects of the ssris fluoxetine and paroxetine were more sensitive to inhibition by u <dig> than the effects of the tricyclic agents.

lithium is not required for antidepressant drug effects on cdp-diacylglycerol
our initial experiments were designed to compare antidepressant drug effects on the ip and diacylglycerol arms of the inositol cycle. thus, it was necessary to include licl in all test incubations, seeing li+ is needed to block inositol monophosphatase and thereby enable the accumulation of released ips to measurable levels. but, is the presence of li+ necessary to demonstrate antidepressant drug effects on cdp-dg? to answer this question we performed additional experiments in which selected antidepressant agents were tested for effects on cdp-dg in the absence or presence of  <dig> mm licl. as shown in figure  <dig>  licl did not significantly enhance or inhibit antidepressant drug-induced cdp-dg production, implying that the presence of li+ is not necessary to demonstrate the enhancing effects of antidepressant agents on cdp-dg production.

antidepressants elicit greater stimulation of cdp-diacylglycerol production than ip formation
to determine if antidepressant agents exert differential effects on cdp-dg production compared to pi hydrolysis, we examined the ratios of cdp-dg production relative to the ips  in corresponding treatment conditions. the ratios were calculated from the data in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  with each antidepressant agent, the cdp-dg/ip ratios increased significantly with increasing drug concentrations. this was true for different classes of drugs, including the maois phenelzine and hydralazine.

monoamine receptor agonists exert divergent effects on cdp-diacylglycerol
in attempts to determine which, if any, of the endogenous monoaminergic systems may show similar profiles of cdp-dg/ip effects, additional experiments were conducted with agonists that act directly at plc-coupled monoaminergic receptors: α-methylserotonin , carbachol , skf <dig> , and phenylephrine . corresponding cdp-dg ratios were calculated as for the antidepressant agents. as shown, α-methylserotonin, carbachol, phenylephrine  or skf <dig>  significantly increased ip accumulation and cdp-dg production in frontal cortex or hippocampal tissues. carbachol failed to increase pi synthesis, skf <dig> significantly enhanced pi synthesis, while the other two agents had significant but relatively small effects on pi. the ratios of cdp-dg production relative to ip accumulation are shown in the corresponding right panels of figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  with both carbachol and phenylephrine, there was a dramatic decrease in the cdp-dg/ip ratio. while the ratio did not decrease as much for α-methylserotonin, there was no concentration-related increase either. conversely, skf <dig> increased cdp-dg/ip ratios significantly and in a manner similar to the antidepressants . indeed, even the ratios of cdp-dg relative to pis or the combination of both inositol derivatives  were significantly enhanced. thus, agonists at the direct plc-coupled monoamine receptors showed parallel and corresponding changes between cdp-dg and the inositides, except for the dopamine agonist which, like the antidepressants, induced proportionately greater production of cdp-dg relative to inositide derivatives.

discussion
various experimental approaches have been used in the past to demonstrate positive effects of select antidepressant agents on the ip arm of pi signaling cascades  <cit> . the present data demonstrate for the first time that antidepressant agents could increase by several-fold the production of cdp-diacylglycerol, a crucial signaling intermediate that is both a derivative of diacylglycerol and a precursor for the biosynthesis of pis. this effect appeared to be common across agents from diverse chemical and pharmacological classes, seeing it was obtained with the tricyclics imipramine and desipramine, the ssris fluoxetine and paroxetine, the atypicals maprotiline and nomifensine, and the mao inhibitors phenelzine and hydralazine. thus, the findings could point to a mechanism  and mediator  for the biochemical and possibly clinical effects that may be common across diverse classes of antidepressants.

earlier studies observed that several antidepressants enhanced ip accumulation and pi labeling in rat cortical slices  <cit> . the mechanism of this response was confounding, seeing other studies that directly assayed phospholipase c activity suggested that the drugs could stimulate or inhibit plc-mediated pi hydrolysis  <cit> . in the present study, the antidepressants were equally effective in enhancing cdp-dg in the presence or absence of licl, whereas the presence of li+ was necessary to demonstrate the effects of the drugs on ip accumulation. this implies that the compounds do not inhibit ip breakdown , and that their effects on ip accumulation is probably secondary and passive to the enhanced production of upstream cdp-dg and pi substrates.

numerous agents acting at diverse receptor systems can enhance pi metabolism, but few such pure receptor agonists are known to exhibit an antidepressive effect in humans or animals  <cit> . how then might an effect of antidepressant agents on cdp-dg and pi synthesis be associated with the antidepressive efficacy of the compounds? an attempt to address this question led to comparisons of the ratio data between the antidepressants as a group and agonists at alpha-adrenergic, 5ht <dig> serotonergic, and dopaminergic receptors  as well as the muscarinic cholinergic receptor that is not known to contribute to the actions of antidepressant agents. while all these receptors are coupled to pi hydrolysis, only some 5ht <dig> agonists and skf <dig> have been shown to elicit antidepressive effects in rodent models  <cit> . the ratio of cdp-dg to ip components for phenylephrine and carbachol decreased, for α-methylserotonin remained unchanged, and for skf <dig> increased, with increasing concentrations of agonist. for the antidepressant agents, the ratios were not only significantly elevated, but actually increased in a concentration-dependent fashion. this was true of all classes of antidepressants examined, including the effective members among the mao inhibitors. the similarity between the effects of skf <dig> and the antidepressants may underlie the behavioral antidepressant efficacy of the compound as previously demonstrated in the rodent model  <cit> . hence, to the extent that cdp-dg production might be relevant to depression or the mechanism of antidepressant drug action, an antidepressive agent should not merely increase pi hydrolysis, but the cdp-dg produced must exceed and probably precede the production of pi messengers.

it was noteworthy that even the ssris produced significant increases in each cdp-dg ratio, whereas the direct 5ht <dig> agonist α-methylserotonin did not. if the biological actions of the ssris were limited to the actions of the drugs to enhance synaptic serotonin levels, then one would expect direct serotonin receptor stimulation to elicit similar effects. this disparity should suggest that facilitation of synaptic serotonin levels may not be the sole or sufficient mechanism of action of the ssris. rather, antidepressant-enhanced synaptic serotonin may work in concert with antidepressant-facilitated neurolipid biosynthesis to achieve the type and level of downstream signaling responses that may contribute to the antidepressive effect.

although cdp-dg production induced by the antidepressants may be derived from phosphoinositide breakdown, it is not impossible that the cdp-dg pool may be generated from additional endogenous sources. in an initial attempt to address this, we observed that antidepressant-mediated accumulation of cdp-dg was completely blocked by the non-specific phosphoinositide inhibitor, neomycin, in prefrontal or hippocampal tissues. conversely, the selective plc inhibitor u <dig> could only partially decrease cdp-dg production, while it completely blocked the release of ips. these results suggest that, while the integrity of the phosphoinositide pool is essential to the full effect of antidepressant agents on cdp-dg , the plc-accessible pool of phosphoinositides may not be the only source of antidepressant-mediated cdp-dg production . it is known that neural  cells maintain multiple pools of phosphoinositides not all of which may be accessible to plc-mediated cycling. the possibility that the antidepressants could mobilize these additional reserves of pi substrates, particularly following acute or chronic metabolic depletion of the substrates, should be an interesting subject for future investigations.

a critical question that was also attempted relates to the extent to which the cdp-dg response may be specific to antidepressant agents versus other psychotropic drugs. after testing a wide range of compounds, we observed that neither the antipsychotics chlorpromazine and haloperidol, nor several other psychotropic agents were capable of inducing the degree of cdp-dg effects observed with the antidepressant agents. while this suggests that the cdp-dg effect, particularly the dose-related effect on cdp-dg/ip ratio, could reflect a characteristic property of antidepressant medications, we were equally surprised by the disparity in efficacy among the mao inhibitors. the ineffective agents included the nonselective mao a/b inhibitor clorgyline, and the selective mao-b inhibitors pargyline and selegiline. at least one of these, clorgyline, is used clinically for the treatment of depression. conversely, other mao inhibitors, including phenelzine, hydralazine and tranylcypromine were significantly effective in inducing cdp-dg. the chemical or biological basis for this disparity among the maois is still unclear. indeed, considering the relatively marked effects of phenelzine and hydralazine, it is possible that inhibition of mao-mediated monoamine breakdown may not be the predominant mechanism by which these compounds modulate cdp-dg signaling.

it remains to be determined how the present in vitro observations may relate to in vivo drug concentrations or behavioral effects. while all tested antidepressants generally induced significant cdp-dg or pi effects at concentrations of 1– <dig> μm , the in vivo concentrations or doses needed to induce comparable effects have not been determined. nevertheless, a recent report suggests that antidepressants may induce in vivo cdp-dg or phosphoinositide effects at doses commonly used to elicit antidepressant-like behaviors in animal models  <cit> . additional studies should help to clarify these questions.

CONCLUSIONS
collectively, the present data raise the speculation that depression may be associated with decreased turnover or biological efficacy of phosphoinositide-related signaling systems, possibly due to depletion of phosphoinositide substrates. antidepressants may act by mobilizing cdp-dg to help replenish or supplement the pool of available pis. in addition to plc-mediated cascades, phosphatidylinositol is a key substrate for the pi3k signaling pathway  <cit> . earlier reports showed that pi3k signaling is relevant to the induction of neurogenesis or neuronal survival and plasticity  <cit> . a recent study determined that the activity of pi3k and its downstream target, akt, is decreased in postmortem brain tissues of depressed suicide victims  <cit> . extensive interactions or crosstalk exists among downstream mediators of the plc and pi3k systems and other signaling pathways that have been implicated in depression. thus, it is conceivable that an early action of antidepressant agents to enhance the mobilization of cdp-dg could lead to coordinate effects on multiple signaling systems, which might then explain the various molecular, structural, and functional effects of the drugs. the data, however, do not exclude the possibility that multiple signaling pathways, including the adenylyl cyclase pathway, may be involved in depression or the mechanism of action of antidepressant agents. nor do the data directly address the conventional notion that antidepressive medications need be administered chronically in order to elicit a clinical effect. additional studies also are required before a model could emerge that might relate these findings to the various theories of depression or antidepressant mechanisms. notwithstanding these pending questions, the present cdp-dg findings demonstrate a functional biochemical response that is common across divergent antidepressant classes, is elicited within the time frame that the drug is available to the tissues, and may have a plausible role in the pathology of depression or the mechanism of action of current antidepressive agents.

