BACKGROUND
preimplantation embryo development is largely dependent on maternal transcripts and proteins synthesized during oogenesis. maternal factors are able to support the first cleavages, while blastocyst formation involves both maternal and embryonic factors. over the last years, oocyte-restricted maternal effect genes have been the focus of much attention due to their specific expression profile and crucial function in early embryo development. they are predominantly expressed in oocyte, remain present in early embryos and then are degraded at the time of maternal-to-embryo transition , without compensation by embryonic transcription. functional studies based on knock-out mouse models have demonstrated their essential role in preimplantation embryo development, whereas functions in the oocyte itself have not been elucidated until this day.

mater  is one such oocyte-specific maternal effect genes and was first identified in mouse  <cit> . the transcript and protein expression profiles have been investigated during oogenesis and preimplantation embryo development. mater transcript and protein are first detected in oocyte from primary follicles and accumulate during oocyte growth. the transcript level decreases after fertilization as shown by ribonuclease protection assay or dna array  <cit> ). the protein remains abundant until the morula stage and is still present in blastocysts  <cit> . mater-null females present a normal phenotype regarding folliculogenesis, ovulation and fertilization, but their embryos do not develop beyond the 2-cell stage coincident with the maternal-to-embryo transition. mater precise function remains to be elucidated, although the global transcription decrease described in two-cell embryos lacking mater may suggest a role in embryonic genome activation  <cit> . in our previous work, we identified the bovine orthologue of mater. the longest open reading frame encodes a putative protein of  <dig> amino acids . as its human counterpart, bovine mater includes the  <dig> domains characteristics of the nacht, leucine rich repeat and pyrin domain containing  family: a n-terminal pyrin domain, followed by a nacht domain and twelve c-terminal leucine rich repeats of the ribonuclease inhibitor subtype . it is localized within a qtl region for reproductive traits  <cit> . mater transcript pattern, i.e. its tissue distribution and its disappearance in blastocyst, appeared in agreement with bovine mater also being an oocyte-specific maternal effect gene and suggested a conserved function as in mouse.

to reinforce this hypothesis, we needed to refine transcript expression during folliculogenesis, and mostly to characterize the expression and localization of the protein. in this study, we show that bovine mater transcript and protein are expressed in the oocyte as early as the primary follicle stage and accumulate during folliculogenesis. the protein localizes in the cytosol of immature oocytes. it remains abundant in the cytoplasm of preimplantation embryos until the blastocyst stage and is mostly degraded after hatching.

RESULTS
antibody characterization
first, we checked our antipeptide serum and purified antibody for sensitivity and specificity by western blotting . under normal exposure, a single intense band was detected at the mater protein predicted molecular weight  with as few as  <dig> oocytes. no such band was detected in a protein extract from cumulus cells in huge excess , although faint bands were observed at various molecular weights. specificity was further confirmed by the absence of mater signal in oocytes using preimmune serum.

mater expression throughout folliculogenesis
the expression of mater transcript during folliculogenesis was analysed using in situ hybridization onto ovarian sections. as previously described  <cit> , mater expression was restricted to the oocyte within bovine ovary. in this experiment, a signal could be detected in oocyte as early as the primary follicle stage and at a higher level in oocyte from antral follicle. hybridization with the corresponding sense probe was used as negative control .

to further characterize mater gene expression during folliculogenesis, we studied its expression pattern at the protein level. using anti-mater serum, the protein was exclusively detected in oocyte and no staining was observed in granulosa or theca cells. mater was detected in oocyte of primary follicles at a low level, with a very distinctive pattern: the staining localized to a single dot  which was specifically and reproductively observed. as folliculogenesis proceeds, staining intensity increases in oocyte from preantral to small antral and antral follicles , suggesting an accumulation of the protein. interestingly, on sections that went through the nucleus in pre-antral and early antral follicles, the protein appeared excluded from the germinal vesicle .

mater expression during preimplantation embryo development
evolution of mater messenger rnas during during oocyte maturation, fertilization and preimplantation embryo development was followed by real time pcr. triplicate reactions were run onto four independent samples at each stage. the level relative to immature oocytes is shown . detection level decreased by 72% during maturation, then remained stable during fertilization. it decreased progressively during the cleavage stages, up to 10% of its initial level in  <dig> to  <dig> cell-embryos. in morulae and blastocysts, amplicons were produced only in one or two samples; the level of polyadenylated transcript was less than  <dig> % of its initial value. western blotting was then performed to characterize mater protein expression . mater was abundant during oocyte maturation, and after fertilization until the expanded blastocyst stage. most protein was then degraded after hatching. this pattern was reproducibly observed with two independent oocyte and embryo collections. by contrast, our positive control β-tubulin increased in hatched blastocysts .

mater protein localization in oocyte and preimplantation embryos
immunohistochemistry onto ovary sections suggested that mater could be predominantly cytoplasmic. to refine protein localization, we performed confocal microscopy analysis on oocytes from  <dig> to  <dig> mm follicles and preimplantation embryos, after immunofluorescent staining using purified antipeptide . firstly, we observed oocytes at germinal vesicle  and nuclear envelope break down  stages, as discriminated by lamin a/c staining . in most gv oocytes, mater protein was predominantly localized in the cytoplasm ; however, a few oocytes  presented a distinct pattern, with staining within both the cytoplasm and the nucleus . in oocytes characterized by degradation of lamin a/c , mater was distributed throughout the oocyte, only excluded from the chromatin area as revealed by hoechst staining. then we analysed mature oocytes, zygotes and preimplantation embryos . mater was predominantly detected in the cytoplasm, with the protein apparently concentrating in the cortical region of mature oocytes, zygotes and embryos at least until the 8-cell stage. in zygotes to 8-cell embryos, increased staining around the chromatin area  suggested that mater also accumulated around the nuclear membrane. in expanded blastocysts, mater was distributed evenly between inner cell mass and trophectoderm. a dramatic decrease was observed in hatched blastocysts, as previously observed by western blotting. as negative control, no staining was revealed using rabbit igg as primary antibody .

to refine mater protein subcellular localization, transmission electron microscopy analysis was performed on ultrathin sections of immature oocytes using purified antipeptide. immunogold particules were diffusely present in the cytosol at a low density. mater protein was not detected in the nucleus, nor in organelles including mitochondria . as a negative control, no particles were observed when omitting the primary antibody .

discussion
in this study, we characterized the bovine mater gene and its expression throughout folliculogenesis and in vitro preimplantation embryo development. we demonstrated that both the transcript and protein were present in oocyte from primary follicle and accumulated thereafter. during preimplantation embryo development, mater messengers were hardly detected after the morula stage, while the protein remained present until the blastocyst stage before rapid degradation after hatching. in immature oocytes and in embryos, the protein was predominantly cytoplasmic.

mater gene expression throughout bovine folliculogenesis and preimplantation embryo development
in a previous study, we demonstrated that mater transcript was restricted to the oocyte within bovine ovary  <cit> . here, we have refined our expression analysis. by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry experiments, we detected mater transcript and protein in oocytes as early as the primary follicle stage , as previously described in mouse  <cit> . this shows that at least some transcripts support immediate translation, but it does not exclude that others are stored within the oocyte cytoplasm. such an early protein synthesis may appear premature since functional studies did not reveal a deleterious effect of mater absence at this early stage, but rather in the 2-cell embryo  <cit> . indeed, zar <dig>  another mouse oocyte-specific maternal effect protein, was also detected in mouse primary follicles  <cit> . several scenarios may reconcile these apparent discrepancies. the first hypothesis is that mater indeed plays a role in the oocyte, but that another gene may be redundant at this stage, at least in mater-null females. obvious candidates are genes of the nalp family, and especially oocyte restricted members such as nalp <dig> in bovine  <cit>  or the nalp <dig> or nalp <dig> genes in mouse  <cit> . to our knowledge, there are no functional data on these genes from knock-out models or other targeted inhibition experiments. this early expression may also be indicative of an upstream role of mater in a cascade of events, as demonstrated for the mouse oocyte-specific homeobox gene nobox  <cit> . alternatively, the protein may be synthesized despite not being required at this stage, simply because specifically repressing the gene would be more complex for the cell than support minimal expression. overall, we observed that immunostaining of mater protein increased in parallel with follicle development, from primary to large antral. this must involve a growing level of translation; in addition, it is possible that once synthesized, the protein remains stable for a long period of time and persists in the oocyte during folliculogenesis. neo-synthesized proteins would then add to those already present, and early synthesis would allow for the accumulation of a largest stockpile of mater.

by real-time pcr, bovine mater transcripts showed a massive deadenylation and/or degradation during maturation . following fertilization, the messengers slowly decreased in embryos until the 5- to 8-cell stage; it was hardly detected in morulae and blastocysts, confirming our previous report  <cit> . we did not evidence neo-synthesis or polyadenylation of mater transcripts neither transiently nor after the met. by contrast, we have demonstrated by western-blot and immunofluorescence coupled to confocal microscopy that the protein is present at all stages, and displays a sharp decrease only after hatching . these distinct patterns for the transcript and the protein provide valuable information. first, later persistence of the protein as compared to the messenger is consistent with mater being a fairly stable protein. this, together with the accumulation of mater during folliculogenesis, suggests that at least some protein detected in early embryos is of maternal origin. second, degradation of mater protein after hatching appears temporally controlled and substrate specific, since most proteins are rather synthesized at this stage following the met. the bovine protein in fact persists longer than its mouse counterpart, which was mostly degraded by the expanded blastocyst stage. this is consistent with active degradation of mater involving factors synthesized from embryonic transcripts in both species. the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is one possible mechanism, and ubiquitin transcripts were actually shown to increase in bovine blastocysts  <cit> . on the other hand, ubiquitin cross-reactive structures were detected preferentially in the trophoblast over the the inner cell mass  <cit>  whereas here we observe a simultaneous degradation of mater in both structures at hatching . overall, the pattern of expression of bovine mater, i.e. non reactivation at met and degradation of the protein before implantation, supports the hypothesis that it is a maternal effect gene as its mouse orthologue.

mater protein intracellular localization in bovine oocytes and preimplantation embryos
data from immunohistochemistry on ovary sections suggested that mater protein was stored in the cytoplasm of oocyte during folliculogenesis . intracellular localization of mater was further investigated in oocytes and early embryos by immunofluorescence coupled to confocal microscopy analysis . in most immature oocytes, mater was predominantly localized in the cytoplasm with an accumulation around the nuclear membrane and was hardly detected in the germinal vesicle. a few oocytes displayed a different pattern of protein distribution, where mater was detected both in the cytoplasm and the germinal vesicle . after nebd, the protein was uniformly distributed throughout the cytoplasm and was only excluded from the chromatin area . such transient nuclear localization of mater was not described in mouse oocytes. we propose two hypotheses consistent with our observations. it may be that mater passively diffuses to the germinal vesicle as the nuclear membrane starts to disaggregate, even though lamins are still detected. alternatively, we can speculate that mater actively translocates to the nucleus just before nebd. mater sequence does not display a nuclear localization signal as analyzed by the predictnls server  <cit> . but neither was such signal identified in the mouse oocyte specific variant of dna -methyl-transferase  <dig> , whose temporarily controlled nucleocytoplasmic trafficking was nevertheless demonstrated: this protein localizes to the cytoplasm of oocytes and preimplantation embryos with exclusion from all nuclei except those of 8-cell embryos  <cit> . mater might be involved in the short burst of transcription that has been suggested to occur in bovine oocyte-cumulus complexes just before chromatin condenses  <cit> 

then, we followed mater localization after oocyte maturation, fertilization and during preimplantation embryo development . localization was predominantly cytoplasmic in embryos at least until the  <dig> cell stage. we noticed that the protein appeared to concentrate in the cortical region of mature oocytes and embryos up to 8-cells, as previously observed in mouse preimplantation embryos  <cit> . a similar peripheral concentration had also been reported for the ovary-specific 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase-like protein  in metaphase ii oocytes  <cit> , and for dnmt1o in mature oocytes, 2- and 4-cell embryos  <cit> . the authors suggested that dnmt1o may be sequestered near the plasma membrane through interaction with annexin v, a calcium-sensitive phospholipid binding protein  <cit> . mater includes protein-protein interacting domains and identifying potential partners may help elucidating this intriguing distribution.

in gv oocytes, mater localization was refined by immunogold coupled to transmission electron microscopy analysis. the protein was detected in the cytosol but not in organelles . this pattern differs from mater distribution in mouse, where the protein was detected in the nucleus close to nuclear pores and in mitochondria  <cit> .

based on the presence of a leucine-rich repreat domain homologous to a porcine ribonuclease inhibitor, mouse mater has been suggested to play a role in mrna stability. altogether, our observations on bovine mater distribution are consistent with this hypothesis. in oocytes, mater would stabilize transcripts from the moment when they are exported from the nucleus and during their storage in the oocyte cytoplasm up until the time when there are recruited for translation in the oocyte or after fertilization. through a similar peri-nuclear accumulation in early embryos, mater could protect the rare transcripts produced from the embryonic genome at these stages. finally, mater is degraded after hatching, once the embryo synthesizes large amount of messengers and proteins. this model is consistent with the phenotype of embryos from mater null female mice: transcripts required for development beyond the 2-cell stage  would not be stabilized, resulting in developmental block.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that mater transcript and protein are specifically expressed in oocyte from the primary follicle onwards in bovine ovary. the protein is stored in the cytoplasm of growing oocytes and persists during maturation, fertilization and in embryos until the expanded blastocyst stage. it is mostly degraded after hatching. therefore mater transcript and protein expression patterns are consistent with a maternal effect function conserved in bovine. challenging functional approaches are now required to confirm this hypothesis.

