BACKGROUND
dna and rna molecules in situ have traditionally been studied by in situ hybridization . ish originally utilized probes in the form of radioactively labeled rrna, visualized by autoradiography  <cit> . subsequently, various non-isotopic probe labels have also been used, usually detected with immunoenzymatic methods  <cit>  or fluorescent in situ hybridization   <cit> . in order to generate sufficient signal, non-isotopic ish methods usually use long probes or multiple probe cocktails for binding of sufficient number of label molecules to each target. these probes or probe cocktails are in most cases combined with some form of signal amplification such as tyramide signal amplification , a technique that can increase fish signal intensity 10– <dig> fold  <cit> . however, long probes pose a problem since affinity and specificity for nucleic acid probes usually are inversely correlated, meaning that whilst a probe's affinity for a target increases so does the risk of non-specific binding  <cit> . long probes are also not well suited for the discrimination of minor sequence variations. artificial nucleic acids, such as pna- and lna-oligonucleotides, have been utilized as probes, allowing higher hybridization temperatures and increased specificity of the ish-probes  <cit> . short horseradish peroxidase  conjugated oligonucleotides have been used for detection of rna, using tsa and fluorescently labeled antibodies  <cit> . traditional ish-methods often rely strictly on hybridization and stringent washing for specificity. therefore, background staining will increase along with the specific signals as result of non-specific binding of the probe. this limits detection of rare targets  <cit> . furthermore most amplification techniques used, such as tsa, are not well suited for multiplexing and since both specific and non-specific signals are amplified careful optimization of each hybridization event is required  <cit> .

another method used for in situ detection of nucleic acids is the primed in situ labeling  technique. the prins technique is based on the generation of detectable dna by performing a dna polymerization in situ. traditionally this has been done by using short synthetic oligonucleotides which are hybridized to a target nucleic acid, and used as primers in the subsequent dna polymerization step during which hapten- or fluorescent-labeled nucleotides are incorporated for tagging sites of dna synthesis  <cit> . prins has usually been performed on repetitive dna sequences  <cit> , although it has been shown to allow both single copy gene detection  <cit> , and mrna detection  <cit> .

thus, existing in situ detection technologies rely on target nucleic acids being sufficiently large or abundant to be detected, and minor molecular differences in individual molecules may be beyond the limits of detection. we now present an approach for rna detection combining the best from prins and fish. initially, an "inversed" prins reaction is performed in which a hybridization probe  is used as template and the target nucleic acid acts as primer . the subsequent dna polymerization results in the tagging of sites of dna synthesis with tandem repeat copies of the circular probe. this firmly localized repeated sequence can then easily be detected by fish. the whole reaction can readily be multiplexed through the application of a cocktail of probes and subsequent visualization of the individual prins products with color coded identifier oligonucleotides.

such an approach was recently presented for the analysis of dna molecules in situ  <cit> , combining padlock probes for dna detection at single nucleotide resolution, with target primed rolling circle dna synthesis, resulting in an amplification powerful enough to allow single molecule detection. ish with circle probes and target primed rolling circle requires both hybridization of the probe and the presence of a 3'-end to prime the rolling circle reaction and thus is unlikely to give any signals if the probe attaches non-specifically to the target specimen. furthermore, only part of the circle probe hybridizes to the target and by using different sequences in the non-binding part the individual probes can easily be identified in multiplex assays.

we now report a new design according to this concept, in which circular hybridization probes detect non-polyadenylated rna molecules, initiating a rolling circle prins reaction from the natural 3'-end of the target rna molecule hybridized to the probe. for this, we developed a new type of hybridization probe, a "turtle probe", and made modifications to previous protocols.

RESULTS
optimization and generation of new probe format
rolling circle based assays have previously been published for in situ detection of dna, both with the addition of an external primer  <cit>  and in a target primed assay  <cit> . initially, we essentially converted the target primed dna detection with padlock probes to rna detection. padlock probes  <cit>  are linear probes that are turned into closed circles when the 3'- and 5'-ends are brought into proximity by hybridization to a matching sequence, and the resulting nick is closed by a dna ligase . although padlock probes can be ligated on rna templates, this results in a reduced yield of closed circles, compared to ligation on dna templates  <cit> . in histological preparations, this efficiency problem may be further aggravated by degradation  and modification  tissue sections) of nucleic acids  <cit> . the performance of padlock probes for the detection of rna molecules in situ was therefore a priori questionable – in particular in ffpe formats. in agreement with this, our initial results employing padlock probes for rolling circle detection of rna showed low sensitivity and variation with the specimen.

in parallel with the optimization of the reaction procedures, we therefore supplemented the padlock format with circle probes not requiring target templated ligation. one way of obtaining such probes would be by using preformed circles. preformed circles were known before padlock probes, and have been employed for in situ detection of dna  <cit> . however, the performance of the probes in that in situ study was not impressive compared to the performance of padlock probes in situ  <cit> , and since the circles are formed on external linear templates, there is always the risk that some template molecules are carried over into the in situ reaction, where they could initiate rolling circle replication of probes not hybridized to the proper target. since the amplification from the rolling circle reaction is sufficient for single molecule detection, any template molecule carried over would be a potential source of false signals. in practice, perfect removal of template molecules is time and labor consuming – if at all possible – since it requires e.g. gelbased purification and it would, therefore, be preferable to leave out this template. to this end we designed what we call turtle probes . these have the desirable features of templating their own formation into closed circles and of only generating signals upon hybridization to and priming from the hybridization target. for in situ detection turtle probes have the added potential advantage over preformed circles of being closed by ligation after target hybridization, which may make them better able to wrap around the target rna with its potential modifications and cross-links to other bio-molecules in the preparation.

while target primed detection has its advantage in securing target localization, it is also limited by the need for a properly located 3'-end in the target molecule. a collaborative study with the laboratory of ulf landegren on how far from the 3'-end a padlock probe could be positioned on a dna template in situ in ethanol fixed cell lines and still result in signal showed that while signals could still be obtained with a probe positioned  <dig> nucleotides from the 3'-end, this position gave less signals than a position closer to the end of the target molecule  <cit> . although similar tests have not been performed on ffpe tissue with rna as target instead of dna, the effect of the distance from the 3'-end will most likely be even more marked here. in the case of rna, the matter is further complicated by the tendency of rna to form secondary structures, and we have unpublished experimental indications on pure rna in solution that the recession of the 3'-end stops when the first region of double stranded rna is reached.

to test the turtle probes in a controllable environment, they were first applied in a solid support setup, using in vitro transcribed rna immobilized on a solid support through a capture oligonucleotide. after hybridization of the rna to the capture oligonucleotide, the turtle probe was hybridized to the rna . the turtle probe was then ligated and rolling circle dna synthesis was performed . we tested two different turtle probes  with two different in vitro transcribed rnas, one rna  having an artificial polya tail to imitate a polyadenylated rna  and the other rna  having a sequence containing all four nucleotides in the 3'-end, to imitate a non-polyadenylated rna . both turtle probes worked well and due to the different backbones they could easily be detected in a multiplexed format by simply adding both probes in the hybridization mixture and visualizing each rolling circle product in its specific color . all the negative controls were negative . as lna probes have improved hybridization characteristics on rna with its tendency to fold into secondary structures, we also tested a turtle probe with four lna bases in the footprint, but this approach produced no signals . this is probably due to a reduced polymerase activity on an lna containing template, and we were told by the provider  to expect a 30–40% decrease in the activity of enzymatic reactions when using an lna containing template. though this had not been tested for rolling circle applications. we mainly used the solid support as test setup. however, besides providing a highly controllable environment, it also illustrates the possibilities for multiplexing turtle probes in e.g. chip analysis.

in situ detection with turtle probes
for the in situ detection of rna, we initially created turtle probes targeting the 5s and 28s ribosomal rnas  and against polyadenylated rna these were then tested in different formats . since the turtle probes worked well, we changed format to ffpe material and further modified the previous protocols, most notably by introducing pre-heating of the specimen, to reverse some of the rna modifications introduced during the preparation of the ffpe material  <cit> , and by combining the use of heating and carrier rna to open potential secondary structures in the rna. to compare the two probe types with this optimized protocol we treated hela cells in a similar way to routine pathological tissue specimens  and then applied turtle probes and padlock probes targeting the 5s rrna, 28s rrna, and htr in a limiting dilution series to see how little probe could be used. our expectation was that if the turtle probes were converted to closed circles with a higher efficiency than the corresponding padlock probes, the same number of signals should be obtained with less probe . since the ligation efficiency of the padlock probes would be expected to vary with the target, we expected that the advantage of using turtle probes would show the same variation. indeed, what we saw was an obvious but variable gain from using the turtle probes. for the two abundant targets, 5s rrna and 28s rrna, we saw more signals with the turtle probes at equimolar amounts of probe, and approximately the same number of signals with an order of magnitude less probe. the less abundant target, htr, is in practice only detected with the turtle probe .

next we tested the two types of probes on ffpe tissue material. here we initially chose the epstein-barr virus  encoded rna, eber <dig> , as target, since eber <dig>  besides being non-polyadenylated and present in high amounts in ebv positive tumors such as hodgkin's lymphoma, also provides an internal negative control with eber <dig> primarily located in the nuclei of the neoplastic reed-sternberg cells in this setting  <cit> . as a second target, we selected the rna template for human telomerase  since, in addition to being non-polyadenylated and much less abundant than eber <dig>  it is also expected to be found in a subset of cells   <cit> . furthermore, htr should give rise to a few discrete signals in the nuclei, reflecting accumulation in cajal bodies  <cit> .

a representative result employing a turtle probe and the optimized protocol for eber <dig> in ffpe tissue is shown in figure 4a, and the representative result of a parallel detection with a padlock probe in figure 4b. as is apparent in the illustrations, both probe formats allowed the detection of eber <dig> in the neoplastic reed sternberg cells of ebv-associated hodgkins lymphoma. however, stronger and more abundant signals were obtained with the turtle probe. the modified protocol also enabled the detection with a turtle probe of the housekeeping rna htr. this detection was done in a multiplexed reaction in which probes for eber <dig> and htr were co-hybridized, co-amplified and co-visualized , showing that multiple turtle probes can be hybridized and rolled in parallel and analyzed individually in situ, if the rolling circle products are visualized with identifier probes that are unique to each turtle probe. for all reactions, negative controls were negative .

CONCLUSIONS
the present paper represents to our knowledge the first publication of rna detection in situ with oligonucleotide probes and target primed rolling circle prins. this approach appears promising because of the high discriminatory power of the short oligonucleotide probes and the impressive amplification power of the rolling circle reaction, providing excellent signal to noise ratios in combination with exact target localization due to the target primed reaction. furthermore, the procedure may be multiplexed to a significant extent, color-coding a number of probes reacted in parallel for combinatorial labeling. as illustrated, the approach works also when challenged with the most technically difficult preparation format, that of ffpe routine samples from the pathology archives, opening up these collections to sensitive and specific rna analysis, something that has been possible only to a limited extent. additionally, the technology should be appealing for the analysis of the rapidly expanding universe of small structural and regulatory rna molecules   <cit> . furthermore, we have just recently, while this paper was under revision, published a method using similar self-templating probes in combination with rolling circle dna synthesis for production of long 5'-phosphorylated oligonucleotides  <cit> .

