BACKGROUND
extensive transcriptional profiling of the plant model system arabidopsis thaliana has been limited when compared to other model organisms, such as human and mouse, mainly due to the lack of high-quality cdna microarrays offering genome-wide coverage. however, during the recent years both academic and commercial alternatives to these cdna arrays have emerged. the public initiative by the catma consortium has aimed at the production of high-quality probes for each of the  <dig>  <dig> genes predicted in the arabidopsis genome  <cit> . the design of the catma gene sequence tag  probes is based on de novo gene prediction from the genome sequence  <cit> , since only a relatively now number of ests are available for arabidopsis . commercial alternatives for genome-wide monitoring of the arabidopsis transcriptome have been developed by affymetrix, agilent technologies, mwg biotech, operon and others. in a recent study the catma, affymetrix and agilent arrays were found to perform equally, but with a minor advantage for the catma arrays in terms of dynamic range  <cit> .

in the first phase of the catma program  <dig>  <dig> gsts covering more than 70% of the predicted genes were designed. the length of the probes is kept low to ensure specificity and ranges from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp, with the size distribution heavily shifted towards the shorter fragments. to further increase the specificity of the gsts their distribution is shifted towards the 3'-end of the genes, with 60%, 16% and 24% representing 3'-, centre and 5'-regions, respectively  <cit> . both 3' and 5' untranslated regions of the genes were included in the design. as a consequence of the gst fragment length, an efficient and robust high-throughput method for purification of short fragments is needed. here we demonstrate that the purification can be accomplished by taking advantage of the recent finding that the streptavidin-biotin bond can be broken, in a fully reversible fashion, without denaturation of the protein  <cit> . the approach is based on incorporation of a biotin molecule during pcr amplification of the gsts, binding of the products to streptavidin-coated paramagnetic beads using high ionic-strength conditions and elution through disruption of the streptavidin-biotin bond in a non-denaturing and fully reversible fashion with deionised water. we exemplify that this feature can be applied for generation of high-quality gene sequence tag microarrays in a cost-effective and high-throughput manner. we also demonstrate the use of these arrays by presenting results on the alteration in gene expression levels at different time points in arabidopsis plants treated with physiological concentrations of the well-known plant hormone indole-3-acetic acid . finally, we compare our results with those obtained in two previous studies  <cit>  carried out on the affymetrix  <dig> k gene chip platform to identify auxin regulated gene expression.

RESULTS
in this study we present a method suitable for purification of gene sequence tags, which have recently been designed and successfully used for transcriptional profiling of the plant model system arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . the purification method is based on reversible biotin-streptavidin binding, utilises streptavidin-coated paramagnetic beads and can be automated on a robotic workstation dedicated for magnetic separation and equipped with a temperature control  <cit> . we exemplify the performance of the method by studying the purification of three representative biotinylated amplification products and subsequently show that arrays prepared using this method can successfully be used for large-scale transcriptional profiling.

the amplification products we use to study the purification process are  <dig> bp,  <dig> kb and  <dig>  kb in length, covering the size range typically used for probes on cdna arrays. for successful purification of the probe both efficient capture by the beads and release is important. an example of the capture of a 50-μl pcr product and subsequent release is shown in figure 1a. as shown, the initial capture and release is highly efficient , and with no product detectable in the eluate corresponding to the second release . next we analyse the efficiency of the capture reaction using an increasing amount of beads while keeping the amount of pcr product and length of incubation time constant. the results indicate that for a standard 50-μl pcr product highly efficient capture is achieved already at approximately  <dig> μg of beads for all products up to  <dig>  kb , but for a highly optimised amplification reaction a higher amount of beads may be necessary . as expected, the binding of the biotinylated product to the streptavidin moiety is a rapid and efficient process with the majority of the binding taking place during the first minutes of incubation . shorter products appear to have faster binding kinetics reaching saturation at earlier time points. also important to note is that the molar amount of captured and eluted product is not equal for the different-sized products, indicating that other factors such as steric hindrance also contribute to capacity of the beads and should be considered for purification of longer products >  <dig> bp.

repeated use of the magnetic beads after a single round of capture and elution is the key feature of the described strategy. to investigate the cross-contamination between iterative cycles of purification as well as the total number of bead purifications that can be used without significant loss in performance, we used agarose gel electrophoresis, dna lab-on-chip technology as well as a more sensitive approach based on printing of eluates onto glass slides and hybridisation using a fluorescently labelled oligonucleotide complementary to the purified and printed probes. a carry-over free purification requires that all captured product is released at the first elution so that no product is transferred to the next sample to be purified using the same set of beads. we analysed the presence of cross-contamination by analysing the eluates of two consecutive release reactions from a single immobilised product . furthermore, the cross-contamination issue was analysed by using the reversible beads in six sequential capture reactions containing either a pcr product or a water-only control in an alternating order . a released product is detected in the first eluate, as expected, but not in the second, by all three methods including the sensitive fluorescence assay. as shown in figure 1a, right panel, hybridisation with a labelled oligonucleotide complementary to the purified probes shows a signal in features originating from a pcr product of the three sizes, but not in features originating from the negative water-only control.

we studied the capacity of the beads after multiple capture and release cycles by using a constant amount of the three pcr products as input for each iterative purification cycle. an extra washing step was carried out between the purification cycles. data for nine consecutive binding, washing, elution and regeneration rounds of the pcr products is presented in figure 1d. the yields of purified products are similar for six rounds of reuse with a minor decline during the subsequent cycles, which more likely correlates with loss of beads during the washing steps than with reduced capacity. we continued to analyse the efficiency of the bead regeneration and reuse by using amplification products of twelve additional clones  and a hybridisation-based quantification approach. the clones were amplified, purified using beads reused up to nine times, printed onto glass slides and finally hybridised with a dna-binding dye to determine the amount of purified product. a clone-wise scaling of the hybridisation signal of each subsequent reuse versus the signal corresponding to the first use was carried out, followed by a calculation of the overall average, which is shown as the solid black line in figure 1d. the results from the quantification through hybridisation are in close agreement with the pattern observed using the probes discussed in more detail above.

assembly of the arabidopsis gene sequence tag microarray
we applied the described method for purification of  <dig>  <dig> arabidopsis biotinylated gene sequence tags , with sizes ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp. the use of gsts in transcript profiling offers improved specificity when compared to the more common est or cdna libraries since each gst has been designed to have minimal cross-hybridisation to other genes, including members of the same gene family. the investigated set of gsts covers approximately 70% of the genes in the genome, as described in more detail by the catma consortium  <cit> . the consortia amplification strategy is based on a two-step pcr system. this facilitates, as shown in this study, the incorporation of a biotin label in the second pcr by generic handle sequences introduced at the initial amplification step. this circumvents the need to design individual gene-specific biotinylated primers. the products were purified in an automated fashion onto  <dig> micrograms of magnetic, streptavidin-coated beads that were reused up to six times. to compensate for the higher molar amount of the gst amplification products, an initially higher amount of beads was used for the purification of the gsts than was used for the optimisation of the method. after elution with  <dig> μl water an equal amount of dmso is added to eluted products, which are then printed onto the glass slides.

changes in gene expression caused by auxin treatment
the arrays generated by large-scale purification of gsts are used in a pilot time-point study where the plant hormone indole-3-acetic acid , also known as auxin, is used to cause transcriptional changes in arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. total rna is collected at three post-treatment time points and compared, using a reference design, to rna extracted from untreated plants. a general overview of the data is shown in figure  <dig>  using the filtered and normalised data  genes which are differentially expressed upon auxin treatment are identified using a bayesian approach  <cit> . using a false discovery rate adjusted p-value of less than  <dig>  as threshold level for differential expression, a total of  <dig> and  <dig> genes are found to be up- and down-regulated, respectively, at one or more of the three time points . as expected, none of these genes are differentially regulated in the control self-to-self hybridisation experiment . it is previously known that auxin influences several key processes during plant growth and development and several lines of evidence indicate that auxin regulation of gene expression plays a key role in its mode of action. a particularly well-studied pathway of auxin-regulated gene expression is the auxin induction of the aux/iaa genes. the aux/iaa genes encode small short-lived nuclear proteins that interact with the arf  family of transcription factors and are thought to modulate the transcriptional activity of the arfs in an auxin-dependent manner. these arfs have been shown to bind to auxin-responsive elements  that are found in promotors of several auxin-regulated genes  <cit> . the arfs function as both transcriptional activators and repressors  <cit> , and the combination of arf and aux/iaa proteins is thought to mediate the tissue-specific effects of auxin  <cit> . thirteen of the up-regulated genes identified in this study are previously shown to be auxin-regulated and include several members of the aux/iaa family. these exhibit different induction patterns, with for example iaa <dig> and iaa <dig> being strongly up-regulated  already at  <dig> minutes, while a two-hour treatment is required for the iaa <dig> transcripts to reach a two-fold up-regulation. in a recent independent study where arabidopsis seedlings were treated for only  <dig> min with  <dig> μm iaa, all of the aux/iaa genes listed in additional data file  <dig>  with the exception of iaa <dig>  were found to be up-regulated  <cit> . in addition to the aux/iaa genes four members of the gh <dig> family that have also been shown to be induced by auxin exhibited a rapid and sustained 2- to 8-fold up-regulation in our study, again confirming the findings reported in a previous study on auxin regulation of gene expression using affymetrix  <dig> k oligonucleotide arrays  <cit> . a key feature of auxin regulation of development is the polar transport of auxin that is mediated by auxin transporters. our data indicate that the polar auxin transporters pin <dig>  <cit>  and pin <dig> are up-regulated by auxin whereas in contrast the expression of several members of the aquaporin gene family  <cit>  are down-regulated. expression of the pin transporters is up-regulated already at  <dig> minutes and remains high throughout the studied time frame. these observations, of control of auxin transporters by auxin, are interesting since it is known that auxin regulates its own transport but to date there has been little data on this type of feedback. other genes that are influenced by auxin in our study include transcription factors , genes involved in signal transduction , metabolic enzymes , as well as several genes classified to other categories and also currently unknown genes. the most down-regulated gene at all time points , for example, shows no sequence similarity to any known sequence and has no recorded expression in any of the sequenced tissue libraries deposited into the public domain. these  <dig> genes are interesting candidates for further research, but it is important that additional validations are carried out to identify and separate the immediate auxin target genes from the indirect.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described an efficient procedure for large-scale purification of gene sequence tags that can be used for several purposes including microarray fabrication. we demonstrate the utility of the technology by applying it to generate more than  <dig>  <dig> short  and highly specific arabidopsis gene sequence tags for use as microarray probes in transcriptional profiling. biotinylated amplification products are rapidly captured and eluted using a reusable streptavidin-coated solid-phase support in an automated high-throughput manner directly compatible with subsequent microarray printing. our results demonstrate that the assembly and purification of gene-specific tags is an alternative to currently used purification methods, especially suitable for short amplification products such as gene sequence tags. in addition, the possibility to generate single-strand probes in the range of 150– <dig> nucleotides by a sodium hydroxide treatment of immobilised probes with subsequent elution of the remaining biotinylated strand, opens up for new microarray applications that would extend probe length beyond current oligonucleotide synthesis limits.

