BACKGROUND
most of what we know about sequence dependent regulation of translation initiation in eukaryotes comes from careful experimental analyses that involve site-directed mutagenesis of nucleotide sequences derived from specific genes. the main drawback of such an approach is that it provides information that is context specific. it is often difficult to determine whether the observations relate to a particular gene or whether they can be extrapolated to all other genes as well. with the newly developed ribosome profiling technique   <cit> , it is possible to look at the translation of all mrnas in the cell simultaneously . therefore the analysis of ribo-seq data can help us to discriminate general aspects of translational regulation from gene specific regulatory mechanisms.

three recently published ribosome profiling studies provided large datasets of initiating ribosomes footprints mapped to the transcriptomes of human and mouse cells  <cit> . despite differences in the experimental approaches and computational techniques, the studies converged in the conclusion that approximately half of the tiss are non-augs . this was unanticipated as the translation initiation machinery was thought to stringently select aug codons for initiation, whereas non-aug tiss were thought to be rare and gene-specific. while the ability of ribosomes to initiate at non-aug codons was documented a long time ago  <cit>  and functional non-aug initiators have been identified using phylogenetic analysis  <cit> , the efficiency of non-aug initiation in general was expected to be very low. earlier measurements of translation initiation in mammalian cell free extracts indicated that, even in optimal nucleotide context, non-aug initiation efficiency is at least  <dig> times lower than that of aug  <cit>  and even lower in yeast  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
the relative frequency of non-aug tiss depends on the sensitivity of the methods and location relative to aug tiss. a. the frequencies of non-aug codons among all tiss  and in 5′ leaders, i.e. upstream of annotated tiss,  for the three ribo-seq datasets. the bottom bars “# footprints” represent the proportion of footprint reads detected at all non-aug tiss. b. the overall number of detected tiss correlates with the sensitivity . c. the proportion of non-aug tiss also correlates with the sensitivity. for a,b,c, the distributions were generated from initiating ribosome footprint data from lee et al.  <cit>   and ingolia et al.  <cit>  . d. a hypothetical example is given of an mrna with one weak  and two strong  tiss. because ribosomes encounter the weak upstream tis first, the proportion of ribosomes initiating at the first tis is higher than that for the third downstream  tis. the green bar represents all undetected tiss downstream of the most 3′ detectable tis.



interestingly, the majority of tiss upstream of annotated tiss, i.e. within mrna 5′ leaders , are non-augs : ~83% in ingolia et al.  <cit> ; ~74% in lee et al.  <cit> ; 78% in fritsch et al.  <cit> . this observation, however, is consistent with the widely accepted leaky scanning model of translation initiation in eukaryotes . in the case of the leaky scanning model, the preinitiation complex first assembles at the 5′end of the mrna, and then scans the mrna in the 5′ to the 3′ direction. once the preinitiation complex encounters an initiation codon in a suitable context, a chain of events triggers the 60s subunit joining and the start of elongation. however, in suboptimal contexts, only a proportion of the ribosomes engage in initiating protein synthesis while the rest of the ribosomes continue scanning. as suggested by lee et al.  <cit> , in this scenario it is expected that low efficient tiss would be detected mostly upstream of strong tiss and not downstream. therefore, in order to study the sequence properties determining the strength of a tis, it is important to estimate its strength independent of its location relative to other tiss. for this purpose we designed a method for calculating translation initiation probabilities from the absolute values of translation initiation. we tested our approach on three publicly available datasets and have shown that the estimated probabilities of initiation at non-aug tiss are typically much lower than those at aug tiss. in addition to resolving the controversy, our approach can be useful for characterizing future ribo-seq datasets.

RESULTS
how to measure the strength of a translation initiation site ?
one way to estimate the strength of a tis is by counting the ribosomes that initiate at this particular codon. this is the basis of the signal generated in the ribo-seq studies described in the background section  <cit> : the number of rna fragments protected by the ribosomes arrested at a tis should reflect the number of ribosomes initiating at this site. as the sensitivity of the experimental technique increases, the number of detected tiss should obviously increase and this indeed can be seen in figure 1b. however, the number of ribosomes at a particular tis largely depends on other factors such as mrna levels and the rate at which the preinitiation complex is formed at the 5′-cap. consequently, and counterintuitively, the number of ribosomes initiating at a tis is not a good measure of tis strength.

figure 1c illustrates how the proportion of non-aug tiss increases with increasing sensitivity. hence, assigning a codon as an initiation site is also dependent on the ribosome footprint coverage thresholds that are used to distinguish starts from non-starts.

an alternative method that we explored in this work was to measure the strength of a tis as the probability with which a ribosome initiates at the start.

proportion of the absolute signal  method
how to calculate the probability with which a ribosome would initiate at a particular tis? without any prior knowledge regarding the mechanism of translation initiation, one may suggest to define it as the relative frequency at which ribosomes initiate. instead of asking the question regarding the number of detectable tiss, let us ask the question what is the chance that a ribosome would initiate at a non-aug codon? to answer this question we simply need to count the number of ribosome protected fragments that have aug and non-aug codons in the position of the inferred peptidyl trna site . only about a quarter or less of the ribosome footprints originate from non-aug starts . the difference between “all tiss” and “# footprints” distributions in figure 1a is because tiss are not all equally efficient translation initiators. purely in terms of the number of ribosome footprints, aug codons appear to be more efficient in capturing initiating ribosomes than non-aug codons which is in agreement with previous observations that aug codons are better initiators. however, because of differences in the levels of mrna, this comparison of aug and non-aug initiation is likely to be very inaccurate.

because transcript levels and the rates of ribosomal load are different for each gene, the comparison of relative initiation strength is meaningful only within the same gene. the strength of a tis can then be measured as the fraction of footprints that initiate at the tis from the total number of footprints that initiate in the entire mrna. so for an mrna with initiating ribosome footprint reads  at initiation sites tis <dig>  tis <dig>  tis <dig> … tisk, the probability of initiating footprints  at each tisi can be calculated as follows:  <dig> pi=ri∑s=1krs 

using the pas approach ), however, is inaccurate because it does not reflect the process of initiation codon selection by the scanning ribosome. this is illustrated with a hypothetical example given in figure 1d which shows an mrna with one weak  and two strong  tiss. because ribosomes encounter the weak tis first, the proportion of ribosomes initiating at the weak tis  is higher than that for the third  tis . in other words, the number of ribosomes that are available to initiate at the third tis is dependent on the efficiencies of the upstream tiss. therefore, the proportion of ribosome footprints that are detected for the third tis using the pas approach ) is not reflective of the tis true strength. for the same reason, the frequency of non-aug tiss is much higher within the 5′ leaders of mrnas .

the leaky scanning  method
to measure the strength of a tis irrespective of its position within an mrna, we devised a method that is based on the leaky scanning  model of translation initiation. consider an mrna with initiation sites tis <dig>  tis <dig>  tis <dig> … tisk. taking into account the leaky scanning mechanism, the number of footprint reads  detected at each tisi would be equal to the product of the initiation probability at tisi  and the total number of ribosomes available to initiate at tisi:  <dig> ri=pi×∑s=ikrs 

hence, the probability of initiation at tisi , as determined by our ls approach, is calculated as follows:  <dig> pi=ri∑s=ikrs 

the advantage of the ls approach over the pas approach is illustrated in figure 2a which shows an mrna with  <dig> tiss with different densities of initiating ribosomes under two conditions. when estimated with pas, the initiation strength of tis  <dig> changes according to the absolute number of ribosomes initiating there. the absolute number of ribosomes that initiate at tis  <dig> is dependent on the number of ribosomes that initiated at tis  <dig>  unlike with the pas estimate, the ls estimate of tis  <dig> strength is not affected by the number of ribosomes that may have initiated at the upstream tis. the ls approach considers only the ribosomes that are available to initiate at each tis and consequently the inferred pi for each tisi is independent of the probabilities of initiation of other tiss in the same mrna.figure  <dig> 
the effect of tis orientation on the pas method and the ls method and selection of the data for performance comparison. a. a schematic representation illustrating the difference in probabilities of initiation  estimated using the pas method , red) and the ls method , blue). b. the frequency of each codon as the first or the last tis in an mrna. the distributions were generated using mrnas with multiple starts from ingolia et al.  <cit>  data. c. the barcharts indicate the number of mrnas with a varying number of tiss  for genes encoding a single transcript isoform from each dataset  and ingolia et al.  <cit>  ). the pie charts show the relative frequency of two tiss transcripts containing three different configurations of tis orfs: tiss that belong to overlapping orfs , tiss that belong to the same orf  and tiss that belong to orfs separated by a non-translated region . d. the frequencies of non-aug codons among all tiss  and in 5′ leaders, i.e. upstream of annotated tiss,  in the  <dig> tiss mrna datasets selected for testing the pas and ls methods. the bottom bars “# footprints” represent the proportion of footprint reads detected at all non-aug tiss.



in this process, the density of the available scanning ribosomes is progressively reduced with each subsequent tis. eventually this number should fall below the detectable level so that no initiating ribosomes would be detected even for tiss with a high probability of initiation. to take this into account, we introduced an artificial tis  that represents a combination of all undetectable initiation events that take place downstream of the detectable tiss so that the mrna now has initiation sites tis <dig>  tis <dig>  tis <dig> … tisk, tisu and the above formula is modified as follows:  <dig> pi=ri∑s=iurs 

tisu represents initiation events that are undetectable with the experimental approach . from our exploratory analysis, the optimum number of reads to assign to ru corresponding to tisu, is equal to the minimum detection threshold level used to identify a tis  on the performance of the ls method”).

dataset for testing the ls method
before testing the method we decided to clean the dataset to reduce falsely detected tiss. ribosome profiling is a new technique and the nature and extent to which it could generate spurious signals is currently unknown. during our analysis we found one source of spurious signals that is best explained by the antibiotics arresting elongating ribosomes at specific codons .

due to the scanning mechanism of translation initiation, it is expected that a codon, which is inefficient as a tis, would be detected more frequently as the first tis  than the last tis , as explained in figure 1d. this was indeed the case for cug, as can be seen in figure 2b which shows the distribution of different codons detected as the first and the last tiss on mrnas for the ingolia et al.  <cit>  data. for other non-aug codons, the portion that was detected as the last codon increased indicating that most likely a large portion of tiss corresponding to these codons are false positives due to the arrest of elongating ribosomes . the rule does not apply to strong aug codons because they are expected to be the least leaky codons and hence would occur more frequently as the last tis in a series of tiss in the same mrna. because the cug set of tiss had a lower proportion of false positives, we limited the test of our method to aug and cug tiss only.

to observe how the ls method ) performed in the simplest scenario, we applied it to transcripts with only  <dig> tiss . to ensure that downstream initiation was due to leaky scanning, we selected tis candidates that occur in a single frame or overlapping frames . thus, we excluded those cases where upon termination at the first orf, ribosomes may resume scanning and reinitiate at a downstream codon  <cit> .

exploration of the effects of varying the 3′ artificial tis footprint signal strength  on the performance of the ls method
to see how the ru parameter affected the model, we varied this parameter and calculated tis probabilities using  <dig> ribo-seq datasets.

when ru =  <dig> , the discrimination between aug and cug tiss was the highest . this can be explained by the fact that when an artificial tis is not included, the second tis  has a probability equal to  <dig>  however, probabilities equal to  <dig> in the context of translation initiation is an unrealistic estimate because we cannot exclude the possibility of downstream initiation occurring below the detectable level. the minimum threshold value used for detecting a tis in each study  provided the next best discrimination of aug tiss from cug tiss.

exploration of how the ls method performs in discriminating kozak contexts
the efficiency of an initiation codon is known to depend on its nucleotide context, commonly termed the kozak context in honour of its discoverer  <cit> . therefore, we also examined the power of the model in discriminating tiss in favourable contexts from tiss in unfavourable contexts in transcripts with two tiss. we grouped mrnas into three sets based on the mutual orientation of the tiss: upstream tis  and downstream tis ;  <dig>  upstream tis  and downstream tis ;  <dig>  upstream tis  and downstream tis . to express the strength of the context numerically, we used a position specific weighting similar to previous approaches  <cit>  .

unlike the identity of a start codon, position specific weighting scores poorly correlated with the strength of tiss irrespective of how the strength was measured . this may be because the identity of a start codon is a larger factor affecting the strength of tiss than its context, and variation in the data does not allow our method to capture the difference. it is also possible that the read coverage in the used data is insufficient to provide the statistical power required for discriminating between codons in different kozak contexts. to explore the latter, we carried out a characterization of the tiss using both methods under varying thresholds of read coverage. the performance of the ls method  improved as the coverage increased .

exploration of the effect of scanning ribosome occlusion due to uorf translation
the ls method already takes the inhibitory effect of utis but not uorf translation into account, i.e. the ribosomes are sequestered at upstream tiss. our method does not take into account the possibility that elongating ribosomes may occlude the progression of scanning ones  <cit> . the longer the orf, the more likely trailing scanning complexes could clash with elongating ribosomes , slow down and perhaps dissociate from the mrna. because relatively little is known about the moiety properties of scanning ribosome complexes  <cit> , their density and the nature of their interaction with elongating ribosomes, it is impractical to model this process for the purpose of this work. instead, we incorporated a single parameter that would take into account the inhibitory effect of elongating ribosomes on the progression of scanning complexes. the parameter represents the number of scanning ribosomes that would be lost because of a clash with elongating ribosomes and thus its value is dependent on the length of the translated orf. we applied the approach to transcripts with  <dig> tiss that occur in the same frame or overlapping frames .

we found that varying the distance parameter value in the ls method ) appeared to have a negligible effect for the  <dig> ribo-seq datasets examined. the predicted tiss probabilities did not improve the discrimination between non-aug and aug tiss  nor correlations with the strength of kozak context . there may be a number of reasons for this. one possibility is the relatively short distance between tiss in the majority of transcripts examined  and the reduction in scanning ribosomes density due to the occlusion is insignificant in comparison with the variation in the data due to the other factors  <cit>  that we do not consider in our model. consequently, we did not incorporate this parameter into our method for the analysis of the tiss data from the  <dig> ribo-seq studies analysed in this work.

comparison of the pas method and the ls method for discriminating the strength of aug tiss from non-aug tiss
figure 3a provides the translation initiation probability density distributions for aug and cug tiss from the “ <dig> tiss per mrna human dataset” described earlier . the probability densities are estimated as the relative proportion of the absolute ribo-seq signal within one mrna using the pas method, , left) and using the ls method , right). we also applied the two methods to all mrnas with any number of tiss, including those that contain non-overlapping orfs, thus allowing for the possibility of reinitiation . it is evident that that ls method ) discriminates initiation probabilities at aug and cug codons much better and this argues for its superiority over the pas method ).figure  <dig> 
comparison of methods for discriminating the strength of aug tiss from non-aug tiss in human. a. probability density plots for human tiss depending on their initiation strength . left: the scores are calculated as a fraction of the footprints aligning to the tiss from the total number of footprints aligning to the corresponding mrna using the pas method ). right: the translation initiation probability scores are calculated using the ls method ). transcripts with two tiss without an in-frame stop codon between the first tis and second tis were used. b. probability density plots for human tiss from all mrnas ; right: ls method, equation ). all data are from lee et al.  <cit>   and a 3′ artificial start value of ru =  <dig>  rltm-rchx was used for the ls method; see additional file 1: figure s <dig> for the other datasets.



interestingly, the discriminatory power of the ls method over the pas method improved with increased footprint coverage . however, while the separation of aug and cug codons clearly improved, it is also clear that the distribution of tiss was also affected as cug codons with low probability were almost entirely eliminated from the higher footprint coverage distributions .

nevertheless, it is apparent from this analysis that aug codons on average are much stronger initiators than cug codons. in the  <dig> single isoform transcripts for which aug/cug tiss were detected, we found that in the 5′ leaders, defined as the region between the 5′ end of an mrna and the most 3′ tis, there are  <dig> aug codons and  <dig> cug codons. of these, 20% of aug codons produced a detectable translation initiation signal, while only 3% of cug codons were detected as tiss.

discussion
it is apparently clear that translation initiation in many mammalian mrnas takes place at more than one location. multiple tiss play different functions. tiss that are in-frame with the main protein coding orf allow various protein isoforms to be synthesized. translation of short orfs from tiss that do not belong to the main coding orfs provides mechanisms for responding to various changes in physiological conditions . approximately 35-40% of mammalian mrnas are estimated to possess uaug codons  <cit> . translation initiation, however, is not limited to aug codons. many non-aug coded n-terminal extensions are evolutionarily conserved  <cit>  and some of these variants play vital functions, e.g. the recently discovered cug initiated variant of pten  <cit> . ribosome profiling studies described in this work  <cit>  provide evidence that the frequency of non-aug tiss could be as high as that of aug tiss. therefore 40% of mrnas with multiple tiss seems to be an underestimate. this multiplicity of tiss is not reflected in the major bioinformatics resources, where coding sequences in mrnas are usually annotated with a single tis. to overcome this problem, wan and qian developed tisdb  <cit> , a database of tiss detected with ribosome profiling carried out in human and mouse. while the information in the database is very useful, binary classification of codons as tiss or non-tiss has serious limitations. assigning strength scores to tiss could help the interpretation of their individual functional role in the translational control of their mrnas. therefore we have developed a computational approach for converting the translation initiation signal obtained with ribosome profiling into probabilities of ribosome initiation at individual tiss.

CONCLUSIONS
the application of this method to two types of tiss  allowed us to conclude that aug and cug codons have markedly different properties as translation initiators. we corroborated earlier observations that aug tiss on average are much stronger initiators than cug tiss. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the majority of aug tiss are very good initiators with the probability of translation initiation being close to  <dig>  in addition there are weak aug codons that cover a wide range of initiation probabilities. perhaps, these codons are located in highly unfavourable contexts for initiation or there are specific factors that inhibit initiation at these codons. the behaviour of cug codons is the opposite: the majority of cug codons are very poor initiators, while a minority of cug codons exhibit strong translation initiation . unlike weak aug codons, perhaps these strong cug codons are located in highly favourable initiation contexts or there are specific factors that activate initiation at these codons. the majority of detectable cug tiss occur in mrna 5′ leaders where the density of scanning ribosomes is the highest. at these locations even infrequent initiation could produce a significant signal. therefore cug tiss can be responsible for significant protein/peptide production from highly expressed mrnas if they are located upstream of aug tiss, despite their weakness as initiators. indeed, many short open reading frames  encoding sorf-encoded polypeptide  products have been found to initiate with non-aug start codons  <cit> . however it has been reported that despite the large scale detection of alternative translation initiation in recent proteomics studies , only a few mass spectrometry detectable translation initiation events occurred at non-aug codons  <cit> . future ribosome profiling of initiating ribosome studies, in particular the qti-seq approach  will undoubtedly provide better data which in turn will likely improve the accuracy of the initiation probability scores as determined by the ls method.

in addition to resolving the contradiction caused by the observation of a large number of non-aug tiss in ribo-seq studies, the ls approach will be useful for the interpretation of future ribo-seq data. it should help in the understanding of how translation initiation is regulated in each specific mrna in response to various conditions as well as the characterization of the features of start codon selection which are specific to a particular tissue or developmental stage. when an mrna has multiple tiss, the absolute number of ribosomes initiating at a particular tis depends on the absolute number of ribosomes initiating at other  tiss for the same mrna . the probabilities of initiation at the tiss, however, are independent of each other. therefore determining the probabilities of initiation at different tiss is more informative for finding tiss that are under regulation than looking at the changes in the absolute number of initiating ribosomes. for instance, the down regulation of the main orf translation may happen as a consequence of uorf translation up regulation. but how can this be determined? if the regulation is mediated through the uorf tis and not the main orf tis, a change in the probability of uorf initiation would be expected, but not of the main orf, while the absolute levels will change for both . consequently, estimating the probability of ribosomes initiating at a start codon is more informative.

