BACKGROUND
the starch granule is a highly-ordered structure with alternating crystalline and amorphous growth rings  <cit> . starch molecules are biopolymers of anhydroglucose units linked by α- <dig>  and α- <dig>  glycosidic bonds. they are composed of two glucan polymers, the generally linear fraction, amylose, and the branched fraction, amylopectin. the constituent amylopectin chains can be mainly categorized into a chains  and b chains   <cit> . the main physiological functions of starch include high-density storage of energy and the controlled release of this energy during starch degradation.

starch-branching enzyme  plays an important role in starch biosynthesis by introducing branch points, the α- <dig>  linkages in starch. boyer and preiss  <cit>  identified three major sbe isoforms in developing maize kernels: sbei, sbeiia, and sbeiib. the sbe isoforms have been shown to be encoded by different genes  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses of sbe sequences from a number of plant species have shown that the sbei and sbeii isoforms are conserved among most plants, and that sbeiia and sbeiib isoforms are conserved among most monocots  <cit> . furthermore, genes belonging to both the sbei and sbeii families can be identified in various lineages of green alga, which supports the theory that these two families of genes evolved approximately a billion years ago  <cit> . these examples of extreme evolutionary conservation are strong evidence for a specific and vital role for each enzyme isoform in starch biosynthesis.

in vitro biochemical analyses have documented that the sbei and sbeii isoform activities are not identical  <cit> , but these studies do not necessarily indicate their action in vivo, as starch biosynthesis occurs in the presence of starch synthases and debranching enzymes. studies have suggested that multi-protein starch synthesizing complexes exist, and that interactions within these complexes could modulate the intricate structure of a developing starch granule  <cit> . whether there are functional differences among sbe isoforms in vivo remains to be addressed.

insight into a possible in vivo function of an sbe may be gained from the study of sbe mutants deficient in one or more sbe isoform activities. the maize amylose extender  mutant, which is deficient in sbeiib, has a profound effect on starch structure, leading to an increased amylose proportion and a reduced branching density of endosperm amylopectin  <cit> . more recently, studies of a maize sbe2a mutant showed that deficiency of the sbeiia isoform decreased plant fitness and resulted in lower kernel yield, but there was minimal effect on kernel starch properties  <cit> . previous work showed no effect of sbei deficiency  on starch molecular size and on chain length distribution after debranching  <cit> . subsequently, preliminary analysis of susceptibility of sbe1a endosperm starch to pancreatic α-amylase digestion, using the aoac procedure  to determine enzyme-resistant starch , indicated that sbe1a mutant endosperm starch had a greater resistance to digestion  <cit> . we reasoned that it was likely that the deficiency in sbei led to reduced susceptibility to enzymatic digestion by altering the starch structure in some way. thus, in this work we sought to confirm this initial observation and to explore more subtle aspects of starch structure in the sbe1a mutant. the objective of the present work was to characterize functional and molecular phenotypes of both sbe1a and wild-type  in the w64a maize inbred line.

RESULTS
starch molecular structure
to study the functional role of sbei on molecular structure of amylose and amylopectin, wt sbe1a starch and mutant sbe1a starch were fractionated from mature kernels. the maize sbe1a mutant contains a mu transposon in the 14th exon of the sbe1a gene, and was previously shown to be null for the expression of sbei transcript and protein  <cit> . the proportions, iodine binding properties, and size-exclusion chromatograms for the amylopectin and amylose fractions were similar for wt and sbe1a starch . to study the molecular fine structure, β-amylolysis and subsequent isoamylase and pullulanase debranching were applied to both the amylopectin and amylose fractions from wt and sbe1a. despite a similar chain length  profile observed for both fractions from the two genotypes , the cl distribution after various extents of β-amylolysis showed differences for wt and sbe1a .

for the amylopectin fraction from both genotypes, hydrolysis with β-amylase caused a dramatic change in cl distribution within the first  <dig> min : a major increase was observed below degree of polymerization  ~ <dig>  in this region for wt, the change in the cl distribution from  <dig> min to  <dig> h of β-amylolysis was primarily a reduction of the dp  <dig> stubs to dp  <dig> stubs; however, for the sbe1a sample no further reduction in dp  <dig> was observed after  <dig> min . after  <dig> h of β-amylolysis, conditions necessary to produce β-limit dextrin   <cit> , the sbe1a sample had a much smaller proportion of the dp  <dig> chains and a much larger proportion of dp  <dig> chains than the wt sample .

for the amylose fraction from both genotypes, β-ld was produced. analysis of the cl distribution of isoamylase-debranched β-lds showed a higher proportion of chains of dp ≥  <dig> and lower proportions of other chains , before and after pullulanase addition . the subsequent pullulanase debranching led to an increase in both the dp  <dig> and dp  <dig> areas for both genotypes, and this increase was greater in sbe1a . the subsequent pullulanase debranching also led to a decrease in chains of approximately dp 8- <dig> for both genotypes .

starch digestibility in vitro by pancreatic α-amylase
starch hydrolysis is an important feature of starch function both in the plant and when the plant is used for human food. hydrolysis of starch ingested as food can vary both with respect to the rate and the extent of digestion by pancreatic α-amylase. in the human digestive tract, the undigested starch that reaches the colon is termed rs; the level of rs is a measure of the extent of digestion by this enzyme. an official in vitro method  is used for determination of the rs level. this method was modified to allow study of both the digestion rate and the extent of digestion  <cit> . f-tests performed for a fully nested analysis of variance  showed an effect of genotype , but no effect of biological replication . the rs value was higher in the sbe1a mutant starch  than in the wt starch  from measures of  <dig> biological replications .

the digestion pattern was similar among the three biological replications for each genotype . for graphic illustration of the digestion time-course, curves for one biological replication for each genotype are shown in figure  <dig>  the kinetics of digestion were analyzed using a five-parameter, double-exponential decay model , and the calculated parameters are presented in table  <dig>  a higher y <dig>  was found in sbe1a than for wt , consistent with the higher limit of digestion given by the rs value for this genotype.

y


0

s


1

k


 <dig> 

s

2
k

 <dig> 

sbe1a
 <dig> kinetic parameters are obtained from model fit using the double exponential decay equation:    where y is % nds, x is the time, y <dig> is the y-value that the model asymptotically approaches, s <dig> and s <dig> are the concentrations of the two different substrate components, and k <dig> and k <dig> are the reaction rate constants for the decay of the two different components.

 <dig> values are expressed as mean ± sd for three biological replications. values for each biological replication were obtained from fit of combined data from two independent digestions. significant differences  in the same column, as determined by one-way anova analysis, are indicated by different superscripts.

granular morphology of native starch and residual starch after digestion
scanning electron microscopy was used to image starch granules from wt and sbe1a mutant plants in native form and after the  <dig> h in vitro digestion with pancreatic α-amylase for determination of the rs value. prior to digestion, native starch granules from wt and sbe1a had similar morphology  with an average diameter of  <dig>  μm for wt and  <dig>  μm for sbe1a. however, after digestion, differences were observed between the two genotypes . samples of the sbe1a rs contained many residual granules with distinct holes in the surface and hollow interiors, whereas for wt only small fragments of residual granules were seen . the wt fragments also showed evident alternating layers on the edge of the pieces, which was less evidently present in sbe1a samples .

light micrographs of iodine-stained native granules are shown in figure 3c. for both genotypes, all native starch granules were stained blue and produced a characteristic maltese cross when viewed in the polarized light microscope; however, sbe1a native starch showed more heterogeneity in staining as compared to wt, as there were more relatively dark-stained granules in sbe1a than in wt native starch .

starch utilization during kernel germination
as endosperm starch from the sbe1a mutant has a lower susceptibility to pancreatic α-amylase, we suspected that the sbe1a endosperm starch might be less readily utilized during kernel germination. to study the effect of sbe1a on kernel germination, starch utilization and coleoptile growth during germination of wt and sbe1a mutant kernels were examined.

all the kernels from three different ears of both wt and sbe1a genotypes were germinated, demonstrating no differences in germination rate. the coleoptile length of each genotype was measured daily over  <dig> days . the average length of sbe1a coleoptiles was shorter than wt from day  <dig> onward . for both genotypes the endosperm starch content decreased over time . on days  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  the starch content was higher in sbe1a germinating endosperm as compared to wt, suggesting less utilization of starch. this trend is consistent with the reduced growth of sbe1a coleoptiles after day  <dig> 

discussion
starch molecular structure
in the present study, rapid degradation of chains dp ≥ <dig> and dp 8- <dig> were observed for both wt and sbe1a samples in the first  <dig> min of β-amylolysis . as β-amylase cannot bypass branch points to hydrolyze starch chains, a plausible interpretation for the less extensive degradation of dp 8- <dig> in sbe1a would be that the b chains   <cit>  would have slightly longer internal segments and shorter external chains. for the second stage of β-amylolysis  <cit> , a slow reduction in the amount of dp  <dig> chains was observed in wt samples over the period of  <dig> min to  <dig> h but not in sbe1a samples , suggesting differences in the proportion of branch points that would differentially limit access of the enzyme to glycosidic linkages  <cit> .

amylopectin branching pattern models for both sbe1a and wt are presented to account for this difference in β-amylase action on dp  <dig> stubs . in the model for sbe1a, dp  <dig> stubs would be difficult for β-amylase to hydrolyze to dp  <dig> when closely associated branch points present a steric barrier to binding of β-amylase. although most of the dp  <dig> is from residual a chains  <cit> , some dp  <dig> chains from residual b chains would result from short b chains with short internal segments. the incomplete hydrolysis of dp  <dig> in sbe1a suggests that a chains are preferentially localized near another branch point, leading to 1) hindered hydrolysis of residual a chains of dp  <dig> to dp  <dig> due to steric constraint, and 2) more residual b chains with dp  <dig> due to incidence of short internal segments . in the model for wt, the dp  <dig> stubs would be slowly hydrolyzed to dp  <dig>  as there is less steric hindrance from proximal branch points. according to the two models, sbe1a amylopectin contains a higher proportion of closely associated branch points than wt. furthermore, based on cl profiles , the calculated overall average branching density is similar in the two amylopectins. thus, we suggest that the effect of the sbe1a mutation is to increase the local concentration of branch points but not to influence the overall amount of branch points in amylopectin.

in the debranched β-lds from the amylose fraction , a higher proportion of long chains of dp ≥  <dig> was observed in sbe1a . the higher proportion of longer chains in β-lds of amylose from sbe1a can be explained by branch points that tend to be closer to the non-reducing ends, so that longer internal chains result.

when debranching of β-lds from amylose was performed with isoamylase without subsequent pullulanase digestion, there were fewer dp  <dig> than dp  <dig> chains . for β-ld from amylopectin, all of the dp  <dig> and some of the dp  <dig> chains are known to be debranched by isoamylase  <cit> . however, our results of β-ld from amylose for both genotypes suggest that even some dp  <dig> chains are not debranched by isoamylase. comparing sbe1a to wt, more of dp  <dig> and dp  <dig> chains are not debranched by isoamylase in β-ld from sbe1a amylose . as the structures escaping isoamylase debranching may have closely associated branch points and those structures can be debranched by pullulanase  <cit> , a greater increase in both dp  <dig> and dp  <dig> by subsequent pullulanase treatment suggests that a higher proportion of these structures are resistant to isoamylase in amylose from sbe1a. amylose branching pattern models are presented in figure 5b to account for the difference in isoamylase action. in the model for sbe1a, a chains are preferentially attached by branch points close to each other whereas in wt, a chains are not, leading to less hindered isoamylase debranching.

our data suggest that amylose of sbe1a mutant starch has 1) longer internal chains and 2) more a chains attached by branch points close to each other. this evidence can be used to create an overall model for amylose branching patterns of sbe1a and wt . the models are drawn taking into account similar cl profiles  and assuming that ~50% of amylose molecules are branched, with ~5- <dig> branches per molecule  <cit> . according to the proposed model, for sbe1a, a chains are closer to each other, and the location of the chains tends to be more towards non-reducing end. for wt, a chains are farther away from each other, and the location of the chains is more random and thus more distributed.

starch digestion
kinetic analysis shows that the y <dig> value for wt starch is effectively zero , in agreement with the rs value for wt starch , and the y <dig> and rs values for sbe1a starch are also in good agreement.

the kinetic model is based on the presence of two general types of starch substrate: a rapidly-digested substrate , and a slowly-digested substrate   <cit> . the two genotypes differ both in the proportions of s <dig> and s <dig> and the reaction rate constants for these two components. the s <dig> components of wt and sbe1a starch were  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively. this suggests that the sbe1a mutation altered the starch structure and this resulted in less rapidly-digested component. consistent with our results, ao et al.  <cit>  found that increased branch density led to a decreased proportion of rds  and an increased proportion of sds .

starch granular structure
two microscopic techniques, scanning electron microscopy  and light microscopy , were employed to observe granular structure before and after rs digestion by pancreatic α-amylase. native starch granules from wt and sbe1a appear similar in size, shape, degree of birefringence, and morphology, as described in a previous report for wx and sbe1a wx granules  <cit> . polarized light microscopy  shows that almost all of the digested wt granules had lost their birefringence, while for sbe1a, many digested granules had maintained some birefringence in the peripheral area of the granules, which indicates that the center of the digested sbe1a granules is either gone or no longer crystalline enough to show birefringence. the presence of a hollow interior in the digested sbe1a granules was confirmed by sem , indicating a relatively greater resistance to digestion for the exterior portion of the sbe1a granule.

most of the recovered rs from wt were represented by small granule fragments. however, the sbe1a rs showed variations in morphology, from small fragments to hollow granules. the difference in digestion of individual granules may be due to differences in heterogeneity in granule structure, as a higher proportion of relatively dark-stained granules were observed in sbe1a than in wt native starch . sem revealed the presence of alternating layers in the wt residual fragments , which probably reflect the residual growth rings after digestion.

by observing the sbe1a rs by sem , one may roughly estimate that, for the recovered granules, approximately 40% of granule content has escaped digestion. however the rs value for sbe1a starch is approximately 13%. therefore, some of the sbe1a granules were likely to have been digested completely. the heterogeneity found among sbe1a granules  may account for different degree of digestion of individual granules. thus, it can be reasoned that the micrographs of the sbe1a rs may disproportionately represent the more resistant granules.

a distinct feature of the recovered sbe1a rs is the presence of holes on the surface of the peripheral portion of the granules. these holes are possibly from the enlargement of the surface pores in native granules by α-amylase hydrolysis  <cit> . the presence of these holes on the shell is consistent with previous studies demonstrating that digestion of normal granules starts with surface pores and proceeds through deeper hydrolysis in channels  <cit> , followed by fragmentation  <cit> . in the current study, the presence of remaining shells with holes in the sbe1a rs indicates continuing difficulty in digestion by α-amylase. neither holes nor shells were observed in the wt rs, indicating a more complete digestion.

as observed under microscopy, the rs from wt consists mostly of portions of residual growth rings, while the rs of sbe1a is mostly residual peripheral regions. the kinetic analysis shows that the digestion of sbe1a starch reached a plateau by  <dig> h, suggesting the rs from sbe1a is not further digested. when the rs is observed by sem, one can conclude that some of the peripheral regions in sbe1a starch granules cannot be further digested. enrichment of amylose has been found by some to exist toward the granule peripheral region  <cit> . sem showed that the peripheral regions were more resistant to α-amylase digestion in sbe1a granules. it is possible that these differences may be preferentially localized in the peripheral region of the granules, where starch synthesis may be more influenced by deficiency of sbei  <cit> . the cl distribution of residual starch collected after α-amylase digestion showed some small differences between wt and sbe1a . however, no direct evidence was obtained in the current study about whether the molecular structure in the peripheral regions was different in sbe1a.

starch utilization during kernel germination
an endogenous α-amylase is considered to be responsible for attacking the starch granule and initiating starch hydrolysis in germinating cereal endosperm  <cit> . starch hydrolysis continues by the action of limit dextrinase, α-amylase, β-amylase, and α-glucosidase to produce maltose and glucose for plant utilization  <cit> . the observed reduction in starch hydrolysis during the later stages of germination raises the possibility that continued hydrolysis of α-amylase-hydrolyzed glucans is hindered in the sbe1a mutant. the altered carbon metabolism could then cause a deficiency in general plant growth characteristics such as coleoptile length  <cit> . the structural analysis of sbe1a starch suggests that the decreased starch utilization of sbe1a seeds is due to an altered starch branching pattern.

consideration of sbei function in the context of pleiotropic effects
differences in sbe activity in sbe mutants could be simply due to the amount of a remaining sbe isoform or to biochemical or physical interactions that modulate the activities of an isoform; for the latter possibility sbei may be regulated through complex interactions with other starch synthetic enzymes. colleoni et al  <cit>  showed that two migratory forms of sbei are missing in maize endosperm of the maize ae mutant, indicating a possible interaction of sbei and sbeiib. seo et al.  <cit>  found that when sbes were heterologously expressed in a yeast system, sbeiia and/or sbeiib appear to act before sbei on synthesizing glucan structure. the studies of yao et al.  <cit>  suggest that in the absence of sbeiib, a reciprocal inhibition exists between sbei and sbeiia, and that the presence of either sbei or sbeiia increases amylopectin branching as opposed to the presence of sbei and sbeiia together.

direct evidence for protein-protein interactions between sbes and different members of all the proteins involved in starch biosynthesis has also been reported by several groups, based on co-immunoprecipitation and affinity purification methods. tetlow et al.  <cit>  reported that sbei from wheat amyloplasts was present in a high molecular weight complex with starch phosphorylase and sbeiib. a separate study  <cit>  using maize amyloplasts showed that eliminating sbeiib caused significant increases in the abundance of sbei, beiia, ssiii, and starch phosphorylase in the granule, without affecting ssi or ssiia. hennen-bierwagen  <cit>  reported that sbei and ssi were shown to interact in one of three independent methods tested; sbei did not interact with any of the other proteins in their study , and unlike the other five proteins in their study, sbei was the only protein to exist as a monomer in gel permeation chromatography.

in present study, the sbe1a mutant line is nearly isogenic with the wt control. most if not all mutant phenotypes are likely the result of many effects, direct and indirect, on the overall growth, development and physiology of the plant, so it is impossible to truly isolate a primary effect of the mutation when looking at a whole plant level phenotype, even the starch structure phenotype. modifying sbe activity may induce modifications in the distribution of phosphate groups within amylopectin such as in potato  <cit> . this may alter accessibility of amylase  to its substrate and may induce differences in digestibility. nonetheless, there is value in observing and characterizing the phenotype of these plants, both at the macro and molecular levels as we have presented. we have a sister paper  <cit>  which does investigate the effect of various sbe mutations on leaf starch which further sheds light on the sbei function in the context of pleiotropic consequences.

evolution and function of maize sbei isoform in starch biosynthesis
this work for the first time reports a specific and unique function for sbei during the life cycle of maize. molecular structure analysis suggests an important function of sbei in modulating the branching pattern in normal starch by decreasing local clustering of amylopectin branch points. thompson  <cit>  emphasized the non-random nature of the distribution of branch points in starch. a specific type of non-random branching pattern may be required to optimize both storage and hydrolysis. it is reasonable to hypothesize that alteration in the specific non-random branching pattern could lead to an altered granule organization, rendering it more or less favorable to the plant for storage and/or for enzyme hydrolysis during utilization. our data from in vitro starch digestibility and from plant germination analysis support this hypothesis.

gene duplication and neo-functionalization are well known mechanisms by which specific genes can evolve to express different isoforms of enzymes with slightly specialized expression patterns or different enzymatic activities  <cit> . with the evidence from current and previous work, we can infer that an ancestral sbe gene has duplicated at least twice during the evolution of maize, and these evolved to express three different sbe isoforms with highly specific functions in starch biosynthesis. a detailed phylogenetic analysis of the branching enzymes was published by deschamps et al.  <cit> . this work demonstrated that genes belonging to both the sbei and sbeii families can be identified in the green alga, which supports the theory that these two families of genes evolved approximately a billion years ago based on phylogenetic estimates of the divergence between the chlorophyta and magnolippyta lineages   <cit> . this example of extreme evolutionary conservation is strong evidence for a specific and vital role for each enzyme isoform in starch biosynthesis. while most plant species studied retain genes representing each subfamily of sbe, arabidopsis does not, suggesting that somewhere in the lineage leading to arabidopsis, the gene was lost with minimal consequences to the species  <cit> .

the evidence presented in this work strongly supports the hypothesis that sbei is required to synthesize endosperm starch granules that allow normal hydrolysis and utilization during germination. considering plant survival in the wild, optimal seedling vigor would be a strong evolutionary force to select for genotypes of plants with starch granules optimized for molecular structure that would lead to efficient storage and utilization. the reduced seedling vigor of sbe1a mutant seeds observed in this work provides powerful evidence for a specialized and important role of sbei in plant development, consistent with the evolutionary conservation of sbei in all higher plants.

CONCLUSIONS
this work for the first time reports that a lack of sbei activity resulted in an observable effect, which was seen on both starch molecular structure and starch function. structural and functional analysis of endosperm starch deficient in sbei activity strongly supports the hypothesis that sbei is required to synthesize starch granules for normal kernel development, allowing efficient hydrolysis and utilization.

evidence from this work reveals a unique and essential function of sbei in normal plant development, consistent with the evolutionary conservation of sbei in all higher plants.

the new knowledge generated in this work will contribute to our understanding of the function and evolution of the maize sbes, and of their roles in the biosynthesis, hydrolysis and utilization of starch granules. moreover, the novel sbe1a starch might have application as a food ingredient with nutritional benefit.

