BACKGROUND
sporadic cases of inherited renal syndromes have been reported in domestic animals including cattle. in danish holsteins and danish red dairy cattle, an autosomal recessive form of renal lipofuscinosis has been described, accompanied by renal dysfunction and reduced longevity   <cit> . a single case of renal amyloidosis has been described in iranian cattle   <cit>  and various forms of renal dysplasia have been reported in other cattle  . in japanese black cattle, renal dysplasia occurred due to two independent autosomal recessive mutations of the claudin  <dig> gene , but no phenotypic differences between both types were reported . members of the claudin gene family play important roles in the formation of tight junctions in the kidney  <cit> . in japanese black cattle, inherited xanthinuria is associated with growth retardation and death at approximately 6 months of age   <cit> . this autosomal recessive inherited disease has been associated with a 3 bp deletion in the coding region of the molybdenum cofactor sulfurase  gene. in a single genetically uncharacterized galician blond beef calf, signs of listlessness and weight loss and renal failure with bilateral nephrolithiasis, composed of 100% xanthine were reported  <cit> .

in a previous report  <cit>  the authors described kidney abnormalities in two eight months old female alpine grey  twin cattle presenting a number of signs: growth retardation, overgrowth of hooves, gradual loss of weight and impaired skeletal development, despite a normal or only slightly decreased appetite and intense vitamin integration.

clinical biochemistry data e.g. associated with variable blood phosphate concentrations indicated a renal failure. pathological examination of the animals showed hypotrophic, firm and pale kidneys, with a roughened and granular surface. subsequent histology showed interstitial infiltrates of immature mesenchymal tissue and disseminated mineralization. mild dilation of the pelvis with free yellow calculi and disseminated medullar mineralization were also observed. small stones  were also found in the ureters and in the bladder. the observed renal syndrome in tyrolean grey cattle resembled inherited renal tubular dysplasia in japanese black cattle. despite phenotypic similarities, no mutation in cldn <dig> was identified  <cit> . therefore, the aim of this study was to use whole genome sequencing to unravel the genetic etiology of this condition.

methods
animals and snp genotyping
initially, blood samples were collected from two affected twin calves and their parents. genotyping of these four animals was performed using the bovinehd beadchip , including  <dig>  evenly distributed snps, at geneseek. plink software  <cit>  was used to search for extended intervals of homozygosity with shared alleles as described previously  <cit> . additionally, archived dna samples from  <dig> normal tyrolean grey cattle were used for genotyping the mocos variant. during the course of the review process of this paper,  <dig> additional blood samples were taken from two clinically suspicious cases and their dam. for the mutation analysis and comparison of sequencing data,  <dig> normal cattle from  <dig> genetically diverse bos taurus breeds were used: angler , angus , brown swiss , charolais , chianina , cika , danish red dairy , eringer , galloway , hereford , hinterwalder , holstein , limousin , pezzata rossa italiana , piemontese , romagnola , scottish highland , simmental , tyrolean grey , and vorderwalder .

whole genome re-sequencing
a fragment library with a 260 bp insert size was prepared and one lane of illumina hiseq <dig> paired-end reads collected ; the fastq files were created using casava  <dig>  . sequence reads were then mapped to the reference cow genome assembly umd <dig>  as previously described  <cit> , at average sequence coverage of 19-fold. the sam file generation, conversion to bam, duplicate detection, variant calling , and variant effect prediction were carried out as described previously  <cit> . the genome data has been made freely available under accession prjeb <dig> at the european nucleotide archive  <cit> .

genotyping
the mocos variant was genotyped by sanger sequencing of a 287 bp pcr product using a forward primer  and a reverse primer  flanking the mocos variant. pcr products were amplified with amplitaqgold360mastermix  and the products directly sequenced using the pcr primers on an abi  <dig> capillary sequencer . sequence data were analyzed using sequencher  <dig>  . in addition, fragment size analyses were performed for the genotyping of the mocos variant on the abi  <dig> and analyzed with the genemapper  <dig>  software .

urolith analysis
the uroliths were washed with deionized distilled water and dried in an oven at 45 °c for 48 h. after visual inspection of the external surface by stereomicroscope, appearance, color and size were recorded, stones weighed and one of the largest stones cut . the test samples were ground in an agate pestle and mortar to obtain a homogenous powder. a small amount of the powder  was mixed with 200 mg of potassium bromide and this mixture pressed in a ten-tone press to form a thin pill/pellet. fourier transform infrared  spectroscopy of this pellet was performed in a spectrophotometer  and the obtained spectrum compared with a specific library for uroliths .

RESULTS
pedigree analysis and homozygosity mapping suggests a recessive inheritance
the pedigree of the established tyrolean grey cattle family was consistent with a possible monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance . both parents were healthy and could be traced back to a single common male ancestor born ~40 years ago. the genotypes of more than  <dig>  evenly spaced snps showed that the affected twins were monozygotic twins with an identity by state  of 100%. since we assumed a homozygous recessive condition, the affected calves were expected to be identical by descent  and homozygous for the causative mutation and flanking chromosomal segments. the search for extended regions of homozygosity with simultaneous allele sharing was carried out, and the results compared with the homozygous region between the cases and the parents. thereby,  <dig> genome regions greater than 1 mb were identified where both affected animals were homozygous, but the parents were not .fig.  <dig> family tree of the affected tyrolean grey cattle with renal syndrome . males are represented by squares, females by circles. affected animals are shown with fully black symbols. half-filled symbols represent healthy obligate heterozygous carriers and open symbols with a question mark represent relatives with an unknown genotype. cases  <dig> and  <dig> are the initially studied twin cases, whereas case  <dig> and  <dig> are the additional cases reported later


fig.  <dig> homozygosity mapping in tyrolean grey cattle with renal syndrome . extended segments of private homozygosity in both cases are shown in blue. note, that the mocos gene is located in an 11 mb sized homozygous regions on chromosome 24




although it was assumed that recessive inheritance was considered most likely, a second possibility that the renal syndrome was due to a spontaneous dominant acting mutation could not be excluded. in fact, since after genotyping the twins were identified as identical twins, the causative mutation could have occurred de novo in the parental germinal cells. this alternative hypothesis was acknowledged in further analyses.

whole genome sequencing reveals a deleterious mocos mutation
due to the severe effect of the mutation, we suggested that most likely a non-synonymous loss of function mutation affecting the coding sequence of a gene would be responsible for the renal syndrome. the whole genome of case  <dig> was sequenced, and initially the variant calls were filtered according to the most likely scenario of recessive inheritance. a total of  <dig>  homozygous snps and short indel variants lying in the coding regions of annotated genes were called across the entire genome. a triple-step filtering to search for private variants was applied:  only homozygous variants falling into the homozygous ibd regions presented above were considered;  a comparison was then made between the remaining variants and variant data of  <dig> cow genomes of various different cattle breeds that were sequenced in our laboratory in the course of other ongoing studies;  lastly, the remaining variants were compared with the run <dig> variant database of the  <dig> bull genome project  <cit>  including  <dig> additional genomes of different breeds. finally, the number of private homozygous variants was dropped to  <dig>  these included two non-synonymous variants : a missense variant in exon  <dig> of the kiaa <dig> gene , located in a 15 mb sized region of homozygosity on bta  <dig> ; and a 1 bp deletion in exon  <dig> of the molybdenum cofactor sulfurase  gene, located in an 11 mb region of homozygosity on bta  <dig> . the function of kiiaa <dig> is not well characterized, however recent studies identified kiiaa <dig> as interacting with ubiquitin-like ubtd <dig> in a yeast-2-hybrid screen  <cit> , and a possible role in cancer  <cit> . on the other hand, the mocos enzyme is known to affect kidney metabolism and kidney development and a mocos mutation was previously shown to be associated with a renal condition in cattle, specifically xanthinuria, characterized by developmental problems, renal failure and the presence of kidney stones  <cit> . therefore mocos represents a very good candidate gene for the condition, and the detected mocos variant is much more likely to be responsible for the observed phenotype.

the mocos variant was confirmed by sanger sequencing . the 1 bp deletion in the bovine mocos gene affects both annotated transcripts  <cit> : ensbtat <dig>  and ensbtat <dig> . for both mocos transcripts, the deletion is predicted to cause a frameshift introducing premature stop codons .fig.  <dig> a 1 bp deletion in exon  <dig> of mocos associated with renal syndrome  in tyrolean grey cattle. a
mocos gene and its position on bovine chromosome <dig>  note the two alternative first exons , leading to the alternate transcripts . b screenshot of the next generation sequencing reads mapped against the reference sequence. note the c deletion in exon  <dig>  c electropherograms of a control tyrolean grey cattle , a parent of one of the affected twins , and one affected case . the arrow indicates the position of the 1 bp deletion




the possibility that the condition was caused by a recent de novo mutation could not be excluded, therefore the private heterozygous variants present in the genome of the sequenced case were also analyzed. the number of heterozygous variants identified in the coding regions of the affected case were  <dig> ; these were then filtered against the in house  <dig> control genomes. of the remaining  <dig> variants,  <dig> were subsequently excluded because of their presence in the  <dig> bull genome variant database. finally, a total of  <dig> private heterozygous coding variants remained. these did not contain any non-synonymous variants and no other variants in genes which might represent suitable candidates for the renal phenotype .

thus, the final conclusion was that among all the possible variants, the recessive inherited deleterious mocos variant represented the most probable causative mutation for the renal syndrome. therefore, the observed renal syndrome most likely represents a xanthinuria which causes the severe  metabolical signs and the occurrence of kidney stones. genotyping this variant in an extended cohort of tyrolean grey cattle confirmed that the mocos deletion was associated perfectly with the condition: only the two twins carried two copies of the mutation, both parents were heterozygous carriers and none of the  <dig> controls showed the homozygous mutant genotype . a total of  <dig> genotyped controls  were heterozygous carriers. in each case of  <dig> carriers with available pedigree records a relationship to the previously identified male ancestor was noticed .table  <dig> association of the 1 bp deletion in mocos with the renal syndrome  in tyrolean grey cattle

mocos

c.1881delg /c.1782delg
controls of other breedsa

a <dig> in-house controls and  <dig> genomes of the  <dig> bull genome project




additional cases confirmed mocos-association and kidney stone analysis supporting xanthinuria diagnosis
after the mapping and identification of the mocos variant, two novel cases were brought to the authors’ attention. pedigree analysis demonstrated that these maternal half siblings were related to the affected twins and also showed genealogical connections to the previously identified male ancestor . the animals displayed similar clinical signs as described for the affected twins  <cit> , whereas the overgrowth of hooves was noticed only in case  <dig> . the six-month-old heifer  was euthanized at 6 months of age and cross sections of urinary bladder and kidney indicated the presence of uroliths . the 21-month-old male  is still alive. interestingly this latter animal did never show problem of hooves overgrowth, but only retarded growth and discontinuous disturbed appetite. both affected animals were genotyped as homozygous carriers for the mocos deletion, the dam carried a single copy of the mutant allele and the two sires were known carriers, already genotyped before. in addition, we genotyped both additional cases and their dam for the missense variant in the kiaa <dig> gene. thereby we showed that all three animals were homozygous for the wild type allele and could exclude this variant as a candidate mutation.fig.  <dig> six-month-old tyrolean grey heifer with renal syndrome . a the affected animal showed retarded growth and discontinuous disturbed appetite. b note the overgrown hooves. the owner reported an exaggerated growth and therefore cut the hooves


fig.  <dig> xanthinuria in a six-month-old tyrolean grey heifer. note the presence of stones visible as diffused mineralization in the granular sandy yellow mass in the urinary bladder  and kidney  of case  <dig> showing uroliths . quantitative mineral analysis by ft-ir spectroscopy of a kidney stone demonstrated a greater than 95% xanthine content 




as the kidney stones of case  <dig> were freshly available, they were analyzed in order to detect their composition. the uroliths contained a combination of grit and some small oval-shaped stones . they were yellowish-brown and smooth with a glossy surface and no layers were observed . the quantitative mineral analysis by infrared spectroscopy using the ft-ir technique, which shows a high sensitivity and allows an accurate identification of stone composition, demonstrated a greater than 95% xanthine content .

in conclusion, the results obtained from the two additional cases confirmed the suspected xanthinuria and the disease association with the 1 bp deletion in the mocos gene.

role of mocos in renal conditions
molybdenum  is present in a large number of metalloenzymes and is ubiquitous in many phyla: bacteria, archaea, fungi, algae, plants and animals  <cit> . mo-containing enzymes are essential for life, holding a key position in the metabolism of the individual organism  <cit> . to achieve biological activity and play a role in the cell’s redox-chemistry molybdenum must form a prosthetic group known as molybdenum cofactor   <cit> . in eukaryotes, the most prominent mo-enzymes are nitrate reductase, sulfite oxidase, and the mitochondrial amidoxime reductase, aldehyde oxidase and xanthine dehydrogenase  <cit> . in detail, xanthine dehydrogenase  catalyzes the terminal two steps of the purine degradation pathway: formation of xanthine from hypoxanthine followed by uric acid from xanthine. this enzyme has been the focus of extensive studies for several reasons: it is a molybdenum containing flavoprotein, because of its interactions with drugs, and for its role in human disorders  <cit> . a deficiency of xd has been shown to cause xanthinuria which is characterized by hypouricemia and hypouricosuria  <cit> . xanthinuria is classified into  <dig> groups, types i and ii and patients with either type tend to develop urinary tract xanthine uroliths due to tissue xanthine deposits  <cit> .

sulfuration of the molybdenum cofactor of xanthine dehydrogenase  is performed by the protein mocos which is required for their enzymatic activities  <cit> . mocos is therefore part of a complex pathway and the object of studies at different levels and expression studies associating the protein with genes involved in regulating transcription and apoptosis  <cit> . in wild silkworms, a mocos loss of function mutation was reported showing a mutant phenotype resulting in translucent skin  <cit> . in humans, mutations in mocos cause type ii xanthinuria . in japanese black cattle autosomal recessive inherited bovine xanthinuria has been reported which was characterized by elevated xanthine secretion in the urine and lethal growth retardation  <cit> . affected cattle had expanded renal tubules containing xanthine calculi ranging from  <dig> to 3 mm in diameter. a homozygous 3 bp deletion perfectly segregated with the disease, resulting in the loss of the tyr <dig> residue  in the bovine mocos protein  <cit> . in humans, two independent patients with classical type ii xanthinuria  showed a mocos c.1255c > t nonsense mutation causing a premature stop   <cit> . a mocos c.466g > c missense mutation  was described in another xanthinuric patient  <cit> . finally, a homozygous mocos c.2326c > t missense mutation , and a compound heterozygous with a mocos c.1034insa nonsense mutation  was present in a further two xanthinuria patients  <cit> .fig.  <dig> summary of known bovine and human mocos mutations. a the two bovine mocos transcripts  are shown . the position of the mutation detected in tyrolean grey cattle is indicated. the two possible wild type proteins and the relevant domains  are shown above. below, the two predicted mutant proteins are shown. note the predicted mutant truncated proteins lack mbb and mosc domains. b previously reported mutations causing xanthinuria in human and cattle are displayed . the nature of the predicted mutation effect of the protein is shown. the positions of mutated bovine residues are aligned to the length of the human protein




in summary, cases of xanthinuria reported in the literature, caused by mocos mutations follow a recessive inheritance in both bovine and human cases. the xanthinuria occurring in tyrolean grey cattle reported in this study is also consistent with recessive inheritance. while it is unclear whether the mutant bovine mocos protein is actually expressed in our cases, with  <dig> amino acids or more than 30% of the normal mocos protein missing, it is very unlikely that a mutant protein would fulfill any physiological function. furthermore, the mutant protein has two functionally important domains missing . it is therefore more likely that the mutant mrna is targeted by non-sense-mediated decay, thus the deleterious bovine mocos variant represents the most likely causative mutation for the renal syndrome.

in a previous case report, the authors diagnosed the renal condition as a renal dysplasia representing a developmental abnormality of the renal tissue. in defense of this diagnosis, it was inferred that the highly disruptive nature of the mutation, the severity of the condition and its probable early onset were responsible for the alteration in the structure of the developing kidney. other macroscopical features also lead to confusion: e.g. deformity or overgrowth of hooves have been previously reported in cases of renal dysplasia in cattle  <cit> . in papers describing xanthinuria in cattle, it was not possible to find reports of overgrown hooves  <cit> , but such features could be an indicator of a general sign of renal failure  and not of a specific disease. the very limited number of cases prevents us from observing in detail how the position and specific nature of the mutation affect the onset and severity of xanthinuria. the two newly reported cases seem to show a milder phenotype compared to the initially observed affected twins. therefore one could argue that the expressivity of the disease phenotype caused by the mocos mutation is variable.

interestingly, there are many phenotypic differences between the initially suspected renal dysplasia and a metabolic disorder like xanthinuria. it was therefore not obvious that the identified mutation would cause the observed kidney development condition, although the detected mutation represents a deleterious loss of function mutation affecting a protein involved in renal metabolism. however, in vertebrates mocos mutations have always been associated with xanthinuria. finally, genotyping two additional cases and the urolith analysis, confirmed the suspected diagnosis as xanthinuria.

the third monogenic recessive defect of tyrolean grey cattle
tyrolean grey cattle  is a very old, dual-purpose  alpine cattle breed. the population is small with only a few thousand registered cows, predominantly in austria  and italy , and fewer numbers in switzerland. in the last decade tyrolean grey cattle breeders experienced outbreaks of two recessive diseases: degenerative axonopathy  <cit>  and chondrodysplastic dwarfism  <cit> . for both defects, gene testing to eliminate the disease from the population is still ongoing. this report presents the breeders with a third, although obviously less frequent, genetic defect to take into consideration.

CONCLUSIONS
this study reveals the genetic etiology of a very rare early-onset metabolic renal syndrome in tyrolean grey cattle. the findings allow targeted selection against a previously unknown or misdiagnosed genetic disorder affecting rearing success.

additional files

additional file 1: homozygous regions detected in the genome of the two animals with renal syndrome . 


additional file 2: list of private homozygous sequence variants of the sequenced animal located within homozygous ibd regions. variants with predicted effects on the protein sequence are presented boldface. 


additional file 3: list of private heterozygous variants in annotated genes found in the genome of the sequenced animal. 




abbreviations
bpbase pairs

bta
bos taurus autosome

cldn16claudin 16

ft-irfourier transform infrared spectroscopy

mbmegabase pairs

mocosmolybdenum cofactor sulfurase

pcrpolymerase chain reaction

snpsingle nucleotide polymorphism

