BACKGROUND
the water column in a stratified lake provides vertical gradients of habitat qualities for zooplankton. surface layers  and deep layers  separated by a strong temperature gradient  differ very much with respect to temperature, light, food availability and predation risk. although zooplankton are defined as "floating" in the water column, their populations show distinct horizontal and vertical distribution patterns  <cit> . at least the vertical distribution is the result of active habitat choice. diel vertical migration is a striking example of habitat shift in response to changing suitability. large zooplankton leave the warm, lighted and often food-rich epilimnion during the day to dwell in the cold, dark hypolimnion where food may be of low quantity and poor quality, in order to avoid predation by visually hunting predators . they return to the surface layers at night when the predation risk is small  <cit> . numerous studies have shown that this pattern is influenced by food conditions  <cit>  and temperature gradient  <cit> .

however, there is increasing evidence that the vertical distribution of algal food for herbivorous zooplankton is not always "typical". in particular, oligotrophic and mesotrophic lakes often exhibit a deep-water algal maximum, i.e. highest algal densities are not found in the epilimnion but in the upper hypolimnion, below the thermocline  <cit> . zooplankton then face a trade-off between high temperature  but poor food  in the epilimnion and low temperature but high food availability in the hypolimnion  <cit> . in the absence of visual predation risk , herbivorous zooplankton should, therefore, distribute vertically so as to optimise the fitness gain depending on the temperature and food gradient. in fact, it has been observed that zooplankton forced to deep layers by fish predation during the day return to the warm epilimnion at night even if their food is more abundant in the hypolimnion  <cit> .

it has been suggested  <cit>  and evidence has been given that the vertical distribution of herbivorous zooplankton  faced with the trade-off follows an "ideal free distribution  with costs"  <cit> . however,  <cit>  placed a question mark after the title of their paper as, although their experimental results resembled an ifd with costs, the mechanism was not yet clear. since then, several new experiments have shown that some of the assumptions underlying the ifd model  <cit>  are fulfilled in the system.  daphnia are "ideal" organisms as they select the habitat best suited to their survival and reproduction. the proportion of individuals dwelling in a particular habitat is correlated to the relative fitness gain in that habitat  <cit> .  daphnia are also "free" to choose the habitat. every habitat is equally accessible to all members of the population. the observed distribution is dynamic, i. e. it is the equilibrium result of individuals moving randomly up and down and allocating a proportion of their time to a certain habitat  <cit> .  the ifd model assumes that all individuals are equal. being members of a clone, daphnia are genetically equal, but differing in size they may not be metabolically equal. small differences in depth distributions of different size classes have been found  <cit> , but only during the day . this problem can be overcome by looking at the response of individual size classes separately.

although several assumptions underlying the ifd have now been tested in this system, the one that is probably most important has not. the ifd model strongly requires that habitat suitability is density dependent. unfortunately, information on density dependence of daphnia distributions so far is scarce, and only a weak effect has been found  <cit> . the purpose of this study was to measure the density dependence of the vertical distribution. the study was designed to test the following hypotheses.  the vertical distribution becomes broader as daphnia density increases.  as density effects are related to food availability, but not to temperature, daphnia will, at higher densities, spread asymmetrically to deeper layers in order to exploit the deep-water algal maximum better.  differences in the depth distributions of differently sized daphnia can be explained by intraspecific competition.

RESULTS
daphnia populations in both columns started to grow after a short lag-phase . total biomass increased steadily from the very beginning indicating that individuals accumulated body mass before they started reproducing. although the absolute numbers of daphnia differed between the two towers, possibly due to small differences in the inoculum, the population growth pattern was similar. the differences between the two towers were due to large numbers of very small individuals in tower  <dig>  as the small individuals contribute less to the total biomass, differences were less pronounced for biomasses than for numbers.

the thermocline was stable at  <dig>  m, and the deep-water algal maximum was maintained throughout the experimental period with little variation . particle concentration in the epilimnion varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg c l- <dig> with a trend to higher particle concentrations towards the end of the experiment. there was a significant linear relationship  between the particle concentration in the epilimnion  and the log-transformed daphnia biomass  in the algal maximum  +  <dig> ).

vertical distributions were assigned to five classes  of increasing total daphnia biomass , and the mean distributions are shown in fig.  <dig>  the vertical distribution changed with biomass density. at low population densities, biomass peaked sharply at the thermocline, but the distribution spread out when the total biomass increased . the peak moved below the thermocline at the time when total daphnia biomass was highest, and the distribution broadened further. however, there were differences in the distributions of different size classes of daphnia . small size classes tended to stay higher in the water column than large ones, regardless of the total daphnia biomass, although their distribution spread out, too, even below the algal maximum.

the results of visual inspection of the vertical distributions are confirmed by principal component analysis . the first three principal components  explain more than  <dig> % of the variation. pc <dig> contrasts the biomass proportions at the thermocline  with the proportions at ports  <dig> and  <dig>  i.e. the algal maximum. hence it depicts the downward spreading of the distribution. pc <dig> contrasts the proportions at the thermocline with those in the epilimnion. finally, pc <dig> depicts the distributional shifts within the algal maximum, but its contribution is very small so it is not considered.

the anova on the factor scores of pc <dig> shows significant influences of total biomass  and daphnia size class  on the vertical distribution, and a significant interaction between these two factors . this confirms the density dependence of the distribution as well as the different responses of size groups to total density. total density had no significant effect on the factor scores of pc <dig>  but there were significant effects of size and tower, a significant mass × tower interaction, and a marginally significant size × tower interaction. this shows that pc <dig>  is mainly influenced by daphnia size . the significant mass × tower and size × tower interactions suggest that the tower effect on pc <dig> is a consequence of differences in size composition of the populations.

the descriptive analysis of the shape of the vertical distributions was followed by more quantitative approaches with ungrouped samples. figure  <dig> depicts the positive relationship between the median of the daphnia depth distribution and total density. the higher the daphnia biomass per tower, the deeper the median. a linear regression between median depth  and the log-transformed biomass  is significant  +  <dig> , n =  <dig>  r <dig> =  <dig> ).

the proportion of the total population  dwelling within the algal maximum increased strongly with total density, but levelled off at ca.  <dig> % above a total daphnia biomass of  <dig> g per tower . the relationship between the log-transformed biomass in the total tower and the log-transformed biomass in the algal maximum was linear . in order to improve homoscedasticity and to obtain a conservative estimate of the slope, the lowest biomass value  was excluded from the analysis. there was no difference between towers so the values were pooled. the slope of the resulting regression  is significantly larger than  <dig> , i.e. with increasing total biomass, disproportionally more daphnia dwelled in the algal maximum.

as daphnia size affected the response to total biomass , the overall regression was broken down to size classes . there was no significant difference between the slopes of the individual regressions, but the intercepts were different and showed a clear trend, increasing with daphnia size class. consequently, all size classes moved toward the algal maximum with increasing total density, but large daphnia moved deeper than small ones.

maximum  daphnia density in each vertical profile increased with total biomass, but the relationship was not linear . rather, an upper limit between  <dig> and  <dig> mg l- <dig>  seems to be approached when the biomass per tower reached high values. this is direct evidence for density dependence of the distribution, and it provides an estimate of the maximum density daphnia pulicaria can tolerate under these conditions.

discussion
vertical distribution and diel vertical migrations of zooplankton have been studied for a long time  <cit>  but are still not fully understood. this study fills an important gap by revealing an additional mechanism  controlling the vertical distribution of zooplankton. density dependence is a basic determinant of ifd theory  <cit> , and the results of this study conform to the theory. considering that the conditions in this system differ strongly from the original ifd model, this shows that the concept is rather robust, even if it only "mimics" an ifd  <cit> .

for simplicity, ifd models have been developed for discrete patches of habitat suitability, where the differences in habitat suitability were caused solely by biotic factors . such a situation has been tested when  <cit>  found that daphnia distributions between food patches complied with ifd predictions. the "ifd with costs" model  <cit>  considers in addition the effect of abiotic factors. this model is more appropriate for the present situation as higher food availability is linked to higher costs . but in contrast to water currents, as in  <cit> , temperature does not only affect the net energy gain; it also limits the speed of development, which is a particularly important factor in parthenogenetic animals with continuous reproduction such as daphnia. consequently, ignoring interference from competitors, the basic habitat suitability  <cit>  is the result of the total fitness gain, not just resource input. also, vertical habitat structure in a lake does not represent discrete patches but changes over gradients, which may not be a problem as ifd models have been shown to be applicable for environmental gradients  <cit> . however, the vertical temperature gradient in a lake is not smooth. the thermal structure rather creates two different habitats  connected by a steep gradient . we may consider this situation as two habitat patches with some overlap. because of the trade-off, it is possible that the optimum habitat suitability is in the overlap zone, i.e. in the thermocline. in fact, earlier experiments with similar conditions   <cit>  resulted in pronounced distribution peaks at the thermocline, very much like the distributions found in this study at low daphnia densities. population densities in the earlier studies were not controlled, but a re-analysis of the raw data of  <cit>  showed that they ranged from  <dig> – <dig>  g dry mass per tower, which is in the lower range of this study.

the sharp aggregation in the thermocline can be profitable as long as density effects are negligible. daphnia are not perfectly "ideal" organisms since they do not have complete knowledge about the suitability of all habitats. hence they need to move around and sample the habitats. the nature of the trade-off may also require that they spend some time in both habitats. it has been demonstrated  <cit>  that the vertical distribution is dynamic, i.e. it is the equilibrium result of random movements and different time allocations of the individuals. since food availability and temperature are uniform in the hypolimnion as well as in the epilimnion, swimming longer distances up and down does not pay off. the steep environmental gradient provides the opportunity to access sufficient food and high temperatures within a short distance, as long as interference from competitors is low.

this changes at high densities when competitive interactions become important. the negative effect of high competitor densities inevitably leads to a broadening of the distribution. there are two mechanisms of competitive interactions in filter-feeding daphnia. interference may cause a reduction of food intake when encounters between individuals become too frequent and the continuous filtering process is disturbed  <cit> . exploitation reduces the food concentration through joint filtering activity. the latter process can only be locally important in the tower system as algal concentrations in the hypolimnion were maintained at approximately  <dig>  mg c l- <dig>  which is above the "incipient limiting concentration" where the feeding rate of daphnia becomes independent of the food concentration  <cit> . only at the upper edge of the food maximum  may exploitation competition play a role due to the high grazing pressure on algae entering the thermocline from below due to small-scale turbulence. the sharp upper edge of the algal distribution is probably a result of grazing.

both types of interactions among daphnia lead to reduced food uptake. on the other hand, density has little negative influence on the temperature effect . this must cause an asymmetric response of the daphnia. spreading into the thermally homogeneous food maximum will have a positive effect since avoiding competitors means obtaining more food with no additional temperature costs, except the additional costs of swimming, which are small  <cit> . spreading towards the surface will have little or no positive effect as energy input is limited by the low algal concentration, not by competitors. the experimental results conform well with this prediction. there is a significant effect on the shape of the distribution at high daphnia densities. the vertical distribution becomes broader and shifts into the algal maximum. although food availability and temperature are identical over the whole hypolimnion, daphnia do not distribute homogeneously, but the distribution is skewed towards the upper edge. again, this points to the fact that the optimum habitat at low densities is near the thermocline where access to warm water and food is easiest. the daphnia distribution follows a gradient of costs , not resources. the shift can be quantified by the positive relationship between daphnia density and median depth, and the increasing proportion of daphnia dwelling within the algal maximum. the density effect is as strong as the effect of increasing hypolimetic temperature  <cit> .

one disadvantage of the experimental design is the correlation of daphnia density with time. it may be argued that the downward spread of the distribution is the result of some unknown factor changing with time. for example, the epilimnetic habitat suitability may have become worse if the epilimnetic food conditions deteriorated with time. measurements do not support this caveat. although the mean particle volume was equivalent to about  <dig>  mg c l- <dig>  there were nearly no intact scenedesmus cells present. the measured particles were small and probably comprised material  that had been recycled by daphnia; thus the food quality was low. in fact, the epilimnetic particle concentration even tended to increase slightly towards the end of the experiment, which if the food were good should have resulted in an upward shift. the significant relationship between particle volume in the epilimnion and total daphnia biomass rather suggests that the increase in epilimnetic particles was due to daphnia feeding in deep layers and defecating in the epilimnion  <cit> .

a final argument supporting the view that daphnia density is the driving force for the downward shift comes from the estimate of maximum local densities. the distribution is not shaped directly by the total biomass of daphnia in the tower, but by the local density at each depth. the maximum local density tends to reach a plateau at 4– <dig> mg l- <dig>  which is an estimate of the upper limit of density tolerance under the given food conditions.

ifd theory assumes that all individuals are equally good competitors  <cit> , but there is little evidence to support this  <cit> . in nature, individuals will have different competitive abilities, and this requires modified concepts  <cit> . the concept of unequal competitors offers a large range of possible distributions  <cit> , and only a special case yields a distribution with equal proportions of different competitors that "mimics" an ifd  <cit> . belonging to a single clone, the daphnia in this experiment are at least genetically equal, but they differ in size. under constant conditions, large daphnia are considered to be competitively superior to small ones. there is mechanistic evidence for this relationship on the level of interspecific comparisons  <cit> . mechanistic support for a similar intraspecific relationship comes from an unpublished laboratory study by c. kreutzer and m. boersma. they found that large individuals of d. pulicaria had lower food thresholds for growth than small ones, i.e. were competitively superior. evidence for intraspecific competition is often inferred from segregation of different size classes in field studies  <cit> , but the interpretation is hampered by the fact that fish predation has a similar size-selective effect, hence the differing depth distributions of small and large individuals may be due to a trade-off between their ability to exploit resources and their susceptibility to predation  <cit> . however, fish predation and any cue for the presence of fish was excluded in this tower experiment.

the experimental results are consistent with the predictions of the model assuming the competitive superiority of large individuals. a greater proportion of small daphnia than of large ones is present in the epilimnion . the distributions at low daphnia densities are very similar to those found under the same conditions by  <cit> , but the differences in the shapes of the distributions become more pronounced at higher daphnia densities . small daphnia spread out in both directions, even into the region below the algal maximum . the relatively larger fraction of small daphnia in the epilimnion suggests that temperature is a more important factor for small than for large individuals. the smallest size class in this study contained varying proportions of neonates that are probably not so dependent on high food concentrations during their first hours of life, as they still carry some yolk left from the embryonic stage. small-scale experiments in stratified columns designed to study individual swimming behavior showed, in fact, that neonates crossed the thermocline much less frequently than adults  <cit> .

if the relative competitive ability of unequal competitors does not change in different habitats, the distribution of competitors can be replaced by the distribution of the sum of competitive abilities. consequently, there are numerous possible combinations of phenotypes in the different habitats  <cit> . nevertheless, it is highly probable that a solution is met where the proportions of different phenotypes are identical in all habitats . the results of this experiment conform with predictions for constant relative competitive abilities in the different habitats. the proportion of individuals dwelling in the algal maximum increases with daphnia densities in all four size classes  since the regression slopes are all above unity. there is a significant trend in the elevations, indicating that the size classes differ in their mean depth. however, the slopes of the regressions do not differ, i.e. the relative proportions of the size classes in the algal maximum remain constant regardless of the total daphnia density. different size  classes respond to increasing competition in the same way.

density dependence probably explains the discrepancy between model predictions and experimental results in  <cit> . a purely physiological model predicted considerably lower proportions of the total population in the hypolimnion than were found experimentally. this was explained by possible food quality effects. however, the physiological model ignores competition completely. the difference between model prediction and experimental results  is relatively small  as daphnia densities were in the lower part of the range covered by the present study. the value of  <dig> % at low densities is consistent with the results of this study . at high daphnia biomasses, the experimental results are about twice as large as the model predicts , which shows that density dependence is an important factor in determining the vertical distribution of daphnia. we are presently not able to incorporate density dependence into a model of daphnia distribution. interference competition rather than exploitative competition is important in our system with continuous food renewal, but quantitative physiological data on the effect of interference are not available. however, the ultimate goal is to construct a quantitative model of the vertical fitness distribution and compare it to the distribution adopted by the animals. only then will it be possible to test if the assumptions of an ifd model are fulfilled.

CONCLUSIONS
although the assumptions of the ifd theory are very often violated, a large number of tests have found distributions that "mimic" an ifd  <cit> . this study has shown that density dependence is important for the distribution of daphnia, hence the basic assumptions of the ifd theory are fulfilled. however, there is a need for modifications. habitat suitability for herbivorous zooplankton is determined by food availability as well as by directed gradients of biotic  and abiotic  factors. the ideal free distribution with costs model  <cit>  is more appropriate in this case. further complications arise as daphnia populations are size structured  <cit> , i.e. models for unequal competitors  <cit>  need to be applied. the experimental results conform well to the theoretical expectations considering the costs  and differently sized daphnia as unequal competitors , although daphnia are not omniscient and the equilibrium distribution is dynamic. this shows that the theory is rather robust.

the ifd with costs concept can be helpful in developing a general model of vertical distribution of zooplankton. this is important as the vertical location of grazers has consequences for phytoplankton production and species composition  <cit>  and, therefore, for ecosystem function. so far, the ifd with costs concept has only been applied to lake situations with a deep-water algal maximum. although deep-water algal maxima are not rare  <cit> , they are special cases and trade-offs will be different when algal densities are high in the epilimnion, and day-time mortality caused by fish predation  <cit>  or uv  <cit>  is also high. diel vertical migrations are the logical consequence. however, predation can be considered another type of cost, and applying the ifd with costs model may be useful for analysing vertical distributions and migrations of zooplankton under a range of environmental conditions.

