BACKGROUND
chlamydomonas reinhardtii belongs to the green algae and is the most widely used laboratory strain of the chlamydomonas genus. besides being a model organism for the study of fundamental biological questions, this species also gains more and more interest as a model for systems analyses and biotechnological applications. the release of the chlamydomonas reinhardtii genome sequence in  <dig>  <cit>  set the basis for systems analyses and genome-wide studies and introduced chlamydomonas as model organism; since then several systems level analyses have been performed. by applying metabolomic and proteomic analyses the genome annotation of chlamydomonas was refined  <cit> . based on the results from metabolomic studies, missing reactions from the metabolic network could be inferred  <cit>  and chlamycyc, a web portal for systems analyses, was generated  <cit> . also a stoichiometric genome-wide metabolic network from chlamydomonas was constructed, that enables flux balance analyses  <cit> . however, such networks rely on stoichiometric basis and do not contain regulatory properties of the pathways. furthermore, not all regulatory mechanisms are discovered to date.

understanding the dynamics and stability of biological systems requires deeper insights in the temporal regulation of cellular processes. specifically, the response of the photosynthetic apparatus to changing environmental conditions can be studied on a cellular level. salt stress is detrimental to plant growth and increasing salt contaminated areas cause problems in agriculture. thus, understanding adaptation strategies of higher plants to salt stress is of major importance. furthermore, a better understanding of the salt stress response of green algae may allow engineering strains with an improved resistance to high salinity. such strains could be cultivated in salt containing water but would keep the desired properties.

to date, methods are available and have been constantly improved to analyze the dynamics of the proteome, the transcriptome and the metabolome. techniques for monitoring the dynamic changes within the proteome and metabolome are mostly based on metabolic labeling of metabolites and proteins using stable isotopes such as 13 c or 15 n in combination with mass spectrometry or nuclear magnetic resonance  analyses. most techniques were initially developed to analyze microorganisms or mammalian cell cultures, e.g. the mass isotopomer ratio analysis of u-13 c labeled extracts  or the stable-isotope labeling in cell culture  using arginine and lysine  <cit> .

arginine and lysine are essential amino acids for many higher organisms and are commonly used for silac-based proteomic studies. however, plants have the capability to synthesize all proteinogenic amino acids. thus the application of stable-isotope labeled arginine in plants results in a partially labeled proteome  <cit> . to completely label plant proteomes 15 n sources were applied  <cit> .

in mammalian cells stable isotope labeled amino acids were applied to determine de novo protein synthesis  <cit> . however the application of 15 n sources for pulse labeling resulted in an enormous complexity of the isotopic pattern of partially labeled proteins and peptides  <cit> . by improving the data analysis workflow martin and co-workers could analyze the dynamic 15 n incorporation into  <dig> peptides resulting in  <dig> proteins  <cit> . other metabolic labeling techniques have also been used, however, only a limited set of plant proteins were monitored  <cit> . recently, stable isotope labeled arginine has been used for metabolic labeling of proteins in chlamydomonas to study proteome-wide response to anaerobic growth conditions  <cit> .

in the present study we introduce a strategy to measure protein synthesis rates in chlamydomonas. for the first time pulsed labeling with 13 c-labeled arginine was applied in a photosynthetic organism. we thereby utilized the ability of chlamydomonas to take up arginine as carbon and nitrogen source from the environment  <cit> .

with this method we characterized the salt stress response of chlamydomonas. the response of the micro alga dunaliella salina to high salt stress was already analyzed on proteomic level  <cit> . also the salt adaptation of arabidopsis thaliana on metabolome level was investigated in a time course manner  <cit> . in contrast, the salt stress response of chlamydomonas was not studied systematically.

applying pulsed silac and gc-ms based stable isotope resolved metabolomics  <cit>  we identified the major metabolic pathways altered in the early response of chlamydomonas to salt stress. we observed that the proline-biosynthetic pathway displayed a strong response at the metabolite but not at the protein level. our study is the first application of a combined proteomics and metabolite approach to study the stress respons of a green alga and represents the first comprehensive analysis of the early salt stress response of chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

RESULTS
in this study we analyzed the protein synthesis rate in chlamydomonas reinhardtii by pulsed labeling using stable 13 c <dig> arginine. for this purpose we made use of the arginine-auxotrophic chlamydomonas strain cc- <dig>  containing the mutated arg <dig> allele of the arg <dig> gene. arg <dig> encodes for the argininosuccinate lyase that catalyzes the last step of arginine biosynthesis  <cit> ; consequently this strain requires arginine in the culture medium.

as a first step, we compared the incorporation of 13 c arginine into the proteome of a wild type chlamydomonas strain  versus the arginine auxotroph strain . we found an incorporation of 13 c arginine in both strains but the rate of incorporation was higher in the arginine auxotrophic strain . hence, for all further experiments the arginine auxotrophic strain was used.

chlamydomonas cells were cultivated in three different conditions  and harvested in a time course manner  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours after the supply of 13 c arginine. for this experiment, chlamydomonas cells were cultivated in the condition of constant and slow growth . under the chosen conditions the cell number increased by a factor of  <dig>  after  <dig> hours. we have chosen these conditions to better distinguish de novo protein synthesis rates – related to the increase in biomass – from real protein turnover. upon salt stress cell growth was mildly reduced . in total, samples from  <dig> conditions were directly analyzed in duplicates and the protein heavy/light ratio  for several hundreds of proteins in any of the samples could be calculated by the maxquant software  <cit> ; a constant increase of the mean protein ratio was observed for all conditions ; also growth behavior and mean h/l ratio displayed a linear co-behavior . the h/l ratio reflects the protein synthesis rate since only newly synthesized proteins can incorporate 13 c-labeled arginine.  <dig> proteins with three or more reported h/l ratios  could be obtained from the 24 h 0 mm time point; to classify the proteins into functional classes the mapman annotation was applied  <cit>  and this protein set was used for further analyses .

we used this dataset to rank relative protein abundance  by dividing the measured intensity by the molecular mass of the protein. this simple calculation is comparable to the empai index  <cit> , with the difference that the latter index is calculated as  -1), where pai is the ratio observed/observable peptides for each identified protein. this calculation allows an intra-sample protein abundance comparison. to test how reproducible this calculation may work we analyzed a mixture of  <dig> recombinant proteins distributed over an abundance range of  <dig> orders of magnitude. as it is reported in additional file 2: table  <dig> and additional file 5: figure s  <dig>  the abundance values calculated for proteins at each concentration level show a very narrow distribution. we extracted the quantitative values of photosystem ii  proteins and of the small and large subunits of rubisco from the control time course data set. in agreement with literature data, which report rubisco subunits being the highest expressed enzymes of the calvin-benson cycle, the ai values for both subunits are among the top  <dig> in the dataset; moreover, these values reflect a nearly perfect 1: <dig> stoichiometry between the small nuclear-encoded and the large chloroplast-encoded subunits . similarly, also proteins of the photosynthetic apparatus appear among the most abundant ones. furthermore, we extracted the ai values and the h/l ratios for the proteins of the photosynthetic apparatus in the 0 mm nacl condition from the time course dataset, in order to monitor their behavior.

the h/l ratios for rubisco large  and small  subunits were found constantly increasing in a similar way, indicating comparable synthesis rate and stability , whereas the relative abundance was constant and with low standard deviation over the entire time course . among the proteins with high synthesis rate we found psba, also termed ad d <dig> protein, which showed a synthesis rate higher than the other psii proteins across the entire time course , in agreement with pick and co-workers  <cit> . a list of selected proteins with the corresponding h/l ratios for the 24 h time point and the ai is reported in table 1; psii proteins and proteins of the calvin-benson cycle are shown in figure  <dig>  the complete list of the proteins identified is available in the supplementary information .

protein list with the corresponding h/l ratio at 24 h  and abundance index  across the entire time course. proteins are sorted in four functional groups: high synthesis rates, rubisco, calvin-benson cycle and photosystem ii; joint genome institute  protein identifier, mapman bincode, a protein description, protein ratio and relative abundance index are reported for each protein.

proteins with increased or reduced protein ratios at 24 h at the 5% level from 100 mm and 150 mm nacl compared to proteins from the control culture . the measured protein ratios were transformed  to enable a comparison of protein ratios from all conditions.

to monitor a larger set of peptides - and subsequently proteins - we used a novel method for isoelectric-fractionationof peptides in solution  <cit> . in contrast to other isoelectric-focusing techniques, this method allows fractionation of any protein or peptide sample in the desired ph range within less than  <dig> hours with high sample recovery. with this method we analyzed the samples taken at  <dig> and  <dig> hours in absence of nacl in the culture medium. the fractionation prior the downstream ms analysis allowed us to identify more than  <dig>  different peptides  with a false discovery rate  of 1%. the identified peptides could be mapped to  <dig> proteins identified with at least  <dig> unique peptides and for  <dig> of those a h/l ratio was measured with at least  <dig> ratio counts in both conditions .

calculation of protein half lives
to analyze protein dynamics for a large number of proteins we measured several time points, from  <dig> to  <dig> hours after addition of 13 c arginine. hypothesizing that within 24 h no protein underwent degradation and was just produced according to the increase of biomass, all proteins would display a protein h/l ratio of  <dig>  . in contrast, the average ratio from all proteins was calculated to be  <dig> , with values up to  <dig> , thus a reasonable de novo protein synthesis in chlamydomonas under this condition could be evidenced. only a few proteins were found with a ratio below  <dig> . those proteins may not be synthesized at the same speed as biomass is increasing . assuming exponential growth, an exponential decay of the light protein present at 0 h time point and 100% 13 c arginine incorporation into newly synthesized proteins, the half-life of proteins can be estimated  <cit> . taken the increase in biomass of  <dig>  times within 24 h and the assumption of exponential growth  = p <dig> * 2 t/tdouble) resulted in a doubling time  of 63 h. for the robust calculation of protein half-lives we used the individual h/l ratios at 3 h, 8 h and 24ht. we applied simplified linear regression  and calculated the half-lives of  <dig> proteins .

chlamydomonas protein synthesis rates and metabolic alterations upon salt stress
to analyze the salt stress response we cultivated chlamydomonas with 13 c-arginine in standard growth medium containing 0 mm, 100 mm or 150 mm sodium chloride. the samples were collected in a time course manner after 1 h, 3 h, 8 h, and 24 h. each sample was analyzed by lc-ms based proteomics and gc-ms based metabolomics. from the proteomics analysis we could determine the relative protein synthesis rates of several hundred proteins . for all conditions we observed an h/l ratio increasing over time, with a slope depending on the salt concentration . the average synthesis rate was highest under the control condition  and the lowest at 150 mm sodium chloride. the protein ratio was clearly correlated to the increase of cell numbers at each time point . to compare synthesis rates from 0 mm, 100 mm and 150 mm the h/l ratios from the 24 h time point from each condition were z-transformed and plotted against each other . this transformation corrects for the underestimation of the h/l ratio because of the metabolic labeling of proline and glutamate . the overlay of normalized protein ratios from 24 h/100 mm and 24 h/150 mm nacl compared to control conditions revealed a similar behavior of proteins upon the two stress conditions ; even the ranking of proteins with up or down regulated h/l ratios is the same .

effects of salt stress on metabolism
to monitor the metabolic response to salt stress a gc-ms based metabolome analysis was performed. with this technique we could identify the salt stress response at the metabolite level. to visualize the general behavior a principal component analysis  was performed; the pca clearly separated samples treated with 100 mm or 150 mm nacl from the control samples. interestingly, the 24 h/100 mm sample showed a very similar metabolite pattern compared to the sample taken after 1 h at 150 mm . many metabolites showed a comparable response to salt stress. for example, at 100 mm nacl proline concentrations reached a maximum after  <dig> hours, however, the same levels were reached at 150 mm nacl already after 1 h . these results indicate that chlamydomonas can slowly adapt to 100 mm nacl, but displays a fast shock reaction at 150 mm nacl concentration, concerted by a strong metabolic response. the overview graphic  displaying the relative metabolite changes after 24 h/100 mm compared to the 24 h non-stressed control shows that a strong response can be observed in the amino acid metabolism. we have extracted the isotopomer distribution from the gc-ms mass spectra, as described in  <cit> , and have calculated the changes of 13 c abundance for several metabolites. careful inspection revealed that 13 c carbon atoms derived from 13 c arginine could be detected in downstream amino acids .

already after  <dig> hours the percentage of 13 c label in proline was 10% and in glutamate 3% and then stayed constant up to 24 h under control conditions . upon salt stress the 13 c-label was enhanced in proline and glutamate but not in putrescine compared to the control condition. furthermore, upon salt stress proline levels increased substantially but glutamate levels only moderately indicating a distinct regulation of proline synthesis. interestingly, the detected enzymes from the arginine to proline inter-conversion pathway did not show changes in abundance .

discussion
using pulse labeling of proteins with stable isotope labeled arginine we were able to analyze the half-life of more than  <dig> proteins, and the relative synthesis rate of  <dig> proteins in chlamydomonas reinhardtii. this is the first report of a systems-wide analysis of protein dynamics from a photosynthetic organism. the new established method allows monitoring dynamics of protein synthesis and thus will open new perspectives for a better understanding of biological processes. in addition technical procedures have been improved enabling a higher sample throughput. our improved method for in-solution peptide fractionation  <cit>  prior to analysis on a nanolc-ltq-orbitrap ms system yielded a high number of identified peptides similar to other proteomics analysis of chlamydomonas <cit> , but in a much shorter time period. thus, our approach is suitable for comprehensive proteome analyses in a higher throughput manner. the data were used to calculate the relative abundance of proteins allowing for an inter-protein abundance comparison. in our study both rubisco subunits rbcl and rbcs showed a nearly perfect stoichiometry under the chosen conditions . also the half-life for both subunits was found comparable . this is remarkable because rbcl is transcribed and translated in the chloroplast, while rbcs is encoded in the nucleus. this suggests the existence of regulatory mechanisms aimed to ensure a similar synthesis rate, highlighting the co-regulation of nuclear/cytosolic and chloroplastic processes. the currently available methods for absolute quantification of proteins as absolute silac  <cit>  or quantitative targeted proteomics methods  <cit>  are selective for defined proteins and thus are not applicable for discovery experiments. we observed constant protein concentrations at all time points under control conditions and thus assumed a steady state of our system . ongoing from this assumption we calculated a median protein half-life of  <dig> hours. interestingly, this result is comparable to the median protein half life of mammalian cells of 46 h  <cit> , which display a much higher proliferation rate. the protein synthesis rates in arabidopsis thaliana were analyzed using ribosome occupancy analyses and quantitative proteomics  <cit> . even if the approaches are not directly comparable the estimated protein synthesis rates are in the same dimension. we could identify proteins with high de novo synthesis rates. interestingly, a high turnover rate of the psba protein was already observed more than two decades ago  <cit>  and nowadays the regulatory nature of this protein in response to high light stress is well understood  <cit> .

the intensity of the 13 c labeled peptides may be underestimated because of the interconversion of 13 c arginine into 13 c proline and its subsequent incorporation into newly synthesized proteins. in our study we could observe only a minor fraction of peptides containing 13 c proline; furthermore, the maximal 13 c label of the free proline pool was 10% and the fraction of 13 c labeled glutamate was below 3% upon control conditions. such a high degree of 13 c proline incorporation as observed by heide and co-workers  <cit>  could not be evidenced in our study. thus we assume that the presented method is suitable to determine protein dynamics in experiments up to 24 h.

we investigated the dynamics of the salt stress response of chlamydomonas by an untargeted metabolome analysis. in particular we compared the protein turnover and the metabolic rates of the proline biosynthetic pathway. the metabolome analysis revealed that amino acid metabolism is strongly induced in chlamydomonas upon salt stress. at a concentration of 100 mm nacl a stepwise adaptation from 1 h to 24 h took place but already at 1 h/150 mm a salt shock reaction was observed. at 150 mm nacl metabolite levels showed an immediate response at the  <dig> hour time point. this metabolic reaction clearly preceded proteome rearrangements and thus it may be driven by yet undiscovered posttranslational regulation. with increasing salt concentrations the label incorporation into proline and glutamate increased whereas the label in putrescine was comparable at all  <dig> conditions. this observation may be explained by the pathway structure  and the regulation of the flux trough this pathway. hence, these data clearly suggest posttranslational activation of enzymes of proline biosynthesis and thus, rerouting of metabolism at high salt stress in chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

CONCLUSIONS
using large scale biochemical analyses it is possible to decipher regulatory steps within the cellular metabolic network, specifically the regulated enzymes and their mode of regulation. these studies will also help understanding stress induced metabolic alterations in higher photosynthetic organisms. in chlamydomonas we found a proline accumulation upon salt stress; this reaction was also reported in higher plants and other algae  <cit> . increases in proline and in mannitol could be detected after short term salt stress in the brown alga ectocarpus siliculosus <cit>  and in nicotiana tabacum prolonged salinity induced progressive accumulation of proline and myo-inositol  <cit> . it was shown that artificially increased proline levels in arabidopsis thaliana plants resulted in an improved resistance against freezing and high salinity  <cit>  for review see:  <cit> . this indicates that the substantial proline accumulation might be a functional response in chlamydomonas to counteract salt stress. interestingly, carbohydrates were not found up-regulated in chlamydomonas. we observed that the metabolic patterns of the two different salt concentrations were not reflected in the behavior of the proteome and that the proteomic responses to 100 mm or 150 mm were very comparable . thus, we may provide evidence that metabolic rearrangements can happen within a short time period if necessary, whereas proteomic changes are more conservative. the observed phenomena may be an expression of a basic regulatory concept in biology; to provide metabolic flexibility with the expressed set of proteins and to restrict ‘expensive’ rearrangements of the proteome to long term environmental changes. similar phenomena were reported within the yeast metabolism  <cit> . these results highlight the power of posttranslational regulation in order to adjust metabolic processes to the demand of the cell. the new established method enables the determination of protein turnover in chlamydomonas and will allow gaining deeper insights in dynamic regulatory processes of photosynthetic organisms; the presented strategies and data will be beneficial for basic research, biotechnology and for agricultural improvements.

