BACKGROUND
bacteriophage and plasmids have a significant capacity to alter the ecology of bacterial and archaeal communities . whether lytic phage lyse their bacterial hosts or lysogenic phage and plasmids provide them with potentially beneficial gene functions  <cit> , the presence of these mobile genetic elements are important drivers of ecosystem diversity in a number of environments . despite their sometimes beneficial effects upon their hosts, many bacteria and archaea have multiple mechanisms by which to counteract phage and plasmids ; thus reducing their potential to perturb microbial communities. in many bacteria and archaea, adaptive immunity has evolved, where exposures to certain phage and plasmids result in the insertion of short sequences into the host chromosome  <cit> . these ‘spacers’ are then utilized via nucleic acid interference to resist future encounters with the same phage/plasmids or other phage/plasmids with similar sequences . these spacers are interspersed between palindromic repeat motifs to form the crispr  locus. these loci, along with a related set of host crispr associated  <cit>  genes form the crispr-cas system .

phage generally outnumber their bacterial hosts by a 10: <dig> ratio in many human specimen types, and that ratio generally increases when they are attached to mucosal surfaces  <cit> . relative to their bacterial hosts, there are far fewer studies characterizing the constituents, dynamics, and responses to perturbations in human phage communities . in the human gut  <cit>  and the human oral cavity  <cit> , there is evidence that phage are highly persistent members of these ecosystems. this suggests that either the host organisms are incapable of utilizing crisprs to eradicate these viruses from the ecosystem, or that a dynamic equilibrium between host and phage has developed that may include crispr-mediated resistance mechanisms. prior studies have demonstrated that phage typically coexist with crispr spacers that match their sequences in the human oral cavity  <cit>  and other environments  <cit> . local phage populations respond to the presence of matching crispr spacers in a number of environments  <cit> , but these dynamics have not been thoroughly explored in complex human specimens types. in human periodontal disease, phage communities are noted to be significantly altered compared to periodontally healthy subjects  <cit> . whether there may be a role for crisprs in the cellular microbiota in helping to shape these differences amongst the periodontal microbiota has not previously been explored. there are substantial repertoires of crispr spacers in human saliva  <cit> , dental plaque  <cit> , skin  <cit> , and the gi tract  <cit> ; however, the expression of these crispr spacers has yet to be examined.

studies of the distribution of crispr spacers in human subjects have revealed that despite a fair number shared between individuals, they are highly individual-specific  <cit> . in addition to subject-specificity, crispr spacers vary according to biogeographic sites sampled  <cit> . there are numerous shared spacers between dental plaque and saliva in the oral cavities of individual subjects; however, each site has its own distinct biogeography. many of the crispr spacers found on different body surfaces are highly conserved over time  <cit> , as evidenced by the large proportion of spacers conserved longitudinally on human skin and in saliva. much of the conservation of crispr spacers likely is due to the persistence of the bacteria harboring them on these body surfaces. despite having significant differences in their bacterial ecology, many crispr spacers in the human mouth are identical to those found on human skin  <cit> , which suggests that both body sites are exposed to similar viruses; however, some crisprs on both body surfaces are probably acquired through either vertical or horizontal transmission. individuals living together share a significant proportion of their crispr spacers when compared to control individuals from different living environments, which likely reflects a combination of shared viral exposures and shared bacterial biota within a household  <cit> . we hypothesize that many of these crispr loci are actively transcribed and may be involved in acquired resistance against oral bacteriophage; however, the activity of crispr loci has not previously been evaluated on a global scale on human body surfaces.

crispr loci are transcribed as a single, long rna precursor that is processed to generate crispr rnas . transcription is generally unidirectional, and initiates at the end of the locus that contains the leader sequence  <cit> . cas proteins are necessary for the processing of the long crispr transcript, but the regulation of cas genes is likely to differ according to bacterial species or strain  <cit> . crispr-cas-mediated resistance then generally proceeds in three stages in the crispr-cas systems described thus far  <cit> . in the first stage, cas proteins recognize and cleave exogenous sequences and incorporate them next to cas genes; the second stage involves the transcription of crrnas, and the third stage involves the interference mechanism  <cit> . type ii crispr-cas systems have been well characterized in streptococcus thermophilus  <cit> , and consist of cas <dig>  cas <dig>  cas <dig> and either csn <dig> or cas <dig>  <cit> . several studies of crisprs in the human oral cavity have characterized type ii crispr-cas systems, alternatively known as sgi and sgii crisprs based on their repeat motif sequences in streptococcal species  <cit> . cas <dig> and cas <dig> are universal among the crispr-cas systems and the others are unique to the type ii crispr-cas system  <cit> . cas <dig> degrades foreign dna and functions in crrna biogenesis  <cit> , and csn <dig> and cas <dig> are important for new spacer acquisition in type ii-a, and type ii-b crispr-cas systems, respectively  <cit> . while crispr-cas transcription mechanisms have been characterized in environmental settings and various bacteria/bacteriophage models  <cit> , transcription of crispr loci has not been evaluated in human ecosystems. many bacteria and archaea in these environments may also harbor crispr loci that are inactive , which may occur at the level of transcription of the crispr locus or the expression of cas genes.

here, we sought to characterize crispr loci at the community level in human saliva to decipher whether crispr locus transcription is targeted towards highly abundant oral phage. because we amplify and sequence spacers belonging to crispr loci based on their repeat motifs, we can simultaneously characterize hundreds of different crispr loci belonging to different oral bacteria  <cit> . in our prior studies of oral crisprs, we have found that the proportion of crispr spacers that matched oral phage was relatively low. due to the high numbers of crispr loci that we can identify and the low proportion of matching oral phage, we hypothesized that the proportion of crispr loci identified in the oral cavity that are expressed as transcripts would be low. the goals of this study were to compare the crispr repertoires found in genomic dna with those present in mrna in a cohort of human subjects, examine whether biases exist in crispr repertoires that may be characteristic of oral health status, identify whether many crispr loci are natively transcribed, develop methods for assembly of crispr loci from short sequence reads, identify highly expressed crispr spacers, and to determine whether the transcription of crispr loci may be regulated by the presence of highly abundant oral viruses.

RESULTS
crispr spacer sequencing
we recruited  <dig> human subjects and sampled their saliva. nine of the subjects were in good overall periodontal health and  <dig> had significant periodontal disease. we amplified and sequenced crispr spacers by utilizing their direct repeat motifs as targets for the primer sequences. the benefit of such a technique is that we can amplify crispr spacer sequences from a wide array of different bacterial species that share the same repeat motifs, while the primary limitation is that we cannot ascribe the spacer sequences to any given bacterial species or strain. we sequenced sgi and sgii crispr spacers  that have previously been identified primarily in various species of streptococcus, ghi spacers identified in gemella haemolysans, and vsi spacers identified in veillonella species  <cit> . ghi and vsi crispr repeat motifs have not previously been assigned to crispr-cas system types. we previously have shown that there are robust repertoires of each of these crispr spacer types in a larger group of human subjects  <cit> . each spacer type likely is present in multiple different oral bacteria species. from the dna of each subject, we sequenced  <dig>  sgi crispr spacers ,  <dig>  sgii spacers ,  <dig>  ghi spacers , and  <dig>  vsi spacers  . we also sequenced crispr spacers from the mrna of each subject to determine whether crispr spacers present in each subject were transcribed. from the cdna, we sequenced  <dig>  spacers sgi spacers ,  <dig>  sgii spacers ,  <dig>  ghi spacers , and  <dig>  vsi spacers .

spacer binning and estimated coverage
we binned the spacer sequences according to our previously described protocols based on their trinucleotide content to correct for potential sequencing errors as well as to group highly similar spacer sequences  <cit> . similar to data utilizing a different group of subjects, the vast majority of crispr spacers from each spacer type was identical and did not necessitate grouping according to trinucleotide content. the estimated polymorphism rate among the spacers was  <dig>  % for sgi spacers,  <dig>  % for sgii spacers,  <dig>  % for ghi spacers, and  <dig>  % for vsi spacers . we next performed rarefaction analysis on the resulting spacer groups to get an estimate of the spacer richness in each subject or group of subjects and to determine whether the majority of the spacer sequences had been sampled. we found that for most subjects and crispr spacer types the curves reached asymptote, indicating that further sequencing would not have revealed many new spacer sequences . for sgii spacers, there generally was higher spacer richness, and fewer of the curves reached asymptote. there was no substantial association between oral health status and crispr spacer richness for sgi spacers , sgii spacers , or vsi spacers ; however, there was a trend towards lower spacer richness for ghi spacers in subjects with periodontal disease . nucleic acid type was not associated with crispr spacer richness, as regardless of crispr spacer type, curves were similar in each subject for those spacers identified from dna and those identified from cdna .

crispr spacer distribution by subject and oral health status
we next characterized the distribution of crispr spacers amongst each subject and nucleic acid type to determine whether there were crispr spacers more likely to be present or transcribed by oral health status. the majority of the sgi , sgii , ghi , and vsi  crispr spacers appear to be subject specific rather than specific to oral health status when examining crispr spacer distribution by heatmap. we quantified the proportions of crispr spacers shared amongst subjects with periodontal health or disease and found that  <dig>  % of sgi spacers,  <dig>  % of sgii spacers,  <dig>  % of ghi spacers, and  <dig>  % of vsi spacers were shared between subjects with relative periodontal health ; none of these values were significantly different from the proportion of spacers shared in periodontal disease or the proportion shared between subject groups. the vast majority of the spacers in each subject were individual specific, and those 10- <dig> % that were shared between different subjects were largely shared with only  <dig> other subject for all spacer types . there were few spacers that were shared between  <dig> or more subjects and no specific patterns observed of spacer sharing between subjects with relative periodontal health and disease. when measuring the relative proportion of crispr spacers shared within a subject versus those shared with other subjects, we found that in nearly all subjects and crispr spacer types, the crispr spacer repertoires were significantly  subject specific .fig.  <dig> heatmaps of crispr spacer groups in all subjects and nucleic acid types. each row represents a unique spacer group and the columns are labeled by each individual subject. for each subject, crispr spacers derived from genomic dna are located on the left and crispr spacers derived from cdna are located on the right. panel a—sgi crispr spacers, panel b—sgii crispr spacers, panel c—ghi crispr spacers, and panel d—vsi crispr spacers

fig.  <dig> bar graphs representing the percentages of shared spacers across all subjects and spacer types. spacers shared when all subjects are compared are shown in gray, when only subjects with periodontal health are compared are shown in white, when only subjects with periodontal disease are compared are shown in black, and for comparisons between subjects with periodontal health and disease are shown in red. the y-axis represents the percentage of spacers shared, and the x-axis represents the number of different subjects sharing spacers. the bars representing ‘1’ are unique to individual subjects, and ‘2’ represents spacers shared by only  <dig> different subjects, and so on. few spacers across all spacer types are shared in more than  <dig> different subjects. panel a—sgi crispr spacers, panel b—sgii crispr spacers, panel c—ghi crispr spacers, and panel d—vsi crispr spacers



crispr spacer transcripts
many of the crispr spacers identified in each subject appeared to also be present in transcripts for most subjects and crispr types . we quantified the proportion of crispr spacers in each subject that were present in the dna, but also were found in transcripts . the vast majority of all crispr spacers identified also were transcribed, with  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % of sgii spacers found in both the dna and rna fractions, while  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % were found in the dna fractions alone. similar results were identified for sgi , ghi , and vsi  spacers, indicating that the vast majority of the crispr spacers were transcribed. the proportions of spacers shared in the dna and cdna fractions were significantly subject specific  in nearly all subjects and crispr types . there was no association between the crispr spacer repertoires of different subjects based on whether they were transcribed or not, as evidenced by the  <dig>  % of sgi spacers,  <dig>  % of sgii spacers,  <dig>  % of ghi spacers, and  <dig>  % of vsi spacers that were shared between different subjects in the cdna fractions. these relative proportions were similar to those shared in the dna fractions between different subjects, and none of the differences were significant based on nucleic acid type .fig.  <dig> percentage  of spacers from each crispr spacer type that are transcribed for all subjects , and the percentage of spacers that match virome reads . transcribed spacers are shown in white and those not identified in transcripts are shown in black



matches to virome reads
we previously sequenced the viromes from the saliva of each subject involved in this study  <cit> . we compared the relative proportions of the crispr spacer repertoires of each crispr spacer type that matched virome reads to determine whether spacers that are transcribed may be targeted towards the most abundant viruses present in the oral cavity. we measured the proportions of crispr spacers matching virome reads for those that were transcribed , and those that were not transcribed . because the proportion of spacers matching phage within the same subject was relatively low in this study and in prior studies of oral crispr/phage interactions  <cit> , we pooled the virome reads to identify matches to phage known to be present in the oral cavity of our cohort. there were no significant trends or differences between transcribed spacers and those spacers not transcribed in their relative proportions that matched virome reads . for example,  <dig> % of the transcribed sgii crispr spacers matched virome reads, while  <dig> % of the spacers that were not transcribed matched virome reads; a difference that was not statistically significant. we also tested whether there was an association between the spacers that matched the virome reads based on the oral health status of each subject. we observed mostly subject specific patterns of spacers that matched virome reads for sgi and sgii spacers , and no associations were observed based on periodontal health status for any of the spacer types evaluated .

identification of highly expressed spacers
we normalized spacer values according to their percentage per thousand spacers  so that we could directly compare their proportions across dna and cdna. the relative abundances of spacers in the dna fraction were used as baseline expression values and compared to relative abundances in cdna to determine whether some spacers were highly expressed. we then utilized a rank correlation method based on the ppts values to characterize how well the relationship between the baseline expression and the expression values in the cdna were correlated. for most subjects and spacer types, there was a substantial correlation between the baseline expression values and those found in the cdna , which suggested that relatively few spacers had significantly altered expression. we calculated spearman’s rho values to describe the degree of correlation between the expression values. in general, values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  are considered strong correlations, values of  <dig>  to  <dig>  are considered moderate, and values below  <dig>  are considered weak. most values exceeded  <dig>  for all spacer types, while only a couple of values indicated weak correlations . for example, sgi spacers for subject h <dig> had a high degree of correlation with a rho value of  <dig>  , while there were quite a few sgi spacers in subject h <dig> that appeared to be highly expressed with a rho value of  <dig>  . to decipher whether those spacers that appeared to be highly expressed were actually highly expressed, we calculated residual values between the ppts in the dna and the cdna and defined those spacers with residual values greater than 3x the baseline expression as highly expressed. spacers that met this definition of high expression represented approximately 9- <dig> % of the spacers repertoires evaluated across all subjects and crispr types . we next evaluated whether those spacers that were highly expressed were more likely to match oral phage from the subjects studied. there were no significant differences identified in the proportions of spacers matching virome reads regardless of whether they were highly expressed or not . there was a trend towards more of the highly expressed sgi and sgii spacers matching phage present in the ncbi nr database, but these results were not statistically significant .fig.  <dig> plots of ppts  values from the dna fractions  and the cdna fractions . the ppts values are shown on the y-axis and the individual spacers are shown on the x-axis. each box or diamond represents a different individual spacer. spearman’s rho values are represented above the curves. ppts values that differ significantly between dna and cdna fractions are shown by the arrows. panel a represents sgi spacers for subject h <dig> and panel b represents sgi spacers for subject h7

 <dig> 
a
 <dig> 

arho values < <dig>  are indicated in bold

fig.  <dig> bar graphs of the percentages  of highly expressed spacers that match virome reads  or that have homologues in the ncbi nr database . highly expressed spacers are represented by white bars and all other spacers are represented by black bars



crispr locus assembly technique
because of the significant number of sgi and sgii crispr spacers that matched virome reads from the subjects , we developed a method to assemble crispr loci from each subject to determine whether certain loci had multiple spacers that matched oral phage. to assemble crispr loci, we re-sequenced all the sgi and sgii crispr spacers from each subject using longer read technology, where the average read length was approximately 200 bp and contained multiple spacers compared to the shorter reads  used to characterize the crispr spacer repertoires. from the dna of each subject, we sequenced  <dig>  sgi spacers  and  <dig>  sgii crispr spacers  . from the cdna, we sequenced  <dig>  sgi spacers  and  <dig>  sgii crispr spacers . we binned the spacers from each sequence read according to their trinucleotide content to account for the potential for sequencing errors, and assigned each spacer a unique identifier . we then compared the reads within each subject by nucleic acid type to reassemble crispr loci based on their overlapping adjacent spacers. only spacer combinations that were present in  <dig> % of the reads were utilized to reconstruct crispr loci, while reads that had similar crispr spacers within a subject with their order altered were discarded, as they may represent lesser abundant crispr loci or could occur from pcr amplification artifacts. we validated that the technique is capable of reconstructing crispr loci by pcr amplifying and sequencing the entire reconstructed locus using traditional sanger sequencing .fig.  <dig> diagram of workflow to reconstruct crispr loci from short sequence reads



analysis of crispr loci
we binned the sgi spacers from dna into  <dig>  spacer groups and the sgii spacers into  <dig>  spacer groups. from the cdna, we binned the sgi spacers into  <dig>  spacer groups and the sgii spacers into  <dig>  spacer groups. we performed rarefaction analysis on each subject and nucleic acid type for sgi  and sgii  to determine whether the crispr spacers had been thoroughly sampled. in each case, the rarefaction curves reached asymptote, indicating that further sequencing would not have identified many more crispr spacers in each subject. the relative spacer richness estimates were lower for the longer reads than for the short-read sequencing  because short reads that likely contained orphan spacers were not included in this analysis.

after assembly, we quantified the metrics of the resulting crispr loci. from the cdna for sgi crisprs, the mean number of loci was  <dig>  per subject with an average of  <dig>  spacers per locus . similar results were found in the dna for sgi crisprs with a mean of  <dig>  loci per subject with an average of  <dig>  spacers per locus. for sgii crisprs, there were  <dig>  loci per subject with a mean of  <dig>  spacers per locus from the cdna, and  <dig>  loci per subject with a mean of  <dig>  spacers per locus from the dna . the shortest loci for all subjects and crispr spacer types contained  <dig> spacers, and the longest sgi crispr locus contained  <dig> spacers, while the longest sgii crispr locus contained  <dig> spacers. for the majority of crispr loci produced, they were identical between the dna and the cdna, suggesting that in most cases the entire crispr locus was transcribed.

while there were relatively few spacers shared between most subjects , a few subjects did share a significant proportion of their spacers . for example, subjects h <dig> and h <dig> shared  <dig>  % of their sgii spacers , which corresponded to shared spacers amongst  <dig> separate assembled loci. there also were a significant number of sgii spacers  shared between subjects h <dig> and d <dig>  which corresponded to shared spacers amongst  <dig> different loci. there also were significant proportions of ghi spacers shared between subjects h <dig> and h <dig>  h <dig> and d <dig>  h <dig> and d <dig>  and h <dig> and d <dig> ; a high proportion  of vsi spacers were shared between subjects h <dig> and d <dig> .

we evaluated the pattern of shared spacers between different crispr loci to decipher whether many of the spacers were shared as a result of separate phage exposures or whether they may have been inherited as a unit. we found several different patterns of sgi and sgii shared spacers amongst the reassembled crispr loci , including: 1) loci that likely were inherited as a unit and continued to acquire new and different spacers, 2) loci that were identical and may no longer be acquiring new spacers, and 3) loci that have spacers with altered order that likely were acquired through separate exposures to similar phage.fig.  <dig> reassembled crispr loci from various subjects. panel a shows some representative loci from sgii loci and panel b shows some representative loci from sgi loci. each spacer is labeled with a unique numeric identifier for sgi and sgii. spacers that are shared between different subjects are shown in colors, and white boxes represent spacers that are unique to that individual subject. the loci are drawn in a presumptive 5’ to 3’ orientation based on the end of the loci that differs between subjects



crispr loci matches to virome reads
we quantified the number of crispr loci from all subjects that had spacers with matches in the viromes of the study subjects to determine whether there may be biases between those loci that matched phage based on whether they were transcribed. for sgii spacers, approximately  <dig> % of the reconstructed loci had no spacers that matched any virome reads, and there was no significant difference based on whether the locus was transcribed . approximately  <dig> % only had single spacers that matched phage, while approximately  <dig> % had multiple spacers that matched phage. these numbers were significantly different for sgi spacers, where  <dig> % had no matches,  <dig> % had single matches, and  <dig> % had multiple spacers that matched viruses. each subject had sgi and sgii crispr loci with matches to phage , suggesting that in each subject there were crispr loci transcribed that may have been active in resistance against these phage. that there were no significant differences in the proportions of loci that matched phage based on whether or not the locus was transcribed, suggests that crispr-mediated resistance on a global scale is not regulated based on locus transcription.fig.  <dig> percentage of reassembled crispr loci with spacers that match virome reads. the crispr loci are sorted based on those loci without matches, loci with only a single spacer that matches virome reads, and loci with multiple spacers that match virome reads. transcribed loci are shown in white and those loci not identified in transcripts are shown in black. panel a represents sgi spacers and panel b represents sgii spacers



we also tested whether the presence of spacers that matched viruses were concentrated to individual crispr loci, which might suggest that some individual loci may be more active against circulating viruses. we measured the proportion of crispr loci that only had single spacers that matched viruses and the proportion of crispr loci that had multiple matches to viruses. interestingly, there was a significant  proportion of sgii crispr loci that had a relatively high ratio of total spacers to virome matches , suggesting that these particular loci were highly adapted to counteracting oral viruses. similar results were not found for sgi spacers, however, the proportion of crispr spacers that matched viruses was much lower for sgi than sgii crispr spacers.

discussion
we previously examined crispr spacers from the oral cavities of human subjects using repeat-based amplification  <cit> , which allowed us to examine large spacer repertoires from multiple different bacterial species simultaneously. in those studies, we could only characterize the presence of crispr spacers, but could not assemble them into loci nor could we determine whether or not those crispr loci were expressed. here, we provide the first characterization of crispr spacers that are actively transcribed in the oral cavities of a cohort of human subjects, and demonstrate that the vast majority of the spacers present are actually transcribed. we amplified and characterized crispr spacers from  <dig> separate repeat motifs in different oral species of streptococcus, gemella, and veillonella, and most of the spacers identified from each motif were transcribed . the transcription of most of these spacers is interesting in light of a recent study that showed tolerance to temperate phage via transcription-dependent targeting by the crispr-cas system  <cit> . most of the phage identified in the viromes in this study were predicted to have temperate lifestyles  <cit> , which suggests that tolerance to temperate phage may exist even in the presence of basal crispr locus transcription. some of these transcribed loci likely belong to the same bacteria, which supports that crispr-cas systems may function independently in some bacteria  <cit> .

the high proportion of spacers from each different repeat motif that were transcribed suggests that most of the crispr spacers in the oral cavity have some basal level of transcription. these results are in support of a prior study that showed the expression of cas proteins from crispr-cas systems that were previously thought to be inactive  <cit> . in that study, the expression of cas proteins was increased in response to phage, and our finding of highly expressed crispr spacers suggests that the transcription of these loci may also be a response to the presence of phage. transcription is a paramount early step in crispr-mediated resistance against plasmids and phage, but the transcription of crispr loci does not necessarily indicate crispr-mediated resistance. depending on the organism and the crispr-cas system type  <cit> , other steps including the processing of transcripts into mature crrnas , and presence/expression of other cas genes  <cit> , ultimately determine whether the production of crispr locus transcripts are active in mediating resistance against viruses and plasmids. the presence of highly expressed spacers would suggest that there were phage present in the oral cavities of these subjects that stimulated transcription, yet our analysis did not demonstrate any relationship between highly expressed spacers and matches to oral phage. there are several possible explanations for this finding, including: 1) basal levels of transcription of these loci are sufficient to counteract invading phage and plasmids, 2) transcription of these loci may respond to other signals besides the presence of matching phage/plasmids and 3) lesser abundant phage that were not identified in our analysis may stimulate crispr locus transcription. we believe that the relative abundance may be very important in identifying phage that may stimulate crispr locus transcription in complex communities, as we found few assembled viruses in this analysis that matched spacers, but a far greater number of virome reads. this suggests that there were numerous viruses present in these viromes that could not be assembled due to a relatively low abundance or limitations in the assembly process. a longitudinal analysis of the crisprs and viromes may also highlight that some viruses in these communities fluctuate in their relative abundance, potentially as a result of interactions with crisprs.

the proportion of crispr spacers matching viruses in the oral cavity was relatively low, but differed significantly by crispr spacer type . both sgi and sgii crisprs are found in multiple different oral streptococcal species  <cit>  and represent type ii crispr-cas systems  <cit> , yet 3x the number of sgii spacers matched oral viruses than sgi spacers. the ghi spacers known to be found in oral species of gemella and the vsi spacers found in oral species of veillonella had many fewer spacers matching oral viruses when compared to streptococcal spacers. these data could reflect a high abundance of streptococcal phage present in each subject, relative abundances of different phage in the oral cavity, or potentially reflect the relative activity of these different crispr types in acquired resistance against oral phage. the data for individual spacers matching phage were also reflected in the relative proportions of reassembled crispr loci containing spacers that matched oral viruses. approximately  <dig> % of the reassembled sgii crispr loci matched viruses, while only  <dig> % of sgi reassembled loci matched viruses . despite the increased proportion of sgii spacers matching the viruses, there was no bias identified in transcribed loci matching viruses. in fact, whether individual spacers or whole loci were identified in transcripts, had no effect upon the proportion of spacers or loci that matched viruses . there also were some sgii loci that were extraordinarily well adapted to oral phage populations with all or nearly all their transcribed spacers matching oral viruses . the highly individual-specific nature of the spacer repertoires in the subjects studied  likely is related to bacterial strains present in each subject. we believe this explains why there was no association between spacer repertoires in periodontal health or disease , and there also were no specific patterns observed of spacers matching phage in these subjects .

the crispr-cas system for bacteria serves the important functions of providing acquired resistance against invading phage and plasmids. this study was designed to characterize those crispr spacers that matched phage in the oral cavities of the cohort of subjects; however, it could not address whether there might exist transcription biases against plasmids. our prior studies have indicated that a small proportion of sgi and sgii spacers do match known streptococcal plasmids; however, we do not have metagenome data for plasmids present in the oral cavities of our subjects for comparison. we believe that the trends seen in spacers matching phage will be similar for plasmids; however, further studies are necessary to demonstrate that phenomenon.

there are several benefits of the repeat-based amplification approach utilized to characterize crispr locus expression in our study subjects. the first is that we can analyze multiple different crispr loci simultaneously without knowing their genomic locations in their various oral bacteria. using this technique, we likely can analyze the crispr loci in tens to hundreds of different oral bacterial species rather than concentrating on a few individual species. second, by utilizing longer sequencing reads, we can assemble crispr loci and improve our understanding of the various loci that target human oral viruses. while it is unlikely that we were able to assemble all crispr loci harboring the various repeat motifs, we were able to assemble many different loci with different spacer content. the patterns of shared spacers amongst the assembled loci suggests that some were inherited as a unit and continue to diversify, some were inherited and may no longer be diversifying, and that others are the result of separate phage exposures . the mean number of crispr loci reassembled and the mean number of spacers per locus in each subject was highly similar for both sgi and sgii crisprs. despite those similarities, the proportion of sgi and sgii spacers matching oral viruses was highly disparate. there were approximately  <dig> % more sgii than sgi spacers transcribed , but the proportion of transcribed spacers of neither crispr type was related to matching phage . further study is needed to evaluate whether the disparity between sgii and sgi may be related to their activities against oral phage.

CONCLUSIONS
there are substantial repertoires of crisprs in the human oral cavity that likely are involved in acquired resistance against oral phage. prior studies have shown that oral crispr repertoires have evolved specific adaptations to oral phage populations  <cit> . the human oral virome is populated by numerous different bacteriophage genotypes  <cit> , and many of those phage likely are targeted by the various crispr types analyzed in this study. we had very little insight into whether crispr locus transcription at the community level is adapted to local virus populations, and the data presented in this study indicated that the vast majority of the oral crispr loci sampled were transcribed. the significant proportions of loci that were transcribed indicated that most were transcribed at a basal level, yet some spacers also were highly expressed. loci that were highly transcribed were no more likely than others to have spacers that matched oral phage , which could indicate that the phage to which they respond are of low relative abundance or that the transcription of these loci was responding to signals other than the presence of oral phage. there were no associations between oral health status and crispr spacer repertoires. the unique spacer repertoires found in all subjects suggest that the crispr loci in each subject have evolved as a result of their unique viral exposures. that many of the crispr loci in the human oral cavity were transcribed and match oral phage, suggests they may play a substantial role in shaping the human oral virome.

