BACKGROUND
protein interaction data are an increasingly important bioinformatics dataset used in biomedical research. these data are generated by a multitude of methods including both high-throughput and more traditional low-throughput proteomics studies  <cit>  as well as in silico predictions based on known interactions  <cit> .

the past several years have seen a proliferation of interaction databases as the field focuses on ways to collect these data into machine readable formats where they may be more easily computed on and reliably exchanged between users. the international molecular exchange   <cit>  represents one effort to consolidate efforts of interaction databases by facilitating exchange of information between primary databases according to an agreed standard exchange language called the human proteome organization's proteomics standards initiative molecular interaction format   <cit> . archival members of imex agree to share and provide a full dataset of globally available imex molecular interaction records  in a manner similar to the international nucleotide sequence database collaboration   <cit> . imex also serves to coordinate curation tasks between the partner databases to avoid redundant efforts. imex is open to new members and is comprised of five active partners including dip  <cit> , intact  <cit> , mint  <cit> , mpact  <cit>  and biogrid  <cit> .

the potential for new imex members is enormous: one recent compilation of protein-protein interaction resources listed over  <dig> databases  <cit> . this large list represents a lively interest in interaction data; it also represents a problem for the user searching for information since there is no unifying index.

we set out to create such an index with two goals in mind; first the index should be capable of grouping together equivalent protein interactions into a single group. the measure of equivalence should be based on exact sequence matches of the protein participants according to the source record without further interpretation based on, for example, encoding genes or near sequence identity. second, operations performed to map protein and interaction records to these redundant groups should be preserved; this would allow for the mapping to be recreated for data integrity checking and would help identify and classify potential problem records.

presently, imex archival databases provide a complete set of records generated by its members; however, these records are meant to be archival and do not resolve redundancies between records. this becomes problematic when trying to compile a non-redundant list of interactors for a given protein especially when records may use different identifiers to describe the same protein. a number of recent studies have addressed this issue and reported on databases and/or software that aim to generate consolidated interaction data sets from primary interaction databases . mimi groups together redundant protein interactors and redundant interactions using "keyless identity functions" and "deep merging"; however, these methods are never explicitly defined  <cit> . piana software also allows for integration of protein interaction data from multiple sources and apparently resolves redundancies between different protein identifier types; again, the methods used to do this are never explicitly defined  <cit> . cpath software also allows users to integrate protein interaction data from multiple sources. redundant proteins are identified using lookup tables that may be defined by the user  <cit> ; however, identical interactions and complexes are not grouped together. the solution presented in this study is unique in that it uses a well-defined, reproducible method to assign distinct identifiers to each distinct protein and to each distinct interaction and/or complex in which the protein participates. our method is also unique in that it was designed to trace this process and provide feedback to source databases on problematic assignments.

mapping protein identifiers to redundant groups is at the heart of this task and a number of solutions exist . one such solution, the seguid database  <cit> , creates and records unique identifiers  for over  <dig> million distinct proteins based on their primary amino acid sequence using the secure hash algorithm digest . two protein sequence records that describe proteins with the same primary sequence will have the same unique sha- <dig> identifier and will therefore be assigned to the same redundant group. we chose to employ this existing method and resource as the basis of mapping protein identifiers to redundant groups for a number of reasons. first, the definition of redundancy is based solely on sequence. this forms a well-defined, baseline solution that is not subject to interpretation. second, anyone can generate these keys using only sequence data and an algorithm . this facilitates accessibility to the solution. third, the sha- <dig> algorithm provides for  <dig> e <dig> possible unique keys. this number is significantly higher than other digest algorithms  and therefore provides further protection against collisions .

our construction of a protein interaction index involved parsing psi-mi files provided by nine interaction databases including bind  <cit> , biogrid  <cit> , dip  <cit> , hprd  <cit> , intact  <cit> , mint  <cit> , mpact  <cit> , mppi  <cit>  and ophid  <cit> . mapping proteins  to redundant groups employed seguid-based keys and required addressing a number of issues including malformed and deprecated identifiers, incorrectly assigned taxonomy identifiers and resolution of ambiguous mappings. methods used to make these assignments were recorded allowing for a detailed examination of potential problems with source records and our own system.

this paper describes the software system and the consolidated interaction dataset that it constructs. we demonstrate the utility of the data set and argue that the method is suited well to integrating high-throughput proteomics studies with existing interaction knowledge. we also suggest that the resulting index could provide useful feedback and search capabilities to source databases. interaction data that may be publicly redistributed under the license agreement of the source database is indexed by the irefindex  and made freely available in taxon-specific divisions via anonymous ftp in the psi-mitab  <dig>  tab-delimited, text format.

RESULTS
the non-redundant index of interactions was constructed in four steps summarized here and described further in the following sections. first, sha- <dig> digest sequence identifiers  for proteins were compiled from several sources and were cross-referenced with the source database and most recent accession and taxonomy identifiers for the protein sequence record. second, interaction data were compiled from several sources and compiled in a single relational database. third, for each protein interactor in each interaction record, a redundant object group  was assigned using the seguid and taxonomy identifier for the protein. fourth, each protein-protein binary interaction or complex was assigned to a redundant interaction group  on the basis of the rog assignments made above. the number of distinct interaction records was examined for each source database and for each of several taxons.

 <dig>  seguid's
sequence globally unique identifiers   <cit>  were employed to provide a unique key for each protein in the interaction dataset that was independent of the source database and accession used to describe the protein. this key may be derived by external groups using only the primary amino acid sequence and the algorithm described below. this key was used to map protein accessions used in interaction records to redundant groups and, in turn, group together redundant interaction records.

the algorithm for the creation of a seguid has been described previously  <cit> . briefly, an amino acid sequence in single-letter code is converted to upper case after all non-letter characters and trailing or leading spaces are removed. the secure hash algorithm <cit>   is used to construct a 160-bit message digest of this amino acid sequence; we used the java.security. message library implementation of sha- <dig>  this digest was converted to the base <dig> representation using the base <dig> java class   <cit> . all trailing "=" characters used for padding were removed to yield the final  <dig> character long seguid string. seguid's may also be derived from primary amino acid sequence using the web interface and services provided by the seguid database  <cit> . in addition, pre-calculated seguid's and their mapping to various protein database accessions, aliases and fasta files can be directly downloaded from the seguid ftp site. seguid's may be used to refer to a group of accessions that all refer to the same primary amino acid sequence . since two proteins in two different organisms may share the same sequence, we also employed a rog  identifier to distinguish between identical protein sequences in different organisms. a rog identifier consists of a seguid string concatenated with the ncbi taxonomy identifier  <cit> . so, for instance, while the proteins pointed to by accessions refseq: np_ <dig> and uniprot:q3yuu <dig> belong to the same redundant sequence group  these proteins belong to different rog's .

 <dig>  initial compilation of molecular interaction data
interaction records were retrieved from nine different sources and a number of elements from each record were parsed to a relational database . in total,  <dig>  records were retrieved including  <dig>  records where all described interacting elements  were proteins. the elements parsed from each record included the source interaction database and accession for the interaction record . each interaction record typically contains two interactors ; however, many interaction records describe complexes where greater than two interactors are present. in these cases, the record indicates that the interactors are all participants in some complex without specifying the individual binary interactions present between the interactors. other interaction records contain only one interactor; these records represent multimeric complexes containing only one subunit type that is present in two or more copies. in all cases, the interactors present in an interaction record were examined and an entry was made for each in the relational database. no attempt was made at this point to consolidate redundant interactors; every interactor in every interaction record is considered a unique object in the relational database. the entry for each of these interactors included:

 <dig> complex2refs.txt
 <dig> ints.txt
 <dig> refs.txt
 <dig> complexes.txt
 <dig> labels.txt
1) a single primary reference describing the interactor in an external sequence database,



2) a list of secondary references that may also point to the interactor in an external sequence database, 

3) an ncbi taxonomy identifier describing the source organism of the interactor,

 and

4) the primary amino acid sequence of the protein interactor,

.

only the first element is mandatory under the psi-mi schema. the other three elements were retrieved and recorded whenever present. all four elements were used during the next stage of processing in an attempt to map the interactor to a redundant object group .

 <dig>  mapping protein interactors to redundant object groups 
the data retrieved for each interactor from each interaction record were used in the process outlined in figure  <dig> to assign a rog identifier to each protein interactor. this process follows an order of preference for the data used to make the rog assignment. an attempt at assignment is first made by using the primary reference provided in the interaction record. if this fails, the secondary references provided in the interaction record are used. if this fails, the protein's primary amino acid sequence is used . the process ends as soon as a non-ambiguous assignment is made.

in the course of this assignment, a rog "assignment score" is generated; this is a nominal value that provides information on how the assignment was made. the assignment score is composed of a set of features that may each have a value of  <dig> or  <dig>  a human readable version of this score is generated by representing each feature with a value of  <dig> with a single character unique to that feature. these characters and their mappings to assignment score features are listed in table  <dig>  as an example, the score represented by "puo+" indicates that the assignment was made using the primary accession  from the interaction record, that the accession required updating , and that there were more than one  possible updated accessions but only one of these accessions pointed to a sequence that was identical to the original  sequence listed in the interaction record. in effect, assignment scores are associated with a path through our workflow. a number of scores are possible when using our workflow. these possible scores are listed in figure  <dig> and scores that were actually observed are underlined.

1total number of assignment scores where this occurs expressed as a percentage of all assignments .

 <dig>  detailed description of the assignment process
each logical block in the assignment process is represented in figure  <dig> and is further described below.

a: using the primary reference
the assignment process begins with a consideration of the primary protein reference given by the interaction record. the reference consists of an external database identifier  and an accession pointing to a record in that database . the taxonomy identifier for the protein is also considered. if the accession is found in the uniprot partition of the seguid table with the expected taxonomy identifier, then the protein interactor is assigned the corresponding seguid and rog identifiers with an assignment score of "p". seventy nine percent of all assignments were made using the primary reference . the external database or taxon provided by the interaction record may be ambiguous . in these cases, database  and/or taxon  criteria may be relaxed in searching the seguid table; the assignment is made with the corresponding score . unexpected database names are only tolerated when the provided protein accession is alphanumeric. unexpected taxon identifiers are always tolerated. in all cases, these discrepancies are recorded along with the expected database name and/or taxon. in some cases, the accession found in the interaction record may require modification in order to find a matching entry in the seguid table . for example, minor typographical changes are allowed  or the version number of an accession is ignored . these cases are indicated by score characters m and v respectively. lastly, protein references are associated with a "type" that may be either "identity" or "see also". the later indicates that the reference does not point to a record about the interactor's sequence but to a record where additional information can be retrieved about the protein. in a few rare cases, the primary reference was of the type "see also". assignments were made with these references and marked by the score character q .

b: updating accessions
protein sequence records from uniprot may be altered over time. in some cases, the new record will receive a new primary accession and the old accession will be included in the new record as a secondary accession. it is also possible that a sequence record may be used to make more than one new sequence record. in these cases, the old accession will appear as a secondary accession in each of the new records  <cit> . our work-flow checks for these cases. in the event that a uniprot accession for a protein  is not found in the seguid table, an attempt is made to update the accession. this is accomplished by searching for uniprot records that list the interaction-record-provided accession as a secondary accession. if only a single record is found, the uniprot primary accession in this record is taken as the updated accession. the corresponding assignment score will contain a u . on the other hand, it is possible that more than one record is found and that these records describe different protein sequences . in this case, the mapping from the interaction-record-provided accession to an updated accession is said to be ambiguous. this ambiguity may be resolved in block g using the protein's sequence when provided by the interaction record .

ncbi accessions do not require an analogous logical block. an ncbi accession follows a sequence record for its lifetime. changes in the sequence are indicated by changes to its version number and its primary geninfo identifier   <cit> . the assignment process considers ncbi accessions and will ignore version information where provided . in the case that gi's or protein databank identifiers are provided, entrez programming utilities   <cit>  are used to retrieve the genbank or refseq accession. corresponding assignment scores will contain the letter i to indicate a gi was used and the letter e to indicate that eutils were used. in summary, an attempt is always made by the assignment process to update the protein's reference to its most recent version.

c: using gene identifiers
in the event that the primary accession is still not found in the seguid table and the accession provided is an entrez geneid  <cit> , the protein accessions corresponding to the gene are retrieved. in the best case, only one protein product is present and its taxonomy identifier matches the one given in the interaction record; the assignment score will contain a g. this block also allows for a relaxed taxon match during search of the seguid table . in the event that more than one protein is encoded by the gene, the assignment may be made using the protein's sequence when provided by the interaction record .

d, e, f: using secondary references
in those cases where an assignment cannot be made using the primary reference provided by the interaction record, the secondary references are consulted. corresponding assignment scores will contain the letter s. these three blocks of code essentially follow the same logic as their analogous blocks for the primary reference . only those secondary identifiers with the type "identity" are considered in these steps. these blocks also account for the possibility that the set of secondary references may point to more than one protein . this ambiguity may be resolved in block g using the protein's sequence.

g: resolving ambiguities using interaction record provided sequence
this logical block attempts to resolve ambiguous assignments that may have arisen in the above blocks by using the protein sequence . this case is marked in the assignment score by the character "+" and may be resolved if the seguid for the sequence  matches one  of the possible assignments .

h: resolving ambiguities using arbitrary methods
this logical block makes an arbitrary assignment where more than one assignment is possible and the ambiguity could not be resolved by using the protein sequence . this case is marked in the score by the character "+" and may be arbitrarily resolved by choosing the assignment that has the expected taxonomy identifier  or by simply choosing the assignment with the largest seguid . the largest seguid is determined as the last in a list of seguid strings that have been sorted in ascending lexicographical order . arbitrary assignment is a stop gap measure and assignments with scores containing l or x  should be treated with caution .

i: using interaction record sequences and archival sequences
in the event that no assignment is possible , but the interaction record lists a sequence, the seguid is calculated for the sequence and a new entry is made in the seguid table . the interactor is assigned to the corresponding rog. likewise, if a protein reference can be used to retrieve an archived  sequence from eutils, the seguid is calculated for the sequence and a new  entry is made in the seguid table. this mechanism serves as a stop-gap measure .

 <dig>  review of assignments made by database
1interaction data source .

2total number of interactors found in all interaction records regardless of type .

3number of proteins assigned unambiguously to a rog. assignments listed in columns  <dig> and  <dig> are not included here.

4column  <dig> expressed as a percentage of column  <dig> 

5total number of rog assignments that were ambiguous and resolved with an arbitrary method .

6total number of assignments made where a new sequence was added to the seguid table .

7total number of protein interactors that could not be assigned to a rog.

8total number of unique proteins .

 <dig>  review of assignment scores
type  <dig> assignments were least problematic. in all cases, an unambiguous assignment to a rog was possible using either a primary or secondary reference . in a few cases, version information was ignored , the source database  was relaxed or minor modifications  to the accession were allowed in order to find the corresponding entry in our seguid table. in total, type  <dig> assignments accounted for 77% of the assignments made.

type  <dig> assignments required that the accession provided by the source database be updated using either uniprot secondary accessions  or ncbi eutils . in all cases, an unambiguous assignment was made. in a few cases, the sequence provided by the interaction database was required to accomplish this . in total, type  <dig> assignments accounted for 3% of the assignments made. there is likely always to be some asynchrony between interaction database releases and the major sequence databases; the ability to map accessions to their most recent versions is therefore an essential component of any integrative effort.

type  <dig> assignments involved references where the taxonomy identifier provided by the interaction database was different than the 'true' taxon provided by the source sequence record. type  <dig> assignments represent those rare cases where both an update to an accession was required and the true taxonomy identifier was different than expected. type  <dig> and  <dig> cases accounted for 16% of all assignments and were typically the result of the interaction record listing a taxon that is parental to the true taxon . for the most part, this practice was not a problem for our purposes because the protein reference pointed to a single sequence record where the 'true' taxonomy identifier was listed. however, these differences must be carefully considered when analyzing data or when designing search strategies based on taxonomy identifiers.

type  <dig> assignments involved references that could be mapped to a number of different proteins  and that could not be resolved using sequence data provided in the record. in some cases, this was resolved by choosing the rog that had the expected taxonomy identifier  or by the arbitrary method of choosing the assignment with the largest seguid  according to its ascii value. the majority of cases arose from use of internal identifiers for the protein's primary reference and where the list of alternative secondary accessions pointed to multiple proteins. psi-mi guidelines suggest that proteins be represented with stable identifiers such as uniprotkb or refseq accessions  <cit>  and our results would recommend that distribution of internal identifiers in psi-mi files be avoided. this would have been possible in the majority of cases. in a few cases, retired uniprot accessions were found that had been split into several new records. the correct mapping was not discernable even when taking into account taxon and sequence information present in the interaction record . ambiguity also arose from the use of entrezgene identifiers that point to multiple protein products.

finally, type  <dig> assignments involved interactors for which no matching reference or sequence existed in our seguid table. the protein sequence provided by the interaction record  was used to construct a new  seguid entry. this served to group together any other interactors that might have the same sequence in the current build of the index. this is a stop-gap measure and new seguid entries are discarded from one build of the database to another. the majority of these cases are due to ncbi accessions that have been retired and for which mappings to new accessions are non-existent and not easily automated . this discontinuity between related sequences is a limitation of ncbi accession use. in some cases, uniprot accessions circumvent this problem by providing secondary  accessions in active records as a built-in history of the sequence; however, in cases where sequence records are split, this may lead to multiple mappings that are not easily disambiguated . on the other hand, the ncbi accession.version and geninfo system allows for simple and unambiguous updating of a sequence while the accession is active  assignments). in the end, there is no perfect system and integrating data will be dependent on updates and clarifications from source databases.

in summary, our method has allowed us to unambiguously map 96% of all protein interactors to redundant object groups . the remaining 4% of proteins are problematic either because our mappings are ambiguous  or because we are unable to make any mapping at all to a current sequences . these identifiers will be the subject of further investigation with the source databases. the protein identifier cross-reference service  <cit>  was released while this project was under development; implementation of this resource provides access to uniparc sequences and may resolve some of these unassigned identifiers. table  <dig> results have been broken down by database and will be made available to interested source databases.

 <dig>  mapping protein-protein binary interactions and complexes to redundant interaction groups 
each interaction record involving only protein interactors was assigned to a redundant interaction group  on the basis of the rog assignments made above. a rig identifier  is constructed by concatenating rog identifiers , applying the sha- <dig> algorithm to the resulting string, converting the digest to its base <dig> representation and removing all trailing "=" characters used for padding . the rigid constitutes a unique and universal pointer to a set of interaction or complex records that all involve the same proteins from the same organism. table  <dig> summarizes our efforts to map source interaction data to redundant interaction groups. in total, we collected  <dig>  interaction records that involved only proteins. 99% of these were assigned rog's for each interactor and the corresponding rig was calculated. in total, we found  <dig>  rigid's corresponding to distinct interactions.  <dig>   of these corresponded to binary protein interactions,  <dig>   to complexes involving  <dig> or more proteins and  <dig>   to interactions involving only one interactor type . only 44% of the rigid assignments represented distinct interactions or complexes. this redundancy in the consolidated dataset was higher than the redundancy within any given source  suggesting that there was a fair amount of redundancy between datasets. we examined pairs of source datasets  and showed that this was the case. there were no examples of one data source completely subsuming another. in fact, each source possesses a large number of distinct interactions. this further illustrates the need for a consolidated dataset. at the same time, this demonstrates that a user searching for interaction information using a number of web-site interfaces would be overcome with redundant interactions; many of these redundancies are not apparent by a visual inspection of the records especially when different protein identifier schemes are used.

1interaction data source .

2total number of interaction records found in source.

3total number of interactions involving only protein interactors.

4number of interactions where all protein interactors were assigned to a rog . percentage of column  <dig> is shown in brackets.

5number of unique protein interactions and complexes  found in the data source .

each cell represents the number of unique interactions shared between two data sources. numbers in brackets represent the number of interactions only found in one database. bold numbers represent the number of distinct interactions and complexes  in a given dataset. for example,  <dig> distinct interactions and complexes were found in bind and  <dig> of these could only be found in bind. bind and dip shared  <dig> distinct interactions and complexes.

1at least one interactor in the counted rig's has this taxonomy identifier according to either the source sequence record or source interaction record.

utility of consolidated data
a great deal of interaction data is derived from high-throughput methods based on co-immunoprecipitation with a tagged bait protein. these data result in "complex" interaction records with many interactors where the interactions between specific protein subunits remain unknown. consolidation of these complex data with pair wise interaction data allows for the development of a more complete picture of the potential biological complexes. figure  <dig> shows a bi-partite graph where a complex record is represented with a closed circle and protein members of this complex are indicated by open circles and adjoining edges to the complex node. the clustering coefficient of this complex will approach  <dig> as all potential interactions between members are met by pair wise interactions from the consolidated database. the complex represented is the alternative ctf18-dcc1-ctf8-replication factor c complex and was observed using affinity purification methods  <cit> . evidence for  <dig> of the  <dig> pair wise interactions between its protein members is provided by  <dig> interactions databases including  <dig> interactions found only in ophid and  <dig> interactions that are only found in hprd. this example illustrates the utility of combining data from multiple sources while treating pair wise and complex interaction data as separate but complementary data types. this subject has been explored in detail with methods proposed by scholtens and gentleman demonstrating how data from affinity purification and yeast two-hybrid experiments can be combined to form a more complete picture of potential complexes  <cit> . we suggest that data from the irefindex would be amenable to this same type of analysis since it includes both complex and binary interaction data in a single non-redundant index.

the non-redundant nature of our data set has also allowed us to classify interactions based on supporting literature. pubmed identifiers  listed in interaction records point to literature references that support an interaction. a pmid may be used to support more than one interaction. the lpr score  is the lowest number of unique interactions that are supported by one of the interaction's pmid's. an lpr value of one would indicate that at least one of the pmid's supporting the interaction has never been used to support any other interaction and that the interaction is not likely to rely solely on high-throughput data. figure  <dig> shows a distribution of interactions according to their lpr. these data show a bi-modal distribution where 38% of all distinct interactions are supported by low-throughput papers . these interactions may be taken  to be more reliable than those relying solely on high-throughput data. in contrast, 46% of interactions have an lpr greater than  <dig> and can be considered high throughput. the long body of the distribution contains "middle throughput" interactions  composing 16% of all distinct interactions.

the publicly distributable subset of the irefindex is available in a psi-mitab  <dig>  tab-delimited text file under a creative commons license . this format allows for the types of analyses described above.

discussion
this paper presents a detailed description of methods used to consolidate protein interaction data from a variety of sources. we have paid special attention to describing exactly how assignments to redundant groups have been made. our goals have been three-fold. first, we hope that this resource will be used by source interaction databases to identify problem records and improve data accessibility. second, we believe that a non-redundant dataset is essential to future work . third, we have presented methods to generate global keys for protein interactions and complexes.

redundancy can be defined in a number of ways. we have chosen to define rog's based on exact sequence and taxonomy identifier match. rog's may be further grouped into larger redundant groups that include all products derived from a single gene or proteins that are very similar in sequence. we could have based rog's on gene identifiers to begin with; but, we do not believe that this is the best possible course for three reasons. first, not all proteins are easily mapped to entrez gene identifiers. second, many genes encode redundant protein products. finally, mapping an interaction to a set of gene identifiers suggests that all products of those genes are involved in the interaction. once this generalization has been made, there is no way back to specify that some pairs of gene products do not interact. additionally, the methods suggested here allow external groups to generate universal rig's and rog's for their own data sets and integrate them with this dataset. they may then choose to further redefine redundancy according to their own purposes.

as an example, modelling the structure of large macromolecular complexes such as the nuclear pore complex  <cit>  is dependent on information from a collection of sources  that helps constrain possible structure solutions. interaction data for complex structure components may be collected from a variety of databases using our index. further these data may be supplemented with interaction data for analogous components in a range of organisms. these protein components may have low to near sequence similarity to the modelled components; their interactions could be easily overlaid with the modelled complex using a simple perl script and file that maps analogous proteins into the same redundant object group. as further example, recent work has shown that genes associated with complex diseases tend to cluster in the human interaction network  <cit> . again, these clusters could be supplemented with interaction information from analogous gene products in other organisms. locating these interactions is facilitated using a list of sequence-related rog identifiers since they are independent of the protein database references used to construct the original interaction records.

our experience suggests that the casual user of interaction data would find it practically impossible to collect and consolidate interaction data using web-interfaces to the numerous source databases. in addition, the effort expended in setting up and optimizing this system suggests that the task is also inaccessible to most bioinformatics groups unless they are dedicated to analyzing interaction data .

the present index provides useful access to a non-redundant view of interaction data using updated protein identifiers and corrected taxonomy identifiers. this paper represents more than a year of development time but is still a work in progress that will require further dialogue with the source databases. in the mean time, users are advised to keep in mind a number of cautionary points.

first, no assessment was made of the accuracy of source records. source records and literature references should be consulted for further details. we have assumed that protein references listed in interaction records represent those interactors described in the primary literature. in truth, in some cases, the authors of this primary literature themselves may be uncertain of the identity of the exact gene products or protein isoforms that mediate the interaction. in other cases, authors may reference proteins using only a name with no database reference. there is no allowance  within the psi-mi specification to deal with such ambiguity and different databases deal with this problem in different ways. biogrid, for instance, intentionally curates interactions at the gene level; all of the protein products for an interactor's gene may be listed within an interaction record. this practice led to a number of ambiguous assignments for biogrid interactors. members of the imex consortium adhere to published curation guidelines and we would suggest that other databases also publish their guidelines. guidelines will understandably differ ; making these guidelines transparent is an essential part of providing access to data.

second, psi-mi xml is a means of exchanging data. it does not guarantee uniform representation of meaning. for instance, some experimental methods  will result in "complex data". intact psi-mi xml records will represent these data as a list of multiple interactors in a single interaction. this "complex" grouping carries no information about the binary interactions between member proteins or about their stoichiometry. in contrast, biogrid will represent complex data using a series of binary interactions with one "hub" interactor in common where the hub may be a tagged "bait" protein used to immunoprecipitate other proteins from an extract . the later representation implies binary interactions that may not exist and runs the risk of confounding complexes that share a common "hub". the intact method is more amenable to our bi-partite representation in figure  <dig> where complexes are represented by a separate node type. these differences in representation may be accounted for during analysis or possibly even normalized prior to analysis. again, publication of curation guidelines is an important first step towards this. at present, the irefindex psi-mitab file preserves complex information where it is present in the source record.

in the near future, we hope to collaborate with members of the imex consortium to create a reference index of all publicly available interaction data. the two biogrid examples given above came to light after soliciting feedback from all source databases on our results; other examples are certain to follow. eventually, the issues identified by this process can be built into checks carried out by the psi-mi validator  <cit>  to avoid recurrence of these problems by databases and data submitters.

providing a web interface to these data is an obvious priority. we believe this would be best accomplished by providing a programmatic web-services interface to our data. this would allow source databases and applications such as cytoscape to provide a user interface to these data that would re-direct users to the appropriate source database. a common query interface was proposed at the recent hupo-psi meeting in toledo, spain and development is in progress on its implementation by each of the databases  <cit> .

finally, our index has the ability to consolidate interaction records derived from a common publication by multiple source databases. this view would facilitate cross-checking between databases where such duplications exist. further, this view may help in the process of normalizing the representation of interactions using common standards and controlled vocabulary. this process is expected to be most important for legacy records predating the  <dig> imex consortium agreement.

CONCLUSIONS
the irefindex dataset represents a carefully constructed non-redundant index of interaction data. this resource has numerous applications and may form the basis of further efforts to improve access to information and to normalize representation of interactions.

