BACKGROUND
genome sequencing provides investigators with a plain genome text, with no biological indication of the genes' location. the first task associated with genome annotation is therefore gene identification. in recent years, gene prediction methods have been developed as part of many genome projects. based on criteria strictly defined by previously known genes, the best computational gene identification methods for prokaryote genomes show sensitivities of 98–99% or higher for proper identification of the genes' reading frames  <cit> . however, based on the widespread assumption that open reading frames  and coding dna sequences  label the same objects, this level of prediction accuracy is calculated using the 3' end location of each gene, not the actual gene span. one of the most widely used methods, glimmer  <cit> , tends to predict the cds to be the longest possible orf displaying a particular nucleotide pattern based on markov chain analysis and starting with the first possible translation initiation codon . the conceptual basis of glimmer rests on the original periodical markov chain analysis approach, genemark, which for precise prediction of the gene's 5' end, also considers sequence features located upstream of the translation initiation sites. the resulting accuracy is 5–30% lower than the 3' end predictions  <cit> . genemark often succeeds better in correct gene identification because it is based on discrimination between typical protein coding states and atypical protein coding states, which is assumed to be populated with genes horizontally transferred into a given microbial genome. this was illustrated, for example, with identification of the cyay gene in escherichia coli  <cit>  and the sece gene in helicobacter pylori  <cit> .

a more accurate translation initiation site  prediction is important not only for the annotation of unknown cdss but also for operon prediction  <cit>  and promoter prediction. furthermore, in silico prediction of genes coding for small untranslated rnas  <cit>  also depends on the correct identification of intergenic  distances.

most existing tools use an unsupervised learning method, using e. coli data sets for validation, due to the lack of experimentally validated data sets in other organisms. in the present work, we adopted a supervised machine learning method for the following reasons. first, we took into account that in the current annotation situation, human annotation is still more reliable than any computational genome-wide predictions, suggesting that by trying to mimic the human approach we might construct more reliable data sets. second, supervised learning assumes that we implement some knowledge of what we can consider as the most important elements in the prediction method. furthermore, it is difficult to know the range of correct applicability with unsupervised algorithms without deep knowledge of the algorithms. for example, in a recent comparison between the tico algorithm and med-start, the latter showed surprisingly low accuracies  with high gc-content genomes, although it showed over 90% accuracy in the e. coli data set  <cit> . this is in line with the general difficulty to identify translation start sites in gc-rich organisms where the lack of a or t nucleotides results in long orfs due to purely statistical reasons. to construct an in silico model of translation initiation based on biological knowledge, we take into account the following elements.

first of all, the ribosome binding site  is one of the most important elements for translation initiation. the rbs sequence is recognized by a sequence near the 3' end of 16s rrna in the 30s ribosomal subunit. after the 30s ribosomal subunit binds to mrna by base pairing to the rbs sequence, the fmet-trna identifies the initiation codon and binds to the complex. next, the 50s ribosomal subunit binds to the complex and begins to elongate the nascent polypeptide  <cit> .

compared to bacillus subtilis, escherichia coli has relatively short or poorly conserved rbs sequences. to be able to separate these weak rbs sequences from the noise, e. coli has an s <dig> protein that plays an important role in the correct presentation of most mrnas to the ribosome. the recognition signal of the s <dig> protein for binding mrna has been studied in its molecular details but is not yet completely understood. the s <dig> protein binds to the leader sequence of mrnas, upstream of the rbs sequence. on synthetic rnas, s <dig> has no strict sequence specificity and binds polyu, polyc, and polya, as well as various heterogeneous rnas. however, it has been shown to present sequences possessing the gagg sequence to the regb nuclease of bacteriophage t <dig>  <cit> , indicating that it has indeed a role in the recognition of the core sequence of the rbs. in contrast, b. subtilis or a+t-rich firmicutes do not possess an s <dig> protein. . finally, both e. coli and b. subtilis are weakly au-rich upstream of the rbs sequence. a difficulty encountered with gc-rich organisms is that long gs stretches can easily be mistaken for authentic rbss. for an accurate prediction of the tis, we also need to consider translational reinitiation when several cistrons belong to a common transcript. translational reinitiation frequently occurs if the initiation codon is an aug, a rbs sequence is present, and the termination codon of the preceding cds lies between the rbs sequence and the aug or overlaps the rbs. in this case, the 70s ribosome does not need to be dissociated into 50s and 30s ribosome subunits  <cit>  to allow translation initiation. therefore, translational reinitiation signals may be different from canonical initiation.

the rbs sequence is usually located 3– <dig> nt upstream of the start codon. the optimal spacing depends on exactly which bases at the 3' end of 16s rrna participate in the interaction. the start codon is preferably aug. weaker base pairings with fmet-trna to initiation codons are less efficient for translation initiation  <cit> . the preference for alternative start codons varies between species. b. subtilis prefers uug rather than gug, while the opposite is true for e. coli . the selection ratio of the primary aug in e. coli is higher than in b. subtilis, and this is one of the reasons making that standard prediction accuracy for b. subtilis is lower than for e. coli, in spite of the "stronger" rbs sequence.

an a-rich sequence following the start codon is typically found in both b. subtilis and e. coli  <cit> . those a-rich  sequences probably stimulate translation initiation by excluding secondary rna structures  <cit> .

furthermore, we also took into account the fact that biases introduced by translation may affect the translation process, discriminating between two types of intergenic distance distributions; head to head  and tail to head  cases, for assuming the non-operon/operon structures.

for each of these biological considerations, we assessed to what degree they can contribute to the tis prediction accuracy, as described in the results. based on this evaluation, we selected six elements  and combined them into a single score function using bayesian statistics.

this bayesian supervised learning method for tis prediction, which we named hon-yaku , showed a prediction accuracy of over 90% for both e. coli and b. subtilis. we also applied this method to gc-rich gamma-proteobacteria that do not have any experimentally validated tis data sets. our python scripts can be downloaded  <cit> . after construction of a reference data set based on core genome sequences, the scripts can be used with some basic knowledge of python to predict tiss in newly sequenced bacterial genomes. to obtain training data sets, we chose genes that have strong sequence similarity to e. coli or b. subtilis data sets, retaining the genes that display genome persistence  <cit> . our algorithm also performed well in p. aeruginosa, b. pseudomallei, and the newly sequenced genome of the beta-proteobacterium herminiimonas arsenicoxydans, which can metabolize arsenic.

RESULTS
rbs sequence motif comparison
except for some special cases such as leaderless genes, most genes have an rbs sequence around 3– <dig> bp upstream from the tis. we considered several rbs motif categories that represent the gene essentiality, the position of each operon, and the organism specificity.

the first gene of an operon typically has a longer intergenic space to the previous gene than subsequent genes. by contrast, the rbs sequences of subsequent genes often overlap with the coding region of the previous gene. in these latter cases, the rbs sequence is influenced by the coding sequence. we constructed a data set of overlapping motifs and a data set of non-overlapping motifs to assess the effect of codon usage on rbs sequence. we used the sequenced  <dig> bp upstream and  <dig> bp downstream from the tis to calculate an information content  score . we constructed a data set of overlapping motifs and a data set of non-overlapping motifs to assess the effect of codon usage on rbs sequence. we used the sequenced  <dig> bp upstream and  <dig> bp downstream from the tis to calculate an information content  score . the ic scores for rbs sequences overlapping cdss  were slightly smaller than for non-overlapping rbs motifs  . the difference is not due to a variation in the rbs sequence itself but to a difference in the a nucleotide content of the sequences upstream from the rbs. the ic score of the rbs sequence  was almost identical in both cases . the lack of conservation of a-rich sequences when cdss and rbss overlap is likely due to constraints specific to translation reinitiation  <cit> . in this case, the mrna is already bound to the ribosome, permitting to relax the constraints needed for translation initiation site selection, while allowing to accommodate overlap with the protein reading frame.

currently, essential genes are defined by in vivo experiments in several species  <cit> . to investigate a possible contribution of gene essentiality to rbs sequence conservation, we calculated the ic for essential genes and persistent genes, which are strongly conserved in most bacterial genomes  <cit> . interestingly, we could not detect specific rbs sequence features which would relate to gene essentiality or persistence, thus validating the use of persistent genes in the training set . the ic scores of these particular sets were not larger than the ecogene data set score, which is the largest data set. we therefore decided to use the rbs sequences extracted from the ecogene data set.

by contrast, there are significant differences between organisms: b. subtilis, which does not have a s <dig> protein, shows the largest score of the three organisms . this is consistent with the role of protein s <dig> in the attachment of the mrna to the 16s rrna in e. coli  <cit> .

accuracy of the method
selecting the order of the markov model
we used a markov model to score the relevant dna sequences near the tis. if the training data set is sufficiently large, a higher order model may provide a better description of the motif. we examined the accuracy for a 0th, 1st, and 2nd order markov model in a leave-one-out cross validation analysis . the 0th order markov model showed the highest accuracy in h. arsenicoxydans, which has the smallest sample of training data, while the 1st order markov model was best for e. coli and b. subtilis. moreover, although we had over  <dig> instances in the training data set of b. subtilis, the 1st order markov model gave a better accuracy than the 2nd order markov model due to many similar instances in the data set.

assimilation vs discrimination
to calculate the relevant bayesian probability, we considered two alternative models . in the first model, an assimilation model, we assumed that base frequencies of non-tis sequences near a candidate start codons are the same as in the genome-wide background model . in the second model, a discrimination model, we learned the base frequencies near a non-tis from the negative data set . this might have led to an improvement of the outcome, similar to that using discrimination in cds identification, illustrated by the better accuracy using genemark in gene identification  <cit> . however, the overall accuracy reported by each model was exactly the same, although different genes were predicted incorrectly by the two approaches. this comparison shows that the differences between background and non-rbs sequences are relatively small.

in this paper, we used the assimilation model, as it is simpler than but achieves the same accuracy as the discrimination model.

performance comparison
for e. coli, we correctly predicted 799/ <dig> =  <dig> % starts for the ecogene data set and 184/ <dig> =  <dig> % for the link data set  <cit> . for b. subtilis, 1152/ <dig> =  <dig> % of tis sites in the 'non-y' data set and 184/ <dig> =  <dig> % in an experimentally validated data set of  <dig> genes were predicted correctly. we compared the prediction of hon-yaku's accuracy with that of other approaches: tico  <cit> , med-start  <cit> , and gs-finder  <cit>  . to avoid overestimating the accuracies, we used the longest orfs as input data instead of genbank annotations, because some of our data sets are made from genbank annotations with strong sequence homology to experimentally validated tis from e. coli or b. subtilis. another well known program, rbsfinder  <cit> , appears to be extremely sensitive to the input tis positions and the parameter for searching window size, making the comparison difficult. we listed the accuracy from the previous publication  <cit>  for reference.

a we used the longest orfs as input data.

b the accuracies are from previously published results  <cit> .

in contrast to a supervised learning method like hon-yaku, these tools are sensitive to the input tis annotation. tico and gs-finder were more stable against the initial position compared to med-start and rbs finder. on the other hand, supervised methods depend on the quality and the size of their training set. to ensure the correct evaluation of our method, we also performed cross validation by randomly selecting 10% or 20% of the data sets as the validation set and training the program with the remainder, and repeated this procedure one thousand times . the difference was <  <dig> % in e. coli and b. subtilis, which have large data sets, and < 2% in other organisms with small data sets . except in the case of e. coli, we found a higher prediction accuracy with hon-yaku as compared to existing methods. interestingly, the accuracy in e. coli is higher than in b. subtilis, even though b. subtilis has a strong rbs sequence motif. this is presumably due to the widespread usage of translation initiation sites other than atg in the latter. this may point to an unknown factor in the translation initiation machinery contributing to translation accuracy in firmicutes, possibly related to the absence of an s <dig> protein in these organisms.

in hon-yaku, the average distance between the true tis and the predicted site is  <dig>  codons for the  <dig> false predictions in e. coli.

estimation of the minimum required size of the training data set
the accuracy of supervised machine learning methods depends on the size of the training data set. to estimate the required minimum number of genes in the training data set, we calculated the prediction accuracy for different sizes of the training data set . when we trained hon-yaku using  <dig> genes, the accuracy decreased by approximately three percent in both e. coli and b. subtilis. however, with first-order markov model the accuracy decreased considerably when we trained with data sets consisting of less than  <dig> genes. for the zeroth-order markov model, we found a small decrease.

genes without a canonical rbs motif
we analyzed the incorrect predictions for  <dig> genes in the data set of  <dig> e. coli genes. one main cause of incorrect predictions is the presence of a non-canonical rbs motif in the upstream sequence. to try and understand possible translation processes when a canonical rbs motif is not present, we considered the following three possibilities.

 <dig>  split rbs motif, which would involve the s <dig> protein translation mechanism  <cit> .

a rbs-like sequence is located in two separate positions in the upstream sequence of the s <dig> protein messenger rna, which can fold into three consecutive hairpins. it was proposed that after a tertiary structure is created, both parts come next to each other and can act as a rbs sequence motif  <cit> . recently, however, skorski et al. showed that this was not the case, using ribosomes modified at the 3'end of their 16s rna. they suggested that the gga motifs present in the structured mrna leader are recognized directly by the s <dig> protein and do not pair with the 16s rna. s <dig> would then interact with the ribosome and properly position the mrna for translation initiation  <cit> . furthermore, for the  <dig> genes of interest, we predicted the secondary structure using mfold  <cit> . within the data set, we could not find convincing examples suggesting that they might generate a good rbs sequence after folding.

 <dig>  leaderless mrnas

another possibility to translate mrnas without rbs sequences is leaderless mrna. although computational methods to predict leaderless mrnas are limited, we examined the assumption that a tis is located at the very beginning of the transcribed sequence without a rbs sequence. we searched rna polymerase recognition sequences using a published weight matrix for the major promoters in e. coli  <cit> . no clear motifs were detected in the region located approximately  <dig> bp upstream from the tis. this supports the conjecture that leaderless mrna is rather uncommon in gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . further experimental data are needed to explore whether this hypothesis is correct.

 <dig>  rbs-less translation supported by the s <dig> protein

in e. coli, the s <dig> protein assists in the unfolding of mrna secondary structures and presentation to the ribosome. in contrast, b. subtilis, which does not have an s <dig> protein, is much less able to tolerate secondary structures in the translation initiation region. in vitro, s <dig> has no strict sequence specificity and binds polyu, polyc, and polya as well as various heterogeneous rnas, but it is involved in presenting particular structures to a virus-mediated rna degradation pathway  <cit> . we therefore considered the possible role of secondary structure in the leader sequence of each mrna coding for the unconventional cdss. we applied mfold to predict possible secondary structures and calculated the correlation with the strength of the rbs motif sequence. the correlation coefficient was  <dig> , showing that there was no correlation between the rbs motif intensity and the secondary structure thus predicted.

 <dig>  known unconventional mrna binding to 16s rna. this has been demonstrated in the case of translation initiation factor if <dig> 

the tis of infc, the structural gene for translational initiation factor if <dig>  starts with the unusual auu codon both in e. coli  <cit>  and b. subtilis, which are separated by  <dig>  billion years of evolution.

the latest version of colibri  <cit>  contains four genes starting with att. we tried to predict these four genes by including a non-zero probability for an att start codon . only infc had a strong enough sd sequence to allow correct prediction against the small probability of an att start codon. colibri has  <dig> genes with an atypical start codon, of which there are  <dig> kinds . most of these genes code for a defective protein or are functionally unknown.

presently hon-yaku evaluates all atg, gtg, and ttg codons in an orf as candidate tiss. hon-yaku can easily be extended to include other possible start codons. however, due to the low prior probability for atypical start codons, they can only be detected if preceded by a sufficiently strong sd sequence. finally, several cases of spurious cdss are created by the presence of codons for the 21st and 22nd amino acids, selenocysteine and pyrrolysine, coded by tga and tag codons respectively  <cit> .

multi-tis genes
the definition of a gene is notoriously difficult. in particular, it may happen that two different functional gene products are coded from the same dna sequence, differing only in their start site. this is the case for the b. subtilis lysc gene, which codes for two proteins depending on two in frame start sites, resulting in a heterotetrameric alpha2/beta <dig> protein  <cit> .

in the same way, both in e. coli and in b. subtilis, the gene infb codes for the two forms of the translational initiation factor if2: if <dig> alpha and if <dig> beta. the lacz::fused gene expresses two different products corresponding to the fused proteins if <dig> alpha-beta-galactosidase and if <dig> beta-beta-galactosidase, which confirms in vivo that the if <dig> forms differ at their n terminus  <cit> .

we presumed that some of the "false" predictions with a high bayesian probability could be good candidates for genes that have two tiss . we also checked the length difference and protein motifs for these cases to see whether the protein function would change upon change in start site. the pfam  <cit>  annotation did not point out particular domain structures that could be related to the difference in the tis for any of the genes we identified. nevertheless, we think that they might be good candidates for multiple authentic cdss coded from a single orf.

*fp: false positive predictions that have over 50% bayesian probability.

**tp: true positive prediction with ecogene data set.

among incorrectly predicted genes, the bayesian probability of an incorrect site was largest for the fuck gene. a blastp search for counterparts in other genomes however suggested that the predicted start site is actually correct. indeed, this putatively "false" tis is annotated as the tis in salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium lt <dig>  yersinia bercovieri, yersinia frederiksenii, sodalis glossindius, and shigella boydii. we therefore presume that the hon-yaku prediction is correct, and that the re-annotated fuck sequence is probably, for some reason, erroneous. similar situations were uncovered in other genes, suggesting that the identification of the n-terminus of the corresponding proteins might not correspond to the primary translation product, but to some maturation product. alternatively, those cases could suggest that some coding regions can code for polypeptides of different length, although a pfam search did not reveal a salient functional difference between them. finally, genes may keep multiple tis candidates to gain robustness against gene mutations in the vicinity of the tis.

CONCLUSIONS
in an attempt to improve translation initiation site prediction and to make it applicable in a variety of bacterial genomes, we introduced biological knowledge of the translation process in the hon-yaku algorithm. we considered the rbs sequence, the distance between the tis and the rbs sequence, the nature of the start codon, the a-rich sequences following start codons, and the distribution of the protein length ratio to compute bayesian joint score function. additionally, using the operon structure predicted from the intergenic distances increases the accuracy by around 2%. hon-yaku displays all these scores together with the total bayesian probability for every tis candidate as a means to improve the objectivity of human annotation.

in addition to user-friendliness, the reason why most existing programs adopt an unsupervised approach is the absence of experimentally validated tis data. although a supervised learning method requires more effort for the creation of a training data set, it identifies organism-specific features and allows the user to produce a final description of the best features relevant to a specific organism.

hon-yaku uses a training set derived from models where tiss have been experimentally established , so strictly speaking, the extrapolating of our successful identifications are limited to gamma-proteobacteria and firmicutes. further work with other distant clades will be needed to see whether it can be generalised to the whole bacteria kingdom.

