BACKGROUND
g protein-coupled receptors  comprise a large family, more than  <dig> in human  <cit> , of cell surface receptors that consist of seven transmembrane  helices. these receptors are activated by a variety of external stimuli, including light, ions, small molecules, lipids, and proteins; moreover, the majority of therapeutic drugs act on gpcrs  <cit> . because of the limited number of target crystal structures  <cit> , gpcr drug design relies largely on ligand-based approaches  <cit>  such as property-based methods  <cit> , pharmacophore models  <cit> , and substructure methods  <cit> . these methods do not require any knowledge about the target protein; however, combining them with target information often increases their potential. the resulting so-called 'chemogenomics' approaches thus involve both ligand-based and target-based aspects  <cit> . they do not focus on a single group of ligands and one individual target, but rather on groups of ligands against groups of targets. the central idea is that similar targets have similar ligands  <cit> . therefore, relationships between targets from the sequence side can be exploited to search for novel receptor ligands on the chemical structure side.

traditionally, the gpcr superfamily has been classified based on sequence homology of the receptors. kolakowski grouped all seven transmembrane  proteins into classes a to f for receptors proven to bind g-proteins and class o for the other 7-tm proteins  <cit> . class a receptors resemble rhodopsin and form the largest cluster. later, fredriksson et al. proposed a more elaborate classification for known and predicted human gpcrs  <cit> . surgand et al. presented a sequence-based phylogenetic classification of gpcrs viewed from a ligand perspective  <cit> . by selecting residues pointing inwards into the generic binding pocket of gpcrs, the authors assembled a set of  <dig> residues most likely to be accessible for ligand binding. based on these residues, phylogenetic clustering was performed. although only a subset of residues was used, the classification was similar to classifications based on the full sequence. applications of a grouping such as proposed by surgand et al. constitute ligand design for related receptors, as well as de-orphanization of gpcrs  <cit> . however, the study by surgant et al. is somewhat limited by the scarcity of structural protein data where the identification of binding site residues was solely based on the structure of bovine rhodopsin. it could not yet take into account recent advances that yielded three pharmacologically relevant x-ray crystal structures, namely those of the human β <dig> and turkey β <dig> adrenoceptors, as well as of the human adenosine a2a receptor  <cit> . building further on surgand's work, gloriam et al. proposed an extended set of ligand-accessible residues, derived from visual inspection of the newly available x-ray gpcr crystal structures, from supporting mutagenesis data and from the evaluation of previously established residue sets  <cit> . the resulting set of  <dig> residues was then applied to cluster class a gpcrs into a phylogenetic tree, which reflected similarities in binding site of the receptors.

complementary to these sequence-based classifications are the ligand-based classifications of gpcrs. approaches that use ligand similarity measures for target classification have been previously described  <cit> . keiser et al. related targets by pair-wise comparison of their ligands  <cit> . from a set of  <dig> k ligands, a network was constructed connecting almost all  <dig> targets through sequential linkage. from this, previously unknown antagonism of methadone on the muscarinic m <dig> receptor and of emetine on the α2-adrenoceptor was identified.

while sequence-based similarity relies on comparison of the residues at certain positions in the sequence, there is no unambiguously defined method to measure ligand-based similarity. one way of defining ligand similarity is to consider the overlap of substructures in the molecules. frequent substructure mining is a method for finding the most common substructures in a set of molecules  <cit> . it evaluates all possible substructures, not only discrete fragments that are present in the molecules; it is therefore an exhaustive approach, resulting in a more complete view on the structural features in the set.

in this study, we employ frequent substructure mining to determine the similarity between groups of ligands in a thorough and unbiased manner. this substructural similarity is then used for classification of gpcrs according to relatedness of substructure profiles of their ligands. the substructure-based classification of gpcrs visualizes relatedness of receptors in the form of a phylogenetic tree, which is then compared to the sequence-based phylogenetic classifications of gpcrs. the differences in tree organization are examined with methods that visualize changes in target position. taken together, we present a  classification from the small molecule  perspective, which facilitates analysis of target similarities and differences in ligand-binding behavior. in addition, we explore the potential of our ligand-based classification in receptor de-orphanization, i.e. the prediction of new ligands for orphan receptors.

RESULTS
sequence-based classification
three types of sequence-based phylogenetic trees were built, namely: one tree that was based on the full 7-tm sequence, one tree employing  <dig> residues described by surgand et al.  <cit> , and one tree which was based on the set of  <dig> residues described by gloriam et al.  <cit> . note that the three sequence-based trees presented here are different from those published in the referenced original work  <cit> , since in the current study orphan receptors, receptors with a low number of ligands, and singleton receptors were left out. singleton receptors are receptors that are the only  member in their respective subfamily. due to the chemogenomic nature of this study, we focus on the phylogenetic tree based on the set of gloriam et al. since it represents the ligand perspective best; this set is referenced as the gsk set  <cit> . the two other trees are provided for reference purposes in additional file  <dig> - phylogenetic trees based on 7tm domain and selected residues. the tree that was built based on the multiple sequence alignment of the gsk set is shown in figure  <dig>  the gpcr subtypes in this tree are grouped as branches in the tree according to subfamily and target since it resembles the sequence-based phylogenetic tree on which gpcr classification is based  <cit> . for instance, the opioid receptor subtypes δ, κ, μ, and nop cluster together, as well as the α- and β-adrenoceptor subtypes. the fact that clustering follows the receptor classification is expected since the classification of gpcrs was based on sequence similarity  <cit> . four clusters are clearly defined in the tree: the aminergic receptors, the adenosine receptors, the prostanoid receptors, and the peptide-binding receptors.

ligand-based classification
the ligand-based receptor classification, which we will compare to the sequence-based classification, is provided in figure  <dig>  subfamilies in this tree are more scattered; however, most subfamilies cluster together. for instance, except for the two purinergic receptors  and the two glycoprotein hormone receptors , all other receptors represented by only two subtypes, such as the melatonin or the leukotriene b <dig> receptors, are clustered together. the adenosine receptors a <dig> , a2a , a2b , and a <dig>  group together, indicating overlap in ligand profiles. this may imply that ligands for these receptor subtypes are non-selective, such as the adenosine receptor antagonists caffeine and theophylline. additionally, receptor selectivity may vary with relatively small changes in ligand structure: an 8-cycloalkyl substituent on theophylline confers a <dig> receptor selectivity, whereas a phenylstyryl substituent on the same position in caffeine renders these compounds selective for the a2a receptor. the purinergic receptor p2y <dig> is found near the adenosine receptors owing to the purine core typical for ligands of both these subfamilies. in agreement with the ligand selectivity reported for the α1-, α2-, and β-adrenoceptor subfamilies, these receptors form three distinct clusters  <cit> ; furthermore, the α1b and α1d receptors are the closest in the distance matrix. the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors m <dig>  m <dig>  m <dig>  and m <dig>  cluster together as one group, supporting the low subtype selectivity of muscarinic antagonists  <cit> . however, the acetylcholine receptor m <dig> is found more distant from this cluster. this indicates the presence of distinct chemical classes in the ligand set of the m <dig> receptor, which may be the result of inclusion of allosteric ligands. for instance, gallamine is an allosteric modulator of the muscarinic m <dig> receptor  <cit>  that is also present in the glida database  <cit> , classified as an m <dig> antagonist. in general, the remaining aminergic receptors  are more scattered throughout the substructure tree. this means that targets share ligands or ligand substructures among subfamilies/subtypes, which is in line with the high level of polypharmacology observed for these aminergic gpcrs  <cit> . for instance, the serotonin receptor 5-ht1a clusters together with the d <dig> dopamine receptor, which fits with reports on antipsychotic compounds combining dopamine d <dig> receptor antagonism and serotonin 5-ht1a receptor agonism  <cit> . structurally similar ligands may act on diverse targets, for instance, when ligands have a gpcr-privileged structure at their core  <cit> . the grouping of the eight prostanoid receptors  indicates similarity in substructure profiles of the ligands. this is based on the fact that most prostanoid receptor ligands are direct derivatives of the endogenous ligands  <cit> , the so-called eicosanoids. these ligands are highly similar, all consisting of large aliphatic, lipophilic alkyl chains. the presence of the leukotriene and cannabinoid receptors in this lipid cluster may seem strange at first. leukotrienes are however also eicosanoids, which clarifies the position of the leukotriene b <dig> and cysteinyl-leukotriene receptors in this cluster  <cit> . in addition, arachidonic acid is the common precursor for eicosanoids and two derivatives of arachidonic acid, anandamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol, both of which are endogenous ligands  of the cannabinoid receptors.

the relationship between target clustering in the substructure tree  and ligand promiscuity suggests that the substructure tree may be used to identify possible side effects on receptors that are close neighbors in this tree. for instance, off-target activity of ligands can be identified. if inspection reveals a ligand to bind to receptor that are phylogenetically related to the target of interest, a more detailed experimental follow-up with respect to receptor selectivity would be worthwhile.

tree comparison
visual comparison of the sequence tree  with the substructure tree  reveals that the overall phylogenetic organization is similar. for instance, with the exclusion of the glycoprotein, p2y, angiotensin, and bradykinin receptors, all other receptors represented by two subtypes occur in pairs in both the ligand tree and the sequence tree. this is also true for receptors with three subtypes present in the dataset, e.g. the three members of the α <dig>  the α <dig>  and the β <dig> adrenoceptors, as well as the bombesin receptors. exceptions to this rule are the neuropeptide y and vasopressin receptors. in addition, the prostanoid receptors largely group together in both trees, as do most of the aminergic receptors.

the clear distinction between the two dopamine receptor types, i.e. d <dig> and d <dig>  versus d <dig>  d <dig>  and d <dig> , exists both in the sequence-based classification and ligand-based classification. this is in agreement with a previous study  <cit>  and also known from drugs on the market such as the benzazepines that favor d1-like over d2-like dopamine receptors. similarly, antipsychotics such as chlorpromazine have a higher affinity for the d2-like subtypes than d1-like receptors  <cit> .

the fact that many clusters arise in both trees indicates that the receptors in these clusters have similar sequences and similar ligands, that is, ligands with substantially overlapping substructure sets. however, there are also receptor targets for which this is clearly not the case. the  similarities and differences among sequence and substructure trees are discussed in the following. a delta-delta plot was constructed to compare how pairs of receptors change. this plot, provided in figure  <dig> , visualizes how receptor distances deviate between the sequence-based tree and the ligand-based classification of receptors. in sequence space, receptor distances indicate the similarly between protein sequences, while in ligand space, receptor distances reflect the overlap in structural features found in ligands for these receptors. for each receptor, the mean distance to all other receptors is plotted. from the delta-delta plot, it becomes apparent that the prostanoid receptors and p2y <dig> receptor are on average the most distant receptors from the rest of the classes. the distances of the purine p2y <dig> receptor, the prostanoid fp receptor, and leukotriene receptor cyslt <dig> towards the other classes are all larger in substructure space than in sequence space, implicating that overall their ligands show little resemblance with ligands of the other gpcrs. in contrast, for most aminergic receptors, e.g. for the α2b-adrenoceptors and the 5-ht2b serotonin receptor in figure  <dig>  distances are smaller in substructure space compared to sequence space. this, again, corresponds with the high polypharmacology found for aminergic ligands, such as for most atypical antipsychotics  <cit> , with clozapine as a prominent example  <cit> . with the exception of a few targets , the distribution of targets in the delta-delta plot is more scattered along the x-axis  than the y-axis . this may be a reflection of the evolutionary relationship between sequences, which results in coverage of a small region of the overall sequence space. the ligands for these targets do not have such a direct relationship and thus cover a broader range in overall substructure space.

the difference between ligand-based and target-based classifications may be due to convergent evolution  <cit> . functional convergence denotes how proteins that differ in sequence may fulfill the same protein function. the protein sequence of gpcr subtypes will be similar in parts that are involved in the endogenous ligand recognition but may be different in other parts, for instance those parts that play a role in recognition of other, exogenous, ligands . these may therefore have a different selectivity profile compared to the endogenous ligand.

validation
to validate how well our method performed as a chemogenomics method, i.e. how well it connects sequence space with small molecule space and how applicable the relationship is in practice, we conducted a 'virtual de-orphanization exercise'. for each receptor in the dataset, we pretended not to know any of its ligands by excluding them from the datasets . we next predicted its ligands by considering a model derived from the closest neighbors of the receptor in sequence space . for this calculation, the distance matrix for the gsk residue set was used. the cumulative number of correctly identified ligands of every receptor is plotted against the number of closest neighbors  included to find these ligands. the  area under the curve  and shape of the curve are measures of the performance of our method. in 93% of the studied receptors, de-orphanization of the pretended orphan receptor using the ligands of related receptors performed better than random  and for 35% of receptors de-orphanization performance was good . all auc plots could be divided into four categories according to curve shape and auc . typical examples of the four categories are given in figure  <dig>  the first category is most abundant and consists of curves with a convex shape and an auc above  <dig> , marking good performance. an example of this category is the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor m <dig>  with an auc of  <dig> . curves of the second category display a gradual rise that is approximately equal to the diagonal of the plot. these plots have an auc near  <dig> , indicating performance that is equal to random prediction. an example is the plot of the angiotensin receptor at <dig>  with an auc of  <dig> . curves of the third category perform worse than random and are characterized by a concave shape and an auc below  <dig> . clearly the worst example is the p2y <dig> purinoceptor with an auc value of  <dig>  . in contrast to the first three categories, curves of the fourth category do not have a clear auc range. this category consists of curves that are divided into several discrete parts of alternating rises and plateaus, as shown in the plot of bombesin receptor bb <dig> , with an auc of  <dig> . performance varies from good  to worse than random, depending on the value of the auc. an example of such a plot with an auc value below  <dig>  is the fsh receptor  with an auc of  <dig> . the steep rises are caused by a few receptors identifying the majority of ligands. some of these curves are steeply rising at the start, which suggests that part of its ligand set could be readily identified even though this is not reflected in the auc. the poor performance concerning the p2y <dig> receptor is probably due to the nature of its ligands: this set consists of a small number of highly similar ligands that all possess a phosphate group, a feature not found in other ligands in the database. the number of features  shared with ligands of this receptor and other receptors is therefore small. interestingly, the adenosine a <dig> and a <dig> receptors, which are also purinergic, identify most  of the p2y <dig> ligands. however, in sequence space these receptors are at great distance .

overall, our method proves useful for receptor de-orphanization, since for 93% of receptors studied de-ophanization performed better than random selection  and for 35% of receptors de-orphanization performed well .

limitations of the work
in the present study, some targets were excluded due to insufficient availability of ligand data in the source databases. the absence of a receptor may influence the order of other receptors in the trees. scarcity of ligand data is reflected in the substructure profiles, thereby influencing the correlations among receptors. the issue of data  completeness and its effect on interaction networks was recently discussed by mestres et al.  <cit> . using three datasets of increasing complexity  that linked ligands to targets based on full chemical identity, the authors showed that an increase in the number of connections rapidly leads to shifts in connection patterns. however, our study linked targets based on overlap in substructures; as a consequence sharing of substructures rather than of ligands is sufficient for targets to be identified as related. bender et al. and keiser et al. already showed that overlapping ligands are not necessary to predict whether targets are close in ligand space  <cit> . in addition, our method employs an exhaustive approach to analyze the structural features of ligands. frequent substructure mining considers all possible substructures that occur in the ligands and is therefore unbiased, i.e. all possible substructures were evaluated, not only those intuitive to chemists, such as functional groups, ring systems , and linkers  <cit> . however, in the present study less 'obvious' substructures such as ethyl or isobutyl are also considered  <cit> . for a complete discussion on substructure generation and evaluation, see ref.  <cit> . our method is not limited to gpcrs alone; it is easily extended to other protein families for analysis of the differences between subfamily phylogenies, given that sufficient ligand information is available. for instance, it can be applied to the realm of enzymes to complement other chemogenomics analyses  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we presented a ligand-based phylogenetic classification that complements the well-established sequence-based classification of proteins, and applied our method to classification of gpcrs. this alternate view may contribute to our understanding of gpcr classification since it reveals relationships that are unnoticed with conventional phylogeny. targets were analyzed based on the substructure profiles of their ligands using an unbiased approach. the overall organization of the sequence tree and the substructure tree was similar; however, substantial differences were also discovered. in the substructure tree, several clusters of subtypes were identified. for instance, it was found that the adenosine receptors group together, and that certain gpcr subfamilies that do not share sequence homology cluster because of ligand similarity. thus, receptor similarities that signal for potential off-target effects, such as for the serotonergic receptors, are readily identified. in addition, combined with sequence-based classification, the ligand-based classification presented has proven potential  for de-orphanization of receptors.

