BACKGROUND
trichophyton rubrum is the main aetiological agent of human dermatophytoses, as well as all chronic and recurrent fungal infections in the world  <cit> . dermatophytes are adapted to infect keratinized tissues such as skin, hair and nails due to their ability to use keratin as a nutrient  <cit> . although dermatophytes rarely penetrate beyond the epidermis, deeper penetration and systemic infections can occur in immunocompromised hosts  <cit> . currently, t. rubrum has become an important public health problem due to an increase in invasive infections in immunocompromised patients  <cit> . analysis of the gene expression profile of fungi grown on culture medium containing protein substrates such as keratin and elastin, which mimic superficial and deep infections, respectively, can be used to understand fungal-host interactions  <cit> . additionally, the gene expression response of t. rubrum co-cultured on human keratinocytes can be evaluated.

the dermatophyte infection process is initiated through the release of arthroconidia adhesins, which bind to the host stratum corneum  <cit> . most fungal adhesins contain an n-terminal carbohydrate or peptide-binding domain, central ser- and thr-rich domains, commonly in tandem repeats, and a c-terminal region that mediates covalent cross-linking to the wall through modified glycosylphosphatidylinositol  anchors  <cit> . tandem repeats are adjacent dna sequences 2– <dig> nucleotides in length. some tandem repeats are involved in the pathogenicity of microorganisms and adaptation to a new environment  <cit> . adhesins are considered the first line of a pathogen’s stratagem of host-cell invasion, and differences in adhesion have been associated with the greater pathogenicity/virulence of one strain over another  <cit> . adhesins participate in mating, colony morphology changes, biofilm formation, fruiting body development, and interactions with mammalian and plant hosts. however, very few adhesins have been identified thus far in filamentous fungi  <cit> .

after adhesion to the host’s skin, quiescent arthroconidia begin to germinate, leading to the formation of fungal hyphae that invade keratinized skin structures through the secretion of endo- and exoproteases  <cit> . elucidation of this response of t. rubrum to the host may reveal new molecular targets that could be explored for the development of novel antifungal agents. these targets may be involved in the establishment and maintenance of fungal infection, and they may include genes that participate in the adhesion, dormancy and onset of the germination of conidia. the vast majority of studies on the gene expression of the fungal-host relationship in t. rubrum have used grown mycelium and then added skin fragments or protein substrates to the culture medium  <cit> . however, arthroconidia are considered the primary infectious propagules that reach the skin and nails during infection in humans, and their germination is a crucial step in this process  <cit> . therefore, the aim of the present study was to evaluated and compare the transcriptional profile of t. rubrum conidia during growth on keratin and elastin substrates by that contributing to the understanding of the infectious process of dermatophytes.

RESULTS
the transcriptome profile of t. rubrum after growth on protein substrates was analysed using a microarray custom slide containing  <dig>  sequences, which correspond to approximately 70 % of t. rubrum protein coding genes . we identified  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts  when the two growth conditions  were compared each one against the control . the transcripts were mapped according to the broad institute database, and we found  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts that were modulated in the presence of elastin and keratin, respectively. seventy-two differentially expressed transcripts were shared in both conditions .fig.  <dig> venn diagrams showing the number of transcripts which are specifically up-regulated  and down-regulated  during the growth of t. rubrum on keratin or elastin compared to glucose minimal medium, respectively



functional categorization of the genes differentially expressed on the two protein substrates identified genes involved in signal transduction, transport, drug resistance mechanisms, regulation of biological processes, response to stress, protease activity, fatty acid and lipid metabolism, the cell wall, and metabolic processes. regarding to protease activity, the growth of t. rubrum conidia on keratin induced six protease genes that encoded respectively: leucine aminopeptidases lap  <dig> and lap 2; subtilisin-like proteins sub  <dig>  sub <dig> and sub 6; and metalloproteinases mep <dig>  exclusive induction of the gene encoding mep  <dig> was observed for conidia grown on keratin and elastin. the repression of  <dig> genes involved in metabolic processes was observed during the growth of t. rubrum conidia on protein substrates . on the other hand, genes related to the respiratory chain  and tricarboxylic acid cycle  were induced. besides genes differentially expressed in the two conditions, 30-34 % were found to be unclassified . those genes exclusively modulated on keratin or elastin and those commonly modulated on both substrates are shown in tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. a subset of genes involved in different biological processes, such as adhesion , dormancy , protease secretion , and adaptation to nutritional stress , were validated by quantitative pcr , and shows a strong positive correlation.fig.  <dig> functional annotation of genes modulated on keratin  and elastin  based on gene ontology


a only genes with a fold change of four or higher are indicated. + induction; − repression


a only genes with a fold change of four or higher are indicated. + induction; −repression
t. rubrum genes modulated on both keratin and elastin substrates


aonly genes with a fold change of four or higher are indicated. + induction; −repression

fig.  <dig> real-time rt-pcr of selected genes from the microarray hybridization of t. rubrum genes during growth on keratin and elastin compared to control . modulation of the adhesin-like protein gene of t. rubrum co-cultured with keratinocytes compared to fungal conidia 



among those, one gene drew our attention, an adhesin-like protein upregulated in t. rubrum conidia grown in keratin substrate and containing an interesting pattern of tandem repeat sequences related to adhesion and virulence. this gene was also induced when t. rubrum conidia were co-cultured with a human keratinocyte cell line for 6 h and 24 h . importantly, the induction of this gene was not observed in a microarray analysis using t. rubrum mycelium grown on the same protein substrate , suggesting that this gene might play a role in the early stages of infection. the function of an adhesin-like protein was predicted using faapred software, with the gene showing a high confidence score .

besides the in silico characterization of this gene indicated a sequence of  <dig>  bp , containing a tandem repeat sequence. the tandem repeat pattern is a minisatellite type that shows high variability among dermatophyte species and strains and is located between positions  <dig>  and  <dig> , with a consensus region of 45 bp and a total length of  <dig>  bp. the tandem repeat sequence encodes  <dig> amino acids; has a repeat unit of glycine, glutamine and proline; and is characterized by the presence of a collagen triple helix domain preceded by a mucin-like glycoprotein domain and flocculin type  <dig> domain . in addition the similarities between mad <dig>  and the t. rubrum adhesin-like protein was verified and exist at the n-terminus, starting in the glycine-rich region. furthermore, both proteins share a predicted gpi cell wall anchor site at the c-terminus and exhibit a tandem repeat sequence in the mid-region . similarly, the findings showed similarities between the t. rubrum adhesin-like protein and a cell surface protein of aspergillus fumigatus , which is characterized by a 188-amino acid serine/threonine/proline-rich n-terminus followed by a large, variable, six-amino acid serine/proline  tandem repeat region . in the last case, besides the tandem repeats, both proteins also contain collagen and flocculin domains and a gpi anchor site.fig.  <dig> structural features of terg_ <dig> adhesin-like protein a) main domains in the adhesin-like protein sequence according to the ncbi’s conserved domain database. b schematic structure of terg_ <dig> showing a glycine rich region, tandem repeats of proline, glycine and glutamine, and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor site . c alignment of the homologous region between terg_ <dig> and mad <dig>  d conservation of tandem repeat regions between terg_ <dig> and cell surface protein  of aspergillus fumigatus




the adhesin-like protein gene of t. rubrum has homologous genes in dermatophyte species, which indicate that the repetitive units are conserved between species. variation of the extent of the tandem repeats can be observed among species and strains .fig.  <dig> variable numbers of tandem repeat sequences in the adhesion-like protein gene of different dermatophytes. the vertical bars represent the end of the transcribed genes of the different species and strains



discussion
the establishment of t. rubrum infection initiates by adhesion to the tissue surface mediated through the release of carbohydrate-binding adhesins by arthroconidia that bind to surface of host receptors  <cit> . the conidia in the dormant stage begins to germinate and then hyphae readily penetrate the stratum corneum, preventing the fungus to be disconnected from the skin due to flaking of the keratinized epithelium  <cit> . after adhesion, dermatophytes secrete a wide range of enzymes such as proteases, keratinases, lipase, elastase, collagenase, phosphatases and esterases, which are important factors during the infectious process . the keratinase secreted by dermatophytes catalyze the degradation of keratin present in the host tissue into oligopeptides or amino acids, which can then be assimilated by the fungi  <cit> .

in this study, the use of different protein sources such as keratin and elastin did not induce a profile of gene expression which would be characteristic of the superficial or deep infection, respectively. this could be attributed to the dormant stage of conidia, because the status of quiescence may be responsible for slow transcriptional profile due to starvation of nutrients. however, it is believed that there is a specific induction of proteases with respect to the protein source used  <cit> . in this work it was observed in fact that fungal growth in the presence of keratin promoted the induction of a greater number of proteases, specifically of the subtilisin family of proteases  and leucine aminopeptidase  compared to growth of the fungus in elastin.

in silico identification and prediction of a gene coding an adhesin-like protein induced by keratin
in our microarray data an adhesin like protein was modulated during the growth of t. rubrum on keratin and also in co-culture in a keratinocyte cell. adhesins are also required for the early stages of infection in dermatophytes  <cit> . the gene expression modulation of t. rubrum adhesin like-protein during the co-culture of conidia in keratinocytes cell line assessed by qpcr showed an increase in gene expression 6 h followed by a decrease at 12 h and a subsequent increase at 24 h. liu et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that dormant conidia of t. rubrum show a fluctuation on gene expression. during the germination process, the same work followed a different time course of conidia development and the morphological transitions promoted during the time was also evaluated indicating that at 6 h the conidia is brighter and swollen and after 12 h the hyphae begin to be developed. as the adhesins are mainly expressed in germinating conidia, as occoured for mad <dig> in m. anisopliae  <cit> , the result obtained by qpcr for the expression of t. rubrum adhesin-like protein was even expected for the incubation of 6 h. furthermore, aljabre et al.  <cit>  studying the co-culture of trichophyton mentagrophytes in corneocytes cells showed that the adherence of the arthroconidia requires 6 h and more than 4 h for germination. regarding to the time of 24 h, some works also demonstrated the adherence of spores to corneum stratum for this time  <cit>  . thus, our assumption is that the adhesin-like protein has a fluctuation on gene expression according to the cell cycle process.

in silico analysis of this adhesin like protein showed the presence of collagen triple helix domains, mucin-like glycoprotein domain and flocullin domain, as described previously. the collagen triple helix domains are currently being investigated because of their role in host-pathogen interactions and bacterial adhesins  <cit> . the mucin-like glycoprotein domain of these proteins plays a role in the adhesion and pathogenicity of microorganisms, including biofilm formation  <cit> . the flocculin domain is present in many cell wall proteins  with tandem repeats that are responsible for mediating the host-pathogen interaction by cell-cell adhesion, and it is related to the biofilm formation observed in aspergillus fumigatus and saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . the fungal adhesion process has been extensively studied in candida spp.  <cit> , but it has only begun to be addressed in other pathogenic fungi. in this respect, an adhesin called mad <dig> has been characterized in the entomopathogenic fungus metarhizium anisopliae. the disruption of mad <dig> adhesin delays germination, suppresses blastospore formation, and reduces virulence against caterpillars  <cit> . also, the cell surface protein of aspergillus fumigatus, which shows features of adhesin-like protein was investigated, and a null mutant for the cspa gene showed a phenotype characterized by rapid conidial germination and reduced adhesion to the extracellular matrix  <cit> . tandem repeats are more commonly found in cell wall proteins, and the number of repeats, as well as the length of the tandem repeat unit, can vary among different species and within isolates, promoting diversity and improving adhesion capacity  <cit> .

expression of genes involved in dormancy and germination of conidia
genes involved in the specific germination processes of conidia are interesting targets for the development of new antifungal compounds. furthermore, the chronic infections caused by these fungi may be related to conidial dormancy because an important factor underlying chronicity is the ability of t. rubrum to survive as conidia inside the human body  <cit> . the pattern of low metabolic activity reflected by the repression of a high number of genes involved in the metabolism process, also known as quiescent status, seems to be related to conidial dormancy  <cit> . while at the same time the induction of a few genes in energy metabolism probably are important for maintaining dormancy and initiating germination  <cit> .

the modulation of genes encoding signal transduction system proteins and regulation of biologic process that are involved in conidial dormancy and the early stages of spore germination was also observed in the present study  <cit> . moreover, we found that elastin promoted modulation of a higher percentage of genes involved in the regulation of biological processes, which may be related to the establishment of deep infections. indeed, studies have shown that genes coding proteins required for polarized growth and wd-repeat proteins  appear to be important for the processes of systemic fungal infections caused by a. fumigatus and c. albicans  <cit> . however, further studies are needed to better understand the role of signal transduction systems and regulation of biological process in the maintenance of dormancy in t. rubrum conidia.

expression of genes coding proteases
proteases play a central role in pathogenesis, as they are widely implicated to have proteolytic activity  <cit> . at least  <dig> protease gene that belong to the metalloprotease and serine protease families of proteolytic enzymes are found in the genome of t. rubrum and other dermatophytes  <cit> . among endoproteases, there are five metalloproteases  and seven serine proteases . the exoproteases are represented by two metalloproteases, leucine aminopeptidases lap <dig> and lap <dig>  and two serine proteases, dipeptidyl-peptidases dppiv and dppv  <cit> . in addition to these proteases, t. rubrum was also found to secrete a metallocarboxypeptidase  and to produce two membrane-anchored serine carboxypeptidases when cultured in medium containing protein as the sole nitrogen and carbon source  <cit> . the proteases modulated in this work, especially during the growth of t. rubrum on keratin, are relevant to better understand the role of these proteases for the conidia infection process.

CONCLUSIONS
the present results broaden the knowledge of the molecular features of infection with t. rubrum conidia. genes involved in conidial adhesion and dormancy seem to be important for the infection process and could be explored as potential targets for the development of new antifungal agents.

