BACKGROUND
formation of alternative structures in 5'-leader regions of mrnas is emerging as a major mechanism of gene regulation. there exist several possible variants of this mechanism whose common feature is the competition between two structures, one of which represses gene expression via premature termination of transcription or inhibition of translation initiation . the energetically or kinetically more favourable structure forms by default, whereas the other one is stabilized by binding of a regulatory protein, trna, or a small cofactor, or is formed co-transcriptionally, as in classical attenuators.

rna regulatory elements have been studied mainly in gamma-proteobacteria  and firmicutes . computational analysis also has been mainly restricted to proteobacteria  <cit>  and firmicutes  <cit> . recently a new class of regulatory elements, riboswitches, has been described. these elements are highly conserved and were found in all major taxa of bacteria, as well as in some eukaryotes and archaea  <cit> . comparative genomic analysis has played a major role in the discovery and analysis of t-boxes  <cit>  and most riboswitches . several groups performed large-scale search for new rna regulatory structures  <cit> . analysis of rna-based regulation often leads to non-trivial functional assignments for hypothetical genes and filling gaps in metabolic reconstruction .

here we performed comparative analysis of candidate rna regulatory elements in genomes of actinobacteria. there are few known attenuators in these genomes. those that have been experimentally studied are attenuators of the trp operons in corynebacterium glutamicum  <cit>  and streptomyces venezuelae  <cit> . studies of attenuator-like structures upstream of the ilvb and leua genes of streptomyces coelicolor produced somewhat ambivalent results. indeed, although candidate leader peptides and alternative rna structures were found upstream of the ilvb and leua genes, reminiscent of the classical attenuators, the mutation analysis demonstrated that the regulatory mechanism is not attenuation in the strict sense: mutations in candidate regulatory codons in the leader peptide of the ilvb gene had no effect on regulation, and, although mutations in the leader peptide of leua had some effect, it was not consistent with classical attenuation  <cit> . computational analysis identified several types of riboswitches: thi-elements  <cit> , rfn-elements  <cit> , b12-elements  <cit> , all of them regulating genes of cofactor metabolism by sequestering the shine-dalgarno box and start codon, and interfering with initiation of translation.

RESULTS
following an approach described previously  <cit> , we systematically analysed the upstream regions of amino acid biosynthesis and aminoacyl-trna synthetase operons. candidate regulatory structures were found upstream of genes involved in tryptophan, cysteine, and leucine metabolism. candidate t-boxes were observed upstream of isoleucyl-trna synthetase genes. no conserved structures were observed upstream of genes from other amino acid biosynthesis pathways.

tryptophan
the trp operons are preceded by classical candidate attenuators in all considered genomes of corynebacterium spp. and streptomyces spp. . the leader peptides have double or triple repeats of regulatory ugg codons. all terminators are gc-rich and followed by poly-u-tracts. the antiterminator and terminator hairpins in all genomes contain complementary triples ggcc-rgcy-ggcc where absolutely conserved positions are set in capitals. this is analogous to the situation in proteobacteria, where the patterns involved in multiple interactions within attenuators are conserved at large evolutionary distances  <cit> . in c. diphteriae, candidate attenuators were found upstream of both biosynthetic operons trpb1edgc and trpb2a. a candidate attenuator was found upstream of the tryptophanyl-trna synthetase gene trps <dig> in s. avermitilis.

cysteine
the upstream regions of the cys operon in mycobacterium spp. and propionibacterium acnes and the cbs gene of bifidobacterium longum contain short open reading frames encoding candidate leader peptides with runs of cysteine codons near the stop codon . the upstream regions of mycobacterium spp. are very similar and can be aligned . however, they do not contain any conserved hairpins that could serve as terminators of transcription. one possibility is that this region contains rho-dependent terminators similar to the situation in the tryptophanase operon tna of e. coli  <cit> . indeed, mycobacteium spp. have few rho-independent terminators  <cit> . on the other hand, all mycobacterium genomes contain the components of the rho-dependent termination mechanism, rho, nusg, nusa, nusb. the region between the candidate leader peptide orfs and the first genes in the cys operons contain polyy motifs that could serve as rho-binding sites  <cit> . however, these motifs are not conserved, and thus this prediction is rather weak.

the cysteine operons in m. avium and m. leprae contain additional hypothetical genes, map <dig> and ml <dig> respectively, that are 62% identitical but have no other reliable homologs.

leucine
the upstream regions of the ilvb genes  in corynebactecterium, mycobacterium, streptomyces species contain short orfs with runs of isoleucine, valine and leucine codons overlapping the candidate terminator hairpins followed by polyu-runs . however, the exact mode of regulation is not clear, as experimental substitution of possible regulatory codons upstream of the ilvbnc operon in s. coelicolor had no effect on regulation or expression of ilvb  <cit> .

classical candidate attenuators were found upstream of leus  in s. avermitilis and s. coelicolor. each of them contains an orfs encoding the leader peptide, as well as the antiterminator and terminator hairpins .

sequences upstream of the isopropylmalate synthase genes leua contain a number of candidate regulatory sequences, together named the leu element . firstly, there is an upstream orf encoding a candidate leader peptide with a run of leucine codons . secondly, this region may fold into a pseudoknot with an additional stem at its base formed by pairing of the leucine codon run with the shine-dalgarno box of the leua gene . finally, the same region may form an alternative hairpin with the same base stem .

a similar pseudoknot was found in b. longum within a gene encoding a transposase. the latter is homologous to the is <dig> transposase of m. tuberculosis and m. bovis , a putative transposase in c. efficiens , putative is <dig> family transposases of s. avermitilis , hypothetical protein map <dig> of m. avium , and some other putative transposases from b. longum, c. efficiens, m. tuberculosis, m. bovis, r. xylanophilus, s. avermitilis, s. coelicolor . however, only the b. longum transposase contains a fragment that may fold into the pseudoknot , whereas other transposases, although highly similar on the protein level in the corresponding region, contain a number of non-complementary mismatches in synonymous codon positions and thus have lost the pseudoknot folding potential.

t-boxes
candidate t-box structures were found upstream of the iles genes from several actinobacteria. they are unusual, as instead of terminators, they contain hairpins sequestering the shine-dalgarno boxes of the iles genes . thus it is likely that the regulatory mechanism involves inhibition of translation initiation. to our knowledge, this is the first example of a t-box acting on the level of translation.

CONCLUSIONS
candidate regulatory elements were found upstream of genes involved in the tryptophan, cysteine and branched chain amino acids metabolism. no conserved rna regulatory structures were observed upstream of histidine, threonine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, arginine, lysine, methionine operons, although orthologous genes involved in the latter pathways are regulated on the rna level in other species: methionine and lysine by the s-box and l-box riboswitches respectively  <cit> , histidine, threonine and phenylalanine by attenuators  <cit> , tyrosine and arginine by t-boxes  <cit> .

attenuators of the classical type were observed upstream of the aminoacyl-trna-synthetase genes trps and leus in some streptomyces genomes, similar to those observed in gamma-proteobacteria,   <cit> . in contrast, in firmicutes, most aminoacyl-trna-synthetase genes are regulated by trna-dependent antitermination  and none by classical attenuation  <cit> . no classical t-boxes were found in actinobacteria, but unusual t-boxes, possibly regulating initiation of translation, were observed upstream of the iles genes in several genomes.

despite the presense of conserved leader peptides upstream of some cysteine and leucine operons, the mode of regulation is unknown, as other attenuator elements are missing. one possible explanation is that attenuation of the cys operons in mycobacterium spp. and p. acnes and the cbs operon in b. longum involves rho-dependent termination, similar to the tna operon of e. coli  <cit> .

the most interesting case seems to be that of the leua genes. the upstream regions of these genes contain several conserved elements  that can be interpreted in different ways. there are some architectural similarities with riboswitches, in particular, a compact structure with a stem at the base  <cit> . the latter is formed by interaction of a run of leucine codons and the shine-dalgarno box. indeed, actinobacteria seem to be the only taxonomic group where the base stems of riboswitches directly overlap the translation initiation site, without additional regulatory hairpins  <cit> . however, the leu element differs from all known riboswitches, as the alignment of leu elements does not contain conserved unpaired nucleotides that would be involved in tertiary interactions and form the ligand-binding pocket, as in the purine riboswitches whose spatial structure has been resolved  <cit>  and in other riboswitches  <cit> . thus direct binding of a small molecule to leu elements seems unlikely. on the other hand, there is experimental evidence that mutations in the leucine codons do not influence the regulation  <cit>  and thus classical attenuation involving translation of a leader peptide also is an unlikely mechanism of regulation.

the above considerations make it likely that the leu element is a binding site of some regulatory protein. to test for this possibility, we compared the pattern of phylogenetic distribution of leu elements to phylogenetic distributions of all actinobacterial genes. the closest phylogenetic pattern was observed for orthologs of ml <dig> from m. leprae: homologs of this protein with e-values <10- <dig> were found in all genomes containing leu elements, but not outside actinobacteria. the only unexplained fact is the presence of a homolog with the e-value ~10- <dig> in p. acnes, which does not have a leu element. the structure of the ml <dig> protein is consistent with an rna-binding regulatory role, as the protein contains an n-terminal dead-box helicase domain  that may be involved in unwinding of nucleic acids.

an additional enigma is the presence of a leu element-like sequence within a transposase gene. on the other hand, it may be a clue to the origin of leu elements. one possibility is that the b. longum transposase represents an ancestral state where the leu element was involved in maintenance or regulation of transposition. situations when a regulatory site occurs within a regulatory and/or regulated gene are not very common, but they happen in mobile elements  <cit> . other transposase genes may have lost the ability to form this structure due to mutations; notably, the protein sequence has not changed much , as most mutations occurred in synonymous codon positions. a plausible scenario is that the transposase gene was inserted upstream of the leua gene in the ancestral actinobacterial genome. the main fraction of the coding sequence was subsequently deleted, whereas the structural element was co-opted for regulation of the downstream leua gene.

