BACKGROUND
in recent years, gene expression signatures based on dna microarray technology have proven useful for predicting the risk of breast cancer. agendia's mammaprint has become the first fda-cleared breast cancer prognosis marker chip containing  <dig> gene signatures  <cit> . many other microarray-based biomarkers, such as  <dig> gene signatures  <cit>  have been derived using independent data sources. however, there are only three overlaps between mammaprint's 70-gene and wang's 76-gene signatures. furthermore, many of these markers are functionally unrelated to breast cancer. in order to identify robust, functionally relevant disease biomarkers, it is crucial to find gene signatures that are consistent in various data sources.

a complex disease such as breast cancer results in many differentially expressed genes , which together can be used to construct a "disease module" network  <cit> . some of these degs directly correspond to the disease phenotype . the expression changes enacted on the driver genes lead to a cascade of changes of other genes: initially to their first-degree interaction neighbors  <cit> , followed by downstream effects to so-called "passenger" genes. due to their direct relevance to the biology of the disease in question, the expression changes of the driver genes and their first-degree neighbours , should be more consistent than those of the passenger genes when compared across independent cohorts. however, it is often difficult to separate the core module from the passenger genes for a given disease  <cit> . in this paper, we aim to isolate the core module from the more general disease module and further identify the driver genes using network analysis.

the most intuitive way of finding the disease core module is to identify the differential expressed genes  over various cohorts. unfortunately, the typically larger number of passenger genes in each cohort will contribute to the majority of gene overlaps, due to statistical chance. a more biologically-motivated technique for identifying the core module is to find overlapping differentially expressed pathways. however, a pathway may also contain hundreds of genes with respect to the disease in question, while only a functional submodule  is differentially expressed. these submodules are often overlooked in pathway enrichment analysis.

in light of the aforementioned challenges, we propose to identify pathway activities  from cohorts of data and use supervised classification to isolate a consistent core module. each pa is a vector aggregating the information of a few genes expressed in a pathway  <cit> . the use of pas for biomarker identification has been shown improve reproducibility and disease-related functional enrichment of the resulting biomarkers  <cit> . the main idea behind our method is to infer the most significant pas in each data cohort, and validate these pas using classification methods in other cohorts. if a pa also scores highly in all the other cohorts, we consider it to be consistently differentially expressed in the disease of interest. furthermore, we would consider the genes that make up the pa to belong to the disease core module.

in this work, we develop a novel biomarker identification framework entitled core module biomarker identification with network exploration . combiner identifies "core module"  that are consistently differentially expressed as a whole in the data cohorts of interest. combiner uses a core module inference  component to infer candidate pas from pathway database, a consensus feature elimination  component to filter out irreproducible pas, and a multi-level reproducibility validation framework to find the consistent pas, which in turn make up the complete core module. in its final step, combiner uses known pathways and protein networks to identify the driver genes within this core module.

to illustrate its utility, we apply combiner to three benchmark breast cancer datasets. we evaluate the resulting core module for accuracy, reproducibility, and enrichment for known cancer-related genes. we then explore the roles of the combiner-identified core module in the hallmarks of cancer, and we reconstruct a breast cancer-specific interaction network composed of functionally coherent modules. finally, we summarize our analyses by identifying  <dig> high confidence driver genes from combiner markers.

RESULTS
overview
combiner is a multi-level optimization framework for identifying core module markers . briefly, combiner infers candidate submodules from known pathways, identifies the reproducible "core module" using independent cohorts, and uses intracellular signaling pathways and protein networks to identify the "driver" genes from the "core module".

we applied combiner to three independent breast cancer datasets to evaluate its effectiveness: netherlands  <cit> , usa  <cit> , and belgium  <cit> . we obtained pathway information from the msigdb v <dig>  canonical pathways subset  <cit> . to decrease redundancy, we applied pathway filtering to remove bulky pathways such as kegg pathways of cancer. this resulted in a pathway dataset containing  <dig> pathways with  <dig>  genes assayed in all three benchmark datasets.

core module inference improves reproducibility and classification accuracy
a primary challenge of pathway inference is to find pathway subsets that are reproducible between independent datasets. we compared core module inference  with five other inference methods as well as individual genes . when compared to a range of numbers of inferred pathway activities , cmi showed two-fold increased reproducibility over the related corg method and about a 10-fold improvement over other methods .

we then compared the classification accuracy of cmi and the other inference methods using linear discriminant analysis-consensus feature elimination  classifiers focused on the top  <dig> inferred pas . as shown in figure  <dig>  combiner run using pa vectors identified by cmi  exhibits better overall accuracy than the other methods coupled with combiner. similarly, cmi also shows good overall accuracy using the svm classifier .

core module markers enrich cancer-related genes
we compared the enrichment of known cancer genes in the biomarkers discovered by cmi-combiner, ; corg-combiner, , ; subnetwork markers  ; mammaprint's 70-gene signature    <cit> ; and wang's 76-gene signature    <cit> . seven known cancer gene datasets were compared . both cmi-combiner and corg-combiner showed much higher enrichment of cancer-related genes in their biomarker signatures . specifically, cmi- and corg-combiner showed up to 4-fold increased enrichment over subnetwork markers and up to 30-fold enrichment over other gene signatures. in particular for known breast cancer genes in census, they exhibited up to  <dig> fold enrichment over others. more than 50% and 40% of the resulting biomarkers are cancer and breast cancer specific, respectively. additionally, cmi-combiner showed greater enrichment than corg-combiner with respect to the atlas of cancer genes, which is the largest cancer gene collection. consistent to chuang et al's results  <cit> ,. we also found insignificant enrichment in cangene dataset including  <dig> mutative genes from  <dig> breast cancer cell lines. a possible explanation is that "the cancer cell lines capture a different disease state than that found in the population of patients surveyed by microarray profiling."  <cit>  the combiner core module markers with associated pathways are summarized in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> and additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> lists the overlaps between cmi-/corg-combiner and kegg pathways of cancer, along with up-/down-regulation information.

* p-value <  <dig>  for hypergeometric tests

core module markers highlight the hallmarks of cancer
as shown in figure  <dig>  the combiner-discovered biomarkers are overlaid on the hallmarks of cancer  <cit> , which integrate the common intracellular signalling pathways of all subtypes of cancer. the components of the core module markers from cmi and corg along with eighteen common markers are listed in different fonts. the remaining proteins  in the pathways are consolidated into unlabeled nodes. figure  <dig> shows that the identified core module genes comprehensively highlight the hallmarks, demonstrating the high specificity of combiner. in particular,  <dig> common markers, which we regard as the most reliable predictors, describe well-characterized processes involving growth factors, survival factors, the cell cycle, and the extracellular matrix . the modules unique to cmi-combiner include anti-apoptosis and jak-stat cascades, while pathways describing anti-growth factors and death factors were unique to corg-combiner. a few well-known mutant proteins, including cyclin d <dig> and p <dig>  may play an important role in connecting other signatures  <cit> , but they showed only limited predictive ability in the three breast cancer datasets.

core module markers in predicted protein-protein interaction networks underpin functional modules
CONCLUSIONS
identifying accurate and reproducible disease biomarkers is an important challenge for gene expression analysis. to facilitate this task, we developed combiner, a novel pathway-based biomarker identification method that extracts the essential "core module" of disease from known biological networks. compared to existing methods, combiner substantially improves the reproducibility and cancer-specific enrichment of its resulting biomarkers. we examined the identified markers in intracellular signalling networks highlighting the hallmarks of cancer. reassembling the core module genes into a regulatory network, we found  <dig> "driver" genes connecting eight functional modules. we anticipate such molecular descriptions to prove even more useful when applied to diseases that are less well-characterized; our current work focuses on several such applications.

