BACKGROUND
the olive fruit mesocarp accumulates a wide range of secondary metabolites. the main category of secondary metabolites is represented by secoiridoids, a group of monoterpenoids with a cleaved methylcyclopentane skeleton, which are typical of the oleaceae and other few dicotyledonous families. secoiridoids are abundant in olives as phenol-conjugated compounds that might contain a glycoside moiety. the most important secoiridoids of the olive fruit and virgin olive oil are oleuropein, demethyloleuropein, oleuroside, ligstroside, nüzhenide and their aglycon forms, such as the dialdehydic form of decarboxymethyl elenolic acid linked to either  <dig> -dhpea or p-hpea , an isomer of oleuropein aglycon  and the ligstroside aglycon   <cit> . the secoiridoid compound p-hpea-eda, also called oleocanthal, was identified in the extra-virgin olive oil but has never been observed in the fruits, probably as a consequence of post-harvest enzymatic activity  <cit> . other olive phenolics include phenolic acids, phenolic alcohols  and tyrosol , flavonoids and lignans  <cit> . these compounds are observed in all parts of the drupe, with the highest concentration in the pulp  <cit> . the fruits of several olive cultivars also contain high amounts of verbascoside  <cit>  and other phenolics present at maturity, such as homovanillic alcohol,  <dig> -dihydroxyphenylacetic acid , caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, phloretic acid, vanillic acid  <cit>  and low amounts of comselogoside  <cit> .

studies of the phenolic profiles in the mesocarp, exocarp, seed, stone and leaf of the olive have demonstrated that different tissues contain distinct compounds. for example, nüzhenide and salidroside are only observed in the olive seed  <cit> , while the flavonoids luteolin-7-glucoside, rutin and quercetin are exclusively present in the fruit peel  <cit> .

other compounds in the olive fruit include triterpenic acids such as maslinic and oleanolic acids  <cit>  and tocopherols  <cit> .

squalene, an intermediate of the sterol pathway, is the precursor of α- and β-amyrins and the triterpenic diols erythrodiol and uvaol. squalene is another important compound with recognised effects on human health that is present in consistent amount only in olive and other vegetable oils  <cit> . sterols, such as β-sitosterol, cycloartenol and 24-methylenecycloartanol, progressively accumulate when the olive fruit reaches its final size and veraison begins  <cit> .

secoiridoids are not soluble in oil and, after the process of mechanical extraction, only a small portion is recovered in the oil, representing the most important microconstituents of virgin olive oils for their health and sensory proprieties  <cit> . indeed, olive secoiridoids play a role in the prevention of atherosclerosis and the inhibition of low-density lipoprotein peroxidation  <cit> . numerous studies have clearly demonstrated that these compounds exhibit cancer preventive activities  <cit>  and can contribute to the nutritional prevention of osteoporosis  <cit> . in particular, oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol  <cit>  and oleocanthal  <cit>  have shown effects on human health. the secoiridoids contribute to the quality of olive oil, influencing the oil taste, being responsible for bitter and pungency sensory notes and as primary antioxidants, secoiridoids are involved in oil oxidative stability  <cit> .

phenolics play a crucial role in the plant response to environmental cues, being the most important defence compounds against defoliating insects  <cit> . they also affect shoot branching  <cit>  and have been hypothesised to protect cells and prevent fungal penetration into the cambial zone  <cit> . some data support the idea that the resistance to specific pathogens might also be related to certain types of phenolics  <cit> . oleuropein is responsible for the release of phytoalexins  <cit> , and it is also a multivalent alkylator that functions as an ideal protein cross-linker, exhibiting the strongest activity reported for a plant metabolite, which adversely affects herbivores by decreasing the nutritive value of dietary proteins  <cit> .

to date, secoiridoid metabolism has not been well clarified, but a pathway has been proposed for some oleaceae species  <cit> . secoiridoid accumulation is a controlled process with expression and composition varying considerably among varieties, tissues, developmental stages and in response to different environmental conditions  <cit> .

the key genes that modulate the synthesis and degradation of secondary compounds in olive fruits have not been characterised, with the exception of a few genes involved in triterpene biosynthesis  <cit> , due to the lack of information for the olive genome sequence. the first olive fruit transcriptome data were recently released  <cit> , representing an important resource for the identification of genes involved in fruit metabolism.

functional genetic studies are difficult to perform in perennial woody species due to the lack of efficient protocols for mutagenesis, transformation and in vitro regeneration; therefore, understanding the natural variations for traits of interest represents a valuable tool. in plant science, the integration of gene expression and metabolic data sets is currently being attempted to study metabolic pathways  <cit> .

the aim of this work was to provide further insight into the evolution of the olive fruit phenolic compounds and to identify their major genetic determinants.

RESULTS
concentration of phenolics according to variety and fruit developmental stage
the cultivars chosen for the analyses represent a high level of variation in the fruit phenolics content, based on a number of studies previously performed on subgroups of these compounds or empirical information, as is the case for dolce d’andria and tendellone, which are traditionally used as table olives and are directly edible without undergoing the debittering process. to our knowledge, our work represents the first attempt to directly compare phenolic profiles of olive cultivars grown under the same environmental conditions. these cultivars, in fact, are cultivated in different regions of italy, under different climate conditions, soils, water availabilities and agro-techniques that greatly affect the fruit phenolic content. a previous molecular characterisation of these varieties has established that they have originated independently, and no close genetic relationships have been observed among either the high- or low-phenolics cultivars .

the total phenolic content decreased during fruit development, and at the first sampling time , it ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> mgg- <dig> dw in the  <dig> cultivars analysed . the concentration of the major compounds, such as oleuropein, demethyloleuropein, 3– <dig> dhpea-eda, ligstroside, tyrosol, hydroxytyrosol, verbascoside and lignans, varied among cultivars, some of which had average phenolic levels higher than 150 mg g- <dig> dw , while others had levels lower than 50 mg g- <dig> dw , and the levels in the remaining cultivars averaged from  <dig> to 130 mg g- <dig> dw .

in the high phenolics  cultivars coratina and rosciola, oleuropein represented the most abundant compound , decreasing in concentration after fruit set, as previously observed in other olive varieties  <cit> . in the low phenolics  cultivars, tendellone and dolce d’andria, the main phenolic compound was not oleuropein, lower than 15 mg g- <dig> dw during all stages of the maturation process , but 3– <dig> dhpea-eda, which accounted for up to 94% of the total phenolic contents at the beginning of fruit development.

demethyloleuropein showed an opposite trend, accumulating during the last period of fruit development, after  <dig> daf, with the highest levels observed in the cvs. coratina, rosciola, frantoio, canino, moraiolo,  and leccino. in contrast, only trace amounts of this compound  were detected in tendellone, bianchella,  and dritta, and demethyloleuropein expression was completely absent in dolce d’andria, nocellara del belice and nocellara etnea, suggesting a block in the reaction leading to the synthesis or accumulation of this compound . in hp cultivars the progressive decrease in the oleuropein concentration corresponded with an increase of demethyloleuropein content. the highest concentration of demethyloleuropein was observed at the stages with the lowest concentration of oleuropein. this observation supports the hypothesis of the derivation of demethyloleuropein from the demethylation of oleuropein, as previously envisaged by obied et al. <cit> . in addition, the observation that in lp cultivars and nocellara del belice, nocellara etnea, bianchella and dritta, oleuropein expression and demethyloleuropein content remain constant during fruit development is in accordance with this hypothesis.

the compound 3– <dig> dhpea-eda represented a consistent portion of the total phenolics during the early stages of fruit development in the cvs. tendellone, dritta, nocellara del belice,  and nocellara etnea,  , but the its concentration decreased to values nearing  <dig> at  <dig> daf for most varieties . interestingly, in dolce d’andria it was the only secoiridoid detected at the early stages of fruit development, suggesting that in this cultivar secoiridoid synthesis is not totally blocked and also that this compound could be positioned upstream along the pathway before oleuropein, as reported by ryan et al. <cit> .

in all cultivars expressing ligstroside, the concentration of this compound increased with fruit development . this trend was opposite to that observed for oleuropein, suggesting that this compound might be derived from oleuropein rather than acting as its precursor.

among phenolics, the tyrosol concentration showed a decreasing pattern from less than 2 mg g- <dig> dw, whereas the hydroxytyrosol concentration remained below 4 mg g- <dig> dw, with minor variation among cultivars and fruit developmental stages; notably, a slight increase in hydroxytyrosol concentration was observed after  <dig> daf in canino, leccino, dritta and bianchella .

verbascoside, a molecule comprising tyrosol/hydroxytyrosol and cinnamyl-derivative moieties  <cit> , was detected in consistent amounts  in coratina and rosciola at  <dig> daf, while its concentration remained lower than 30 mg g- <dig> dw in the other cultivars during all developmental phases , in accordance with the results of jemai et al. <cit> . these authors detected verbascoside only in earlier maturation stages in the cv. dhokar. based on our data, it seems that the two major phenolic compounds of olive fruits, oleuropein and verbascoside, with common tyrosol/hydroxytyrosol moieties, do not show any clear relationship.

the lignans acetoxypinoresinol and pinoresinol  showed a modest increase in expression during fruit development, with the former being greater than the latter. the strongest difference in the relative content of these compounds was observed in dolce d’andria, for which the acetoxypinoresinol contents were approximately ten times higher than those of pinoresinol .

the metabolic analysis allowed us to select hp and lp cultivars for further transcriptional analyses, as the contrasting phenotypes of these cultivars might reflect differences in the expression of the genes involved in phenolic metabolism.

identification of transcripts putatively involved in the synthesis of the main secondary metabolites identified from fruit est datasets
a total of  <dig> transcripts  identified from the olea fruit est database  <cit>  were selected for their putative function within secondary metabolite pathways, considering the major compounds present in olive fruits, such as secoiridoids, phenolics, terpenes and sterols . although the genes involved in the secoiridoid pathway are unknown because they are synthesised only in a restricted number of species whose genome sequence data are not yet available, it is still possible to predict some of the required enzymatic functions by observing proposed biosynthetic steps. furthermore, many proposed reactions are similar to those working in parallel pathways in well-characterised plant species   <cit> . 

a the genbank accession numbers of the transcripts are provided. numbers jz <dig>  jz <dig> and jz <dig> refer to the dbest collection.

b putative enzymatic function and enzyme commission  number are provided.

c the e-value and the percentage identity from the best hit of the blastx search are provided. these values were used to indicate the significance of sequence similarity. the text in parentheses indicates the species of the best hit from blastx search.

d transcript sequenced and characterised by shibuya et al. <cit> .

* transcripts derived from the cdna-aflp and race pcr analyses.

the unigenes showing best tblastn scores to protein sequences functionally characterised in other species were selected for subsequent transcriptional analyses. to restrict the number of candidates, only those with the highest levels of expression, deduced by the number of ests per contig, were considered. in fact, taking into account that phenolic compounds represent the most abundant secondary metabolites of olive fruit, we assumed that the metabolism should be strongly oriented to their biosynthesis. the e-value and the percentage identity to known proteins have been reported for the selected genes . although this method has a certain level of uncertainty and further studies are necessary to confirm the proposed functions, the identification of candidate genes considering the similarity to known proteins is a powerful approach, as demonstrated for many other species.

the transcripts were resequenced for the cvs. coratina and dolce d’andria and named according to their putative function.

among the selected transcripts, some were involved in plastidial 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate  and cytosolic mevalonate  pathways, whereas other candidate transcripts were putatively involved in the synthesis of secoiridoids , other phenolics, terpenoids and sterols .

moreover, an olive gene encoding for a lupeol synthase  , which resulted implicated in triterpenoid biosynthesis in yeast  <cit> , was considered for the expression analyses.

identification of other transcripts from cdna-aflp analysis
to identify genes that might play a role in secondary metabolism but not included in the fruit est dataset, a cdna-aflp analysis was performed. comparing the fruit transcriptional profiles of the hp cvs. coratina and rosciola and lp cvs. tendellone and dolce d’andria in three developmental stages  allowed the identification of  <dig> fragments showing differential expression patterns. for  <dig> fragments, high quality sequences were obtained and blasted against protein databases. forty-five transcripts  showed significant similarity to proteins with known function. the blast results and expression patterns of these transcripts are shown in additional file  <dig>  the sequences of cdna-aflp fragments matched entries in the fruit est database, with low differences attributable to cultivar allele variations, est sequence uncertainties, or different genes of the same family.

the results of the blast2go analysis allowed the annotation of the expressed sequences according to the terms of three main gene ontology vocabularies. the majority of the transcripts encoded for putative proteins with binding or catalytic activities  .

for  <dig> transcripts, the expression profiles were confirmed using semi-quantitative pcr  analysis, and  <dig> transcripts showed a similar expression pattern to that observed in the cdna-aflp analysis .

seven transcripts  were implicated in the synthesis or degradation of secoiridoids . the sequences of the transcripts for oedxs, oendhd, oegt, oeadh, oecuao, oeglu and oepox were extended to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  bp, respectively, using race-pcr. the sequences of oendhd and oepox include the complete coding and partial 5’ and 3’ utr regions.

the oedxs sequence exhibited high identity  to dxs type ii  of m. truncatula, which is putatively involved in secondary metabolism, and a lower blastp score  to dxs type i , which is proposed to play a role in primary metabolism  <cit> .

quantitative expression analyses for olive fruit mrnas
the expression of the  <dig> candidate genes identified from est datasets and the seven selected ones from the cdna-aflp analysis, putatively encoding for enzymes involved in secoiridoid, phenolic, terpene and sterol metabolism, was characterised using rt-qpcr to detect a possible correlation with the metabolic data.

the analysis was performed at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> daf using the fruits of hp  and lp  cultivars.

relative expression of transcripts putatively involved in mep and mva pathways
in higher plants, the five-carbon building blocks of all terpenoids, isopentenyl diphosphate  and dimethylallyl diphosphate  may derive from the plastid-localised mep pathway and the cytosolic mva pathway. enzymes and related genes in both pathways are well known and have been characterised.

the six transcripts putatively involved in the mep pathway   showed a strong significant decrease in expression from  <dig> daf to subsequent developmental stages, whereas oecdpmek did not show a significant expression modulation . oedxsoedxr and oehmbppr had the strongest differential expression in accordance with their key role in the mep pathway, which has been proposed in other plant species  <cit> . in particular, our results showed that oedxs, which is involved in the first step of the mep pathway, was exclusively expressed in the first developmental stage  in both cultivars. based on current studies, there are two types of dxs. type i is constitutively expressed in photosynthetic tissues and is likely involved in the biosynthesis of isoprenoids of primary metabolism, such as carotenoids and phytols, whereas type ii dxs seems to be involved in the biosynthesis of isoprenoids for specialised metabolism  <cit> . it is possible that in the olive there is more than one dxs isoform, and the deduced amino acid sequence of our oedxs showed similarity to dxs type ii, suggesting its involvement in isoprenoids for secoiridoid biosynthesis rather than for primary metabolism. it has been reported that in grape a dxs gene co-localises with a major qtl, affecting monoterpene content  <cit> , and it is putatively responsible for muscat flavour  <cit> . at  <dig> daf, oedxsoedxroecdpmes, oehmbppr were significantly more expressed in coratina than in dolce d’andria. oeippi, coding for an enzyme involved in both the mep and mva pathways for the conversion of ipp to dimethylallyl pyrophosphate , did not show a significant expression difference among the samples . 

the four transcripts putatively encoding enzymes involved in the mva pathway  showed completely different profiles compared with the mep transcripts. in particular, oehmgr and oemvak did not display strong differences among the developmental stages or varieties, except for a weak expression increase at  <dig> daf in cv. coratina .

two isoforms of the enzyme hmgr were identified in coffea arabica fruits and transcripts of isoform cahmgr <dig> were expressed only at the initial stages of fruit development, while the isoform cahmgr <dig> was constitutively expressed  <cit> . it is also possible that these two isoforms are expressed in the olive fruit, and it is likely that we have identified the constitutive form.

coratina oemvapk was more expressed at fruit pit hardening , whereas in dolce d’andria, it was expressed at the same level in all three developmental stages. oemvappd mrna increased during fruit development and was always more highly expressed  in coratina than in dolce d’andria.

unlike transcripts involved in the mva pathway, the expression patterns of transcripts involved in the mep pathway, in accordance with secoiridoid, decrease during fruit development, suggesting that the mep pathway is also present in olives and might contribute to the terpenoid portion of secoiridoids. these results are consistent with those reported in other plant species, where mep and mva pathways produce different terpenoid classes. in fact, it is generally accepted that geranyl diphosphate  and geranylgeranyl diphosphate , deriving from the mep pathway, are used in plastids as substrates for monoterpene, diterpene and tetraterpene synthesis, whereas farnesyl diphosphate , obtained from the mva pathway in the cytosol, is involved in triterpene and sesquiterpene biosynthesis  <cit> . however, cross talk between these two different ipp biosynthetic pathways has been documented, and the relative contribution of each pathway to the biosynthesis of the various classes of terpenes remains uncertain  <cit> . in olive, only a contrasting report has been published  <cit> , suggesting the involvement of the mva pathway in secoiridoid formation in the oleaceae family, but neither enzymatic nor molecular data were provided.

relative expression of transcripts putatively involved in biosynthesis of the terpenic moiety of secoiridoids
biosynthetic steps leading to formation of the terpenic and phenolic portions of secoiridoids are still not well clarified and, as a consequence, enzymes involved in these pathways remain uncertain.

transcripts putatively involved in the synthesis of the terpenic portion of secoiridoids , oeges, oege10h, oendhd, oegt, oelamt, and the four transcripts putatively coding for secologanin synthase, oesls <dig>  oesls <dig>  oesls <dig> and oesls <dig>  were analysed . their expression dramatically decreased from  <dig> to  <dig> daf, with the largest variation occurring between  <dig> and  <dig> daf, in accordance with the decay of oleuropein concentration observed during fruit ripening. significant differences between varieties were also observed for oege10h and oendhi, which appeared to be more highly expressed in coratina than in dolce d’andria at  <dig> daf.

ges is a monoterpene synthase involved in the synthesis of geraniol  <cit> , and ge10h is a cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase that hydroxylates the monoterpenoid geraniol at the c- <dig> position to generate 10-hydroxygeraniol. this enzyme was reported to be involved in the biosynthesis of iridoid monoterpenoids and several classes of monoterpenoid alkaloids observed in a diverse range of plant species  <cit> . feeding experiments on syringa and fraxinus  showed that the biosynthesis of oleoside-type secoiridoids proceeds via iridodial  <cit> , which presumably originates from geraniol and 10-hydroxygeraniol  <cit>  . interestingly, it has been recently shown using in vitro enzymatic assays that the same oeges <dig> that we have analysed is involved in the synthesis of geraniol  <cit> , demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in identifying candidate transcripts for phenolics biosynthesis.

the g10h of c. roseus  also catalyses the 3'-hydroxylation of naringenin to produce eriodictyol with a catalytic activity efficiency that is  <dig> times lower compared to geraniol hydroxylation. these studies demonstrated that g10h plays an important role in the biosynthesis of flavonoids, in addition to its previously described role in the metabolism of terpenoids  <cit> . based on these studies, we cannot exclude that oeg10h might also be involved in flavonoid biosynthesis in the olive.

despite the fact that ndhi and gt are enzymes required in different pathways, the strong differential expression of oendhi and oegt in lp and hp varieties and during different stages of fruit development, suggested a putative role for these transcripts in secoiridoid metabolism. these enzymes might play a role in various steps of the pathway. ndhi might work in both, the conversion of iridotrial to deoxyloganic acid aglucone and the conversion of 7-epi-loganic acid to 7-ketologanic acid. gts are required for terpenic and phenolic fractions, transferring glucosylic groups to deoxyloganic aglucones for the formation of deoxyloganic acid, the conversion of oleoside 11-methyl ester to 7-ß-1-d-glucopyranosyl 11-methyloleoside and catalysing the formation of oleuropein from oleuropein aglycone, which is the last step of the pathway .

the position of  <dig> -dhpea-eda along the secoiridoid pathway remains controversial. it has been considered either as a derivative of oleuropein, produced by its enzymatic degradation by endogenous β-glucosidases  <cit>  , or as the intermediate compound of an alternative biosynthetic pathway leading to oleuropein formation  <cit> . the high level of expression of genes encoding enzymes promoting the conversion of  <dig> -dhpea-eda to oleuropein, such as oegt, during the early stages of fruit development in the hp cv. coratina supports the hypothesis of  <dig> -dhpea-eda as an oleuropein precursor. this hypothesis finds a further confirmation in the observation that  <dig> -dhpea-eda is the only secoiridoid detected in cv. dolce d’andria at the early stages of fruit development, suggesting that a downstream block may prevent the formation of the other secoiridoids.

in o. europaea both epoxides of secologanin and secoxyloganin could be precursors of oleuropein  <cit> . the oxidation required for the conversion of 7-ketologanin to oleoside-11- methyl ester is similar to the mechanism taking place for the conversion of loganin, an epimer of 7-ketologanin, to secologanin. therefore, we assumed that the gene encoding this enzymatic function might have high sequence similarity with the secologanin synthase . moreover, the role played by loganin and secologanin in secoiridoid biosynthesis in olea europaea remains controversial, and it cannot be excluded that these compounds might be intermediates of secoiridoid biosynthesis  <cit> , further supporting the involvement of a secologanin synthase.

in the fruit est database, we identified four transcripts  showing high similarities to secologanin synthase. using rt-qpcr analyses, oesls2oesls3oesls <dig> showed a pattern similar to the other transcripts that were included in the secoiridoid synthesis, supporting the hypothesis of their involvement in this pathway. however, oesls <dig> showed a low level of expression at the first sampling, which increased later. this result could be explained by the putative involvement of oesls <dig> in the biosynthesis of other secondary compounds, such as terpene indole alkaloids, as reported in other plant species  <cit> , rather than playing a major role in oleuropein synthesis.

the methylation of 7-ketologanic acid might be catalysed by an enzyme similar to loganic acid o-methyltransferase , which converts loganic acid to loganin , as indicated by the functional characterization in c. roseus , showing that this enzyme exhibits high specificity for the loganic acid substrate  <cit> . therefore, we identified a putative olive homolog  of the lamt gene.

relative expression of transcripts putatively involved in phenolics biosynthesis
the phenolic moiety of secoiridoids is presumably derived from tyrosine and proceeds through tyrosol  <cit>  . in most plants, tyrosine is synthesised from arogenate decarboxylated by arogenate dehydrogenase   <cit> , and hydroxytyrosol is synthesised from tyrosine through dopa and dopamine. recently, the biosynthesis of hydroxytyrosol was clarified in olea europaea using cultured cells  <cit> . another pathway for the tyrosol formation has been reported in other plant species, where tyrosol might be produced from a p-coumaric acid precursor, which is derived primarily from phenylalanine  <cit> . however, in olive, the presence of this alternative pathway has never been demonstrated. instead, two alternative routes from tyrosol to oleuropein have been proposed: one considering ligstroside as direct oleuropein precursor  <cit>  and the other proceeding via oleuropein aglycone  <cit>  . alternative biosynthetic pathways are proposed for verbascoside, e.g., from tyramine via dopamine or from tyrosol via hydroxytyrosol  <cit> .

a schematic representation of the putative olive phenolics biosynthetic pathway is proposed in figure  <dig>  according to the previous findings discussed above. based on these findings, we searched for transcripts putatively involved in the biosynthesis of the phenolic portion of secoiridoids and other related phenolic compounds, such as tyrosol, hydroxytyrosol and verbascoside.

we selected and analysed the following genes that might function in the considered pathway: oeadhoecuaooeppooetyrdoealdh <dig> and oealdh <dig>  adh decarboxylates the arogenate producing tyrosine  <cit> . cuao deaminates various compounds with biologically active amines producing their corresponding aminoaldehydes, h2o <dig> and nh <dig> <cit> . ppo catalyses the o-hydroxylation of monophenols to o-diphenols, and it might be involved in different steps of phenolics metabolism  <cit> . an enzyme similar to a tyrosine/dopa decarboxylase  is required for both the conversion of tyrosine in tyramine and dopa in dopamine  <cit> . the conversion of both tyramine to tyrosol and dopamine to hydroxytyrosol requires an amino-oxidase  and an alcohol dehydrogenase   <cit> .

the expression profiles of four of the six genes  correlated with the secoiridoid content, decreasing during fruit development, similarly to the genes involved in the terpenic moiety . mrnas of oeadh, oeppo and oetyrd were exclusively present at  <dig> daf, and oealdh <dig> and oealdh <dig> were more highly expressed at the first sampling and strongly decreased with fruit development. oetyrd was more expressed in coratina at  <dig> daf compared to dolce d’andria. only oecuao was more highly expressed at  <dig> daf, decreasing at  <dig> daf in coratina, whereas oecuao expression remained constant during development in dolce d’andria.

in phenylpropanoid metabolism, two key genes have been investigated: pal and 4cl. they are involved in the synthesis of large groups of compounds, such as flavonoids, lignans and verbascoside. the expression of oepal increased at  <dig> daf in both cultivars, whereas oe4cl showed the highest expression only at the first sampling in both cultivars . the strong increase of oepal mrna levels at  <dig> daf is consistent with the accumulation of anthocyanins and the change in fruit colour to purple-black that occurs in this phase  <cit> . the opposite trend observed for oe4cl did not correlate with the content of lignans and flavonoids. in fact, the concentration of lignans first increased and then decreased during fruit growth in all cultivars, whereas the main flavonoids, rutin and luteolin 7-o-glucoside, are reported to increase during olive fruit ripening  <cit> . it is possible that oe4cl might not be associated with lignans or flavonoid formation but with that of unique phenylpropanoid end-products, as reported for some species, such as arabidopsis, aspen and soybean  <cit> .

relative expression of transcripts putatively involved in phenolics degradation
the expression of putative oeglu and oepox orthologs was analysed. glu and pox enzymes are involved in phenolic degradation; moreover, glu plays a role in the formation of oleuropein and ligstroside derivatives  <cit>  .

oeglu was almost exclusively expressed during the early stages of fruit development  of cultivar coratina, whereas oepox was almost exclusively expressed at  <dig> daf in both cultivars . these profiles are similar to those observed for transcripts putatively involved in secoiridoid synthesis. these results confirm the role of these enzymes in processes that lead to the decrease in phenolic concentration observed at  <dig> and  <dig> daf, and their expression might be down-regulated whenever a lower availability of oleuropein, their main substrate, occurs  <cit> . a similar mechanism might explain the lower expression observed for both types of transcripts in the lp cultivar, where the lack of oleuropein could be due to differences in the regulation of enzymes involved in its biosynthesis rather than in its degradation.

relative expression of transcripts putatively involved in terpenoid and sterol biosynthesis
the expression of oels, putatively leading to the synthesis of limonene, an important volatile monoterpene, showed a strong variation during fruit development. in particular, it was almost exclusively detected at the last sampling in both analysed cultivars . this pattern is perfectly consistent with the limonene content in unripe and ripe fruits  <cit> . 

oefpps and oesqs mrna levels, putatively coding for two key enzymes leading to the synthesis of squalene, were also analysed, and their expression reached a peak at  <dig> daf in coratina . it is noteworthy that important compounds are synthesised from squalene-oxide at the onset of fruit development, such as maslinic and oleanolic acids and α- and β-amyrins  <cit> . the expression profiles observed for oefpps and oesqs of coratina were consistent with these findings. in contrast, differences among developmental stages were not observed in dolce d’andria.

the expression profile in developing fruits of the gene for lupeol synthase, catalysing the formation of triterpenic lupeol and functionally characterised in yeast  <cit> , has never been analysed. our oelups showed a different mrna profile between the two cultivars at  <dig> daf , which was more highly expressed in coratina than in dolce d’andria, and, in the last two stages, they shared the same pattern. these results could be explained by a different accumulation of squalene and triterpenes during fruit development in dolce d’andria; however, the accumulation of these compounds in this variety has not yet been investigated.

the mrna levels of ggps, catalysing the synthesis of geranyl geranyl pyrophosphate , an important intermediate for diterpenes and carotenoids formation, were higher at  <dig> daf compared with the other developmental stages in both cultivars, and, at the same stage, the expression was higher in coratina . our results are consistent with the higher accumulation of carotenoids during the first stages of olive fruit development  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study represents an effort to characterise the transcriptional profile of candidate genes putatively involved in secondary metabolism in olive fruits by assessing the content of major phenolic compounds in a comprehensive number of cultivars at different fruit developmental stages. these methods allowed us to identify candidate genes for secondary metabolites.

we observed a strong variation in overall metabolite content, in the level of specific compounds and in the accumulation trends among genotypes and fruit developmental stages. coratina and rosciola were characterised by the highest oleuropein concentration at  <dig> daf. in contrast, dolce d’andria and tendellone showed the lowest content at all stages. interestingly, we identified genotypes characterised by the complete absence of other compounds. in particular, nocellara del belice, dolce d’andria and nocellara etnea did not accumulate demethyloleuropein, and dolce d’andria was the only variety showing undetectable amounts of all secoiridoids, excepting  <dig> -dhpea-eda at the early stages of fruit development. these findings might result from a block in the enzymatic steps leading to the biosynthesis of these compounds.

the evidence of an accumulation of ligstroside occurring when oleuropein decreases, leaves space to the hypothesis that ligstroside may derive from oleuropein instead of the contrary.

the observed differences in the phenolic profiles among the cultivars might reflect great variability in the modulation of their biosynthesis and accumulation. this variability can be exploited in breeding programmes to increase the fruit composition of important phenolic compounds.

the recent development of est datasets for olive fruits allowed the extrapolation of gene information using sequence-similarity-based approaches. we used protein sequences that were previously characterised or had an assigned function in other species. the high level of similarity detected allowed us to predict the enzyme classes and, with some degree of approximation, the substrate specificity. as a complementary approach, the cdna-aflp analysis proved to be an efficient technique for the isolation of differentially expressed transcripts without any sequence similarity assumption.

based on these approaches,  <dig> transcripts were identified and their expression profiles were characterised and associated with corresponding metabolite profiles.

the strong correlation observed between the content of specific metabolites during fruit development and the expression of transcripts putatively involved in their biosynthesis, suggests that metabolite content is regulated at transcriptional level and strengthens the involvement of the candidate genes in the proposed pathways. the differences observed in the expression of some genes between coratina and dolce d’andria might indicate a different regulation of the transcripts involved in the secondary metabolism among olive genotypes.

in particular, the levels of most of transcripts putatively involved in the biosynthesis of secoiridoids  showed a strong decrease during fruit development, according to the decrease in oleuropein concentration at the same stages, and many genes involved in secoiridoid pathway were more highly expressed in hp cv. coratina than in lp cv. dolce d’andria.

we observed a correlation between the mep pathway and secoiridoid transcriptional profiles, supporting the hypothesis that this pathway, rather than the mva pathway, primarily contributes to secoiridoid biosynthesis.

interestingly, some key genes of monoterpenoid and phenolic biosynthesis, such as oedxs, oeges, oeg10h and oeadh, were exclusively expressed in the earliest sampling, when the highest secoiridoid concentration was detected. these genes might regulate the accumulation of these compounds during fruit development.

a strong correlation between metabolic and transcriptional data was also identified for the biosynthesis of limonene and ggpp. oels was almost exclusively expressed at the developmental stage when the highest level of this compound was detected. oeggpps, putatively involved in carotenoid biosynthesis, was expressed only in young fruits when the highest levels of these compounds occur, as reported in other studies.

these data provide useful information for functional genetic studies of this crop species and for the identification of functional markers related to the accumulation of compounds and metabolites affecting the nutraceutical and organoleptic properties of olive fruits and oil.

