BACKGROUND
efficient expression, accumulation and recovery of recombinant eukaryotic proteins in their native conformations are difficult to achieve at reasonable cost in cell-based biomanufacturing systems  <cit> . in general, such platforms are either highly capital-intensive mammalian cell cultures based on secreted proteins  <cit> , or require complex and inefficient refolding of bacterially expressed proteins sequestered in insoluble inclusion bodies  <cit> . among eukaryotes, the plant kingdom has evolved cereal seeds to facilitate massive and extremely stable intracellular accumulation of complex proteins in a dense form that enables rapid protein mobilization during germination. a key biological sequestration mechanism of plant seed storage proteins involves the formation of protein bodies   <cit> . in maize, one type of pb formed in the endoplasmic reticulum  lumen of endosperm cells  <cit>  contains zeins, a group of polypeptides which account for more than half of the total seed protein mass. the  <dig> kd γ zein protein bears an n-terminal signal sequence but is retained intracellularly rather than being secreted even though it lacks a canonical kdel/hdel er-retention signal. instead, γ zein localizes to the periphery of the pbs surrounding aggregates of other zein proteins  <cit> . although the mechanism of pb biogenesis is not fully understood, it appears that the initial presence of γ zein confers stability to other pb-associated zeins and facilitates their sequential assembly in the pb  <cit> . surprisingly, heterologous expression of γ zein in plant leaves results in the ectopic formation of membrane-bound structures strongly resembling cereal pbs  <cit> , suggesting that one or more structural motifs of γ zein may be responsible for de novo pb formation. this hypothesis is supported by the finding that a synthetic peptide of the n-terminal repeat region of γ zein  was able to self-assemble in vitro  <cit>  and that both γ zein proline-rich domains, the repeat region and the so-called pro-x sequence, each contribute to pb biogenesis when expressed recombinantly in plants  <cit> .

here, we describe a protein fusion-based approach for heterologous protein production via creation of induced pb-like organelles. exploiting the natural mechanism of protein accumulation in seed pbs, we demonstrate that not only is the zera domain capable of directing assembly of pb-like organelles in plant tissues other than seeds, but this assembly property also extends to a broad range of non-plant eukaryotes including fungal, insect and mammalian cells. these synthetic pbs share many of the advantageous storage properties of bona fide cereal pbs, including the presence of eukaryotic chaperones to facilitate recombinant protein folding, high densities that allow simple downstream target protein concentration by pb capture, and insulation of pb contents from proteolytic and enzymatic activities of the cytosol. transferring the seed-type attributes conferred by pb sequestration to proven eukaryotic cell-based and transgenic expression systems creates unique opportunities for improving biological manufacturing. such an approach is of particular interest for polypeptides which are poorly secreted, host-toxic, or otherwise challenging to produce.

RESULTS
the γ zein proline-rich domain  induces protein body-like organelles in eukaryotic cells
to explore if pb attributes could be transferred to divergent eukaryotic lineages and a broad range of fusion protein partners, we first investigated the induction of pbs in various hosts expressing fusions of the engineered zera domain to fluorescent reporter proteins. epidermal cells of tobacco leaves transiently expressing a zera-ecfp  construct displayed well-defined and highly fluorescent foci distributed throughout the cells  that were similar in size and appearance  to the natural, round,  <dig> to  <dig> micron pbs present in maize seeds  <cit> . to define more specifically the role of zera in pb formation we compared these results with the fluorescence of ecfp preceded by the γ zein n-terminal signal peptide either with  or without  the kdel c-terminal er retention signal. the proteins from construct spg-ecfp-kdel accumulated in the er  while those from spg-ecfp were secreted , but neither were capable of inducing pb-like organelles.

we next investigated the properties of zera fusions expressed in animal cells. chinese hamster ovary  cells were transfected stably and transiently with zera-ecfp constructs or appropriate non-zera controls. dense, highly fluorescent foci became visible in the cytoplasm starting two to three days following transfection with zera-ecfp . the contribution of the zera domain to storage organelle formation was also investigated using ecfp fused directly to spg, either with or without a c-terminal kdel retention signal. confocal images obtained from cells expressing spg-ecfp-kdel showed a typical er pattern , while fluorescence was distributed throughout the er and the golgi complex  as expected for secretory transport in cells expressing spg-ecfp without kdel. we also analyzed by immunoblotting the effect of zera on partitioning of ecfp between cells and the extracellular medium . zera-ecfp and ecfp-kdel remained exclusively intracellular , while ecfp without zera or kdel was secreted efficiently . taken together these results show evidence for the entry of zera-ecfp into the initial portion of the secretory pathway but exclusion from ultimate secretion. this observation prompted us to investigate whether zera-ecfp was sorted terminally in the er, or was able to exit this compartment in order to subsequently reach the golgi complex. zera fusions were co-transfected with an er membrane protein marker, calnexin, and with a golgi protein reporter, a glycosyltransferase fused to yfp. calnexin was found to co-localize with zera-ecfp pbs  but no co-localization was observed in cho cells between zera-ecfp and the golgi reporter protein , consistent with an er origin of the zera-induced pbs.

filamentous fungi and insect cells were also found to support the biogenesis of seed-type pbs induced by expression of zera fusions. significant accumulation of zera-gfp fusion protein in dense structures was observed in hyphae of trichoderma reesei transformed with zera-gfp constructs . the zera fusion protein accumulated intracellularly to ca.  <dig> % of fresh weight when expression was driven by the trichoderma cbhi promoter. in spodoptera  cells infected with recombinant zera-dsred baculovirus, the fusion protein also accumulated in abundant, intensely-fluorescent pb-like structures . in contrast, dsred controls expressed without zera showed fluorescence dispersed diffusely throughout the cells with no formation of dense structures .

zera stabilizes biopharmaceutical proteins by intracellular encapsulation in pb-like organelles
the ability of the zera domain to segregate proteins away from normal secretory transport into pb organelles appears to be conserved between plants, fungi, insects and animals. in light of these results, we then asked whether zera fusions could provide an efficient and universal means to produce diverse recombinant proteins by stable encapsulation in er-derived organelles. to test this hypothesis, we fused zera to calcitonin , epidermal growth factor  and human growth hormone  sequences and expressed these fusion constructs in various eukaryotic hosts. expression and pb induction by zera-ct, zera-egf and zera-hgh was first investigated using three different types of mammalian cells following transient or stable transfection . human hek293t cells were transfected with zera-ct and zera-hgh, cho cells with zera-hgh and zera-egf and cos <dig> cells with zera-egf. in all cases, zera fusion proteins were present intracellularly  but were not secreted . moreover, immunodetection of calcitonin in transiently transfected human , primate  and hamster  cells expressing zera-ct revealed that the recombinant protein was encapsulated inside pb-like vesicles in all cultured cell types tested .

we also generated cho cell lines stably expressing zera-hgh. the recombinant protein had the expected molecular weight and was localized to prominent electron-dense spherical structures that were  <dig> to  <dig> microns in size . the membrane bounding the pb-like structures in zera-hgh cho cells was studded with ribosomes , suggestive of a rough-er origin, and the structures were highly enriched in zera-hgh . immunogold-labeled zera-hgh appeared in the newly formed pbs, whereas no significant labeling was observed in any other cell compartment. cryosections of non-transfected cells did not contain pb-like structures . interestingly, despite the presence of heterologous pb organelles containing high concentrations of recombinant proteins, transfected mammalian cells were indistinguishable from non-transfected cho cells with respect to proliferation ability and propensity to undergo apoptosis or necrosis . this indicates that the accumulation of zera fusion proteins within pbs does not in itself perturb normal cell growth and viability.

to explore the ability of induced pbs to accumulate biopharmaceutical recombinant proteins in plants we generated transgenic tobacco expressing zera-egf and zera-ct fusions. protein extracts from leaves of homozygous zera-egf and zera-ct tobacco plants were analyzed by immunoblotting using an antibody  raised against zera. major bands corresponding to the expected apparent molecular masses of the respective fusion proteins were observed , with fainter high mw bands  likely reflecting oligomerized zera fusions. similar oligomers have been observed for native maize γ zein and γ zein proline-rich domains when expressed in arabidopsis  <cit>  as well as in protein extracts from alfalfa plants and in nt- <dig> tobacco cells expressing zera fusions to the f1-v antigen of yersinia pestis . in order to evaluate the stability of zera-egf and zera-ct fusions in pbs, we compared protein accumulation in flash-frozen leaf material vs. leaves dried at 37°c for one week after harvest and subsequently stored at room temperature for five months . at the end of the five-month storage period expression levels of each fusion protein were determined by immunoblotting. no significant difference was found between frozen and dried leaves , despite the significant desiccation stress.

zera-ct was localized in leaf mesophyl cells of transgenic plants  within  <dig> to 2-micron membrane-bound organelles that were heavily decorated with immunogold particles targeting either the zera domain  or ct . no significant immunolabeling was observed in the cell wall, nucleus, chloroplasts or other organelles. the major er chaperone bip was also detectable by immunogold within the pb-like structures  suggesting that the process of pb formation may involve incorporation of pre-existing er-resident proteins into these structures. bip is known to be present in cereal pbs where it is thought to play a role in storage, protein folding and assembly  <cit> . hence, co-localization of zera-ct and bip in the pb-like organelles formed in tobacco leaves indicates that the recombinant fusion proteins are associated closely with chaperones that may mediate eukaryotic protein folding in the er. the transgenic plants grew and developed normally and were not adversely affected despite the presence of pb organelles and large amounts of fusion protein.

we investigated the accumulation of egf in insect cells by baculovirus infection with zera-egf. sf <dig> cells accumulated zera-egf to remarkably high levels, exceeding 15% of total protein . in contrast, egf accumulated to much lower levels  in cells infected with virus containing constructs lacking zera. in fact, egf in these cells was not detectable by silver or coomassie staining, and was only faintly visualized by immunoblot . cryosections of zera-egf infected cells  showed the presence of abundant electron-dense structures which were absent in non-infected sf <dig> cells . these pb-like particles were heavily decorated by anti-egf immunogold .

to evaluate the efficiency of recombinant protein production in induced pbs we compared the accumulation level of recombinant egf and hgh proteins expressed with and without zera in tobacco plants and insect cells . in both expression systems, fusion with zera resulted in marked increases in target protein accumulation associated with pb induction.

poi: product of interest; sd: standard deviation; egf and hgh recombinant proteins

induced pbs facilitate recombinant protein recovery
one of the most significant bottlenecks in non-secreted recombinant protein production is the recovery of the protein from the expression host. we explored whether zera-protein fusions could be isolated from crude cell or tissue extracts by virtue of the high density of zera-induced pbs . leaf homogenate extracts from zera-egf transgenic tobacco plants were fractionated on density gradients and analyzed by gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting using anti-zera and anti-bip antibodies . most of the zera-egf protein was recovered in the dense  <dig>  to  <dig>  g/cm <dig> sucrose gradient interface , with some present in the er fraction . bip also partitioned with the pb-containing fraction , in agreement with the immunoelectron microscopy findings for zera-ct . zera-protein fusions could also be recovered by density from transformed filamentous fungi and insect cells extracts. in trichoderma , zera-gfp was detectable by both direct coomassie staining and immunoblotting following gel electrophoresis of dense particles isolated on sucrose density gradients. in controls lacking zera no gfp could be isolated in high-density fractions . as in plants and fungi, dense pb-like structures from zera-egf-expressing sf <dig> cells were readily isolated by density gradients . zera-egf fusion protein but not egf could be recovered from crude lysates in the  <dig>  to  <dig>  g/cm <dig> sucrose gradient interface . it should be noted that low-speed direct centrifugation of the homogenates, while less efficient than gradients  was also able to effect substantial concentration and purification of zera fusions .

discussion
our results indicate that in a variety of eukaryotic cells the n-terminal proline-rich portion of γ zein, the zera assembler domain, is by itself sufficient to direct recombinant fusion protein accumulation within de novo-produced storage organelles similar to the pbs of seeds. these organelles retain many of the beneficial characteristics of cereal seed pbs, including the physical properties of high local concentration within a discrete membrane-bound structure that allows efficient isolation by simple density-based protocols, sub-cellular sequestration that facilitates protein accumulation preventing adverse metabolic interactions, and association with molecular chaperones that may facilitate folding and enable functional and stable expression of enzymes and human proteins. remarkably, the mechanism by which the er of cereal seeds segregates storage proteins away from normal secretory transport and accumulates them into pb organelles appears to be conserved between plants, fungi, insects and animal cells. this finding suggests that pb biogenesis may be related to general cis-mediated biophysical interactions of the er with the zera structure rather than depending on trans-factor associated processes such as receptor-mediated signaling. the mechanism by which zera forms these novel cell organelles is not yet fully characterized, but an important contributing factor is likely to be the physico-chemical properties of the pppvhl repeat domain of zera. this domain folds in vitro into an amphipathic poly-proline ii conformation  <cit>  that in turn forms an expanded helix able to assemble both with itself  <cit>  and with membrane lipids  <cit> . besides the specific properties derived from its amphipathic nature, the zera domain also contains six cysteine residues, which may serve to stabilize nascent assembled zera complexes via intermolecular disulfide bonds. studies of pb formation in tobacco plants expressing a chimeric storage protein created by fusion of the maize γ zein proline-rich domain and the legume storage protein phaseolin  <cit>  suggests that γ zein cys residues contribute to fusion protein polymerization and accumulation in the er  <cit> .

recombinant protein accumulation was clearly enhanced by using zera. this enhancement has been observed with several proteins expressed in different eukaryotic hosts with and without fusion to zera. recombinant hgh accumulated  <dig> times more when transiently expressed as zera-hgh in nicotiana benthamiana, while the differential accumulation of recombinant egf as a fusion was 100-fold greater than egf alone . these high levels of fusion protein accumulation in pbs suggest that in addition to organellar sequestration, zera protein condensation may also provide a mechanism for such fusions to evade the normal er degradative pathways. the er-associated degradation  mechanism  <cit>  is induced transcriptionally in all eukaryotic cells in response to the presence of unfolded proteins  <cit> . this mechanism is conserved from yeast to humans and affects both endogenous and heterologous proteins. high accumulation of zera fusions assembled into heterologous pbs may therefore reflect poor recognition by the erad pathway and/or inefficient delivery of fusions to the cytosol for proteolysis following erad pathway entry.

in addition, accumulation of recombinant zera fusion proteins apparently does not alter normal host cell growth and development, and neither predisposes such cells to apoptosis nor perturbs the normal functionality of the secretory pathway. it is well known that if the rate of synthesis of a given protein exceeds the rates of folding and degradation the resultant over-accumulation in the er usually triggers apoptosis  <cit> . our results suggest that this is not the case for pb-accumulated proteins, as we observed that 1) transgenic zera plants germinated, were fertile and developed identically to wild-type plants; 2) apoptosis profiles and proliferation rates of cho cells over-expressing zera fusion proteins were similar to non-transfected cho cells; and 3) fungal cells expressing zera fusions grew normally and vigorously despite accumulating large intracellular pbs. naturally occurring er-derived structures sequestering aberrant proteins have been observed previously in mammals. such structures include the so-called russell bodies found in non-apoptotic plasma cells of multiple myeloma and aids patients  <cit> . these structures are thought to arise from dilated er cisternae that sequester condensed immunoglobulins that might otherwise trigger deleterious cellular responses  <cit> . the broad species conservation of pb induction may therefore reflect an ancestral protective response to mitigate the potentially adverse effects of protein over-accumulation in the er. taken together, our observations of high intracellular accumulation, enhanced recombinant protein stability, and the lack of adverse metabolic consequences for the expressing host cell all suggest that sequestration within membrane-bound pbs serves as an effective means to isolate the cell and recombinant target protein from one another.

an additional key consideration for recombinant protein production is the efficiency of downstream recovery and purification  <cit> . packaging of recombinant protein into dense organelles that are easily concentrated from cell lysates provides a significant enrichment of pre-purification titer prior to chromatographic separation or capture steps. the resulting density-fractionated zera protein fusions can be readily purified following disaggregation under mild reducing conditions. this creates an opportunity to design improved downstream purification protocols that may be less costly than current approaches. currently, downstream purification comprises the bulk of the costs associated with recombinant protein biopharmaceutical manufacture.

CONCLUSIONS
zera sequence provides an efficient and universal means to produce recombinant proteins by accumulation in er-derived organelles. this intracellular storage and sequestration system evades the normal cellular protein degradation mechanisms and does not perturb cell metabolism. the pb structures formed by zera fusions share many of the advantageous storage properties of bona fide cereal seed pbs, including the presence of eukaryotic chaperones to facilitate recombinant protein folding, high densities that allow simple downstream target protein concentration by pb capture, and insulation of pb contents from proteolytic and enzymatic activities of the cytosol. transferring the seed-type attributes conferred by pb sequestration to proven eukaryotic cell-based and transgenic expression systems creates unique opportunities for improving biological manufacturing. such an approach is of particular interest for polypeptides which are poorly secreted, host-toxic, or otherwise challenging to produce.

