BACKGROUND
the concept of ecological niche as a hypothetical multidimensional space  <cit>  has boosted the exploration of niche properties  <cit>  and has enabled generalist and specialist species to be distinguished according to their respective niche breadth. theoretical studies have tried to evaluate the origins and/or the consequences of niche-breadth differences among species. the "jack-of-all-trades is master of none" hypothesis states that the existence of generalist versus specialist species is the result of an evolutionary trade-off between the ability of species to use an extended range of resources and their capacity to exploit each one with a level of performance above those of competing species  <cit> . this trade-off has been associated with several life-history traits: generalist species are supposed to maintain higher dispersal abilities  <cit>  and to cope more easily with environmental stochasticity  <cit>  while, conversely, specialists would be strongly shaped by intra-specific competition  <cit> . the generalist-specialist concept could thus be appropriate to find community assembly rules  <cit> , in particular in habitats where communities are subjected to varying levels of disturbance. the distinction between generalist and specialist species can pinpoint general mechanisms of species filtering, similarly to approaches using species traits rather than the species themselves. indeed, several authors have recently focused on the processes leading to the replacement of many specialist species by a few generalist species that take place in diverse phylogenetic groups such as fish  <cit> , bird  <cit>  or plant assemblages  <cit> . in parallel to species extinction, this so called 'biotic homogenization' process would characterize the next biodiversity crisis  <cit> .

the weed communities of arable land provide an interesting model for exploring the generalist/specialist concept because the arable field habitat is characterized by an intense disturbance regime and by varying ecological conditions, both within a year  and across years . compared to other vascular plants occurring in more stable habitats, one would expect arable weeds to be generalist species. indeed, it has been hypothesized that "under a constant environment or slow environmental changes, inter-specific competition involves local processes that favour specialist species at the expense of generalist species, while under moderate to high rates of environmental change, local population dynamics increasingly favour high immigration rates of the generalist over the local competitive ability of the specialist"  <cit> . however, arable fields can also be viewed as a particular habitat harbouring a set of specialized species  adapted to frequent but also specific disturbances. within a year, agricultural practices can be perceived as highly specialized with the single aim of favouring a particular species, i.e. the crop, so that all species in the seed bank sharing the same requirements might well find regularly optimal conditions for completing their life cycle. large differences between habitat breadth of weed species are observed with some species confined to arable fields in western europe  while others are able to grow both in crops and in other less disturbed habitats . even within arable fields, differences can be observed in niche position and breadth between weeds that are specialized to a particular crop type or to particular soil conditions, and weeds that are present almost everywhere  <cit> . finally, even if arable fields are characterized by stochastic conditions, a specialized species could persist temporally, for example, with dormant diaspores that would wait for optimal environmental conditions e.g., high relative summer air humidity for arable bryophyte species  <cit>  or each time a favourable crop occurs in the rotation  <cit> . therefore, even though most agroecosystems experience high levels of disturbance, it is not clear whether the current arable weed flora is dominated by specialist or by generalist species and what would be the resulting variation in ecosystem function  <cit> . the present paper addresses this question and classifies the french arable weed flora along a specialist-generalist gradient, using vegetation records from a national monitoring network for applying and comparing six different specialisation indices available in the ecological literature. it should be noted here that what is meant by generalist species are species able to exploit many or all the niches within the "arable field" habitat regardless of their ability to occupy other habitats.

a second set of questions relates to possible relationships between the degree of specialisation of weed communities and disturbance regime that are related to the choice of contrasted agricultural management options. in this paper, we focus on two sets of situations that result in different levels and regime of disturbance.

the first situation compares the weed flora in maize cultivated as a monoculture and in a crop rotation. monoculture means here that the same crop species is cultivated for several consecutive years. crop rotation means that each year a different crop species is cultivated. crop rotation induces disturbances that vary with the crop grown each year  while the disturbance regime is constant in monocultures. while many recent studies focused on the impact of crop rotation on weed diversity  <cit> , the present study aimed to quantify the functional shift in weed composition. there could be two alternative responses of weed communities to crop rotation  crop rotation could either favour generalist species and monoculture specialist species, or,  crop rotation could favour specialist species of each crop , so that weed communities would mainly be composed of specialist species alternating each year, persisting within the seed bank during the unfavourable years.

the second situation analyses the shift in weed communities that has taken place in the same arable fields between the  <dig> s and the  <dig> s. it is here assumed that the level of disturbance has significantly increased with agriculture intensification  between the two surveys. increased n-fertilization and systematic liming or drainage have homogenized soil conditions across the sampled fields. in addition, recurrent changes in cultivation techniques since the  <dig> s  are likely to have translated into continuous environmental changes for the arable flora. these changes may have hampered specialist species and/or favoured generalist weed species.

RESULTS
classification of weed species along the gradient of specialization
in total,  <dig> weed species were frequent enough to estimate their degree of specialisation  with six different indices . each pair of indices were significantly correlated . the is values varied from  <dig> for stellaria media, the most generalist species, to  <dig> for arenaria serpyllifolia, the most specialist species . the segregation of the values of is in three classes of equal size  enabled us to distinguish the most generalist species, from is =  <dig> to is =  <dig>  intermediate species from is =  <dig> to is =  <dig> and the most specialist species, from is =  <dig> to is =  <dig>  at the level of communities, the ics values  follow a normal distribution and varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

abbreviations: see table  <dig>  *p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> 

note: correlations are based on n =  <dig> weed species

is was negatively correlated with the frequency of occurrence of the species  but not significantly with their abundance  . with the exception of raphanus raphanistrum at 25% of its actual frequency, all six indices classified the species as generalists with very similar positions regardless of their rarefied frequency .

the most generalist species  were found on a large range of soil types, climates, crop types and cropping techniques. in fact these species are found all over western europe  <cit> , and even in other temperate countries such as canada. at the opposite extreme, the most specialist species were weed species that all seemed highly specialized on at least two important axes of their n-dimensional niche, e.g., rumex acetosella was only found in winter crops exhibiting very acidic and sandy soil conditions, while phalaris paradoxa was only observed under rather oceanic climate, heavy clay and wet soil conditions. at an intermediary level, some species were specialized on one important axis of their niche while being present on a broader range of ecological conditions on other axes. for example, papaver rhoeas or veronica hederifolia were associated with a particular crop type  but were present on a large range of soil and climatic conditions while juncus bufonius was strictly limited to acid and silty soils but was found in various crop types.

effect of monoculture versus crop rotation
the comparison of maize weed communities in crop rotation versus monoculture showed similar field species richness or abundance  while the average specialization index  indicated different species composition . more generalist species were observed in fields with maize-wheat rotations , whereas maize monocultures contained more specialist species . this was mainly due to the high proportion of generalist species when maize is grown in crop rotation . the generalist chenopodium album was the dominant species in both monoculture and crop rotation, followed by the two specialist species echinochloa crus-galli and amaranthus retroflexus in monocultures and the two generalist species polygonum aviculare and fallopia convolvulus in rotations. the two cropping systems were not evenly distributed between the different soil types, with proportionately more fields with crop rotation on clay soils and sandy clay soils, and more fields with monocultures on sandy soils . however, the distribution of ics values across soil types presented in fig.  <dig> shows no significant effect of soil type on ics of weed communities.

a- in maize fields cultivated as monoculture  and in maize-wheat rotations  in the  <dig> s,

b- for the same fields over time between the  <dig> s and the  <dig> s .

khi <dig> test, khi <dig> =  <dig> , p <  <dig> 

evolution of the specialist-generalist ratio over the last  <dig> years
between the  <dig> s and the  <dig> s, weed species richness significantly decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  species per field and species density from  <dig>  individuals per m <dig> to  <dig>  . among the  <dig> species recorded in both surveys,  <dig> species significantly decreased in frequency and only  <dig> significantly increased.

the index of community specialization ics significantly decreased from ics =  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  in the  <dig> s to ics =  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  in the  <dig> s . the frequency of generalist species was either stable  or increased , while the frequency of specialist species fell . there was a higher proportion of specialist species in the  <dig> s while the weed communities of the  <dig> s were characterized by a higher proportion of intermediate and generalist species, with 90% of the effect attributable to the loss of specialist species over time .

discussion
robustness of the specialization index
the use of several indices was not to assess the performance and relative value of the different methods but rather to increase the robustness of the results. the six indices representing different measures of species niche breadth gave consistent and correlated classifications of species, from the most specialized to the most ubiquitous. not surprisingly, there were exceptions, notably plantago lanceolata, ranked according to i <dig> as the most generalist species while the other five indices consistently classified this species as intermediate. such differences presumably arose when species are regarded as generalist or not according to which niche axes were included in the analysis .

the significant correlations between the pairs of indices seem to indicate that the choice of an index based on species co-occurrence or on precise environmental data with different ordination or classification methods does not alter the ranking for most of the species. it is worth noting that indices based solely on species co-occurrence such as i <dig> demonstrated that increasingly available, large-survey datasets could yield information on species niche-breadth without detailed environmental or habitat measurements  <cit> .

frequency and abundance of species according to their niche breadth
the species with the largest niche breadth were also the most frequent but not necessarily the most abundant . the random rarefaction of five common species in the dataset did not alter the classification of these species as generalists which tends to indicate that is is not directly affected by the number of samples where the species concerned occurs . this result partially supports the 'resource breadth hypothesis'  <cit>  that states that 'species with broad environmental tolerance and able to use a wide variety of resources  would survive in more places and over larger areas'. it is however not clear to what extent the relationship could result from a sampling artefact, i.e. when data has been collected along a large environmental gradient, very frequent species will also appear as generalist species  <cit> . however, the reverse is not necessarily true: a rare species could either be generalist  or specialist . the absence of any strong relationships between niche breadth and species mean abundance means however that, contrary to the 'resource breadth hypothesis', not all generalist weed species would achieve high local densities. moreover, the reverse seems often true in cultivated fields, since arable weeds that appear as specialists of a crop  can form very dense populations.

the effect of disturbance dynamics on the assembly of communities
we show here that a two-year cycle combining maize and winter wheat enhances the representation of generalist species in the weed communities found in maize  compared to maize cultivated as monoculture . maize grown every two to three years does not appear to be sufficient in terms of  fitness advantage for specialist weed species to outperform the generalist species that are able to cope with alternating crops. our results also suggest that in maize grown in a rotation, the annual change of crop sowing dates and associated practices have caused a shift in the weed flora in favour of 'germination generalist', i.e. species that can germinate all-year-round or at least in both autumn and spring   <cit> . the annual changes in herbicide selectivity limit the selection of specialist species associated to a particular crop  <cit> . in the monoculture situation, although many generalist species were still observed, the repetition of a similar selection pressure each year appears to have favoured some of the efficient and well adapted species such as the intermediary-specialized calystegia sepium, cynodon dactylon, amaranthus retroflexus or the specialized digitaria sanguinalis, datura stramonium or setaria pumila species. it is worth noting that we found no significant differences in either weed diversity or weed density between crop rotation and monoculture which although counter-intuitive  <cit>  is in line with several studies showing that the effect varies according to the rotation that is being considered  <cit> . as in the case of the present study, it is possible that the ratio of specialist-generalist species in weed communities proves to be a more responsive indicator of the effect of monoculture versus crop rotation. this remains to be explored in further studies.

longer-term agricultural changes and the increasing proportion of generalist species
the decline of arable weeds during the last decades has been reported in various european countries  <cit> . in this paper, we show that in addition to the loss in the number of species, the specialist-generalist ratio in weed communities has significantly changed over the last decades. this trend is mostly the result of a more pronounced decrease in the occurrence of specialist species, while during the same period intermediate and generalist species remained more often stable or even increased. for example, legousia speculum-veneris and lithospermum arvense are two specialist weeds of winter cereals on calcareous soils that are in decline most probably due to their sensitivity to the main herbicides used in cereals. the decline of gnaphalium uliginosum, misopates orontium and stachys arvensis, specialist species of acidic and sandy soils, could be related to the agricultural practice of liming. species of highly drained soils with poor competing capacity  could have been eliminated by an increased level of fertilization and the resulting increased competition with other plants, mostly the crop itself. on the other hand, the increase or the maintenance of species such as senecio vulgaris, matricaria perforata, cirsium arvense, poa annua or lolium spp. can be explained in part by their generalist properties i.e. i) the capacity to germinate all year round and thus the possibility that some cohorts avoid herbicides pressures or periods of intense competition with the crop species, ii) the lack of specialisation to individual crop types and thus the lack of response to shifts in the acreage devoted to specific crops and iii) the tolerance to a broad range of soil types and thus the lack of response to changes in agricultural practices modifying ecological conditions . our results therefore indicate that not only did agro-ecosystems lose a significant number of weed species in the recent decades, but those that remain also are the most generalist, which could lead to a decreased differentiation of weed communities found in different crop types in the longer term. this confirms that the biotic homogenisation process reported in other plant groups in rural landscapes  <cit>  also affects weed communities found in cultivated fields.

there may be an apparent contradiction in the results between the selection of generalists over the last  <dig> years of agricultural intensification and the selection of specialists by monocultures . however, this paradox disappears when analyzing the nature of the species specialization in each situation. in the diachronic long term study, the ratio of generalist/specialist increases because a lot of specialist species of typical physical environments have disappeared or decreased with the concomitant decline or extinction of their preferred niche within arable fields . the difference of ics in weed communities found in crop rotation and in monoculture is more related to the specialization of species to the crop species, and more specifically to the crop germination date. in our study, species that were specialist of specific crops could generally grow on a wide range of soil and climatic conditions, for example amaranthus retroflexus and digitaria sanguinalis which grow in maize crops.

CONCLUSIONS
this study aimed to classify arable weeds along a generalist/specialist continuum and to assess if differences in disturbance patterns could lead to differences in the representation of generalist and specialist species in plant communities. our study extends ecological approaches to an environment highly disturbed by human activities where it is not often easy to get clear expectations between contrasted and/or opposite forces that govern the assembly of community. the distinction of species into generalist or specialist species helps to highlight the general rules in the assembly of weed species into communities  <cit> . in our case, the classification of  <dig> arable weed species along a specialist/generalist gradient gives insights to their contrasted responses to changes in agriculture. we show that the relative proportion of generalist and specialist species is not constant but varies in relation to the frequency and intensity of disturbance that result from agricultural practices. our results also show that, despite the high level of disturbance that characterises agroecosystems, ecological theories developed in more stable environments do apply and that either a sequence of disturbances of different nature  and/or the intensification of disturbances have favoured the most generalist species.

