BACKGROUND
the development of cell-sheet tissue engineering, where cells are plated and allowed to form confluent layers which are then dissociated from the plate to form intact, functional sheets, has generated a need for a systematic characterization of cell-cell interactions to better condition constructs for in vivo use  <cit> . such cell sheets have been generated for a wide variety of tissues, such as skin, heart, corneal and renal components  <cit> . cell sheets generated for tissue engineering purposes are fragile and are typically handled by using external supports, such as chitin membranes  <cit> . methods for improving the strength and other mechanical properties of such sheets is essential for further development of these constructs. however, to be effective, such methods must rely on information regarding the mechanism by which sheet properties are regulated. for example, of interest would be mechanisms by which cell sheet contraction is limited by targeting select aspects of the cell cytoskeleton. to uncover such mechanisms, there needs to be a systematic examination of the role of the cytoskeleton in regulating cell sheet properties. further, there is a significant amount of recent interest in the relationship between the cytoskeleton and cell-cell interactions to model physiology or disease processes  <cit> .

the cellular cytoskeleton primarily consists of three main components in mammalian cells – actin, microtubules and intermediate filaments. for cells that remained attached to a substrate, the contribution of the cytoskeleton to cell-substrate adhesion, spreading, and signaling have been extensively studied  <cit> . actin is a well-examined cytoskeletal component, since actin links to the focal adhesion complex and disruption of actin is linked to reduced traction forces and altered mechanotransductive signaling  <cit> . microtubules have a role in supporting the actin framework and destabilizing focal adhesions  <cit> , but play more prominent roles in cell division and intracellular transport. intermediate filaments are much less frequently examined, but are thought to be involved in tissue strength  <cit> . much less is known about the roles of these components in determining the properties of suspended cell sheets, however.

while many previous studies in cell–sheet engineering use thermoresponsive polymers, the use of dispase to generate intact cell sheets can also be used to measure generate cell sheets for examination  <cit> . the relative impact of each component of the cytoskeleton on cell sheet cohesion and cell sheet contraction is not currently well-established. additionally, passive and active contraction might be involved in sheet contraction, but the relative role of each is still poorly understood. contraction may influence the sheet’s ability to provide sufficient coverage in the tissues being repaired. however, inhibition of contraction by interfering with acto-myosin contraction may also influence sheet strength. thus, there is a need for systematic characterization for the role of the cytoskeleton in regulating cell sheet strength and contraction.

to address this need, we disrupt cytoskeletal components in cell sheets to assess the effects of such disruption on cell sheet cohesion and contraction. we show that all three main components of the cytoskeleton are distributed differently in cell sheets, contribute to cell sheet cohesion strength and contraction. additionally, our previous work suggests that cell sheet contraction is a mechanism for parts of the cell cytoskeleton to reinforce cell-cell junctions  <cit> . inhibition of such contraction may weaken this reinforcement, leading to more fragile cell sheets. keratinocytes were chosen for this study in part due to existing interest in keratinocyte cell sheet cohesion for dermal tissue engineering and in part because they exhibit strong cell-cell interactions, including desmosomes, which provide a solid foundation for including intermediate filaments in the consideration of cell sheet properties. together, these findings demonstrate that the biomechanical properties of substrate-free cell sheet may be dependent on the integrity of the cytoskeleton network. this study of substrate-free cell sheet contraction and response to cytoskeleton disruption represents a quantitative investigation of the link between cell sheet cytoskeletal biology and mechanics.

RESULTS
dispase lifting and cytoskeletal disruption variably alter cytoskeletal distribution
since some key mechanical properties of cells are dependent on the cellular cytoskeleton, we first assessed changes in cytoskeletal distribution in cell sheets lifted from a plating substrate, as well as from disruptions of specific cytoskeletal components.

phalloidin staining of untreated, attached cells shows actin localized predominantly at cell-cell junctions with some stress fibers in the cytoplasmic region of the cells . dispase-lifted monolayers exhibit contraction, resulting in cells displaying smaller horizontal cross-sections. actin remained localized to the cell-cell junctions . both prior to  and post dispase-dissociation , treatment of the cells with actin-disrupting cytochalasin-d altered, but did not eliminate, the junctional localization of actin, with only diffuse staining visible in the cytoplasmic region of the cells.

cells labeled for microtubules exhibit dense, convoluted fibers with minimal junctional localization . dispase-lifted monolayers display a loss of fibers with diffuse staining . after treatment with microtubule disrupting nocodazole, the cells display diffuse staining, even while adhered to a substrate . dispase-lifting the nocodazole-treated cells did not lead to any significant further changes, compared to nocodazole-treated adhering cells, other than cell contraction . in dispase-lifted conditions, there is a notable lack of signal at cell-cell junctions, not due to cell-cell separation, suggesting that microtubules may be excluded from those regions.

the intermediate filament keratin staining  exhibits somewhat uniform staining with few fibers throughout the cytoplasm, with little apparent junctional localization . dispase lifting leads to diffuse cytoplasmic staining with some focal deposits . intermediate filament-disrupting acrylamide treatment results in loss of visible fibers , while lifted and acrylamide-treated cell sheets exhibit similar loss of fibers, but with some contraction .

after dispase-lifting, cell sheets exhibits contraction immediately on separation from the substrate, and cytoskeletal disruption affects the degree of sheet contraction . sheet thickness measurements also exhibits different thickness with cytoskeletal disruption, with sheet thickness for plated control , dispase-lifted control , dispase-lifted + cytd treatment , dispase-lifted + nocodazole treatment  and dispase-lifted + acryl treatment .

cytoskeletal disruption weakens cell sheet cohesion
we next assessed the cohesion strength of cell sheets to determine how individual cytoskeletal components may regulate cell sheet cohesion. shear tests were performed on cell sheets with actin, microtubule, or intermediate filament disruption and compared to matched untreated controls, with increased disruption time indicating increased cell sheet cohesion . disruption of any of the cytoskeletal components weakens cell sheet cohesion. while acrylamide-treated sheet appears to be weaker than sheets treated with either cytochalasin-d or nocodazole, this effect is not statistically significant . although acrylamide is known to disrupt intermediate filaments in some cells  <cit> , the specificity of acrylamide on intermediate filaments is not without controversy. because the keratin pair k5/k <dig> has been reported as reliable markers for the study of keratin organization in keratinocytes  <cit> , we next examined the role of k5/k <dig> in modulating cell sheet cohesion.

rna interference was used to knockdown k <dig> and/or k <dig> . shear tests were performed on sirna treated cell sheets compared to matched untreated controls, with increased disruption time indicating increased cell sheet cohesion . no difference was observed between control and the sample treated with negative control sirna . knockdown of k <dig> or k <dig> alone exhibited a non-statistically significant reduction in disruption time compared to control or the negative control sirna treated sample . knockdown of k <dig> and  <dig> together exhibited significantly reduced disruption time compared to either control  or knockdown of k <dig> or k <dig> alone . notably, the knockdown of k <dig> and k <dig> together had a similar effect as acrylamide.

immunofluorescence staining  on adhered cells four days after sirna transfection showed diminished keratin expression, and combined knockdown of k5/ <dig> together exhibited a larger reduction of keratin expression. no visible difference was observed between control and the sample treated with the negative control sirna . to confirm the effects of sirna knockdown of keratins, western blot analysis of sirna transfection was performed, and showed reduction of k <dig> or k <dig> expression levels . similar results were obtained using a second set of k <dig> and k <dig> sirna .

dispase lifting results in cytoskeletal-dependent cell sheet contraction
all cell sheets exhibited significant contraction when lifted off the culture dish , using nuclear density as quantification. control cells showed a large amount of contraction post dispase lift. nocodazole-treated cells exhibited comparable contraction as controls . both cytochalasin-d and acrylamide treated cells exhibited reduced contraction .

contraction assays performed using k5/k <dig> sirna transfection showed no significant difference in nuclear density when cells remain attached to the cell culture dish . immediately after dispase lifting, all samples exhibited significant increases in nuclei density and thus significant contraction, relative to the pre-lifted control . controls and the sample treated with scrambled negative control sirna showed the greatest amount of contraction . both k <dig> and k <dig> sirna treated samples exhibited reduced but significant contraction . combined treatment with k <dig> and k <dig> sirna together exhibited further reduced contraction . further, k <dig> and/or k <dig> sirna treated samples contracted significantly less than the sample treated with scrambled negative control sirna . similar results were obtained using a second set of k <dig> and k <dig> sirna .

individual keratinocyte diameters were measured on trypsinized cells . the average cell diameter was found to be 18± <dig> μm. if we assume the cells are roughly spherical, then the volume of the cell can be calculated from that diameter as  <dig> ± <dig> μm <dig>  the average thickness of a spread  cell can be calculated by multiplying the nuclei density  by the cell volume to get  <dig> ± <dig>  μm for the control cell and  <dig> ± <dig>  μm for a dispase-lifted cell. with cytoskeletal disruption, the dispase-lifted cell sheet thicknesses are  <dig> ± <dig> μm with nocodazole,  <dig> ± <dig>  μm with cytochalasin d, and  <dig> ± <dig>  μm with acrylamide. these values correlate quite well with the cross-sectional thickness measured using cell sheet images . the force of cell contraction in a dispase lifted control sheet compresses the cell so that the cell height is greater than the cell’s lateral dimension, indicating the cells have columnar morphology when dissociated from the cell plating surface. this effect is reduced in cell sheets with actin and keratin suppression.

disruption of actomyosin contraction affects both cell contraction and cell sheet cohesion
to determine the role of actomyosin contraction on cell sheet contraction and cohesion, cells were treated with blebbistatin for one day prior to dispase lifting, followed by either continued blebbistatin treatment or replacement back to normal media  and compared against control . pretreatment with blebbistatin ensures that actomyosin interactions are inhibited upon dispase lift and permits the assessment of actomyosin’s role in the initial contraction of cell sheets. immediately upon dispase-lifting , control cell sheets shrunk to about 20-25% of their original area, consistent with a four-to-five-fold increase in nuclei density reported in figure  <dig>  this contraction was markedly decreased with blebbistatin treatment, which resulted in contraction to 60-70% of their original area . after one day of incubation in suspension, control cell sheets contracted even further to 6% of the original area. the cell sheets that were maintained in blebbistatin-dosed media  contracted to 18% of the original area, but were still significantly greater than the time-matched control . in contrast, in the cell sheets incubated with blebbistatin, but reverted to normal media  for one day, exhibited similar contraction as control . by two days post dispase lifting, all of the cell sheets  exhibited similar areas, indicating that the effects of continued blebbistatin dosing cannot permanently halt cell sheet contraction.

we next assessed whether blebbistatin affects cell sheet cohesion using shear tests : control 0/1/2=93/253/208; bleb+ 0/1/2=23/41/11; bleb- 0/1/2=24/140/131). immediately upon dispase lifting , blebbistatin-treated cell sheets were considerably more fragile compared to control cells . after one day of treatment, bleb- cell sheets exhibited cohesion strength comparable to that of control cells, which themselves exhibited increased cohesion . however, the bleb+ sheet was considerably more fragile compared to control . after a second day of incubation, bleb- cell sheets continued to match control levels of cohesion, while bleb+ cell sheets essentially broke apart right away with nominal shears, indicating significantly reduced cohesion compared to control . these results indicate that disrupting actomyosin contraction interferes with both contraction and cell sheet cohesion, even without directly disrupting the cytoskeletal fibers.

discussion
understanding cell-cell interactions is important for generating strategies for conditioning cell sheets or other constructs for tissue engineering purposes, or at least to define some limitations of cell-sheet engineering. further, characterizing cell-cell interactions are crucial for modeling the balance between cell-cell and cell-substrate interactions. thus, results from the characterization of how different cytoskeletal components contribute to cell sheet cohesion and contraction have broad application.

to determine the contribution of different parts of the cytoskeleton to cell sheet mechanics, we assessed the changes to the cytoskeleton from dispase lifting as well as from pharmaceutical or sirna-based disruption of each of the major cytoskeletal components. consistent with the idea that the intermediate filaments contribute to tissue strength, we show that keratins are at least as important as actin in establishing cell sheet cohesion, even though actin clearly localizes to cell-cell junctions, whereas microtubules and intermediate filaments appear less prominent at these junctions. disruption of microtubules also diminishes cell sheet strength, suggesting that all components of the cytoskeleton likely play significant roles in establishing cell sheet cohesion. while increased cell sheet fragility may also be due to cell rupture , the role of the cytoskeleton remains vital to keeping the cell sheet whole.

dispase lifting resulted in cell sheet contraction, with disruption of actin or intermediate filaments, but not microtubules, significantly reducing the amount of cell sheet contraction. since actin is a major component generating traction forces against a substrate and is involved in cell-cell linkages via cadherins, it is not unexpected that actin disruption also diminishes cell-cell contractile force. interestingly, microtubules do not appear to have a major role in regulating cell sheet contraction, while they influence cell sheet strength. the contribution of intermediate filaments has the same, or greater, magnitude as actin, suggesting that there is a contractile mechanism that depends on intermediate filaments. additionally, the  cell-cell contractile force is of magnitude sufficient to create a columnar morphology of the cells, where cell-cell contact area is vastly increased due to the increased thickness. such a phenomenon may be a result of compensation from loss of cell-substrate adhesion, but we show that it can be reversed by certain types of cytoskeletal disruption.

blebbistatin treatment significantly reduced cell sheet contraction, and this effect was transient if blebbistatin was removed. further, blebbistatin treatment also significantly reduced cell-sheet cohesion. removal of blebbistatin restored contraction and cell sheet cohesion within a day of removal. however, maintaining cell sheets in blebbistatin did not eliminate the effects of contraction over time. further, cell sheet cohesion remains reduced, even as the sheet contracts. we hypothesize that continued cell sheet contraction is via an intermediate filament mechanism which is unaffected by blebbistatin, but the cell sheet cohesion component that relies on actin is somehow disrupted by blebbistatin’s action, resulting in reduced cohesion as the cells try to contract with reduced cell-cell junctional reinforcement. testing this hypothesis is difficult, however, due to the increased fragility of cell sheets with intermediate filament disruption in addition to blebbistatin treatment. elucidation of this, or some other, contraction mechanism would likely yield further insight into the role of the cytoskeleton in regulating cell-cell interactions.

both passive and active processes are likely involved in sheet contractions. one possible model is that initial contraction on dispase lifting is generated primarily by passive processes, perhaps resulting from prestressed actin and intermediate filaments . continued contraction of the cell sheet over the next  <dig> hours results from active processes . our results indicate that inhibiting actomyosin contraction does not eliminate this extended contraction period, suggesting that other mechanisms, such as molecular motors, may contribute during active contraction. interestingly, the degree of contraction resulting from passive processes is about the same as for active processes . further clarification of passive versus active contraction may lead to alternative approaches to modify the size and strength of these sheets.

in this study we show that all components of the cytoskeleton are important for regulating the properties of the cell sheet, but that in particular the intermediate filaments, which are generally not well-studied, play a significant role in maintaining cell sheet cohesion and potentially in regulating cell sheet contraction. thus, optimization of cell sheet engineering may benefit from manipulation of all three components of the cytoskeleton, such as via mechanical conditioning. combined with our previous work on keratinocytes sheets  <cit> , we can propose the following for tissue-engineering applications. if cells sheets are initially too fragile for use, extended incubation in suspension will yield improved cohesion at the cost of usable area. the amount of contraction is to roughly a quarter of the original sheet area if used immediately. alternatively, if cell sheet cohesion is extremely strong, then pretreatment with either actomyosin-, actin- or keratin-disrupting compounds will yield increased area at the cost of increased fragility. microtubule disruption yields increased fragility without a corresponding preservation in cell sheet size and thus is likely not useful to creating larger, stronger sheets.

CONCLUSIONS
the primary conclusions of this study are  substrate-free cell sheet biomechanical properties are strongly dependent on the integrity of the cytoskeleton network and interactions between neighboring cells,  cytoskeletal distributions change in substrate-free cell sheets,  actin and intermediate filaments, and microtubules to a lesser extent, regulate cell sheet cohesion and contractility of cell sheets,  actomyosin interactions also regulate those properties, and  both active and passive contractions are involved in cell sheet contraction. these findings suggest that cytoskeleton and tightly associated intercellular junctions may be crucial for unlocking the potentials for cell sheet engineering, which has emerged as a promising approach to reconstructing various types of laminar tissues, such as skin, myocardium, cornea, and vascular systems, etc. without using any biodegradable scaffolds.

