BACKGROUND
postcopulatory sexual selection can occur in situations where females mate with more than one male and ejaculated spermatozoa compete for fertilization  <cit> . because sperm traits have a direct impact on fertilization success, they are subject to strong postcopulatory sexual selection forces in polyandrous species  <cit> . theoretical models suggest that the pressures of sperm competition and cryptic female choice will drive sperm evolution towards an optimal morphology  <cit> . in support of this prediction inter-male variation of sperm morphology in birds is negatively associated with the level of sperm competition  <cit> . similarly, in drosophila sperm length coevolves with the length of the female reproductive tract as paternity bias is selected by female morphology  <cit> , and so an optimal sperm morphology that fits with the majority of female reproductive morphologies would be selected, resulting in reduced intra-specific diversity in sperm morphology.

sperm competition theory predicts that sperm size is influenced by the intensity of sperm competition among males , with either larger or smaller sperm favoured depending on the underlying assumptions  <cit> . empirical studies support this prediction in a range of taxa including insects  <cit> , amphibians  <cit> , fish  <cit> , birds  <cit>  and mammals  <cit> , although recent studies have found no clear link between sperm size and sperm competition intensity, when considered the phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . however, definitive tests of the predictions from sperm competition theory using empirical data have been mostly restricted to comparisons between related species with different levels of polyandry or gonadosomatic index. intra-specific tests are possible where alternative male reproductive tactics, in which consort males guard females and sneaker males steal fertilizations from consort males, result in biased sperm competition risk among males  <cit> . previous studies have tested if differing sperm competition risk leads to different sperm size between tactics, but only one study supported the prediction that sneaker males have longer sperm than consort males  <cit> . however, even in this study the difference in sperm sizes is thought to be attributable to more variable sperm length within consort males and due to a few consort individuals having unusually short sperm  <cit> .

aside from the effects of sperm competition, adaptation to fertilization environments can be predicted to have an impact on the evolution of sperm traits. species displaying internal or external fertilization will employ quite different mating strategies, and therefore sperm traits. differing physiological conditions in fertilization site in terrestrial or aquatic mating habitats have been shown to influence the evolution of sperm size in frogs  <cit> . as sperm evolution theory has mainly been driven by comparative analysis among related species, the effects of differences in fertilization environments in driving sperm trait evolution have been often overlooked in previous studies.

the squid loligo bleekeri is an ideal species to examine the evolution of sperm morphology under sexual selection within a species, because it exhibits alternative reproductive tactics that create discretely different fertilization conditions among males within a single spawning episode  <cit> . females store spermatozoa in two separate locations in/on their bodies, whereas individual males transfer spermatozoa to one or other of these sites according to a mating tactic related to their body size, similar to that observed in other loligo species  <cit> ; figure 1a]. larger "consort" males compete with other males and court females using body colouring displays. successful consorts mate with females in a parallel position, place spermatophores inside the female's oviduct opening, and guard the female until she spawns egg strings. smaller "sneaker" males show few male-competition and courtship behaviours, but instead rush into an established consort male and female pair, mate in a head-to-head position and place their spermatophores on to the female's external body surface near the sperm storage organ  located below the mouth. both consort and sneaker males can achieve fertilization during a spawning event, although fertilization success is higher for consort males  <cit> . adult males show discrete spermatophore dimorphism, where larger males produce significantly longer spermatophores than smaller males  <cit> , spermatophore size variation is small within individuals, and no individual has both types of spermatophore simultaneously. spermatophore dimorphism is linked also to female sperm storage sites , confirming a tight association with alternative male mating tactics. the life span of this species is one year, with a single and short terminal reproductive period  <cit> . although it is not known to what extent either genetic or environmental factors determine male morphology or mating tactic, individuals are thought to be specialized for one mating tactic and ontogenetic transition from small sneaker to large consort is unlikely.

due to the process of egg laying in l. bleekeri, insemination and fertilization can therefore occur in two sites under different environmental conditions: a string of eggs is extruded from the oviduct  where it is exposed to consort sperm inside the oviduct , and the female pulls the egg string through her siphon and into position within her arm crown around the mouth, where it is exposed to sneaker sperm , before she deposits the egg string onto the sea bed. the different fertilization environments can be predicted to lead to different optimal outcomes for sperm size evolution. here we investigate the first example of dimorphic fertile sperm within a species, which is associated with alternative male mating tactics and alternative fertilisation environments.

RESULTS
sperm size
to assess differences in sperm morphology among males, we collected and measured the size of spermatozoa from males defined as consorts or sneakers. we found that sneaker males produce sperm with a longer head and flagellum than those of consort males : head χ <dig> =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; flagellum χ <dig> =  <dig> , p <  <dig> . figures 1b, 2). the size distribution of sperm stored in the seminal receptacle  and in sperm masses attached around the female's mouth  were statistically indistinguishable from sperm in sneaker spermatophores . the size distribution of sperm stored in oviduct  was statistically indistinguishable from sperm in consort spermatophores , suggesting that the sperm dimorphism is closely related with the alternative sperm storage sites.

fertility
to examine if both types of sperm are competent for fertilization, we carried out an in vitro fertilization assay using ovulated fresh oocytes retrieved from the oviduct . control oocytes that were not inseminated  showed no sign of embryo development after  <dig> hours, whereas oocytes inseminated with sperm collected from consort spermatophores , sneaker spermatophores , and from sperm masses  retrieved from the female's oviduct or seminal receptacle  showed multinuclear staining as a result of discoidal cleavage at the animal pole . success rates of in vitro fertilization reached 41-98% in combinations between the same  <dig> females and either  <dig> consort or  <dig> sneaker males , suggesting that sperm from both male types were capable of fertilization and genetically compatible with the females.

motility and number of sperm
we measured swimming velocity of both type of sperm and found no difference between sneakers and consorts .

the number of spermatozoa within a single spermatophore was different between consorts and sneakers:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells in consorts and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells in sneakers .

discussion
this is the first reported case of discrete dimorphism of fertile sperm  exhibited between individuals within a species. a few previous studies have suggested that sperm morphology is influenced by different sperm competition risks associated with different male mating tactics  <cit> , although the observed differences in sperm morphology between tactics are small compared to large variation within a tactic. why is much greater  divergent evolution of sperm morphology evident among males of the squid l. bleekeri? first, it is possible that sperm competition does not operate under a "fair raffle" system  <cit>  between consort and sneaker males due to storage site-dependent sperm precedence towards consorts . as consort sperm, released in the oviduct, have access to the oocytes earlier than sneaker sperm, stored in the external location, sneaker sperm might be predicted to possess increased swimming speed  to offset the consort sperm advantage. increased motility can be an effective strategy as time from insemination until sperm-egg fusion may be sufficiently long to allow sneaker sperm to compete, as observed in the frog rana temporaria in which sneaker  males ejaculate onto a deposited egg mass after it has already been inseminated by a guarding male, but still achieve a mean fertilization success of  <dig> %  <cit> . a positive relationship between sperm size and swimming velocity has been found in many animals  <cit> , although there are a few exceptions  <cit> , and sperm swimming velocity is positively related to fertilization success in species both with internal and external fertilization  <cit> . we tested l. bleekeri sperm swimming velocity and found no difference between sneakers and consorts, suggesting that this factor is unlikely to explain the size dimorphism.

a second possible explanation for dimorphic sperm would be strong selection among sperm from sneaker males competing for space in the seminal receptacle . larger sperm would have an advantage in occupying spaces within the seminal receptacle to exclude, and so outcompete, smaller sperm  <cit> . in this case, the size distribution of sperm stored in the seminal receptacle would be expected to be biased upwards compared to that found in the original sperm populations. contrary to this prediction, the size distribution of sperm stored in the seminal receptacle was not different from that in sneaker spermatophores or in sperm masses attached around the female's mouth, suggesting that this factor also is unlikely to explain the size dimorphism

a third explanation for dimorphic sperm would be divergent selection pressures on sperm from different male mating types as a consequence of adaptation to different fertilization environments . males adopting different mating tactics are expected to maximize fitness in different ways, in the context of reproductive energy expenditure as a trade-off between sperm size and number. in some examples of consort versus sneaker male strategies, sneaker males produce relatively larger numbers of sperm than consorts to offset the positional mating advantage of consorts  <cit> . contrary to this expectation, in l. bleekeri the number of spermatozoa within a single spermatophore was estimated to be ~5-fold greater in consorts than in sneakers . the different sperm size versus number strategies employed by sneakers and consorts, running contrary to expectations under simple sperm competition, suggests that fertilization environment  may be an important factor in determining the sperm size/number trade-off in this species. aside from the obvious factor of water movement , there may be many differences between external and internal fertilization environments  that may affect fertilization success by different sized sperm. although there have been a number of cases reported, across diverse taxa, of species exhibiting alternative male mating tactics, there has been no clear evidence of sperm dimorphism between sneaker and consort males  <cit> . the common factor among these previous studies is that despite sperm from each tactic facing different sperm competition conditions arising from different male competition behaviours, courtship behaviours, mating order, mating duration and sperm expenditure  <cit> , how and where released sperm meet with eggs  are basically the same among competing males. given the accepted importance of sperm competition in the evolution of male mating strategies , it is likely that sperm competition is also a strong selective agent in the evolution of sperm and ejaculate characteristics in l. bleekeri, perhaps in optimizing these characteristics for each insemination/fertilization site. however, viewing previous observations together with the data presented here, it can be proposed that fertilization environment has a predominant adaptive significance for sperm size diversification in l. bleekeri and other species.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, postcopulatory sexual selection under strong constraints associated with alternative mating tactics can drive discrete sperm polymorphism. although alternative mating tactics can create differences in sperm competition risk, in the squid l. bleekeri they also produce different fertilization opportunities conditioned by the internal versus external environment. at the moment the mechanisms by which sperm polymorphism has evolved remain elusive. however, our study illustrates that l. bleekeri constitutes a fascinating and suitable model system for answering such questions in evolutionary biology, behavioural ecology and sexual reproduction.

