BACKGROUND
to better define cell types of the bone lineage, our past work has exploited the use of fluorescent protein  reporter gene mice  <cit> . this work has involved standard transgenic approaches where defined transcriptional regulatory regions derived from genes selectively expressed in bone cells drive the expression of a reporter gene to mark distinct cell types. by elegant mutagenesis schemes and directed evolution, the generation of fp variants has expanded considerably and covers the visible spectrum  <cit> . among these different fp variants there are at least three colors that are optically separable, cyan, yellow, and red. this allows for multiplexing, where multiple fp readouts can be combined and viewed simultaneously, but distinctly detected. multiplexing approaches are advantageous for a variety of reasons including,  the ability to undertake combinatorial biological approaches where different reporter readouts allow the association of different biological events,  multiple fp readouts can further resolve molecular mechanisms, and  data can be quickly acquired from multiple readouts in the same sample.

to capitalize on the separable nature of fp reporters we have generated transgenic mouse lines containing different fp spectral variants allowing us to cross two or more mouse lines together to further define bone cell populations  <cit> . we envision an even greater role for fp reporter mice to aid in the investigation of complex biological mechanisms. unfortunately, we are limited in the pace of research and the types of questions we can answer as a result of the one promoter-reporter gene/mouse model. while breeding two distinct transgenic mouse lines together to visualize two distinct reporter genes in the same mouse is straightforward, adding a third variable, such as a genetic mutation, becomes dramatically more time consuming, and adding a fourth variable, such as a cre recombinase, often makes the experiment unrealistic to carry out. therefore, while multiplexing strategies are highly desirable, it can also be impractical to use reporter gene mice in a research study when the breeding schemes of combining different genetic loci into the same animal become too time consuming and costly.

this problem has made us reconsider the design of transgenic reporter gene mice and appreciate the great value in establishing a methodology that would result in the generation of a single dna fragment containing multiple reporter gene elements. this dna construct could then be used for mouse transgenesis to create an animal model where the multiple reporter genes would insert into a single locus, thus simplifying breeding schemes, yet expanding the capability and usage of the animal model. ideally, the expression of the different reporter genes should not influence each other and accurately represent their respective endogenous gene's expression.

within the past decade there have been notable advances in the genetic engineering of mice including the use of homologous recombination in bacteria to engineer bac cloned genomic dna fragments for mouse transgenesis  <cit> . bacs hold large fragments of genomic dna  sometimes containing more than one gene. an indirect benefit of genome sequencing projects has been the careful annotation of bac genomic clones allowing investigators to obtain specific clones without laborious screening. for most genes of interest, bacs can be chosen that are likely to contain all the transcriptional regulatory elements. as a result, reporter gene expression in transgenic mice, generated from large bac genomic inserts, accurately reflects endogenous gene expression. importantly, a variety of bacterial recombination systems exist to modify genomic dna in bacteria, including those that employ reca or the red genes from bacteriophage lambda  <cit> . strategies to modify genomic dna fragments include the ability to insert reporter genes into bac cloned genes and the physical linkage of two overlapping bac clones  <cit> .

based on these existing methodologies, we have pursued a combinatorial strategy composed of inserting spectrally distinct fp reporter genes into genes of interest followed by linking these gene fragments together. as proof of principle and in an effort to generate an animal model to mark multiple cell types relevant to bone biology, we have subcloned two genomic dna fragments into bac linking vectors gm and sp. one genomic dna fragment contains the gene acid phosphatase  <dig> , better known as tartrate resistant acid phosphatase , which is expressed in osteoclasts  <cit> . the second genomic dna fragment contains the genes dentin matrix protein- <dig>  and integrin binding sialoprotein , which are highly expressed in osteocytes and osteoblasts, respectively  <cit> . fp reporters ecfp, mcherry, and the yfp variant, topaz were inserted into trap, dmp- <dig> and ibsp, respectively. these two gene fragments were then linked together and transgenic founders were generated. we report here on our methodology and present some preliminary characterization of different founder lines towards advancing this technology.

RESULTS
subcloning genes into bac linking vectors
past work has resulted in the generation of bac linking vectors baclink-gm, and baclink-sp for the purpose of combining the components of one large gene, whose overlapping regions extended over multiple bac clones, into one bac vector  <cit> . this original linkage design relied on regions of homology, one of which was common to both genomic inserts and a second region present in the vector backbone. importantly, these regions of homology flanked different antibiotic resistance sequences, gentamicin  and spectinomycin , allowing selection for the desired clone after homologous recombination. we reasoned that this strategy could also be used to link different genes of interest together, by engineering a second homology arm common to both bac linking vectors .

to subclone genes of interest, bac clones rp23-412o <dig> and rp23-395m <dig> containing the genes for trap and dmp1/ibsp, respectively were obtained from children's hospital oakland research institute  and their sequence identity verified. we decided to link two separate genomic dna fragments containing a total of three genes. one dna fragment contained the gene encoding for trap, an osteoclast marker, while the second dna fragment contained the genes dmp <dig> and ibsp, whose protein products are highly expressed in osteocytes and osteoblasts, respectively. trap is located on chromosome  <dig>  while dmp <dig> and ibsp are adjacent to each other on mouse chromosome  <dig>  to link the trap genomic fragment with the dmp1/ibsp genomic fragment we cloned three homology arms, each ~ <dig> kb in size into baclink-sp  and two homology arms were cloned into baclink-gm . arms  <dig> &  <dig> flanked a ~ <dig> kb dna region upstream of dmp <dig> and downstream of ibsp, while arms  <dig> &  <dig> flanked a ~ <dig> kb dna region of trap . trap homology arm <dig> was cloned into both baclinking vectors as the second common homology arm in addition to a region of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase coding sequence that is present in the vector backbone of both linking vectors. based on past work indicating that the size limit for linkage was between 50– <dig> kb, the trap genomic fragment was chosen for linkage. however, it is worth mentioning for larger genes, successive rounds of linkage can be carried out  <cit> . the dmp1/ibsp subcloned region started  <dig> bp upstream of the dmp <dig> translational start codon and went to  <dig>  bp downstream of the ibsp stop codon. while the subcloned region of trap started  <dig>  bp upstream of the trap translation start codon and went to  <dig>  bp downstream of the trap stop codon.

to carry out subcloning, the bacteriophage λ red recombinase system was introduced into host bacteria containing rp23- <dig> and rp-23-395m <dig> by using the previously described mini λ vector  <cit> . baclink vectors, were restriction digested within their homology arms, transformed, and selected for with gentamicin  or spectinomycin . subcloned genomic fragments were confirmed by restriction digestion and field inversion gel electrophoresis   and also by pcr amplification of bac ends . gm-trap and sp-dmp1/ibsp were digested with i-ppo <dig>  age i, and mlu i. restriction digestion of gm-trap and gm-dmp1/ibsp with i-ppo <dig> yielded dna fragments that corresponded well with the predicted insert size of ~ <dig> kb for trap and ~ <dig> kb for dmp1/ibsp . further analysis of subcloned vectors with age i and mlu i also produced dna fragments of predicted size . to confirm the accuracy of homologous recombination, pcr was carried out using primer sets that flanked homology arms to confirm the genomic insert ends . the subcloning procedure retained an efficiency of 20%.

inserting fluorescent protein reporters
different bacterial recombination strategies exist to insert a reporter gene into a gene of interest. we favored using a two step recombination strategy developed by heintz and co-workers  because it involves a resolution step to remove unwanted vector sequences and antibiotic selection genes allowing us to repeatedly target multiple genes within the same genomic dna fragment  <cit> . the shuttle vector  has positive  and negative  selection schemes that allows for insertion of the vector and resolution of unwanted vector sequences in two consecutive recombination steps . we modified the original pld53-scaeb vector by changing the original egfp with the spectrally distinct fp reporters, topaz, mcherry, and ecfp . to avoid the creation of undesireable regions of homology, we also decided to engineer our fp reporters with three different polyadenylation sequences, sv <dig>  bovine growth hormone, and β-globin for ecfp, topaz, and mcherry, respectively. furthermore, we decided to keep topaz and ecfp, aequorea victoria gfp variants, which have nearly identical dna sequences, separate by recombining them into the two different bac subclones. recombination between topaz and ecfp during linkage  is less of concern since this step involves the use of the red recombinase system, which works by a gap end repair mechanism.

to insert fp reporters, two distinct homology arms , , and  were pcr amplified for each gene from the original bac clones and cloned into topaz, mcherry, and ecfp shuttle vectors. to avoid problems with the reporter gene reading frame, the homology arm preceding the fp reporter  was located a few nucleotides before the gene's endogenous translational start site. however, for trap the translational start site overlaps with a splice acceptor site, therefore homology arm e extends + <dig> bp past the translational start site in the same reading frame as ecfp. the shuttle vector two step recombination strategy was carried out for all three genes and is diagrammatically shown for ibsp . shuttle vectors were transformed into host bacteria containing either gm-trap or sp-dmp1/ibsp subclones and underwent amp/gm or amp/sp selection. ampicillin resistant colonies were screened by colony pcr for the insertion event. positive colonies were plated on sucrose plates to resolve vector sequences and screened again by pcr. pcr screens for resolution used primer sets that flanked outer homology arms . fp reporter insertion resulted in a notably larger pcr product . positive clones were further analyzed by restriction digestion. insertion of ecfp-pa into the trap gene introduced a unique noti site . since the sp subclone contains two genes of interest, two consecutive rounds of recombination had to be carried out first using the topaz shuttle vector, then the mcherry shuttle vector. insertion of mcherry-pa into dmp <dig> introduced an additional cla i site .

linking genes of interest
prior to subcloning the dmp1/ibsp genomic fragment into baclink-sp, a homology arm for trap  was cloned into baclink-sp to allow future linkage of the trap genomic dna fragment to the dmp1/ibsp genomic fragment. for linkage we added the red recombinase system to the host bacteria containing the sp-dmp 1-mcherry/ibsp-topaz genomic dna fragment by transformation with mini-λ dna  <cit> . gm-trap-ecfp was then digested with i-ppo and transformed into the host bacteria containing dmp1/ibsp. linkage was selected for with gentamicin, since during linkage spectinomycin resistance will be lost and exchanged for gentamicin resistance . linked products were initially screened by pcr using primers against trap and dmp <dig> . from the gentamicin resistant colonies, we determined that this linkage step had an efficiency of 10%. positive colonies were further analyzed by restriction enzyme analysis with mlu i and age i to confirm linkage and the size of digested products. figure 3c is a diagnostic restriction digest of the individual baclink subclones, trap-gm and dmp-1/ibsp-sp compared to the linked dna construct , where the restriction digest confirms that the linked construct retains all the appropriate size dna fragments that collectively are present in the two separate genomic subclones. we further confirmed linkage by comparing the pcr amplification of the three fluorescent protein reporters and the linkage region in separate subclones to the linked dna construct figure 3d.

functionality of linked reporter construct in transgenic mice
to determine the functionality of the linked three gene reporter construct, transgenic mice were generated by dna pronuclear injection. nine of thirty potential founder mice showed expression of one or more of the three reporters by examining the tail biopsy under a standard epifluorescence microscope. three transgenic founders expressed all reporter genes at a very low level and therefore were euthanized. f <dig> generation animals from the six remaining transgenic founder lines are currently being characterized and future work will report on their properties in greater detail. however, our preliminary observations of these transgenic lines suggest the outcome of this technical approach to design multiple reporter gene constructs has met with mixed success. imaging of  <dig> week old female spines across multiple lines under the same exposure conditions within each reporter demonstrates that f <dig> animals from lines 26-1- <dig>  28-4- <dig>  28-4- <dig>  28-2- <dig>  28-2- <dig> express ibsp-topaz and dmp1-mcherry relatively strong while showing lower to undetectable levels of trap-ecfp expression . occasionally, a trap-ecfp positive cell can be observed suggesting mosaic expression of the trap reporter . in contrast, line 28-2- <dig> expresses trap-ecfp at higher levels and uniformly in osteoclasts as determined by comparing histological trap staining to trap-ecfp , while showing low expression of ibsp and no detectable expression of dmp <dig> .

the detection of higher trap reporter gene expression in line 28-2- <dig> was an interesting observation. we anticipated that the trap gene, encoding for an acid phosphatase, would be expressed at lower levels relative to ibsp and dmp <dig>  highly expressed sialoproteins. in agreement with this thinking, most of the transgenic lines generated from this construct resulted in much high reporter expression from ibsp and dmp <dig>  than trap. at the same time, we considered that the transcriptional regulation of trap, taking place in an osteoclast, would be drastically different from dmp <dig> and ibsp, which are expressed in bone cells. therefore, when 28-2- <dig> showed higher trap reporter expression levels relative to all the other lines, we speculated that the transgenic construct integrated into a more favorable chromosomal site for trap expression relative to dmp <dig> and ibsp. however, genotyping for each reporter gene within the transgenic construct surprisingly showed that while lines 26-1- <dig>  28-4- <dig>  28-4- <dig>  28-2- <dig>  and 28-2- <dig> carried all three reporter genes that segregated together into the same offspring , we were unable to amplify dmp1-mcherry in line 28-2- <dig> . consistent with this genotyping data, we never observed dmp1-mcherry expression in line 28-2- <dig>  but did observe weak ibsp-topaz expression . since dmp- <dig> mcherry is present in the middle of the transgenic construct, the likely explanation is that the transgenic construct that generated line 28-2- <dig> fragmented prior to chromosomal integration. if we also consider that separation of the trap reporter from the dmp <dig> and ibsp genomic region also could have contributed to its increased trap reporter expression, this then suggests that by linking trap to dmp <dig> and ibsp, we may have created a positional effect that ultimately dampened trap activity. however, it is also possible that the transgene copy number of trap-ecfp is greater in line 28-2- <dig> relative to the other transgenic lines. to discern this possibility we used real time pcr to estimate transgene copy number for the trap-ecfp reporter. however, from this analysis line 28-2- <dig> actually had the lowest estimated copy number for the trap transgene . moreover, transgene copy number analysis corresponded well with reporter gene expression for dmp1-mcherry and ibsp-topaz .

despite the less than ideal functioning of the trap reporter, our preliminary observations indicate that the dmp <dig> and ibsp reporter gene readouts appear to be consistent with previous expression studies for these two genes in skeletal elements  <cit> . dmp1-mcherry is highly expressed in osteocytes, but can also be detected at low levels in certain populations of osteoblasts and hypertrophic chondrocytes . ibsp-topaz is highly expressed in osteoblasts, but also can be detected at lower levels in osteocytes and hypertrophic chondrocytes . therefore, we believe this animal model still has great utility for skeletal research.

discussion
reporter gene mice are valuable animal models that can dramatically facilitate and enhance biological studies. in this study, we have exploited the development of optically distinct fluorescent protein reporters and bacterial recombination strategies to engineer multiple bac reporters as one contiguous dna fragment for the purposes of creating more informative and biologically relevant animal models. we have also tested the functionality of this multi-reporter transgenic construct by transgenesis in mice. while the analysis of these transgenic lines is on going, our preliminary findings have been very informative regarding variables to consider when approaching this methodology.

the technical scheme employed here has utilized previously described methodologies that we have adopted and carried out in a defined order containing three successive steps,  subcloning genes of interest into baclinking vectors,  inserting fluorescent protein reporter genes, and  linking genes together. the recombination steps for each step of this process worked with reasonable efficiency, where frequency of recombinants ranged from 10–20% of the clones screened. for efficient subcloning of large genomic dna fragments into the baclinking vectors, we generated homology arms of roughly  <dig> kb in size and carried out restriction digests within the homology arm, not at the end of the homology arm using an artificially introduced restriction site. furthermore, the suggested convention when designing homology arm a is to override the endogenous genes translational start. however, for some genes, such as trap, the translation start also serves as the splice acceptor site, therefore, our first efforts to engineer a trap reporter failed because when we recombined in the ecfp reporter we also destroyed the splice acceptor site.

the use of fluorescent protein reporters has great value allowing the visualization of gene expression under live conditions. with the generation of different spectral variants it is possible to multiplex at least three different fluorescent protein reporters using a standard epifluorescent microscope. in this study we have used ecfp , topaz , and mcherry  fluorescent protein reporters. custom filters did have to be designed for mcherry to shift it further away from topaz for better optical separation . the disadvantage of fluorescent protein reporters has to do with their sensitivity compared to enzyme based reporters. therefore, when considering candidate genes to create fluorescent protein reporters, it is best to favor genes that have higher expression levels. in low expressing genes, signal to noise can be problematic, particularly when it is desirable to view gene expression in adult animals where tissues generally have higher levels of autofluorescence. among the different fluorescent proteins, our experience has shown that yfp's have the best signal to noise, followed by rfp's, and lastly cfp's.

the generation of transgenic animals from this construct has been informative in regard to how one should approach future designs of multi-reporter animals. we favored the use of bac engineered reporters because of their very large size allowing for a truer representation of endogenous gene expression. at the same time, it was hoped that the large genomic dna regions would also contain the appropriate dna sequences to insulate one gene from the other. our preliminary analysis of the multiple reporter genes substantiates that their expression appears to accurately reflect their endogenous genes expression, respectively. while we do not have any definitive evidence, our data also suggests the concept of retaining sequences that would appropriately insulate one gene from another may have been erroneous. the transgenic lines from this study that retained an intact transgenic construct had low to undetectable levels of trap reporter expression, while line 28-2- <dig> had the highest level of trap expression, the lowest transgene copy number, and a fragmented transgenic construct. given this evidence, we believe it is likely a positional effect was created by linking the trap gene next to the dmp1-ibsp genomic fragment. however, we believe the imposed dampening effect on trap expression is likely a result of its drastically different regulation relative to dmp <dig> and ibsp, being expressed in an entirely different cell type, the osteoclast. had we chosen a different gene within the osteogenic lineage, we may have had fewer problems. a second variable in addition to gene choice is the size of genomic fragment. the region of trap that we linked onto the dmp1-ibsp fragment was ~ <dig> kb, which with respect to gene regulation is still relatively small and likely to be subject to positional effects. this mini-gene genomic fragment was chosen because we wanted to exclude the genes adjacent to trap in the dna construct and it was an ideal size for linkage. disregarding the dampening effect, trap reporter expression in line 28-2- <dig> appears to be accurate, as it is identical to the tartrate resistant acid phosphatase staining. at the same time, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the regulatory elements for trap are missing from the  <dig> kb genomic dna fragment and their absence could also be a possible explanation for our results.

CONCLUSIONS
while we speculate that gene choice and genomic dna fragment size are critical variables that can contribute to positional effects, it is desirable not to be limited by these constraints. a potential solution to the positional effect problem is the use of insulator elements that retain both enhancer blocking and barrier properties. it would be ideal to use the native insulator that normally controls the endogenous gene. with recent whole genome mapping of gene boundaries, in the near future it may be possible to incorporate these regions into the transgenic construct design  <cit> . however, while the pace of understanding global regulator mechanisms that regulate genomic dna has dramatically increased, in depth knowledge of how insulators work is limited to a relatively small group with most elements remaining poorly defined. with that in mind, an existing solution is the application of well characterized insulators such as the β-globin hs <dig> insulator, which has been successfully used to insulate standard transgenic constructs  <cit> . it may be feasible to engineer bac linking vectors with insulator elements that could also potentially serve a secondary function as a common homology arm to link different genomic fragments together. future studies will incorporate the use of well defined insulator elements in bac linking vectors to assemble multi-reporter gene dna constructs.

