BACKGROUND
when grown in spatially structured environments several pseudomonas species are known to produce variants with altered phenotypic properties. such variants are often isolated from laboratory biofilms  <cit> , cystic fibrosis airways  <cit> , and the plant rhizosphere  <cit> . two variant types have been characterized in some detail; the wrinkly spreader  and the small colony variant , of which the primary phenotypic characteristic is the overproduction of exopolyscharides  <cit> .

given that these variants arise in structurally heterogeneous environments, presumably still populated with the ancestral strain, one could expect the variants to have an advantage in specific niches within these environments. indeed, the ws morphotype isolated from static microcosms has a competitive advantage at the air-liquid interface where it can form self-supporting mats generated by the cellulose-like polymer that it overproduces  <cit> . however, besides competition studies with this morphotype very little work has been done to examine spatial interaction between colony variants and the ancestral phenotype, within the environment where the variant evolved. to the best of our knowledge only one other study has specifically examined the spatial distributions of variant and wildtype populations in a biofilm on a microscopic level. this was done with a laboratory derived p. aeruginosa colony variant and the authors concluded that the variant only had a selective advantage in certain niches within the biofilm  <cit> .

we have previously isolated scv and ws variants from biofilms of p. fluorescens <cit> . to examine spatial interactions between colony variants and the wildtype ancestral strains, strains were labeled with  <dig> different coloured auto-fluorescent proteins . in order to determine if these variants had any spatial preference or advantage in the environment where they evolved we examined co-culture biofilms and planktonic populations of scv and ws with the ancestral strains.

RESULTS
the emergence of phenotypic diversity in biofilms or other structurally heterogeneous environments is generally associated with selection for that phenotype in that particular environment. such is the case for the previously studied ws from p. fluorescens sbw <dig>  which has adaptations that allow it to out-compete wildtype genotypes from the air-liquid interface of the static microcosm where it evolved  <cit> . previously we isolated an scv and ws variant from a Δgacs strain of p. fluorescens biofilms and here we sought to determine if these variants might have an advantage in the biofilm environment. the hypothesis was that the variants would have a distinct advantage over the wildtype, when colonizing a surface, due to the fact that they evolved in the biofilm. in addition, the fact that the ws is over-producing a cellulose-like polymer  <cit>  suggests it might be better at colonizing a surface.

to test this hypothesis, different coloured auto-fluorescent proteins  were introduced into the four different strains of p. fluorescens; cha <dig> , cha <dig> , scv, and ws. the two variants were isolated from the Δgacs strain, which produces a higher frequency of colony morphology variants  <cit>  and so both the wildtype and Δgacs strains were included. green fluorescent protein , yellow fluorescent protein , cyan fluorescent protein , and dsred  were introduced on a plasmid that is stable in p. fluorescens without antibiotic selection  <cit> . biofilms of the individual strains or mixed co-cultures were grown and imaged using confocal laser scanning microscopy . imaging the individual strains with each of the  <dig> colours of afp revealed that expressing the different fluorescent proteins did not significantly alter the biofilm structure when compared to the biofilms stained with acridine orange  <cit> . although some variation in biofilm structure was observed between replicates, this was independent of which afp was being expressed, indicating that no one particular afp was affecting biofilm formation or structure.

for the initial analysis a pair-wise matrix was setup, whereby each strain was co-cultured with each of the other strains and this was performed with two pairs of afps, a gfp-rfp pair and a cfp-yfp pair. in all cases a further control was performed where the protein pairs were reversed between strains. both of these controls ensured that variations in expression between the different plasmids would be accounted for. representative images from multiple growth replicates  are shown in figure  <dig> and quantification of these images is shown in figure  <dig>  when cha <dig> is co-cultured with the Δgacs the two strains are distributed evenly throughout the biofilm and neither one appears to overgrow the other  . this is also the case when the scv and ws are cultured together , although the scv may have a slight advantage over the ws . however, when either the scv or ws are cultured with cha <dig> or cha <dig>  the variant appears to almost completely out-compete the parental strains . as can be seen in figure 1b there are only small patches of cha <dig> or cha <dig> in biofilms dominated by the scv or ws. in some cases no cha <dig> or cha <dig> cells were visible in the image.

in contrast when the strains were competed in shaking planktonic culture there was little to no competitive advantage of the variants over the wildtype strains . the ws and scv did have an advantage over the cha <dig> strain , however the relative fitness values were low indicating that cha <dig> still made up a large proportion of the population unlike what was seen with the biofilm cultures. final cell densities of the two strains differed by less than  <dig>  logs.

co-culture experiments were also done where both the scv and ws were cultured together along with either cha <dig> or cha <dig>  the results from the triple co-culture are shown in figure 1c and demonstrate a similar result as the paired analysis with the two variants being evenly distributed but very little cha <dig> or cha <dig> cells in the biofilm. the triple co-cultures were then used for a time course experiment to determine if the parental strains were co-colonizing the surface with the variants and then being out-competed in a mature biofilm or if the ws and scv were colonizing the surface better and excluding the parental strains. images of the strains grown individually were acquired at various time points throughout a total growth time of  <dig> h. in all cases the individual populations were able to efficiently colonize the peg surface . however, within  <dig> h of inoculation the two variants already made up the majority of the biofilm with this trend continuing at the remaining time points . this suggests that the two variants are better able to colonize the surface of the peg, thereby excluding the parental strains who, when grown individually are capable of forming substantial biofilms.

niche specialization is an important aspect of colony morphotypes and this is certainly the case for the variants described in this study. here we have shown that the scv and ws colony variants out-grow the ancestral populations in the environment from which they were isolated, that is, the peg surface in the cbd. microscopic evaluation of spatial distributions of variant and ancestral strains in biofilms is virtually non-existent, hence, these findings represent the first detailed microscopic examination of multiple variant types within a biofilm. one previous study examined a variant and wildtype co-culture of p. aeruginosa in a tube biofilm  <cit> . here they observed that although the variant seemed to dominate initially, upon prolonged growth the wildtype eventually took over and the variant never made up more than 40% of the biofilm. the conclusion was the variant was only able to grow within certain microniches in the tube biofilm. given the microscale heterogeneity assumed to be present in the biofilm environment  <cit>  such microniche specialization could certainly be expected. however, the work here suggests that, at least for p. fluorescens, the two morphotypes are macroniche specialists, that is, they have adaptations that allow them to better colonize the entire surface, rather than small niches within the biofilm. the extensive work done with the ws morphotype from p. fluorescens sbw <dig> supports this concept in that this morphotype is adapted to colonize the air-liquid interface of static microcosms, a niche that cannot be colonized by the wildtype phenotype  <cit> .

it is interesting to note that in the present study, the wildtype can colonize the peg surface efficiently suggesting that the emergence of diversity is not solely associated with ecological opportunity but may have other function such as resistance to stress, as is suggested by the enhanced metal tolerance these variants have over the ancestral Δgacs strain  <cit> . in addition to having properties suggestive of adaptation to surface growth variants of p. aeruginosa isolated from the lungs of infected cystic fibrosis patients also have markedly increased antibiotic resistance  <cit> . this has lead to the general conclusion that these variants have more than just surface-attachment adaptations but may actually have a host of adaptations specific to the environment from which they were isolated  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have presented a microscopic examination of variant-wildtype distributions in biofilms, which has revealed that the variants rapidly out-grow the wildtype and dominate the biofilm environment. furthermore, we demonstrate that this is phenomenon is specific to surface associated growth and is not observed in planktonic culture.

