BACKGROUND
the bunyavirus genus consists of  <dig> serogroups, of which the simbu serogroup composed of  <dig> antigenically related arthoropod-borne viruses are present throughout the world  <cit> . in particular,  <dig> simbu serogroup bunyaviruses, the akabane virus  and aino virus  have been frequently reported in asia, including republic of korea  . since august  <dig>  a novel orthobunyavirus named the schmallenberg virus , which is closely related to simbu serogroup viruses, has been reported in ruminants such as cattle and sheep across europe  <cit> . these three bunyaviruses, sbv, akav and ainv are primarily transmitted by biting midges, and cause reproductive disorders including abortion, stillbirth and congenital malformation in ruminants resulting in considerable economic losses to the livestock industry  <cit> . because, the clinical signs are so similar, confirmatory diagnosis requires viral detection in order to differentiate infection between these three viruses. this can be especially important if any of the viruses are exotic to a country, which would require rapid detection to quickly identify any new incursions. in rok where akav and ainv are reported, a new introduction of sbv could be misdiagnosed for an endemic disease, possibly resulting in the rapid spread of sbv before it’s eventually identified. to avoid this scenario, testing for exotic diseases such as sbv should be included when diagnosing suspect cases of akav or ainv. however, most commercial diagnostic detection kits are only available for each of the viruses, and conducting single real-time pcr assays targeting individual viruses are expensive, labor-intensive and time-consuming. thus, a cost-effective, convenient and rapid laboratory assay which allows simultaneous diagnosis of several viruses in clinical samples would be useful for such applications enabling rapid differentiation between endemic and exotic diseases that are clinically similar  <cit> .

in this study, a one-step multiplex reverse-transcriptase quantitative pcr  was developed for the simultaneous detection and differentiation of sbv, akav and ainv. the test was applied to clinical samples collected from rok such as bovine serum, bovine whole blood, bovine brain, goat serum and culicoides biting midges for further evaluation.

RESULTS
reproducibility
to assess the analytical intra- and inter assay reproducibility of the amplification step of the assay, cp values were compared between replicates of 10-fold serial dilutions tested in same batch or on different days. the coefficient of variation  was calculated to measure the inter- and intra-reproducibility of the assay. the cvs in intra assay ranged from  <dig>  % to  <dig>  %, and the cvs in inter assay ranged from  <dig>  % to  <dig>  %. the results showed good reproducibility.

sensitivity of one-step mrt-qpcr
ten-fold serial dilutions of each of the in vitro transcribed rnas or viral rnas were tested, and repeated in triplicate. the cp values and detection limit of the one-step mrt-qpcr were compared with the one-step single reverse-transcriptase quantitative pcr  format for each of the viruses using the same templates. there were no appreciable differences in the mean cp values between the one-step srt-qpcr and one-step mrt-qpcr  . the detection limit of the one-step mrt-qpcr were  <dig>  copies  for sbv,  <dig>   for akav and  <dig>  copies  for ainv. the mrt-qpcr was also compared with previously published rt-qpcrs  <cit>  for each of the viruses using the same templates, which showed similar results. the detection limit of the published rt-qpcrs were  <dig>  copies  for sbv,  <dig>   for akav and  <dig> copies  for ainv. the detection limits for inter- and intra-assay and spiking assay were shown to be same as those of the one-step mrt-qpcr.fig.  <dig> analytical sensitivity of one-step srt-qpcr and one-step mrt-qpcr. serial dilutions of a in vitro transcribed sbv rna, b in vitro transcribed akav rna, and c in vitro transcribed ainv rna, were amplified in one-step srt-qpcr and one-step mrt-qpcr



specificity of one-step mrt-qpcr
the test performance of the one-step mrt-pcr for transcribed rnas or viral rnas of the negative control viruses, which included bovine ephemeral fever virus, chuzan virus, ibaraki virus, west nile fever virus ny <dig> stain, west nile fever virus b956stain, japanese encephalomyelitis virus and bluetongue virus, demonstrated neither non-specific reaction nor any inter-assay cross amplification as same results of one-step srt-qpcr.

detection of three viruses in field samples
the performance of the one-step mrt-pcr assay was evaluated and compared with previously published rt-qpcrs  <cit>  using several different types of field samples collected in rok, including bovine serum, bovine whole blood, bovine brain, goat serum, and culicoides biting midges. no sbv and ainv were detected in any of the samples by any of the tests. akav was detected in one bovine brain sample  by both the one-step mrt-pcr and published rt-qpcr  <cit>  . the akav positive sample was further confirmed by additional rt-pcr tests  <cit> , and by nucleotide sequencing.table  <dig> detection of viruses in clinical samples using one-step mrt-qpcr

sbva
akavb
ainvc

aschmallenberg virus


bakabane virus


caino virus


dnumber of positive samples for each target virus /number of clinical samples



discussion
sbv, akav and ainv are responsible for reproductive failure in ruminants, which cause significant economic losses for farms . because these viruses can cause similar clinical signs associated with reproductive failure, there is a need for a sensitive and accurate diagnostic method that can simultaneously detect and differentiate infection from these viruses.

in a few short years, sbv has quickly become established in many countries in europe, and due to increased international trade and travel, a new introduction of sbv into previously free countries cannot be ruled out. once introduced it could then quickly become established as was the case in europe. also, recent studies indicate that antibodies to akav and ainv will not provide protective immunity to sbv  <cit> , and therefore it is likely that a new introduction of sbv would cause wide spread outbreaks even in countries where similar bunyaviral infection such as akav and ainv are already present. such countries will benefit from a rapid diagnostic test that can quickly identify and also differentiate sbv from akav and ainv. the rok is one such country, which similar to many countries in asia, has had many reported incidences of akav and ainv detection  <cit> , particularly akav  <cit> .

various rt-pcr and qpcr assays have been published for the detection of sbv, akav or ainv  <cit> . but, simultaneous detection and differentiation of sbv, akav and ainv in a rt-qpcr format has not been previously reported. in this study, a one-step mrt-qpcr was developed for the simultaneous detection and differentiation of schmallenberg virus , akabane virus  and aino virus . when compared to previously published rt-qpcrs, the one-step mrt-qpcr provided comparable level of sensitivity and specificity. the one-step mrt-qpcr was further evaluated using various clinical samples, such as bovine serum, whole blood and brain tissue, goat serum, and culicoides. the samples used for the evaluation were selected as the three viruses have been previously detected in these clinical samples, except for serum  which has only been reported for sbv and akav  <cit> . also, culicoides were selected as they are regarded as being the major vectors for all three viruses  <cit> . in this study, only akav was detected in one bovine brain sample. however, this could be due to all clinical samples, except for the brain samples, being collected from healthy cattle and goats at farms or slaughter, and short duration of viraemia for akav and ainv in blood  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a one-step mrt-qpcr assay was developed to provide a rapid and sensitive diagnostic method for the simultaneous detection and differentiation of three viral pathogens associated with reproductive failure in clinical samples. the assay will be a useful tool for countries with akav and ainv, but is free from sbv or vice versa, to conduct diagnosis not only for suspect diseases in the country, but for diseases that is exotic to the country that would need to be quickly identified if any incursion was to occur.

