BACKGROUND
the ‘red queen hypothesis’ suggests that coevolution between hosts and pathogens or pests results in a ‘boom and bust’ cycle where neither host nor its invader can gain lasting supremacy  <cit> . allopolyploidy could provide an opportunity for host species to outpace red queen coevolution and achieve epochal gains in resistance such as when two moderately-resistant diploids give rise to an allotetraploid with a full complement of resistance genes. this allopolyploid resistance hypothesis incorporates resistance into models explaining heterosis  <cit> , and has been tested experimentally in multiple plant and animal systems  <cit> . allopolyploidization contributes to 2-4% of speciation events in angiosperms  <cit> .

viruses have challenged plants for millennia  <cit> . the genus nicotiana has been used as a model system for studying plant-virus interactions and for investigating genotypic and phenotypic changes that occur at and after polyploidization  <cit> . the genus nicotiana has  <dig> recognized species,  <dig> of which are allotetraploids arising from at least five independent interspecific allopolyploidization events  <cit> . the most likely diploid progenitors of most nicotiana allopolyploids have been determined using nuclear and plastid dna sequence information  <cit> . while the majority of nicotiana allopolyploids retained their original chromosome number, most species in section suaveolentes underwent a reduction in chromosome number. genomic changes can occur in the earliest generations following polyploidization  <cit> , and all well-studied nicotiana allotetraploids have undergone gene loss or conversion  <cit> . the main center of diversity for nicotiana is bolivia and the natural range of this genus extends throughout south america, to the western us, australia and africa  <cit> . in particular, n. tabacum and n. rustica likely originated in south america, n. clevelandii and n. quadrivalvis are endemic to the western us, and all but one species of section suaveolentes are endemic to australia  <cit> .

plant viruses are commonly characterized by their experimental host ranges, sometimes incorporating reactions on nicotiana species in their descriptions  <cit> . the susceptibility status of n. tabacum is known for  <dig> plant viruses, and at least  <dig> nicotiana species have been used in virus host range studies  <cit> . members of nicotiana section suaveolentes  tend to have the widest experimental host ranges  <cit>  and n. benthamiana’s multi-pathogen susceptibility makes it an important tool for phytopathology research  <cit> . although the biological basis of nicotiana nonhost resistance to viruses is unknown, a mutated form of rna-dependent rna polymerase  <dig> in n. benthamiana compromises its broad-spectrum antiviral resistance response  <cit> . several dominant, strain-specific virus resistance mechanisms have been described in nicotiana <cit> , and closely related viruses exhibit differential capacities for nicotiana systemic infection  <cit> .

interspecific hybridization can be a useful tool for transferring resistance genes to crops species and for investigating virus resistance  <cit> . interspecific  hybrids of solanum tuberosum and s. brevidens showed quantitative resistance to three diverse potato viruses compared to s. tuberosum, which exhibited high virus titers after inoculation  <cit> . the broad-spectrum virus resistance was quantitatively enhanced if the hybrid contained additional copies of the s. brevidens genome or if the plants were aneuploids missing an s. tuberosum chromosome  <cit> . introgression of an alien chromosome from n. africana into n. tabacum produced tolerance  to potato virus y in n. tabacum, but did not confer the immunity exhibited by n. africana per se <cit> . these data support the conclusion that basal virus resistance is quantitatively controlled by multiple genes.

nepoviruses are nematode-transmitted polyhedral-shaped viruses of the family secoviridae <cit> . these viruses, including grapevine fanleaf virus  and tomato ringspot virus , have single-stranded bipartite rna genomes in positive-sense orientation. gflv and torsv are present in most arable temperate regions and cause severe economic losses to grapevine and other crops  <cit> . based on the distribution of their highly specific nematode vectors, the likely origins of gflv and torsv are the near east and eastern north america, respectively  <cit> . n. tabacum exhibits a recovery reaction after infection of gflv and torsv, and salicylic acid -based resistance mechanisms appear to be critical for recovery from torsv  <cit> . rna silencing mediates n. tabacum resistance  <cit>  and tolerance  <cit>  to the nepoviruses tomato black ring virus and tobacco ringspot virus. although rna silencing- and sa-based mechanisms of nepovirus resistance have been described, no nepovirus resistance genes have been identified including in well-studied vitis spp.  <cit> , and the diversity and heritability of nepovirus resistance responses are unknown.

although experimental work has shed light on the effect of allopolyploidy on pest resistance  <cit> , very little is currently known about how allopolyploidy could impact evolution of plant virus resistance. the objective of this research was to investigate the relationship between allopolyploidy, geographical origin and genomic bases of basal antiviral responses in nicotiana. the nicotiana-nepovirus pathosystem is a logical choice to test basal  antiviral responses because nicotiana species are generally inbreeding  <cit> , nepovirus strains are genetically stable  <cit>  and these plants and viruses have not coevolved. in this study, we tested the nepovirus resistance status of nicotiana and ascertained heritability using synthetic allopolyploids. we also tested whether the resistance is local or systemically acquired. the central hypotheses were that greater or lesser basal resistance could be explained by geography and ancestry, and that allopolyploids exhibit greater levels of virus resistance than diploids.

RESULTS
test for virus presence
twenty-four nicotiana species and synthetic allopolyploids of distinct geographic origins were evaluated for their reaction to infection with gflv strains ghu and f <dig>  and torsv strain ap . since gflv-ghu displays levels of virulence intermediate to that of gflv-f <dig> and torsv-ap in most nicotiana species, plants were primarily assessed for resistance to gflv-ghu. each plant-virus combination was sampled at three or more time points except when a definite resistance or susceptibility determination could be made in the first or second apical leaf i.e. for gflv-f13-inoculated 4 × , 4 × , 4 ×  and 4 ×  , and gflv-ghu-inoculated 4 ×  and n. goodspeedii . all panels were surveyed for virus presence in every plant , except for gflv-f13-inoculated 2 × , where  <dig> plants in an original population of  <dig> plants was sampled for virus presence in apical leaves in a stratified sampling approach.
nicotiana 
species and synthetic allopolyploids used in this study


nicotiana 
a
b
c
an/a: not available.

bspecific origin of the accession is given, where known. otherwise, the endemic range of the species according to  <cit>  is listed.

cncsu: north carolina state university.

das-elisa was used to determine virus presence or absence for  <dig> gflv samples and  <dig> torsv samples in  <dig> plant-virus combinations. das-elisa absorbance values had a bimodal distribution, which allowed a clear delineation of virus-positive from virus-negative samples. infection frequencies at each leaf position in each virus-host sample group were summed to calculate virus incidence, which was the dependent variable in correlation analyses. the trajectory of virus incidence among leaf positions in given host-virus combinations were evaluated to generate six discrete resistance categories. based on the spatial distribution of virus in host plants, host-virus interactions were labeled ‘susceptible’, ‘immune’ or one of four categories of recovery , or ‘delayed susceptibility’.

symptoms
virus-inoculated plants were checked regularly for symptoms. the only instances of visible symptoms were for gflv-ghu on n. benthamiana, n. clevelandii, n. goodspeedii and 2 × , and for torsv-ap on n. benthamiana and 2 × . gflv-ghu symptoms on n. benthamiana and n. clevelandii were consistent with those previously described  <cit> , and included vein clearing on n. benthamiana and amorphous ring-like mottling on n. clevelandii. gflv-ghu symptoms on n. goodspeedii included vein clearing analogous to that observed for n. benthamiana. gflv-ghu symptoms on the 2 ×  were composed of non-necrotic ringspots on the first or second leaf position. torsv-ap symptoms on n. benthamiana were similar to those previously described  <cit> , and included stunting, severe mottling, and necrosis from which the plant ultimately recovered. torsv-ap caused mild mottling and slight stunting on 2 ×  and symptoms were not observed on n. tabacum cv. xanthi.

inoculated leaf infection
das-elisa revealed different frequencies of virus infection in inoculated leaves . some host-virus combinations consistently produced absorbance values below the virus detection threshold, which reflects immunity or perhaps limited subliminal  infections. 4 × , 4 × , 4 ×  and n. paniculata exhibited immunity to gflv-f <dig> in inoculated leaves. some host-virus combinations resulted in less than 50% inoculated leaf infection including gflv-ghu-inoculated n. obtusifolia  and n. glauca , and gflv-f13-inoculated 4 ×   and 4 ×   . all other tested host-virus combinations produced 50% or greater inoculated leaf infection . since gflv-ghu always produced infections in inoculated or apical leaves, and torsv-ap inoculations always produced some frequency of infection in the first apical leaf, there is no immunity within this nicotiana panel to these two viruses .
grapevine fanleaf virus 
and 
tomato ringspot virus 
resistance ratings of 
nicotiana 
species and synthetic allopolyploids

section
a
x
nicotiana 
b
c
aspecies and synthetic allopolyploids are referenced by their sections within the genus nicotiana, primary location of origin, and their haploid chromosome numbers according to  <cit> .

bcategories of resistance  are indicated for each virus-host combination tested.

cboxes without resistance ratings represent virus-host combination not tested.

high resistance interactions
virus-host combinations yielding no detectable virus in inoculated leaves  were designated as immune . immunity was observed for n. paniculata, 4 × , 4 ×  and 4 ×  inoculated with gflv-f <dig> . gflv-f13-inoculated n. tabacum did not produce apical leaf infection, but whether this plant is immune  or possesses early recovery  to gflv-f <dig> is uncertain because inoculated leaves were not tested. all tested members of section tomentosae, n. debneyi and 4 ×  exhibited early recovery  to gflv-f <dig> . n. obtusifolia, n. glauca, n. sylvestris, n. kawakamii, n. tabacum and n. tomentosiformis exhibited early recovery after gflv-ghu inoculation. early recovery was not observed for these species in response to inoculation with torsv-ap .

moderate resistance interactions
late recovery  was the most frequent host-virus interaction phenomenon observed in this test panel, and was seen for all virus isolates tested. all tested members of section tomentosae, 4×, n. tabacum and resynthesized allopolyploids involving possible n. tabacum progenitor species  showed late recovery to torsv-ap . 2 ×  and 4 ×  showed late recovery to gflv-f <dig>  and 4x, 4 × , 4 × , 4 × , n. glutinosa, n. paniculata and n. setchelii showed late recovery to gflv-ghu . intermediate recovery , characterized by fluctuation of virus incidence over three or more leaf axes , was observed in gflv-ghu-inoculated n. debneyi, n. rustica, 4 ×  and 2 × , and in gflv-f13-inoculated 4 ×  .

low or no resistance interactions
delayed susceptibility  was observed only in response to gflv-ghu inoculation of n. otophora, n. suaveolens, and 4 ×  . plants were designated as susceptible  when 100% of the plants became infected and virus was present in all tested leaves. n. benthamiana and n. clevelandii were susceptible to gflv-f <dig> and gflv-ghu, as expected  <cit> , n. goodspeedii and n. attenuata were susceptible to gflv-ghu, and n. benthamiana and 4 ×  were susceptible to torsv-ap .

additive resistance phenomena in synthetic polyploid plants
incompletely dominant virus resistance was observed in synthetic nicotiana allopolyploids. whereas n. tabacum showed high resistance to gflv-ghu, torsv-ap and gflv-f <dig>  and n. benthamiana was fully susceptible to all three virus strains, 2 ×  exhibited delayed susceptibility to gflv-ghu, intermediate recovery to torsv-ap, and late recovery to gflv-f <dig> . whereas n. clevelandii was fully susceptible to all viruses tested, and n. debneyi exhibited early recovery to gflv-f <dig> and intermediate recovery to gflv-ghu, 4 ×  exhibited intermediate recovery to gflv-f <dig> and delayed susceptibility to gflv-ghu . the 4 ×  response to gflv-ghu was not categorically different than the response of n. rustica , but the synthetic allopolyploid showed consistently lower incidence of infection in apical leaves  compared to n. rustica , which could reflect the contribution of n. tabacum  to resistance . the intermediate virus resistance observed across nicotiana lineages  suggests quantitative resistance is not due to a single gene with dosage effects, but due to multiple genes with dosage effects.

resistance profiles of allopolyploids and their progenitors
we tested two natural allopolyploids  and the closest relatives of their known progenitors for gflv-ghu resistance. the closest extant diploid progenitors of n. clevelandii are n. obtusifolia  and n. attenuata   <cit> . while n. obtusifolia exhibited an early recovery phenotype , both n. clevelandii and n. attenuata showed complete susceptibility . n. tabacum, its representative maternal genome donor , and one possible representative paternal genome donor  each exhibited early recovery . n. otophora, another representative of n. tabacum’s possible paternal genome donors exhibited delayed susceptibility  to gflv-ghu. resynthesized allopolyploids corresponding to either n. tabacum ancestry scenario exhibited late recovery phenotypes  to gflv-ghu with low virus incidence levels . thus, n. tabacum exhibits an early recovery phenotype similar to that of its maternal genome donor and of n. tomentosiformis, but less resistance than that of n. otophora or representative resynthesized allopolyploids. additionally, species of section suaveolentes showed low or occasionally moderate resistance to gflv-ghu, while its most closely related proposed paternal genome donor   <cit>  showed high resistance  . while neoallopolyploids showed intermediate gflv-ghu resistance characteristics, extant allopolyploids did not show intermediate gflv-ghu resistance characteristics .

systemic recovery
systemic recovery was tested in apical leaves of gflv-resistant  synthetic allopolyploids 4 × , 4 × , and 4 ×  . resistance was induced with gflv-ghu or gflv-f <dig>  and one upper, apical leaf of each recovered plant was re-inoculated with gflv-ghu and tested for virus presence. notably, plants that showed inoculated leaf susceptibility to gflv-ghu lost this susceptibility in the apical leaf of the recovered plant, no matter whether the resistance was induced with gflv-f <dig> or gflv-ghu . gflv-ghu was occasionally detected in the apical inoculated leaf of gflv-ghu-recovered plants encompassing two of  <dig> plants in 4 ×  and one of nine plants in 4 × . of the plants that did not acquire systemic recovery, the possibility of the originally-inoculated gflv-ghu infected these apical leaves cannot be excluded given that late recovery does not bar the virus from infecting the fourth leaf position, albeit at a low incidence.
grapevine fanleaf virus 
 strains f <dig> and ghu

a
b
agflv-ghu was inoculated to the fourth apical leaf following induction of resistance .

bplants  were characterized as having systemic recovery if gflv was undetectable at five days post-inoculation.

relationship between host geographic origin and virus resistance
australian and north american accessions generally displayed greater levels of susceptibility than south american accessions to all virus strains tested . the australian species n. benthamiana and the north american species n. clevelandii were fully susceptible to all viruses tested, and australian species n. debneyi, n. suaveolens and n. goodspeedii, and north american species n. attenuata and n. quadrivalvis displayed lower levels of resistance than south american species to gflv-ghu individually or in hybrid backgrounds . exceptions to these geography-based resistance trends included the n. debneyi  early recovery response to gflv-f <dig>  the n. obtusifolia  early recovery response to gflv-ghu, and the n. otophora  delayed susceptibility response to gflv-ghu. overall, origin had a significant  and moderate correlation for gflv-ghu incidence when hybrids were excluded from the analysis  and a weaker correlation  when hybrids were included, with south american species showing greater resistance than australian species, which in turn showed greater resistance than species from the southwest us. because the effect of section cannot be separated from the effect of origin , the effect of origin on virus resistance could reflect phylogenetic factors.

limited relationship between host ploidy level and virus resistance
there was a weak association between ploidy level and virus susceptibility. for example, n =  <dig> diploids from section tomentosae generally displayed greater levels of resistance than n = 16- <dig> allopolyploids of section suaveolentes, and similar levels of resistance to n. tabacum and n. rustica  . the correlation between gflv-ghu incidence and chromosome number was low  and nonsignificant  when hybrids were included in the analysis, and low  but significant  when hybrids were excluded, indicating that increasing ploidy is weakly negatively related to gflv-ghu virus incidence among extant nicotiana species. these results indicate that increasing ploidy is correlated with slightly greater virus susceptibility, but that the trend is abolished when synthetic allopolyploids are taken into account.

other trends in virus resistance
members of section tomentosae produced higher inoculated leaf infection rates  for gflv-ghu than for gflv-f <dig>  . every tested member of section tomentosae produced an early recovery phenotype for gflv-f <dig> and a late recovery phenotype for torsv-ap . members of section tomentosae showed variability in response to gflv-ghu, where n. kawakamii and n. tomentosiformis exhibited early recovery, n. setchelii displayed late recovery, and n. otophora showed delayed susceptibility . the delayed susceptibility of n. otophora to gflv-ghu was masked in the 4 ×  synthetic allopolyploid, which reflected the early recovery of n. sylvestris to gflv-ghu . early recovery was also observed for n. tabacum inoculated with gflv-ghu, a species believed to have evolved from a n. sylvestris × n. otophora or n. sylvestris × n. tomentosiformis hybridization event  <cit> . members of section suaveolentes exhibited intermediate or low resistance to the nepovirus strains tested, except for n. debneyi, which displayed early recovery after inoculation with gflv-f <dig>  .

n. tabacum and its corresponding resynthesized allopolyploids  exhibited high or moderate virus resistance phenotypes for each virus tested . both resynthesized allopolyploids are immune to gflv-f <dig>  and n. tabacum also displays high resistance to this virus. n. tabacum and its resynthesized allopolyploids showed late recovery to torsv-ap, though n. tabacum frequently had lower frequencies of infection at any given leaf position than its corresponding neoallopolyploids . the response of n. tabacum and the synthetic allopolyploids 4 ×  and 4 ×  to gflv-ghu were similar in terms of inoculated leaf infection, but n. tabacum showed early recovery whereas the neoallopolyploids showed late recovery, though the overall apical virus incidence levels were similar . the recovery responses of n. tabacum to gflv and torsv inoculation confirm previous reports  <cit> .

synthetic polyploids formed from resistant and susceptible species frequently displayed resistance in the moderate categories . 2 ×  and 4 ×  exhibited intermediate resistance phenotypes after inoculation with gflv-ghu and gflv-f <dig> compared to their parents . the same was true for the 2 ×  response to torsv-ap . an intermediate level of apical leaf infection was also seen in the 4 ×  response to gflv-ghu .

torsv-ap typically produced equal or greater categorical ratings than gflv-ghu, and gflv-ghu always produced equal or higher category ratings than gflv-f <dig> . an exception to this virulence trend was that n. otophora and 4 ×  showed lower resistance  to gflv-ghu than to torsv-ap . virulence differences between gflv-f <dig> and gflv-ghu were highly apparent in synthetic allopolyploid plants with resistant and susceptible parents, including 2 × , 4 × , and 4 ×  . there was a significant  but weak  correlation between virus composition and infection frequencies across plant genotypes .

according to individual components of χ <dig> in the contingency table that compared observed and expected virus incidence frequencies for each virus at each leaf position, there is a higher virus incidence in the first apical leaf than expected for torsv-ap; conversely, there is less virus incidence in the first apical leaf than expected for gflv-f <dig> . expected and observed apical virus incidence values are similar for gflv-ghu. these results suggest that torsv-ap displays higher virulence and gflv-f <dig> displays lower virulence than gflv-ghu in this panel of nicotiana species.

discussion
a spectrum of plant resistance and viral virulence was observed in the present nicotiana-nepovirus panel. changes in virus incidence were characterized using das-elisa on multiple leaves of large samples of plants  and used to distill six categories of host resistance  from which nicotiana species, synthetic allopolyploids and viruses were compared. while all host-virus combinations exhibiting low leaf inoculation frequencies  exhibited early recovery, this phenotype was frequently associated with a high infection frequency  in inoculated leaves . moderate or high leaf inoculation frequencies  were associated with an entire range of resistance and susceptibility phenotypes  . within individual plant genotypes, torsv-ap generally produced higher susceptibility ratings than gflv-ghu, and gflv-ghu always produced an equal or greater susceptibility rating than gflv-f <dig> , and the correlation between virus identity and virus incidence ratings were significant. the spectra of quantitative resistance displayed by nicotiana accessions and virulence among nepoviruses suggest the role of multiple interacting alleles from nicotiana accessions and nepoviruses in the determination of the ultimate infection outcomes. similar plant genotype by virus genotype interactions were observed in a panel of  <dig> arabidopsis accessions challenged with three cucumber mosaic virus isolates  <cit> .

the full susceptibility seen for 4 ×  and delayed susceptibility of the 2 ×  responses to torsv raises the interesting possibility that n. quadrivalvis and n. benthamiana may possess a dominant torsv susceptibility factor in n. tabacum backgrounds. the observation of ringspot symptoms on the gflv-ghu-inoculated 2 ×  amphihaploid suggests that the vein clearing symptomology typical of n. benthamiana infection  <cit>  is a recessive trait. similarly, while torsv-ap produced necrosis on n. benthamiana, necrosis was not observed on the 2 ×  amphihaploid or on n. tabacum. the absence of n. tabacum-torsv necrotic ringspot symptoms was unexpected given previous reports  <cit> . the lack of hypersensitive responses observed in this host panel is consistent with the lack of involvement of a specific gene-for-gene recognition system in nicotiana-gflv and nicotiana-torsv interactions. this lack of hypersensitive response and the absence of coevolutionary history between nicotiana and gflv or torsv supports the idea that resistance or susceptibility is due to the interaction of broad-spectrum immune responses and virulence factors  <cit> .

most plants in the host panel used in this study recovered from virus infection after infection was initially established in inoculated leaves. recovery from virus infection can be controlled by simple or complex host plant genetics, and can be countered by effective pathogen virulence factors  <cit> . host plant and pathogen genotype determined the level of plant recovery to gflv . compatibility between host and viral components is a prerequisite for infection in the matching allele model  <cit> . the partial resistance phenotypes observed in this study do not fit with the strict bimodality of the matching allele concept. however, a modified matching allele model that allows for partial compatibility and limited infection  <cit>   could explain the range of resistance and virulence observed in the nicotiana-nepovirus interactions observed here.

the intermediate resistance responses of nicotiana neoallopolyploids are congruent with the additive resistance hypothesis proposed by fritz et al. <cit> . by applying the modified matching allele model to the additive resistance hypothesis, we theorize that susceptible parents contribute susceptibility alleles and resistant parents contribute resistance alleles, and their neoallopolyploids contain novel combinations of resistance and susceptibility factors . neoallopolyploids would possess a greater number of matching alleles than their more resistant parent, but the dosage of resistance factors would be reduced compared to the resistant parent. furthermore, non-additive gene expression, which is commonly observed in allopolyploids and other hybrids  <cit> , could modify expression of resistance and susceptibility alleles .

while the identities of the nicotiana’s nepovirus resistance alleles are unknown, re-inoculation experiments  show that the resistance signal is translocated to result in systemic recovery. because the n. tabacum torsv resistance response appears to be sa-mediated  <cit> , susceptibility alleles conferred by n. benthamiana in the 2 ×  hybrid could allow torsv to quantitatively inhibit sa biosynthesis, affect conversion of sa to an alternate derivative, or vitiate downstream sa-activated resistance responses  <cit> . similarly, null or ineffective rna silencing alleles present in susceptible backgrounds could conceivably compromise rna silencing-mediated virus resistance in hybrids  <cit> . these hypotheses are consistent with fraser’s model of virus resistance  <cit> , which postulates that the effects of resistance alleles are proportional to their dosage and levels of influence on resistance pathways.

although animal allopolyploids frequently show dominant parasite susceptibility  <cit> , nicotiana neoallopolyploids exhibit virus resistance greater than one but not both of their parents . in cases where both parents were either resistant or susceptible, the neoallopolyploid displayed a resistance response similar to their parents, and thus there was no inherent penalty or benefit from hybridization or genome duplication . contrary to the model that neoallopolyploid plants could face a depression of innate immunity  <cit> , our findings suggest that allopolyploidization itself did not penalize nicotiana for virus resistance.

‘revolutionary changes’ that accompany polyploidy can be distinguished from ‘evolutionary changes,’ which follow allopolyploidization  <cit> . the maintenance of virus resistance in n. tabacum contrasts with the apparent loss of virus resistance in section polydicliae, which did not maintain partial virus resistance imparted by its likely maternal genome donor  . similarly, members of suaveolentes exhibited high degrees of virus susceptibility despite the resistance of their paternal genome donor’s closest relative . low virus resistance in sections polydicliae and suaveolentes suggests genetic drift and/or selection conferred a loss of virus resistance inherited by neoallopolyploids. nicotiana neoallopolyploids show gene loss and neofunctionalization  <cit> . since favorable alleles have a lower chance of becoming fixed in allopolyploids than diploids  <cit> , drift could have resulted in losses of innate immunity alleles in the polydicliae and suaveolentes lineages .

the correlation of higher levels of virus resistance in south american nicotiana species than north american and australian species suggest that geographic influences had a major effect on the efficacy of antiviral resistance responses. alternatively, because plant taxon  is frequently inseparable from origin, there is a possibility that phylogeny rather than origin could account for virus resistance. in either scenario, long-term biota-specific interactions would be critical factors to select for improved virus resistance. existing virus resistance alleles could be maintained or enhanced if virus challengers perennially recur , or virus resistance alleles could be lost if virus challenges diminish  . comparison of several allopolyploids used in these virus resistance experiments suggest that n. tabacum, endemic to the relatively large and competitive biome of the eastern andes has followed trajectory  <dig>  while members of sections suaveolentes and polydicliae, endemic to the relatively isolated biota of australia and southwest us, respectively, have followed trajectories  <dig> or  <dig> . because n. debneyi and n. benthamiana are monophyletic  <cit> , but n. debneyi shows greater antiviral resistance than n. benthamiana , random or selection-based processes may have driven divergence of innate immune functions within this allopolyploid lineage. the sister allopolyploids n. clevelandii and n. quadrivalvis have similarly diverged for herbivory resistance responses  <cit> .

changes in immune function due to allopolyploidy could precipitate changes in challenging pathogens, and prompt a red queen-type evolutionary response between the plant and pathogen  <cit> . ineffective innate immune systems could allow otherwise ill adapted viruses to acquire more effective virulence factors and erode quantitative resistance  <cit> . an allopolyploid that can endure colonization by a pathogen or pest and that permits pathogen adaptation to an otherwise resistant host progenitor is referred to as a hybrid bridge  <cit> . rather than escaping virus infection, allopolyploids could furnish another niche for viruses to expand their host ranges.

CONCLUSIONS
the red queen hypothesis explains how resistance and virulence temporally change in parasitic relationships. allopolyploidy might represent an opportunity for plant hosts to break the red queen cycle of coevolution by gaining a new complement of dominant resistance factors, but the potential for allopolyploids to experience an epochal gain in innate immune function may be compromised by the inheritance of susceptibility alleles or genetic dysfunctionality caused by hybridization. the nicotiana-nepovirus interaction sheds light on potential dynamics of how allopolyploidy may affect innate immunity. based on a detailed survey of the interaction of non-coevolved plant and virus species, it appears that host and pathogen genotypes contain multiple alleles that interact in a quantitative fashion to determine the level of resistance or susceptibility. synthetic allopolyploids faithfully display additive virus resistance characteristics that correspond to modified matching allele interactions . virus resistance/susceptibility factors change in allopolyploid progeny due to classical drift and selection . these changes raise the interesting possibility that moderately resistant allopolyploids could provide a hybrid bridge, which could result in a new red queen cycle of coevolution.

