BACKGROUND
the conserved notch pathway participates in diverse aspects of animal development, and has been implicated in human diseases and cancers  <cit> . notch encodes a transmembrane receptor, which, upon ligand binding, undergoes proteolytic processing and releases an intracellular fragment capable of acting as a transcription co-regulator. as both notch and its ligands  are widely expressed, their activities need to be tightly regulated. one such important regulation appears to be ligand internalization, which plays a critical role in activating notch receptors  <cit> .

notch ligand internalization utilizes an ubiquitin-dependent endocytic pathway, as two structurally unrelated e <dig> ubiquitin ligases, neuralized  and mind bomb , can append ubiquitin to dsl  ligands  <cit> . epsin/lqf  then recruits the ubiquitinated dsl ligands into clathrin-coated vesicles   <cit> . the scission of these ligand-containing ccvs from the plasma membrane seems critical for notch activation, as disruption of dynamin function also causes a notch-like defect  <cit> .

another relevant factor in drosophila notch ligand endocytosis is the j-domain protein auxilin  <cit> . first identified in mammals, auxilin is known to cooperate with hsc <dig> in mediating the disassembly of clathrin triskelia and coat proteins from newly formed ccvs in vitro  <cit> . the mammalian genomes contain two distinct auxilin-related genes: auxilin and gak, differing in the presence of an ark  family kinase domain and their tissue distributions  <cit> . gak contains the ark domain at the n-terminus and it is ubiquitously expressed. in contrast, auxilin lacks the kinase domain and its expression appears to be neuronal. however, the expression of auxilin in non-neuronal cells has recently been demonstrated  <cit> . besides uncoating, several other functions during endocytosis have recently been suggested for auxilin family proteins, including facilitating clathrin exchange during coated-pit formation  <cit> , participating in pit constriction  <cit>  and preventing precipitous assembly of clathrin cages  <cit> . furthermore, gak has been implicated in clathrin-mediated trafficking from the trans golgi network   <cit> .

while it is unclear which of the aforementioned cellular functions are most relevant under physiological conditions, mutations in the sole drosophila auxilin ortholog  clearly disrupt several notch-dependent processes  <cit> . one such process is the patterning of neural tissues, in which the cells destined to become neurons send a notch-mediated signal to prevent neighboring cells from adopting neuronal fate. in the absence of this lateral inhibition, supernumerary neuronal cells are generated, forming the so-called neurogenic phenotype  <cit> . consistent with the notion that daux participates in notch signaling, excessive neurons were seen in both the embryonic cns and the larval eye discs of daux mutants  <cit> . mosaic analysis showed that the function of daux during notch signaling is required in the signal-sending cells, suggesting that it has a role in ligand internalization  <cit> .

given the high degree of conservation of the notch pathway, it seems reasonable to expect an inhibition of auxilin function in other animal systems would cause notch-like defects. however, as multiple distinct endocytic pathways exist in higher metazoans  <cit> , it is possible that different endocytic pathways can functionally substitute for one another in notch ligand endocytosis. inhibition of auxilin function by rna interference in c. elegans was shown to disrupt the receptor-mediated uptake of yolk proteins, yet no notch-related defects were reported  <cit> . rnai-mediated reduction of gak function in mammalian cells appeared to deregulate egf signaling and promote tumorigenesis  <cit> . tissue-specific inactivation of mouse gak during embryonic development caused severe degenerations in brain, liver, and skin  <cit> , but it is unclear whether any of these defects were due to a disruption of notch function. thus, while it seems clear that auxilin family proteins are important for animal viability, whether their function in notch ligand endocytosis is evolutionarily conserved requires additional investigations.

we have used zebrafish to further assess the roles of auxilin-dependent endocytosis in animal development. besides being a versatile model organism, zebrafish is suitable for our purpose because the importance of notch ligand endocytosis has been demonstrated during embryonic neural patterning  <cit> . we show that zebrafish, like mammals but unlike drosophila, contains both auxilin and gak. zebrafish auxilin and gak are interchangeable in their abilities to substitute for daux during drosophila notch signaling, suggesting that they share some cellular functions. however, they have different expression patterns during development, suggesting that these two paralogs are not completely redundant. morpholino-mediated knockdown of gak function during embryogenesis caused an increase in the formation of neuronal cells and a decrease in the expression of a notch target gene, supporting our hypothesis that the role of auxilin family proteins in notch signaling is conserved. furthermore, we showed that embryos deficient in gak function had a higher level of programmed cell death in neural tissues, suggesting that gak is required for the survival of neuronal cells.

RESULTS
the zebrafish genome contains both gak and auxilin
to examine the roles of auxilin-related genes during vertebrate development, we first sought to identify auxilin or gak in zebrafish genome. database search revealed that, like mammals, the zebrafish genome contains both gak  and auxilin  orthologs, located on chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. this presence of two distinct auxilin-related orthologs appears to be a feature shared by other vertebrates, as the chicken  and pufferfish  genomes both contain gak and auxilin. in contrast, arthropods such as drosophila , honeybee  and flour beetle  have only gak. c. elegans also has only one auxilin-related gene, but it lacks both the kinase and the pten homologous region  <cit> .

the zgak locus encodes a polypeptide of  <dig> amino acids and, like other gak orthologs, contains an n-terminal ark kinase, a pten domain, a cbm region and a c-terminal j domain . alignment of protein sequences shows that zgak is 65% identical to human gak overall, with the sequence conservations concentrated in the kinase, pten and the j-domain. the kinase, pten and j-domain of zgak are  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % identical to the corresponding domains of human gak respectively. in contrast, the cbm domains of zgak and human gak are more divergent, sharing only  <dig> % amino acid sequence identity.

the zaux protein, on the other hand, is an  <dig> amino acid long polypeptide, which contains a pten region, a cbm and a j-domain, but lacks the n-terminal kinase . the protein sequence of zaux is  <dig> % identical overall to the human auxilin. again, the conservations are higher in the pten and the j-domain, as these domains share  <dig> % and  <dig> % amino acid identity respectively. these domains of zaux are also highly related to the pten and the j-domain of zgak , suggesting that zaux and zgak are derived from a common ancestral gene. however, while zaux is similar to zgak, it is more similar to human and mouse auxilin proteins , suggesting that the divergence of gak and auxilin occurred prior to the divergence of fish and mammals during vertebrate evolution.

in addition to the similarities in protein sequences, the intron/exon organizations among auxilin family genes are highly conserved. first, the human, mouse, and zebrafish gak loci all contain an identical number  of introns. the zaux locus appears to have lost one intron in the cbm during evolution, as it contains  <dig> introns while the human and mouse auxilins have  <dig>  furthermore, in the conserved domains, the positions and the phases  of these introns can be precisely aligned. for example, the pten homologous regions of zebrafish, mouse, and human gak and auxilin loci all contain  <dig> introns . these introns, although different in nucleotide lengths, are located at the same positions in the coding region with identical phases. this high degree of conservation in intron/exon organization strongly bolsters the notion that gak and auxilin were derived from a common ancestral gene through gene duplication.

overexpression of zgak or zaux causes clathrin aggregations
to ask if zebrafish auxilin family proteins have similar cellular functions as their respective mammalian counterparts, we determined the subcellular localizations of zgak and zaux. both zgak and zaux were tagged with gfp at the n-termini, placed under the control of a cmv promoter in pcs <dig>  and transiently expressed in hela cells. these gfp-tagged fusion proteins are functional, as ectopic expression of either gfp-zgak or gfp-zaux in drosophila could restore the neurogenic defect and the lethality caused by daux mutations . to reveal clathrin-positive structures, these cells were also stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody against clathrin heavy chain.

as shown in figure  <dig>  qualitatively different gfp patterns were seen in pcs2-gfp-zaux and pcs2-gfp-zgak transfected cells, depending on the expression levels. in cells expressing low levels of gfp-zgak or gfp-zaux , gfp signals were mostly cytosolic and slightly enriched near the perinuclear regions. these perinuclear zgak- and zaux-positive structures showed overlaps with clathrin, most likely representing the tgn.

in cells expressing high levels of gfp-zgak and gfp-zaux, the cytosolic staining and the enrichments near the perinuclear regions could still be seen. however, these cells also contained large gfp-positive aggregates  that were intensely clathrin-positive. in untransfected cells, clathrin staining had a vesicular appearance throughout the cytosol, but it appeared depleted from these structures in those aggregate-containing cells. we noticed that zgak seemed more capable of causing these aggregates than zaux, as intense gfp-positive and clathrin-containing structures were readily seen in cells expressing milder levels of gfp-zgak. it has been shown that endogenous gak is predominantly cytosolic and shows elevated associations with tgn  <cit> , and over-expression of mammalian auxilin family proteins in hela cells can cause the formation of clathrin-containing "granules"  <cit> . thus, our results showed that over-expressed zgak and zaux are localized similarly within the cells. in addition, their localizations are similar to those of their respective mammalian homologs.

zgak and zaux are functionally interchangeable in rescuing daux defects
to determine whether there are intrinsic functional differences between zgak and zaux, we compared their abilities in rescuing the extra photoreceptor defect and the lethality caused by daux mutations. n-terminally gfp-tagged zgak and zaux were placed under uas control, and transgenic flies carrying these constructs were generated. we reasoned that if zgak and zaux function similarly during clathrin-mediated transport, both should be able to supplant daux function during neuronal differentiation in drosophila eye discs and for animal survival.

in wild-type eye discs, regular arrays of photoreceptor clusters could be revealed with αelav antibody, which labels the nuclei of neuronal cells  <cit> . in contrast, excessive and disorganized elav-positive cells were seen in dauxf956x mutant tissues   <cit> . this defect of extra elav-positive cells could be rescued by an act5c-gal4-driven expression of the full-length daux   <cit> . similar to daux, both uas-gfp-zgak and uas-gfp-zaux, when driven by act5c-gal <dig>  could restore the normal elav staining pattern in dauxf956x mutant clones . we have previously shown that the lethality of daux mutants could be rescued by a ubiquitous expression of full-length daux  <cit> . similarly, act5c-gal4-driven gfp-zgak and gfp-zaux could both restore the viability of daux mutant flies. these results suggest that zgak and zaux can both functionally substitute for daux.

deletion of the j-domain from drosophila auxilin is known to render them non-functional  <cit> . to ask whether the j-domain is essential for both zaux and zgak to rescue daux, uas-gfp-zgakdelj and uas-gfp-zauxdelj were generated. unlike their full-length counter parts, these j-deletions failed to rescue the extra elav-positive cell phenotype  and the lethality, suggesting that, like daux, the j-domain is critical for the functions of these auxilin family proteins.

zgak and zaux are differentially expressed during embryonic development
although it is known that mammalian gak and auxilin are expressed in different tissues  <cit> , their temporal and spatial expressions during development have not been fully investigated. to better understand the requirement of zgak and zaux, we examined their expression at various stages of zebrafish development using whole-mount in situ hybridization. zygotic expressions of zgak and zaux, which were also maternally expressed , were detected in diverse tissues, but were most prominently associated with neural tissues. between 8- to 15-somite stages, zgak was broadly expressed in the dorsal region of the embryo, and the expression of zaux appeared to be restricted to the bilateral cell clusters on the dorsal side of the embryo . as a control, hybridization using sense probes did not yield detectable signals . at the 19-somite stage, zgak still expressed broadly in the entire embryo, whereas zaux was predominantly found in hindbrain neurons, spinal chord neurons, and otic vesicles . at 24-hour post fertilization , zgak was enriched in brains, eyes, otic vesicles, and vasculature, and zaux expression was detected in hindbrain neurons, spinal chord neurons, otic vesicles and posterior otic capsules . the fact that the expression patterns of zgak and zaux did not coincide completely suggests that they have overlapping and distinct functions during development.

inhibiting zgak function causes neural-specific cell degeneration
because of the structural conservation of the gak genes from drosophila to human, we decided to focus on zgak function during embryonic development. to inhibit zgak, we designed an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide  to disrupt the normal splicing of zgak mrna . a control antisense morpholino oligonucleotide , which is a modified sequence of gak-mo <dig> with five nucleotide changes, was also included. embryos injected with  <dig> ng of gak-mo <dig> at one-cell stage  consistently had smaller eyes, enlarged hindbrain, thinner yolk extension, and weak circulation at  <dig> to  <dig> hpf . in contrast, injection of the same or higher amount of gak-mo1c caused no developmental defects in embryos . to ensure that the splicing on zgak mrna was disrupted, rnas isolated from gak-mo <dig> morphants at  <dig> hpf were analyzed by rt-pcr. as shown in figure 6a, the injection of gak-mo <dig> resulted in a transcript lacking exon  <dig>  generating an in-frame deletion in the kinase domain .

morphologically, the development of gak-mo <dig> morphants appeared normal until the segmentation stage. at the 10-somite stage, gak-mo <dig> morphants displayed cell degeneration in the eyes, which became noticeably opaque . at the 14-somite stage, degenerating cells persisted in the eyes, began to appear in the hypothalamic and thalamic regions of the brain and the hindbrain , and continued to increase for the remaining duration of somitogenesis. in contrast, these same regions of the uninjected embryos were transparent . in some cases, the degeneration had spread to the developing neural tube of gak-mo <dig> morphants. it is noteworthy that cell degeneration was only observed in neuroectodermal tissues, but not in non-neural tissues such as the notochord and somites. from  <dig> to  <dig> hpf, thinner yolk extension and weak blood circulation were observed in gak-mo <dig> morphants, as compared to the uninjected embryos at the same stages . at  <dig> hpf, the hindbrain and the tectal ventricles of gak-mo <dig> morphants were enlarged , although these embryos still retained the ability to respond to touch .

to ensure that these phenotypes were caused by the disruption of zgak, we tested the binding specificity of gak-mo <dig>  the complimentary target sequence of gak-mo <dig> was placed in front of the mcherry reporter gene  <cit> , and the resulting fusion  was cloned into pcs <dig> . similarly, the complimentary sequence for gak-mo1c was placed in front of mcherry and cloned into pcs <dig> as a control. using these constructs, gak-mo1-mcherry and gak-mo1c-mcherry rnas were transcribed in vitro and injected along with either gak-mo <dig> or gak-mo1c morpholinos into one-cell stage embryos. injected embryos at  <dig> hpf were then analyzed for the protein expression of mcherry. as shown in figure 6b, gak-mo <dig>  but not gak-mo1c, was capable of blocking the translation of gak-mo1-mcherry. conversely, gak-mo <dig> had no effect on the expression of gak-mo1c-mcherry. these results demonstrate a high degree of binding specificity and efficacy of gak-mo <dig> to its intended target.

to further show that the phenotypes of gak-mo <dig> morphants were not due to off-target effects, a second morpholino antisense oligonucleotide  was designed to block splicing at a different region of the gak gene . rt-pcr analysis showed that injection of gak-mo <dig> caused the retention of intron  <dig>  resulting in a premature stop codon in the pten domain in the zgak transcripts . embryos injected with  <dig> ng of gak-mo <dig> exhibited the same phenotypes as those observed with gak-mo <dig> morphants . taken together, these results strongly suggest that the developmental defects of gak-mo <dig> and gak-mo <dig> morphants resulted from the specific inhibition of zgak function.

disrupting zgak function causes excessive neural-specific programmed cell death
to further define the extent and understand the cause of the cell degeneration in gak morphants, we performed in situ tunel assay to detect apoptotic cells. at the 14-somite stage, a slight increase in apoptotic cell death was observed in the brain regions of gak morphants, as compared to the control embryos . at  <dig> hpf, gak morphants displayed a significantly higher level of cell death in the brain, as well as in the neural tube . similar to the aforementioned cell degeneration, excessive apoptosis in gak morphants was seen only in neural tissues, but not in non-neural tissues. thus, there appears to be a good correlation in the onset and the extent of these two phenotypes, suggesting that this increase in the programmed cell death is the basis for the cell degeneration in gak morphants.

reduction of zgak disrupts the development of specific brain regions
to explore the role of zgak in brain patterning, gak morphants were stained for krox <dig>  fibroblast growth factor  <dig>  and sonic hedgehog , whose expressions delineate various regions of the brain. krox <dig>  a zinc finger-containing transcription factor, is expressed specifically in the hindbrain  <cit> . at the 12-somite stage, the pattern and the level of krox <dig> expression appeared normal in gak morphants . at  <dig> hpf, the pattern of krox <dig> expression in gak morphants remained similar to that seen in wild type, although the two stripes of krox <dig> in the rhombomeres  <dig> and  <dig> appeared much closer . this suggests that, while the overall patterning of the brain regions is not significantly affected, the rostral hindbrain is reduced in size in the absence of zgak function.

fgf <dig>  expressed in the forebrain, the mhb  and other mesodermal derivatives that include somites and tailbud, has been shown to regulate forebrain development and establish the segmental identity of the hindbrain  <cit> . at the 12-somite stage, the expression of fgf <dig> in gak morphants appeared to be normal . in contrast, gak morphants at the 18-somite stage exhibited higher levels of fgf <dig> expression in the mhb, optic stalks and forebrain, suggestive of a requirement for gak in repressing fgf <dig> expression in these regions . no alteration in fgf <dig> expression in the somites and tailbud regions was observed , consistent with the notion that zgak function is required predominantly in neural tissues, but not in non-neural tissues. at the 18-somite stage, shh mrna was detected in the ventral midbrain, hypothalamus, telencephalon and notochord  <cit> . in contrast to fgf <dig>  shh expression appeared normal in the gak morphants at this stage .

reduction of zgak impairs notch signaling
to ask if zgak, like daux, has a role in notch signaling, we examined the expression of huc and her <dig> mrnas in gak morphants. huc, the zebrafish homolog of elav, is one of the earliest markers for neuronal cells  <cit> . in 8-somite stage wild-type embryos, huc transcripts are detected in bilateral stripes of neuronal cells along the anterior-posterior axis  <cit> . in gak morphants at similar stage, although the pattern of expression was similar, more huc-positive cells were seen , suggesting that additional cells had adopted neuronal fate. this increase in huc staining persisted in gak morphant embryos at 10-somite stage . interestingly, by  <dig> hpf, gak morphants appeared to have fewer huc-positive cells in the forebrain and midbrain regions . however, it is important to note that the reduction in huc-positive cells at this stage coincides with the onset of the elevated cell death in neural tissues .

her <dig>  a homolog of drosophila e  gene, is a known target of the notch pathway and participates in specification of neuronal cells  <cit> . in 8-somite stage wild-type embryos, her <dig> is expressed in bilateral stripes of cells  <cit> . compared to wild type, the level of her <dig> expression in gak morphants appeared lower , suggesting that the output of the notch pathway was reduced at this stage. similar to huc, this decrease in her <dig> expression was still observed in 10-somite stage gak morphant embryos . at  <dig> hpf, her <dig> expression in gak morphants and control embryos was not significantly different , suggesting that either gak is not required for notch signaling, or gak and auxilin are redundant for notch signaling at this stage. nevertheless, the alterations in the expression of huc and her <dig> at the 8- and 10-somite stages showed that a reduction of gak function could impair notch activity in zebrafish.

discussion
zebrafish, like mammals but not invertebrates, has two distinct auxilin-related genes. like their mammalian counterparts, zebrafish gak and auxilin differ in the presence of the n-terminal kinase and their respective expression patterns. zgak has a kinase domain and is ubiquitously expressed during embryonic development. in contrast, the expression of zaux, the ortholog without the kinase domain, appears predominantly in the neuronal cells. there are other differences between the two at the protein sequence level. for instance, zgak, but not zaux, contains a sequence of fgdl at the amino acid position  <dig>  which matches perfectly to the consensus ψg . this motif, conserved in mammalian gaks, has been shown to mediate interactions with ap <dig> adaptor in golgi-lysosomal trafficking  <cit> . taken together, these structural differences between gak and auxilin suggest that their molecular functions may have diverged during evolution. it is notable that inhibiting zgak function causes an increase in apoptotic cell death in the neuroectodermal tissues, where gak and auxilin are both expressed. this inability of zaux to compensate for the zgak knockdown would argue that gak has a function unique from auxilin. however, we cannot formally exclude the possibility that these neural cells may have a higher demand for the functions of auxilin-related genes. in this scenario, the functions of both genes would be needed to prevent the onset of apoptosis; therefore, inhibiting gak alone would be sufficient to induce extra neural cell deaths.

despite the structural differences between gak and auxilin, it seems clear that these two paralogs have overlapping molecular functions. both gak and auxilin are required for receptor-mediated endocytosis in hela cells, indicating that they act in the same process  <cit> . consistent with this, we showed that the subcellular localizations of zgak or zaux in hela cells were similar, and over-expression of either in hela cells could form clathrin-containing aggregates. more importantly, we showed that over-expression of either zgak or zaux in drosophila could completely restore the neurogenic defects caused by daux, and this ability to rescue daux absolutely requires their respective j-domains. together, these results suggest that zgak and zaux are at least partially redundant.

unlike zgak or daux, zaux does not have the n-terminal ark kinase. nevertheless, over-expression of zaux in drosophila could completely restore the defects caused by a strong daux allele. this is not entirely surprising as we have previous shown that over-expression of dauxΔk, a daux with its kinase domain deleted, could rescue the daux phenotype  <cit> . in fact, over-expression of a fragment consisting of the cbm and j domains alone appears sufficient to restore the function of daux in notch  <cit> . however, the kinase domain does have a role in gak's function in notch as kinase domain-specific disruptions, by either point mutations  <cit>  or morpholino-induced mis-splicing , produce notch-like phenotypes. still, it does appear that, when expressed at a high level, the kinase activity is not required for the functions of auxilin family proteins.

in drosophila, auxilin has been shown to participate in notch signaling by facilitating ligand internalization  <cit> . given that mammals and vertebrates have two auxilin-related genes, it is not known if either, neither, or both function in the notch pathway. the similarities in domain structures and expression patterns suggest that gak is more likely to have a role in notch. however, while inactivation of gak affects the formation of multiple tissues in mouse  <cit> , it was unclear whether these defects were caused by disrupted notch signaling. here we showed that, in gak morphants, the number of huc-positive cells appeared increased, a defect analogous to the neurogenic phenotype. moreover, we showed that, in gak morphants, the expression of her <dig>  a known notch target gene, was reduced. thus, while it is not yet known whether zgak participates in ligand internalization, these defects in huc and her <dig> expressions suggest that gak function is also required for notch signaling in zebrafish. these results provide the first evidence that the requirement for a gak-dependent endocytic pathway during notch signaling is evolutionarily conserved. a requirement of the mindbomb e <dig> ligase and epsin in notch has also been demonstrated in flies  <cit> , fish  <cit> , and mouse  <cit> , which, along with our analysis of zebrafish gak, suggests that notch ligand internalization may rely on the same set of endocytic genes.

it has been demonstrated that a conditional removal of gak function during mouse brain development causes a significant loss of neural tissues  <cit> , although the mechanism is not known. likewise, our depletion of gak function during zebrafish embryonic development results in neural-specific cell degeneration. using tunel staining, we showed that this cell degeneration is caused by increased programmed cell death, suggesting that gak has a role in preventing the apoptosis of neural cells. thus, although more huc-positive cells were present in zgak-deficient embryos at the 8- and 10-somite stages, fewer huc-positive cells might be expected at later stages because of cell death. indeed, this was precisely what we observed, as fewer huc-positive cells were seen in gak morphants at  <dig> hpf. interestingly, in mindbomb mutant embryos, where notch ligand endocytosis is impaired, no cell degeneration phenotype was observed . this, along with our observation that her <dig> expression was not significantly reduced at  <dig> hpf, suggests that the role of gak in maintaining neural cell survival may be notch-independent. taken together, our results suggest that gak has at least two distinct functions during the development of neural tissues: an early role in the patterning of neuronal cells and a later role in maintaining the survival of neuronal cells. furthermore, human gak has recently been implicated as a susceptibility gene in familial parkinson disease  <cit> , and the neurodegenerative phenotype observed in gak morphants certainly supports this conclusion.

it is noteworthy that the phenotypes of the gak morphants bear a strong resemblance to those of the "spacehead" class zebrafish mutants  <cit> . these mutants, isolated from a large-scale screen, are characterized by defects including cell degeneration in the eye and the brain regions, thinner yolk tube, and weak blood circulation  <cit> . as the genes responsible for most of these mutants have not been determined, the phenotypic similarities suggest that zgak may correspond to one of them. if this is indeed the case, it will provide important clues to understand the functions of these genes in maintaining neuronal cell survival.

CONCLUSIONS
zebrafish, like mammals but not invertebrates, has two distinct auxilin-related genes, auxilin and gak. these two genes share some molecular functions, but are not completely redundant, as they are differentially expressed during development. inhibition of gak function appears to impair notch signaling during embryonic neural patterning. this, along with the fact that auxilin has been implicated in drosophila notch signaling, suggests that the notch pathway is regulated by a similar set of endocytic factors. in addition, we showed that inhibition of gak function increases apoptosis in neural tissues, suggesting that gak has a role in promoting or maintaining the survival of neural cells. as gak is recently implicated in familial parkinson disease  <cit> , our results should provide a useful model for further understanding the cause of this neurodegenerative disease.

