BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of small rna molecules derived from transcribed mrna hairpin structures and spliced introns  <cit>  that play a key role in mrna targeting, leading to the degradation or translational repression of the target transcript. the regulatory functions of mirnas are essential to many key biological processes in metazoans, including development, cell growth and death, stem cell maintenance, hematopoiesis, and neurogenesis. aberrations in mirna regulation have been linked to blood disorders, oncogenesis, and other malignancies in humans  <cit> . the hairpin structures in mrna transcripts that give rise to primary micrornas  are not unique to mirnas or metazoans; these hairpins can form much more frequently than functional pri-mirnas  <cit>  and can arise from inverted duplications, transposable elements, and genomic repeats  <cit> . metazoans, however, possess a unique complement of cellular machinery for processing and transporting mature mirnas to their targets that has not been identified in any non-metazoan species to date  <cit> . it has been observed that once novel mirnas emerge in a metazoan lineage, they are very rarely lost. thus, mirnas are thought to represent strong phylogenetic markers and, through their ability to fine-tune gene expression, appear to be major drivers of biological complexity  <cit> .

the canonical mirna biogenesis pathway in metazoans is part of the larger rna interference  pathway, which includes the closely related sirna pathway . the mirna pathway is distinct from the ancestral sirna pathway in that it is initiated by the cleavage of hairpin structures  from mrnas in the nucleus by the drosha/pasha complex , producing precursor-mirnas  that can be exported into the cytosol via the exportin-5—ran-gtp complex. after being transported into the cytosol, mirnas and sirnas undergo the same processing and targeting steps, initiated by dicer cleavage and loading into the rna-induced silencing complex  with argonaute  <cit> . the sirna pathway is an ancient biological defense mechanism used to ward off the integration of foreign nucleic acids, such as double stranded rnas  introduced by viruses, and is known to have existed in the oldest eukaryotes  <cit> . thus, the emergence of the metazoan canonical mirna biogenesis pathway most likely coincided with the evolution of the drosha/pasha complex found only in metazoans  <cit> . functionally, the drosha/pasha complex enables cleavage of pri-mirna hairpins that are subsequently exported out of the nucleus and processed by the pre-existing rnai pathway.

given the differences in molecular machinery, processing, and target recognition, mirnas are thought to have evolved separately and exclusively in animals and plants  <cit> . however, a number of recent studies have reported identification of mirnas in unicellular eukaryotes, including several thought to be homologs of mirnas specific to animal and plant lineages  <cit> . these studies imply that mirnas evolved once, early in eukaryotic evolution. nevertheless, a recent report  <cit>  reexamined these studies and found that, of the cumulative  <dig> reported mirnas, none of the putative plant or animal homologs met established criteria for mirna annotation; they were, instead, likely traces of other small rnas  that happened to fit the length spectrum of mature mirna sequences. additionally, only  <dig> of the putative novel mirnas passed the annotation criteria, and those were restricted to green and brown algae. in light of this evidence, it appears most likely that mirnas evolved independently in multiple eukaryotic lineages, with the metazoan pathway being dependent upon the drosha/pasha protein complex.

here, we describe an in-depth characterization of both the mirna biogenesis pathway proteins and genomic regions that may correspond to pri-mirna loci in the recently sequenced genome of mnemiopsis leidyi . recent phylogenomic analyses suggest that ctenophora may be the earliest branching metazoan lineage  <cit> , and genomic studies of a number of gene superclasses  <cit>  and signaling pathways  <cit>  in mnemiopsis are consistent with this theory. if ctenophores are, indeed, the earliest metazoan branch, examining the genome of mnemiopsis provides us a rare opportunity to better understand the origin of mirna processing in metazoans. alternatively, if ctenophores branched later in evolution and porifera is the most basal metazoan lineage  <cit> , mnemiopsis still provides a valuable model from which to study the early evolution of this important small rna processing pathway. putative mirnas  have been studied in other non-bilaterian metazoans, including nematostella vectensis, hydra magnipapillata, trichoplax adhaerens, and amphimedon queenslandica <cit> . the complete processing pathway was identified in all cases except trichoplax, which lacks a pasha homolog and recognizable mirnas  <cit> . however, the presence of drosha, pasha, and mirnas in amphimedon, a metazoan lineage that branched prior to trichoplax, suggests that trichoplax must have lost mirna functionality  <cit> .

RESULTS
in order to understand the increasing complexity observed in the early evolution of animals, we have sequenced, annotated, and performed a preliminary analysis of the mnemiopsis genome. during this process, we were able to map  <dig> % of the  <dig>  publicly available mnemiopsis est sequences to our genome assembly. these data are available through our mnemiopsis genome project web site . this web site provides access to the assembled genome scaffolds, predicted protein models, transcriptome data, and est data. the web site also provides access to the mnemiopsis genome browser, a blast utility, a gene-centric wiki, protein domain annotations, and information on gene clusters mapped to human kegg pathways via an intuitive and easy-to-use interface.

through our examination of the mnemiopsis genome and its predicted proteome, we were able to identify multiple rnai pathway proteins necessary for mirna and sirna processing, including dicer, argonaute, ran, and exportin- <dig>  but the mirna-specific biogenesis pathway proteins drosha and pasha are strikingly absent. to our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a metazoan genome lacking a drosha homolog. since dicer and drosha are both members of the ribonuclease iii  protein family , we focused our analysis on the rnase iii protein domain to better characterize the mnemiopsis dicer protein and to yield insight into how, through the evolution of this protein family in the metazoa, the canonical mirna biogenesis pathway may have emerged.

drosha and dicer belong to subclasses  <dig>  and  <dig>  of the rnase iii protein family  <cit> . both proteins are characterized by tandem rnase iii domains that cleave dsrna to a specific length, often producing cleavage products with a two-nucleotide 3′ overhang. however, distinct differences have been observed in the dsrna-binding specificity and cellular localization of these two rnase iii subclasses  <cit> . class  <dig> rnase iii enzymes have a paz domain that recognizes dsrna ends with the distinctive two-nucleotide 3′ overhang indicative of prior rnase iii cleavage. class  <dig> rnase iii enzymes do not appear to contain a domain with specific affinity for dsrna and, instead, rely on complex formation in the nucleus with a co-factor  that recognizes the ssrna-dsrna junctions characteristic of pri-mirna hairpins  <cit> . rnase iii class  <dig> dicer-like proteins that lack a paz domain  have been identified in non-metazoans but function as part of an unrelated pathway  <cit> ; they have also been identified in early branching metazoans, but their function has not been confirmed experimentally  <cit> . since deletion of the paz domain in a functional dicer has been shown to produce an rnase iii enzyme without target specificity  <cit> , there are likely functional binding domains other than paz within the rnase iii class  <dig> subfamily.

to determine which class of rnase iii enzymes the mnemiopsis dicer protein is most closely related to, we performed a phylogenetic analysis on the rnase iii domains of early-branching metazoan dicer and drosha proteins. we used hmmer  <cit>  to search available non-bilaterian animal protein sequences  to identify all candidate class  <dig> or class  <dig> rnase iii proteins containing tandem rnase iii domains. our search yielded only one dicer protein in mnemiopsis and numbers of proteins consistent with other reports on the early-branching metazoa  <cit> . we included a sample of bilaterian dicer and drosha sequences in our analysis to ensure each protein class was monophyletic across the metazoa. we separated the rnase iiia and rnase iiib domains of each protein , aligned the domains, trimmed the poorly conserved and flanking regions, and used the resulting alignment as the basis for further phylogenetic analysis .

the tree generated from this alignment  contains separate clades for each rnase iii domain subgroup, confirming the characterization of the mnemiopsis rnase iii protein as a dicer protein. importantly, the topology unites the drosha rnase iiia and rnase iiib domains with the respective dicer rnase iii domains. given that rnase iii class  <dig>  proteins are restricted to the metazoa  <cit> , whereas rnase iii class  <dig>  proteins are found in the rnai pathways of ancestral eukaryotes  <cit> , this topology suggests that drosha evolved from dicer via a duplication event early in the evolution of the metazoa, roughly coinciding with the emergence of mirna functionality . this observation contradicts the less parsimonious argument that these double rnase iii domain-containing enzymes evolved independently from separate eubacterial rnase iii domains  <cit>  .

it is possible that mnemiopsis utilizes alternative methods for producing mirnas for transcriptional regulation. therefore, we searched for mirnas using data from short rna sequencing runs on two mnemiopsis samples. we were unable to identify any known metazoan mirnas that mapped to the mnemiopsis genome. while we were able to predict several novel mirna candidates using two methods, no predictions were reproducible across all samples and methods. in addition, ev en the highest-scoring predictions exhibited atypical read mapping signatures. thus, we have classified all of these predictions as false positives, as they do not appear to be processed by the canonical mirna machinery .

some spliced introns can correctly fold into pre-mirnas, called mirtrons, independent of cleavage by drosha and pasha  <cit>  . however, within the mnemiopsis genome, only a handful of introns have predicted secondary structures suggestive of mirtron-coding potential, and none of these have read mapping signatures to indicate that they are functional mirtrons. the presence of exportin- <dig> and downstream rnai pathway proteins dicer and argonaute in mnemiopsis could indicate the existence of an alternative mechanism for mirna production that predates the canonical mirna pathway. the lack of recognizable mirnas in our small rna sequences, however, suggests that this scenario is unlikely. recently, cases of functional exogenous mirnas acquired via ingestion were identified in animals  <cit> , suggesting a possible dietary mechanism by which mnemiopsis could utilize mirna regulatory functions in the absence of a functional endogenous canonical pathway. however, the mechanism for exogenous mirna activity remains poorly understood.

it has been hypothesized that mirtrons may have predated the drosha/pasha-mediated pathway, based on the observation that the mechanistic requirements for their evolution may have been fairly simple  <cit> . the identification of mirtrons in rice  <cit>  and the presence of the necessary machinery in mnemiopsis  are consistent with this hypothesis. however, given the absence of functional mirtrons in mnemiopsis, it appears more likely that mirna functionality evolved alongside the drosha/pasha-mediated pathway, independently of the mirtron pathway. discerning the point in evolutionary time in which mirtrons became functional will require a thorough analysis of the genomes of additional species beyond nematodes, mammals, and avians  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the implications of these results depend upon the phylogenetic position of ctenophora. if ctenophores are the most basal metazoan clade, the most parsimonious explanation for our observations is that metazoan mirna functionality originated after ctenophores diverged from the rest of animals . alternatively, if poriferans are the most basal metazoan clade, then drosha, pasha and canonical mirna functionality must have been lost in the mnemiopsis lineage . if the latter were true, then canonical micrornas and their machinery would have been independently lost in both ctenophora and placozoa. this, along with the large-scale losses of mirnas described in acoelomorphs  <cit>  and cnidarians  <cit> , would contradict the premise that mirnas are ultraconserved, canalized characters that are continuously added, but rarely lost – and, as such, would challenge their usefulness as phylogenetic markers  <cit> .

our data supports a scenario in which the role of mirnas in fine-tuning gene expression was not solidified until more recently in metazoan evolution and thus indicates that mirna regulatory functions were, perhaps, non-essential during early metazoan diversification. given this, the lack of recognizable mirna functionality in mnemiopsis supports a scenario with ctenophora branching at the base of the metazoa, prior to the emergence of mirna functionality . it may also indicate that a novel rna-based regulatory pathway evolved either within the ctenophore lineage or as a precursor to the canonical mirna pathway recognizable in the rest of the metazoa. in either case, ctenophores represent an intriguing model for better understanding the early evolution of small rna-based regulatory functions, shedding light on a point in evolutionary time that may have predated the need for additional plasticity in key molecular systems inherent to animals. we expect that further exploration of the genomes of other ctenophores, early branching metazoans, and closely related non-metazoans will help determine the exact point in evolutionary history at which both canonical and mirtron-based mirna pathways  emerged.

