BACKGROUND
a cornerstone in developmental biology is the concept of morphogens. these are chemical substances that form concentration gradients to provide positional information to a developing embryo or tissue  <cit> . despite significant advances in the understanding of morphogens in recent years, how the geometry of an embryo or tissue may affect morphogen gradient formation has not been well investigated experimentally. this question, like other quantitative questions about morphogens, requires an accurate measurement of the gradient concentrations, a task that poses significant technical and analytical challenges  <cit> . recent efforts, including live-imaging studies  <cit>  and our own embryo staining studies  <cit>  of the gradient of the drosophila morphogen bicoid , have overcome such challenges and revealed important new insights into the behavior of this morphogen gradient . here we extend our studies to investigate the effects of embryo geometry on bcd gradient formation and the interpretation of its encoded positional information.

bcd, a morphogen which forms a gradient along the anterior-posterior  axis in drosophila embryos, is responsible for patterning the anterior structures, including the head  <cit> . it is a transcription factor that directly activates the expression of its downstream target genes in a concentration-dependent manner  <cit> . bcd gradient formation takes place before the physical boundaries of cells  are formed in the embryo. it is a process  <cit>  thought to involve localized synthesis of bcd protein molecules in the anterior coupled with diffusion and degradation of these molecules throughout the embryo . at the syncytial blastoderm stage when bcd begins to establish and refine its concentration gradient and activate its target genes, the embryo already possesses two distinct diffusion media for bcd molecules: the inner part  of the embryo and the nuclear layer on the cortex  <cit> . since the cortex of the embryo is a curved surface, embryo geometry may affect how the bcd gradient is formed and, as a consequence, how its target genes are activated during development.

in this study, we systematically analyze the behaviors of both the bcd gradient and its target responses on the dorsal  and ventral  sides of the embryo to investigate the effects of embryo geometry on morphogen gradient formation and action. we sought to address the question, through quantitative studies of bcd and its direct gap gene targets, of how segmentation gene expression patterns exhibit differences between the dorsal and ventral sides. previous studies show that the expression boundaries of gap genes and expression stripes of pair-rule genes are not parallel to the d-v axis, but rather present a splay on the ventral side of the embryo  <cit> . how such a splay is established remains controversial because several models, ranging from an interaction between the a-p and d-v patterning systems  <cit>  to embryo geometry  <cit>  and nuclear density/movements  <cit> , have been proposed. our experimental results reveal important insights into how distance is properly measured and positional information is encoded by the bcd gradient in embryos. we also present 3-d simulation results demonstrating that a curvature difference between the two sides of an embryo is sufficient to generate bcd gradient properties that are consistent with experimental observations. our systematic analyses of a direct bcd target, hunchback , show that both dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo are fundamentally similar to each other in terms of hb response to the bcd gradient. these results suggest an important role of embryo geometry, operating through its effects on the bcd gradient, in establishing differences of segmentation gene expression patterns between the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. together, our findings demonstrate that the physical features of an embryo, such as its shape, can directly affect the outcome of the patterning process.

RESULTS
embryo shape and design of study
in physics and mathematics, the distance along a curved path between two points is distinct from the displacement along a straight line connecting them. for instance, in fig. 1a the red line represents the displacement from point a to point b, which is shorter than the distance along a semi-circle  or a partial ellipse . while displacement is simply the length of the line segment between points a and b, more quantities such as curvature are required to determine the distance along a curved path. in developmental biology, how distance is measured  by morphogen gradients is an important question. this question is directly relevant to the fundamental problems of how morphogen gradients are formed and how their encoded positional information is interpreted in a developing embryo or tissue. in early drosophila embryos, the dorsal and ventral sides exhibit different geometric features. for example, as shown in fig. 1b, the contour length measured along the perimeter of the dorsal side , cd =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm , is significantly shorter than the contour length measured along the perimeter of the ventral side , cv =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm . the difference between the two contour lengths, cv and cd, is a direct consequence of the different curvatures on the two sides of the embryo.

in our current study, we take advantage of the geometric differences between the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo to facilitate our investigation of how the bcd gradient is formed and how its direct gap gene targets are activated during development. we analyze bcd gradient profiles and its target responses using a-p positions that are defined in two distinct ways: projected distance x from the anterior pole or contour distance c from the identical anterior pole . technically, while x is measured by projecting the coordinate of the center of an intensity scanning window onto the a-p axis, contour distance c is measured as the route along the perimeter of either the dorsal or ventral side of the embryo . in fig. 1c, we plot the average difference between the two contour distances, Δcembryo/cd , against fractional embryo length  x/l in wt embryos. this plot reveals the following information regarding the geometric differences between the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo: 1) cv is longer than cd at same x/l positions in most parts of the embryo, except near the anterior pole ; 2) there are two broad regions of the embryo, ~ <dig>  <x/l < ~ <dig>  and ~ <dig>  <x/l < ~ <dig> , where cv expands/accumulates its lead over cd; 3) in the mid-embryo section along the a-p axis , Δcembryo is stable, reflective of a small curvature difference between the two sides of the embryo . these observed differences between the dorsal and ventral sides represent important tools to facilitate our study of bcd gradient formation and target gene activation during development. here we compare the behaviors of the bcd gradient profiles and its target responses on both dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. an important premise of our work is that the observed bcd gradient properties can directly shed light on how distance is measured and positional information encoded during development. thus, if the positional information encoded by the bcd gradient is based on the projected distance x in embryos, the profiles from the dorsal and ventral sides are expected to be more similar to each other as a function of x than as a function of c. the converse is expected to be true if the encoded positional information is based on the contour distance.

evaluating two different distance measurements for the bcd gradient
in our analysis, embryos at early nuclear cycle  <dig> were triple-stained with anti-bcd and anti-hb antibodies as well as dapi . we captured high-resolution digital images on the midsagittal plane of the embryos and measured fluorescence intensities along the cortical, nuclear layer . as further discussed in our recent work  <cit> , we used raw bcd intensities b in our analysis, with background subtracted when necessary ; our experimental conditions yielded bcd intensity profiles with a reproducibility that is comparable to live-imaging studies  <cit> . the high precision in bcd intensity measurements and the use of raw bcd intensities make the analyses described in this report possible. as discussed in detail previously  <cit> , normalization of bcd intensities can mask or distort the system properties. using a pixel-by-pixel scanning approach , we recorded both the intensity values and the x-y coordinates in microns in order to quantify the intensity profiles using two distinct distance measurement methods: x and c as defined above.

to gain insights into how distance is measured by the bcd gradient in embryos, we plotted average raw bcd intensities b from the dorsal and ventral sides against either x or c in wt embryos. we binned all recorded positions from all embryos using two distinct methods: 1) either using a constant x interval  between neighboring bins for plotting bcd intensity profiles as a function of projected distance x from the anterior, or 2) using a constant c interval  between neighboring bins for plotting bcd intensity profiles as a function of contour distance c from the anterior. our results show  that, around the hb boundary positions, the two average bcd raw intensity profiles from the dorsal and ventral sides of the wt embryos are significantly different from each other when measured as a function of projected distance x from the anterior . in contrast, these two average bcd profiles are much closer to each other when measured as a function of contour distance c . as explained above, these results are supportive of a hypothesis that, at the syncytial stage, the contour distance c, as opposed to projected distance x, represents a more proper measurement of distance during bcd gradient formation . we will return to this hypothesis by further considering the physical process of bcd gradient formation and simulating, in a new 3-d model, the biological effects of embryo geometry on bcd gradient profiles.

measurements of hb expression boundary positions using two methods
to determine whether the positional information encoded by the bcd profiles on the dorsal and ventral sides of the wt embryos are properly interpreted by its downstream target responses, we measured hb expression profiles in wild-type  embryos. to ensure a direct evaluation of the relationship between bcd and hb, we extracted bcd and hb intensities in wt embryos that were simultaneously stained with both bcd and hb antibodies . again, we analyze hb expression profiles in two distinct ways: as a function of either projected distance x from the anterior or contour distance c. this allows us to measure the hb expression boundary position  as either projected distance xhb from the anterior or contour distance chb. fig. 2c and 2d show the average hb intensity profiles from the dorsal and ventral sides as a function of either x or c, respectively. while these two hb profiles are visually different from each other when measured as a function of x , they converge near mid-embryo when measured as a function of c . quantitatively, while the xhb values on the dorsal and ventral sides of wt embryos  are significantly different from each other , the difference between the chb values on these two sides of the embryos becomes much smaller . the observed value of Δchb, but not Δxhb, is comparable to the diameter of a single nucleus  or the embryo-to-embryo variation of the hb expression boundary position . these results show that hb, as a biological readout of the bcd gradient, exhibits expression properties that are consistent with those of the bcd gradient in terms of how distance is measured  in embryos. together, these results suggest that both bcd profiles and its encoded positional information  follow a function of contour distance c from the anterior, as opposed to projected distance x.

input-output relationship on dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo
it has been suggested that the a-p and d-v patterning systems can interact with each other during development  <cit> . such an interaction may represent an important mechanism to influence how bcd targets are expressed on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. to further determine whether bcd molecules have similar or distinct biological activities on these two sides of the embryo, we analyzed the input-output relationship between bcd and hb. the input-output relationship depicts the biological activities of the bcd gradient in stimulating its target gene expression during development. as shown in this fig. 3a, the two clusters of data points overlap with each other, both exhibiting a steep on/off switching pattern. these results demonstrate that both dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo have a similar hb response profile to the bcd concentration gradient.

to evaluate the bcd-hb relationship more quantitatively, we plotted the average hb intensities versus bcd intensity  for the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo . kd is the dissociation constant, which reflects the effective bcd concentration required for the hb on/off switch, measured as the background-subtracted bcd fluorescence intensity value at chb. the bcd-hb relationship on both sides fits well to the hill's law as expressed in the following equation:   

where n is the hill coefficient, which defines the steepness of the hb on/off switch in response to the bcd gradient . since these two parameters provide quantitative measures of the bcd-hb relationship, we compared their values calculated from both sides of individual embryos. our results show that neither kd values  on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo  nor their n values  exhibit a significant difference. finally, to evaluate the precision of the hb readout machinery in response to the bcd gradient, we calculated the normalized standard deviations of hb expression  on both sides of the embryo as a function of bcd concentration . our results  reveal a globally similar profile of hb expression noise in response to bcd on both sides of the embryo. together, these results demonstrate a fundamentally similar bcd-hb relationship on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo.

analyzing precision of the bcd gradient on dorsal and ventral sides
to further evaluate the bcd and hb behaviors on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo, we compared their bcd intensity noise δb/b  profiles. previous studies including our own focused primarily on the reproducibility of the bcd gradient on the dorsal or lateral side of the embryos  <cit> . in all those studies, bcd intensity profiles were measured as a function of projected distance x. here we measure them as a function of c and directly compare the measured bcd intensity noise on dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. our results show that the ventral side has a higher δb/b around chb than the dorsal side . although the precise mechanism for this intensity noise difference remains to be elucidated, here we simply take advantage of this difference to further help us evaluate the bcd-hb relationship. to directly compare the precision of positional information provided by the bcd gradient, we converted bcd intensity errors δb  to its positional errors σc  <cit> . our results reveal a higher σc on the ventral side  than the dorsal side . if hb expression properties are dictated by bcd gradient properties as suggested above, hb expression is expected to be more variable on the ventral side than on the dorsal side. to specifically test this prediction, we compared the precision of chb on the two sides of the embryos. our results show that the variability of hb boundary on the ventral side  is higher than that on the dorsal side . these results provide further support to our conclusion that the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo are fundamentally the same in regard to the bcd-hb relationship.

contributions of bcd gradient profiles to dorsal-ventral differences
our analyses discussed thus far show that, in wt embryos, hb boundary positions on the dorsal and ventral sides are significantly different from each other when measured as a function of projected a-p position. this difference, defined as Δxhb , effectively depicts a tilt or slant of the hb expression boundary toward the anterior pole on the ventral side, which is reminiscent of the splay of a-p gene expression stripes at later stages of nuclear cycle  <dig>  <cit> . while this ventral splay is well-documented, its underlying mechanisms remain controversial . to further study the contributions of bcd gradient profiles to the expression slanting of its direct gap gene targets, we analyzed the data shown in fig. 2a and 2b in an alternative way that measures the differences in locations at given thresholds of bcd concentrations on the two sides of the embryo. here, we plot such differences, Δxbcd and Δcbcd , as a function of bcd concentrations on log scale . since the bcd profiles follow an exponential function except at the most anterior part where bcd concentrations are high, this plot may be viewed as an equivalent  to a plot of Δxbcd or Δcbcd against the a-p position. fig. 4b is a presentation of these same results in a visually more straightforward manner, where the locations of equal mean bcd intensities are marked on the dorsal and ventral sides of an average wt embryo frame on the midsagittal plane .

our results shown in fig. 4a make four specific, experimentally testable predictions if the bcd profiles are responsible for the expression slanting of its direct gap gene targets in embryos. first, as seen with the hb expression boundary positions in wt embryos , targets at other boundary positions along the a-p axis  should also exhibit a slanting effect, i.e., Δxtarget = xtargetd - xtargetv should be a positive value. second, while targets with a boundary position closer to mid-embryo should have a smaller Δxtarget thus with a subdued slanting, those with a more anterior boundary position  should have a larger Δxtarget with an enhanced slanting. third, the distribution of the lines connecting the boundary positions on the two sides of the embryo should exhibit a global similarity to that of bcd profiles shown in fig. 4b. finally, as seen in fig. 4a where Δxbcd is larger than Δcbcd except at the highest bcd concentrations , Δxtarget should be larger than Δctarget.

to directly evaluate these predictions, we measured xhb in embryos that have either reduced  or increased  bcd concentrations, thus shifting the xhb position toward the anterior and posterior, respectively. we also analyzed the expression boundary of another direct bcd target, orthodenticle , in wt embryos. similar to our analysis of hb expression in wt embryos, we measured the expression boundary positions on both dorsal and ventral sides. our results  show that, consistent with our predictions outlined above, Δxtarget is a positive value in all the cases tested. furthermore, this value is highest for otd, which has the most anterior expression boundary position among those tested, and lowest for xhb in 3×-bcd embryos, which has the expression boundary position closest to the center of the embryo. the line distributions in fig. 4d and fig. 4b also exhibit a global similarity where data are available. finally, as predicted and shown in fig. 4c, Δctarget  is smaller than Δxtarget  in all cases tested . together, these results show that the differences in bcd gradient profiles on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryos are responsible for the observed slanting of its direct gap gene targets.

3-d simulation of an embryo with asymmetric curvatures
we now return to the hypothesis that the bcd gradient is formed in a process where contour distance from the anterior is measured, as suggested by our observed bcd gradient properties in wt embryos at early nuclear cycle  <dig> . bcd gradient formation is a complex process, which takes place during a developmental period when the embryo itself is undergoing an exponential growth in terms of the nuclear number. there are also migrations of the nuclei to the cortex of the embryo at nuclear cycle  <dig>  leading to the formation of the cortical  layer where bcd activates transcription of its downstream target genes  <cit> . how distance is measured and positional information encoded by the bcd gradient in the embryo is governed by physical properties of both bcd molecules and the embryo acting as the bcd diffusion medium. we recently developed a biologically realistic 2-d model to simulate the dynamics of bcd gradient formation in embryos  <cit> . this model was based on the equilibrium binding of bcd molecules to low-affinity, non-specific dna bindings sites throughout the drosophila genome. here we expand this 2-d model to a new 3-d model .

to further study the effects of embryo geometry on bcd gradient formation, and to specifically determine whether a curvature difference on the two sides of the embryo may be sufficient to explain the observed bcd gradient properties, we performed simulations in our 3-d model. fig. 5a shows a heat map of local total bcd concentration on the midsagittal plane of a simulated embryo, at nuclear cycle  <dig>  with asymmetric curvatures on its dorsal and ventral sides . fig. 5b and 5c show heat maps of local total bcd concentration of the same simulated embryo on transverse planes at the otd and hb boundary positions. as seen experimentally  <cit> , our simulated embryo shows that bcd molecules are concentrated within the cortical layer where the nuclei are located. we analyzed the simulated nuclear bcd concentration profiles within the cortical layer on both sides of the midsagittal plane in a manner identical to our analyses of the experimental data presented above. fig. 5d and 5e show simulated nuclear bcd concentration profiles as a function of projected distance x or contour distance c, respectively. our simulated bcd profiles recapitulate three experimentally observed properties regarding d-v differences . first, the value of maximal bcd concentration on the ventral side is lower than that on the dorsal side . second, the length constant on the ventral side is larger than on the dorsal side when measured as a function of either x or c . third, for a broad section of the embryo along the a-p axis, the simulated bcd profiles on the two sides are more different as a function of x than as a function of c. in particular, similar to experimental results , Δcbcd at both the hb and otd boundary locations  is smaller than their corresponding Δxbcd . these results demonstrate that a curvature difference between the two sides of an embryo is sufficient to cause distinct bcd gradient properties similar to those observed experimentally. importantly, our results show that the nuclear layer is not only where bcd molecules are enriched but also a principal medium through which the bcd gradient is formed in a syncytial blastoderm, providing an explanation for why it is more appropriate to describe bcd gradient in contour distance c than in projected distance x .

discussion
in this study we systematically analyze the bcd and hb behaviors on both the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. we reasoned that, since these two sides of the embryos have distinct geometric features , a direct comparison between the bcd and hb profiles on these two sides should shed new light on how embryo geometry may affect both bcd gradient formation and target gene activation during development. in our analyses we use two distinct methods to measure positions along the a-p axis: the projected distance x from the anterior pole and the contour distance c along the perimeters of the dorsal or ventral sides of the embryo. our findings support a hypothesis that the bcd gradient profile establishes and exerts the positional information by following the contour distance c. our simulation studies  show that a curvature difference as seen on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo is sufficient to generate bcd gradient properties consistent with experimental data. mechanistically, our findings underscore the importance of the nuclear layer on the cortex of a drosophila syncytial blastoderm as a critical medium for bcd gradient formation. however, as further discussed below, bcd gradient formation cannot be viewed as a simple 1-d process in the cortical layer as an isolated diffusion medium, suggesting that an interaction  between the cortical layer and the inner part of the embryo is important in proper bcd gradient formation.

our quantitative studies presented in this report show that, at early nuclear cycle  <dig>  the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo have a fundamentally similar input-output relationship between bcd and hb . these results provide important insights into the well-documented splay of the segmentation gene expression stripes toward the poles on the ventral side  <cit> . previous studies did not have a quantitative consideration of both the embryo geometry and morphogen profiles and, thus, were not able to explain how such a splay is achieved mechanistically. our current work probes, in a quantitative way, the earliest decisions an embryo has to make along the a-p axis, namely, expression of gap genes in response to the bcd gradient in the anterior. our results show that the slanting of the hb and otd expression domains can be directly traced to the differences in bcd gradient properties between the two sides of the embryo . our input-output analyses further support the notion that bcd gradient properties are primarily responsible for target expression differences on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. additional support to this conclusion also comes from previous findings that a bcd-responsive reporter containing only bcd binding sites , or even reporters of artificially-generated a-p activator gradients, also exhibit a slant of the expression boundary  <cit> . we suggest that the documented, extensive interactions between the a-p and d-v systems  <cit>  may play important roles in maintaining or refining the expression of a-p genes that are either further downstream of the gene activation cascade or at times subsequent to early nuclear cycle  <dig>  the stage of embryos analyzed in our work. we note that, unlike in the anterior , the iso-concentration contour lines of the bcd gradient in the posterior part of the embryo do not exhibit any obvious ventral splay toward the posterior pole . it is possible that the d-v system may play a particularly important role in a-p gene expression, in terms of ventral splay, in the posterior. this suggestion is consistent with recent quantitative findings that mutations in the d-v system preferentially reduce the splay of segmentation gene expression stripes in the posterior  <cit> . an alternative explanation is that posterior gradients such as nanos may have d-v differences analogous to the bcd gradient. we also note that recent studies suggest that the terminal system and other gap gene products can interact with bcd to regulate target gene expression  <cit> . however, these interactions, which are along the a-p axis, do not affect our interpretations of the sources of d-v differences regarding the observed slanting of bcd target expression patterns.

our experimental and simulation results suggest that proper bcd gradient formation may require an interaction between the cortical layer and the inner part of the embryo. in particular, we found that the bcd gradient profiles on the two sides of the same embryo are not identical even when measured as a function of contour distance c . ideally, if bcd diffusion within the cortical layer were a simple 1-d process, we would have expected bcd profiles on both sides of the embryo to be identical when measured as a function of contour distance c. our experimental results show that, compared with the dorsal side, the bcd gradient on the ventral side has a lower bmax  and a larger length constant λ . these results indicate that simple 1-d diffusion models, even when incorporating the appropriate consideration that the cortical layer is a critical medium for bcd diffusion, are inadequate to address the geometric issues in such a complex biological process. in contrast, our 3-d simulation with an asymmetric embryo revealed results that are strikingly similar to these experimental findings including a lower bmax and longer λ on the ventral side than the dorsal side . these differences are also obtained in a 2-d simulation of an asymmetric embryo in which, similar to the simulated 3-d embryo, bcd molecules can diffuse within the inner part of the embryo and are allowed to exchange between the inner part and the cortical layer . however, in a 3-d simulation where the inner part of the embryo is impermeable to bcd molecules , the simulated λv is not larger than λd . we note that, although our 3-d simulation can replicate our experimentally observed bcd gradient properties, it is possible that other physical features of the embryo may exert additional effects on bcd gradient formation. for example, it has been shown that the ventral side of wt embryos has a lower nuclear density than the dorsal side  <cit> . it is possible that the nuclear density difference may further affect bcd gradient formation in ways  that are beyond those caused by the geometric differences, an issue that will require future investigations. furthermore, nuclei on the cortex of the embryo at nuclear cycle  <dig> make systematic movements referred to as the nuclear flow  <cit>  but such a flow was shown to have a relatively minor effect on the anterior hb expression pattern. we emphasize that, since our current 3-d model can fully recapitulate our experimentally observed properties regarding the differences between the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo, it likely has incorporated the key physical quantities most relevant to the system behavior.

CONCLUSIONS
the experimental and theoretical studies described in this report represent a first, systematic investigation of the effects of embryo geometry on the positional information encoded by the bcd gradient. our results suggest that the ventral splay of segmentation genes along the a-p axis may be directly traced to the distinct properties of the bcd gradient  on the dorsal and ventral sides of the embryo. our findings also suggest that, while the cortical layer is critical for bcd gradient formation, bcd diffusion likely requires an interaction between the cortical layer and the inner part of the embryo. these results demonstrate that modeling a morphogen gradient requires a realistic consideration of the physical properties, including the geometry, of the relevant biological system.

