BACKGROUND
pd is caused by progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of the vmb  <cit> . the resulting lack of the neurotransmitter da leads to decreased signaling within the nigro-striatal pathway and produces disturbed regulation of movement with tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity  <cit> . as of today, there is no cure for pd.

nuclear hormone receptors  are emerging as interesting factors in pd research. most nrs are regulated by small, lipophilic ligands that easily enter the cell nucleus to control transcription. rxr  is activated by the synthetic ligand lg <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, this activation has been shown to rescue da neurons from degeneration in survival assays based on primary cultures  <cit> . increased survival was dependent on activation of the heterodimer between rxr and the orphan nr, nurr <dig> , as substantiated by several findings. survival was selective for nurr1-expressing neurons in vmb as well as cortex and the effects were abolished in cortical cultures from nurr <dig> knock-out mice. furthermore, the ligand xct, which is selective for the nurr1-rxr heterodimer, also increased vmb da neuron survival. nurr <dig> is essential for vmb da neuron development  <cit> , regulates genes essential for da synthesis and storage  <cit> , and has been indicated to have a role in neuroprotection of mature da cells in several studies  <cit> . indeed, human nurr1-mutations have been associated with familial pd  <cit> , providing clinically relevant evidence for such a role.

the origin of da cell degeneration in pd is largely unknown, but it is suggested to be caused by agents causing oxidative damage and energy depletion in the brain  <cit> . the hydroxylated da analogue 6-ohda is commonly used to model nigral degeneration in experimental animals as well as in vitro, where it causes da cell death and neurotransmitter depletion  <cit> . in vivo, its uptake is selective for da cells through the da transporter, and when inside the neuron, 6-ohda produces oxidative stress  <cit>  as well as mitochondrial inhibition  <cit> . several other stressors can also be used to induce neurodegeneration and stress, for example hypoxic environments  <cit> , the oxidative agent h2o <dig>  <cit> , and the excitotoxic glutamate analogue ka  <cit> .

primary neuronal cultures provide data of high biological relevance. however, their use is diminished by low yields and high technical demands. recently, we developed a platform for in vitro studies using da cells derived from mescs. overexpression of the homeobox domain containing transcription factor lmx1a under the control of the neuroprogenitor specific nestin enhancer  induces formation of high numbers of bona fide vmb da neurons in culture  <cit> . these neurons express all relevant neurotransmitters, show proper electrophysiological characteristics as well as physiological levels of da and metabolites. moreover, they survive and regenerate when grafted into 6-ohda lesioned rat brains  <cit> .

here we have used da neurons derived from primary vmb cultures as well as mescs to further establish the neurotrophic role of rxr activity. we can show that rxr ligands selectively protect da neurons from stress caused by 6-ohda and hypoxia, but not from ka and h2o <dig>  the protective effects are only seen in nurr1-expressing da cells. to conclude, rxr ligands and mesc-derived da cells represent promising platforms in the search for novel pd therapies.

RESULTS
since primary neurons are retrieved directly from developing brain tissue, artifacts are small, assuring data of high biological relevance. primary neuronal cultures were prepared from rat e <dig>  vmb. the initial extensive neurodegeneration declined significantly within approximately  <dig> hours of plating and after three days in vitro  the cell death was negligible, whereby the cultures could be maintained for weeks . after three div, neurons have clearly visible neurites and a mature neuronal morphology. approximately 2-3% of the neurons in the vmb cultures was dopaminergic and could be identified by immunostaining against the rate-limiting enzyme in da synthesis, tyrosine hydroxylase . to investigate the specificity of the rxr effects on neuronal survival, several stressors were used.

rxr ligands rescue primary vmb da neurons from 6-ohda-induced degeneration
to simulate pd-like neurodegeneration, primary vmb cultures of three to five div were exposed to the neurotoxic da analogue 6-ohda. rxr ligands were added three hours prior to the toxin, and after  <dig> minutes of 6-ohda exposure the medium and ligands were replaced to avoid unspecific stress from oxidized 6-ohda. after additional  <dig> hours, cells were fixed, stained and scored. 6-ohda produced clear signs of neurodegeneration in the th-positive population, with evident neuronal loss, leaving cell debris and damaged neurites . the degeneration was dose dependent  .  <dig> μm 6-ohda reduced the number of da cells by 60% compared to control . simultaneous exposure of the rxr ligand lg <dig>  rescued the da neurons from degeneration to 95% of control  . rxr is ubiquitously expressed and it heterodimerizes with several nr subtypes. however, rxr-ligand dependent neurotrophic effects have been shown to be mediated through nurr <dig>  <cit> . here, the positive ligand effects after 6-ohda exposure were only seen for the nurr <dig> expressing da neurons, whereas no neuronal rescue could be detected for the general neuronal population in the culture, as determined by scoring tuj1-positive cells . to further relate the trophic effects to nurr <dig>  we used the rxr ligand xct, which is selective for the nurr1-rxr heterodimer in the dose applied . indeed, xct rescued vmb da neurons to 103% of control  . without exposure to toxic stress, none of the ligands alone had any effect on cell number at three to five div .

rxr ligand rescues primary vmb da neurons from degeneration caused by hypoxia, but not from ka and h2o2
to study whether the neurotrophic activities of the rxr ligands were general or rather selective for specific cellular challenges, we studied their effects on several types of stressors and toxins. primary vmb da neurons of three to five div were stressed by hypoxic culture conditions . ligands were added three hours prior to the hypoxic insult and kept throughout the experiment. cells were fixed, stained and scored after different time intervals. in control culture conditions there is no decrease in the number of da cells over time. however, hypoxia induced a time dependent decrease in da cells  . simultaneous exposure of lg <dig> during  <dig> and  <dig> hours in hypoxic conditions partly rescued the da cells, giving a 30%  and 40%  increase, respectively, compared to the untreated cells . further, the excitotoxic glutamate analogue ka and the oxidative agent h2o <dig> were applied to primary vmb neurons of three to five div. ka as well as h2o <dig> exposure resulted in dose dependent degeneration of the da neurons   . however, addition of the rxr ligands lg <dig> or xct provided no neuronal rescue at any of the doses tested. this implies that the ligands are acting on specific cell death mechanisms, induced by 6-ohda and hypoxia, but not on the calcium dependent excitotoxicity caused by ka or the pure oxidative stressor h2o <dig> 

rxr ligands rescue mesc-derived da neurons from 6-ohda-induced degeneration
we further used mesc-derived da cells as platforms for our evaluation of rxr ligands. these cells represent great progress for in vitro studies, since they provide a very high number of the correct cell type and homogeneous cultures. stable nese-lmx1a mescs  were induced for neuronal differentiation as monolayer cultures in medium supplemented with the da instructive cues sonic hedgehog  and fibroblast growth factor   <dig>  <cit> . after  <dig> days of differentiation, cells have a mature phenotype with long extended neuritis and expression of relevant da cell proteins including th . cells were given rxr ligands for three hours and were then exposed to 6-ohda for another three hours. subsequently, media was changed and fresh ligands were added. cultures were kept for additional  <dig> hours before fixation, staining and scoring. 6-ohda produced a dose dependent toxicity, with reduced number of th-positive cells and degenerate morphology  . as for the primary vmb neurons, simultaneous exposure of 6-ohda stressed cultures to lg <dig> completely rescued the da neurons from 55%  reduction to 100% of control  . no ligand-effect could be detected in the tuj1+/th- neuronal population . also the selective nurr1-rxr ligand xct fully rescued the vmb da neurons from 6-ohda-induced degeneration  , suggesting an important role for nurr <dig>  treatment of the cultures with rxr ligands without prior stressful insult did not affect the cell number . thus, the mesc-derived da neurons reacted similar as primary neurons to the 6-ohda stress and the rxr ligands. however, the much higher number of da cells in culture substantially increased the power of the study. furthermore, once the proper mesc line was established and the differentiation protocols were refined, the mescs offered more accessible cultures than those of primary neurons, allowing faster and more experiments.

pd inflicts considerable suffering for the affected and their families, and it constitutes a great cost for the society. today, the opportunities for pharmacological treatment are meager and mainly consist of substitution with the da precursor levodopa. however its medical potential decreases severely over time  <cit> . the development of neuroprotective or neuroregenerative therapies would provide great benefits. as such, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor  has been tested in several clinical trials against pd  <cit> . unfortunately, lack of efficacy and potential hazardous side effects has lessened the initial enthusiasm, and future development of gdnf-based drug therapies seems uncertain. thus, there is a high need for alternative strategies to treat pd.

nr ligands are small and lipophilic, and they easily pass the blood-brain-barrier, providing excellent targets for the pharmaceutical industry. indeed, the characterization of novel nr-mediated signaling pathways during the last decade has resulted in development of novel drugs used in the treatment of metabolic disease and cancer. specifically, rxr ligands have limited toxicity in humans  <cit>  and selective rxr ligands would minimize the risk of adverse effects. our findings that rxr activity leads to neuroprotection  <cit>  provide novel possible approaches to pd research. the neuroprotective effect is mediated, at least partly, by the nurr1-rxr dimer. here, we further show that rxr ligands provide neurotrophic support after stress induced by the pd modeling toxin 6-ohda. the effects are selective for the nurr1-expressing da cells and do not affect total neuronal number in the cultures. interestingly, neuroprotective effects are also seen after hypoxia-induced neurodegeneration. no protective effects are seen after excitotoxic or pure oxidative stress induced by ka and h2o <dig>  respectively. thus, the effects of ligand activation is not generally neuroprotective, but rather likely to affect individual cell death pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
ligands activating rxr and the rxr-nurr <dig> heterodimer selectively protect da neurons from stress induced by the pd-modeling toxin 6-ohda and hypoxia. thus, the regulation of rxr activity holds promises to contribute to a novel, alternative strategy in pd treatment. furthermore, mesc-derived cultures offer accessible platforms of da neurons and may provide novel means to conduct valid in vitro-based pd research.

