BACKGROUND
rna molecules are traditionally shown in either one dimension in fasta format or two dimensions, with the purpose of showing their base pairing and the resulting secondary structures, important for their stability and function. a number of tools for displaying rna molecules in 2-d has been created, such as rnaviz, varna, rnallviewer, jviz.rna and 4sale  <cit> , to name a few. some of them provide not only a visual display but also tools for analysis and comparison of rna molecules.

the advent of the next-generation sequencing  technologies has changed the research approaches in molecular biology and ngs is quickly becoming a standard. the technologies are based on determining sequences of short fragments of dna or rna , assembling them de novo into contigs or aligning them to a reference genome sequence and finding meaningful deviation of the sequence itself or the read coverage from expected models. in rna-related applications, these interpretations are context-specific: for instance, sequence mismatches are often interpreted as potential sites of rna editing, or uneven read coverage is taken as an indicator of mature form of microrna. however, it is not straightforward to combine a linear graphical display of ngs data with the 2-d rna depictions.

some of the tools mentioned above provide a linear view of the rna, but none allow for clear connection with genomic features. we have developed a novel representation of rna secondary structure that is integrated with the display of reads generated by ngs. it is similar to a linear feynman diagram but implemented in an interactive java applet and provides intuitive visualization of genomic environment, sequence reads, nucleotide polymorphisms and editing sites together with the structural and functional elements of the encoded rna molecules. it is not intended to replace the 2-d depictions but, rather, to usefully supplement them with providing visual links to genomic features and experimental data, which can be overwhelming in ngs projects.

micrornas
micrornas are endogenous short non-coding rnas that are involved with regulation of messenger rnas through either rna degradation or translational repression. the widespread functionality of these molecules has been implicated in many different areas including development and various disease states and conditions  <cit> . as a result, the studies of these molecules have become essential in understanding the plasticity of the transcriptome in relation to gene expression. emerging evidence has also surfaced suggesting that the biogenesis of these micrornas is under precise control, which includes specific sequential cleavage, 3'-trimming and similar events  <cit> .

it is important to note that the microrna secondary structure plays a crucial role for proper processing of these molecules. for example, drosha, an exonuclease, recognizes a transcript hairpin structure, which it then cleaves and generates a precursor microrna. additionally, dicer, another protein involved with cleavage, must recognize the loop region and a specific nucleotide duplex in the microrna stem-loop after nuclear transportation. the stem-loop length varies from microrna to microrna, but it includes a duplex that contains a mature microrna and a star strand, as well as a loop region, which is removed and then subsequently degraded  <cit> . furthermore, the strands consisting of the duplex are sometimes referred to as 5p and 3p arms or species of the microrna stem-loop referring to their relative positions . in addition to the duplex and the loop, the stem-loop also includes small bulges across the rna fragment. these secondary structure elements have been hypothesized to be, together with the 5' most nucleotide, the determinants of recognition-assisted partitioning and loading of the two microrna strands into ago <dig> or ago <dig> complexes  <cit> , although our report of microrna partitioning/loading being age-dependent suggests further complexity  <cit> .

rna editing
editing is a phenomenon that is often observed in rna and has been shown to play important roles in development, tissue specificity and rna structure  <cit> . rna editing is a molecular process in which the information content in an rna molecule is modified through a chemical change in the base makeup. rna editing events generally include nucleoside modifications, cytosine  to uracil  and adenosine  to inosine  deaminations, as well as un-templated nucleotide additions, deletions and insertions. these have been observed in trna, rrna, mrna and more recently in microrna, where it has been shown that editing may be involved in target selection, degradation and stability, which greatly influence the expression and regulation of the genome  <cit> .

the rna editing is performed by the enzyme called adar , responsible for editing by site-specific deamination of adenosines. it specifically converts a to i. this type of editing is mostly active in the brain, but also has been implicated elsewhere, including various tissues and developmental stages  <cit> . it is also worth noting that the position of an editing event may result in truncated products, splice variants, and structural changes. all of these results may change the functionality of a particular gene and contribute to genome's plasticity making it more dynamic than originally thought. adar has been thus far understood to function and recognize double-stranded rna substrates  <cit> . another, less prevalent, type of editing is a c to u conversion executed by apob/apobec proteins in mammals  <cit> . no apob/apobec homolog has been reported in drosophila, although methylated c is known to spontaneously deaminate to u. in this study, we use a novel visualization approach to overlap rna secondary structure of known drosophila melanogaster micrornas with potential editing events or other single nucleotide changes.

we have developed an approach to integrate the rna secondary structure display with the results of ngs projects, using linear feynman diagram as a model. this graphical tool is implemented in an interactive java applet and provides intuitive visualization of genomic environment, sequence reads, nucleotide polymorphisms and editing sites together with the structural and functional elements of the encoded rna molecules . here we illustrate this visualization approach with a few examples, highlighting connections between these different sequence and structural features for micrornas in drosophila melanogaster.

RESULTS
general features of visualization
as is common in the analysis of the microrna libraries, our display shows the number of reads with the given start/end coordinates. such numbers are often used for the determination of the borders of the 5p and 3p forms of microrna. a group of identical sequence reads is thus summarized as a single bar with the number of reads. further, color segments in the top line of the bar are used to highlight sequence mismatches in this group compared to the reference sequence, thus making it easier to observe specific editing patterns in a compact display. alternatively, if necessary, individual sequences can be "spelled out" , as shown in figure  <dig> .

library reads are shown in line  <dig> . the list of available libraries is shown here in the menu in the center of the display and the selected library is highlighted in pink in the main display. libraries can be de-selected to remove from view for less cluttered display. in different libraries, identical reads are summarized in a single bar with the number of counts and, when applicable, the colors on top of the bar reflect the mismatches, as compared to the reference genome.

one can also inspect actual read sequences and the secondary structure, shown in line  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. this makes the rna secondary structure visualization intuitive and as a result we can clearly see the pre-microrna hairpin. in this case, the secondary structure consists of single stranded and double stranded regions referring to the 5p, loop region, and 3p fragments of the stem-loop. finally, the bottom line shows the single-stranded sections, while the double-stranded sections are above. the double stranded portion of the structure is clickable and also contains pertinent base-pairing information. in other words, if a user clicks on a position in this line, its corresponding base-pair in a stem will be connected by a magenta line in the display . finally, the green boxes show bulge lengths in the rna strand opposite to the bulge.

in this particular case , we observe that for mir- <dig> the sequencing depth  is significant in the 5p and 3p arms, indicating that both the mature and star strands are detected. we can easily extrapolate that mir- <dig> is a mirtron and is drosha independent, since it is located in an intronic region in the genome. more so, this visualization allows us to infer that single nucleotide changes mostly occur on the 3p arm in a bulge region. in sum, the display allows us to connect editing levels, events and locality, rna structure, genomic regions, and ngs read counts and depth in a cohesive and meaningful manner.

editing
the structural complexities of micrornas, including 5'/3' trimming, editing, and base pairing and folding, can be conveniently visualized together using our approach. these features have been shown to be very important for proper modulation and for accurate processing  <cit> .

for illustration, we chose bantam , a microrna that is ubiquitously expressed and conserved with widespread associations in development and disease  <cit> . we identified editing events using ngs data from two different libraries, which are specific to ovaries and ago <dig> loading  <cit> , respectively. our examples show substitutions present in both double and single stranded regions. since adar, implicated in most of rna editing events, act preferentially on double-stranded regions  <cit> , we conclude that a non adar-mediated editing mechanism may also be involved in producing these substitutions. our observations of nucleotide changes other than a to g also support this idea . on a more global level, we were also able to identify microrna editing candidates by analyzing several publicly available libraries .

all libraries can be downloaded from ncbi's geo database with the gsm identifiers below. full description and references are also reported there.

for this purpose, we selected all cases where editing level  exceeded a threshold of 10% with > <dig> reads per library. this filtering was done to avoid mismatches that result from sequencing errors. we found some  <dig> micrornas that pass the filter , with mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> being amongst the micrornas with the highest editing level. we also observed that most of these micrornas possess the same edits in multiple libraries furthering our confidence in these events. we also found that a c to u and a to g conversion events showed the highest level of editing  and read numbers, while other events were mostly supported by only a few reads and likely represented experimental noise. these results indicate that the canonical type and method of editing is amongst the most prevalent type and supports previous studies  <cit> .

mir- <dig>  the strongest candidate for editing, displayed 98-99% editing level in position  <dig> of the stem-loop. the functionality of mir- <dig> is still being elucidated, but the editing is significant due to the fact the site is 1- <dig> nucleotides away from the seed sequence and the event is conserved through multiple libraries. this allows us to speculate that the editing may play a major role in what mrnas are targeted, specifically in the case of mir- <dig>  the second top editing candidate micrornas, mir- <dig> has already been reported as such in an earlier publication  <cit> , although we did not observe editing events in their other candidates fulfilling our criteria across several libraries.

editing in single- and double-stranded regions
we also analyzed the frequency of these editing events in double- and single-stranded regions. we quantified all unique strong editing incidences and positions to help us understand if there was preferential editing based on rna secondary structure of microrna. in other words, we wanted to see if there was a significant difference in editing between bulges or double-stranded regions  as would be expected from the properties of adar, if it discriminated against bulges.

for single- and double-stranded regions we obtained the observed  and expected  rates of editing from publicly available libraries  as described in materials and methods. the ratios of observed to expected events of oss/ess =  <dig>  and ods/eds =  <dig>  for single- and double-stranded editing sites, respectively, indicated that editing is essentially non-discriminatory when it comes to microrna stem regions. we observed no editing events in the loop regions, even in those micrornas that contained significant number of reads  partially  or entirely in loop regions, such as mir- <dig> . a reason for this observation may be due to the fact that the loop regions are contiguously single stranded, which is not a canonical structure of an editing target. in contrast, single-stranded bulge regions in microrna stems show a very slight prevalence for editing events, suggesting that adar may tolerate bulges, if it is responsible for the editing events in microrna.

differential 5p/3p abundance
as is common in the analysis of microrna libraries, our display shows the number of counts per read with given start/end coordinates. high read numbers are often used to determine the borders of the 5p and 3p forms of microrna. in the case of bantam, our display may reflect differential biogenesis as in some libraries abundant reads do not match the canonical end sites . this can be viewed for any set of micrornas by inspecting start/end positions of the read and comparing it to the grey shades on the bottom of our display .

in bantam, we can observe a high number of read counts with the end positions on the 5p arm that differ from known mirbase annotations  <cit> . we see that numerous  unedited reads end at position  <dig>  while the mature microrna is annotated as ending at position  <dig>  thus indicating possible trimming of one nucleotide. we also observe many other highly expressed  forms with different terminal sites. additionally, the two libraries  seem dramatically different in the assayed expression of the 5p arm . while in this example we simply illustrate this difference of expression on a qualitative level, one can utilize appropriate normalization  for quantitative measures to limit experimental bias or biological fluctuation.

the overall pattern of the ngs analysis of bantam suggests that dicer cleavage can occur at multiple sites resulting in different isoforms. notably, both of the most abundant isoforms on the 5p arm display the same substitution  in base  <dig>  we also observe differential end positions on the 3p arm, which may hint at a 3' trimming event.

in addition to our observations and conclusions above, what makes this example more interesting is that we see in different libraries reads that correspond to only mature or both the mature and star strand. we can also see how the same microrna is modified differently in specific libraries, which may be an effect of the cellular environment. this is a further indication that the star strand may be functional and that functionality as well as editing may be context-dependent.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we described an approach to display microrna features and visualize them in the context of the genome environment, rna secondary structure, nucleotide substitution and ngs. a number of visualization tools has been developed for ngs . what makes our approach distinct is not only the display of read alignments and their counts, but the integration of rna secondary structure, sequencing depth, and rates/patterns of editing or other modifications. in essence it produces a more comprehensive picture, which is necessary for large-scale studies and detailed analyses. using our approach we identified and inspected the microrna editing candidates detected in several small rna sequencing libraries. we observed a prevalence of canonical c to u and a to g editing patterns but found no editing bias between bulges and double-stranded regions.

our results indicate that the modulation and modifications of micrornas may be context-dependent or specific to experimental conditions; linking together editing, differential expression, modification, and secondary structure, helping us gain insight into the intricate relationships between these events. finally, we can easily exploit our tool to depict other transcripts  and genome/sequence features relevant for them, which makes our visualization approach both versatile and robust. the java applet is available from the authors upon request.

