BACKGROUND
in most biodiversity and conservation assessments species are the fundamental unit by which diversity is measured . depending on the criteria used to recognize species, vastly different numbers and distributions can be identified. for example, the difference in species numbers when utilizing a phylogenetic species concept  versus a biological species concept  can be substantial. agapow et al.  <cit>  estimated a 48% increase in recognized species across a wide range of organisms  when using a phylogenetic species concept. similarly, zink  <cit>  proposed a doubling of known bird species, mostly due to the elevation of subspecies to full specific status. such a drastic difference in species numbers would necessitate an extensive revision of most conservation measures. furthermore species are the fundamental unit of comparison in all subdisciplines within biology . as such, robust measures of species delimitation and boundaries are crucial to understanding the evolution of organisms and how best to manage biodiversity in the face of increased anthropogenic pressure.

the lemuriform primates of madagascar have undergone a recent explosion in species descriptions, with as many as  <dig> new species described in the last  <dig> years as a result of intensified field work, the incorporation of molecular data in the identification of previously cryptic species, and a paradigm shift in what we recognize as a species  <cit> . this increase has come in the face of tremendous anthropogenic pressures, with madagascar having just a fraction of its original native habitat remaining  <cit> . increased recognition of lemuriform species diversity has been particularly acute in the family cheirogaleidae, a clade of small-bodied and nocturnal lemurs with a generally cryptic morphology. in just over  <dig> years the number of recognized cheirogaleid species has more than quadrupled with most of this activity occurring in mouse lemurs of the genus microcebus .

the dwarf lemur genus cheirogaleus has received considerably less taxonomic attention despite having an island-wide distribution and sharing similar habitats with mouse lemurs. this genus consisted of two species from the 1930s until the turn of the last century, with only the number of recognized subspecies varying between authors. it was proposed that a grayish colored species, cheirogaleus medius, inhabited the western dry forests, and a larger rufus-colored form, cheirogaleus major, occupied the eastern rainforests  <cit> . using descriptive morphological assessments of existing museum material, groves  <cit>  split c. medius into two species:  c. medius in western madagascar and  c. adipicaudatus in the south. cheirogaleus major was split into five species:  c. major with a broad eastern distribution,  c. crossleyi, which is found more inland than c. major and also extends further north,  c. minusculus, known only from a single eastern locality at ambositra,  c. ravus, which has a narrow coastal range within c. major, and  c. sibreei, with an unclear distribution, but known from an eastern locality at ankeramadinika and possibly from the northwest at the ampasindava bay. while maintaining these two groups , groves  <cit>  noted that he did so only for convenience. nonetheless, he found these seven taxa to represent distinguishable morphs and interpreted them as separate genetic entities. however, until now, no comprehensive study of geographic and genetic variation has been performed to test the hypothesis that these seven taxa represent distinct phylogenetic species.

only one study has assessed the geographic patterning of genetic variation in cheirogaleus. hapke et al.  <cit>  used mitochondrial dna  sequence data in an attempt to clarify the species status of three different morphotypes resembling c. crossleyi, c. major, and c. medius found in close proximity in the fort dauphin area of southeastern madagascar. using dense sampling in this area along with representatives of c. crossleyi, c. major, and c. medius from other portions of the island, hapke et al.  <cit>  resolved three mtdna haplotype clades each exclusive to one of the three representative species. these results are the only genetic evidence to date that some of the species described by groves  <cit>  represent independent lineages. they also greatly expand the potential range of c. crossleyi into the southern portion of the island. evidence for the exclusivity of c. adipicaudatus, c. minusculus, c. ravus, and c. sibreei is still lacking.

robust studies of species delimitation should take into account both geographic and genetic variation in the recognition of species-level lineages. field sampling of individuals should be sufficient to characterize the frequency of alleles within a single locality and also sufficient to characterize their spatial distribution  <cit> . genetic sampling should be sufficient to provide some understanding of the genealogical variation that exists across independent loci as a result of the lineage sorting process and gene flow  <cit> . species delimitation approaches that take the above into account and search for concordant patterns across independent data sets have been proposed and employed by numerous researchers in the past . however, recent efforts in lemur species delimitation have raised concerns regarding the methods and data used for the diagnosis of species-level lineages  <cit> . the majority of recent descriptions has relied primarily on mtdna, using either genetic distances or fixed substitutions as criteria for species recognition or has not provided proper holotypes . these practices beg the question whether such data and their analysis are sufficient to reliably diagnose species-level units, despite the potential for gene tree-species tree discordance due to gene flow or lineage sorting  <cit> .

in this study we aim to provide a more comprehensive assessment of species diversity in the genus cheirogaleus using an expanded geographic and genetic sampling approach. we use a concordance-based approach  across independent sources of mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequence data to identify independently evolving lineages according to the general lineage concept of species  <cit> . we also explore a finer level of resolution using population-genetic structuring methods to diagnose sets of populations that are genetically distinct and, which may represent more recently diverged, but independently evolving population-level lineages.

in our molecular analyses we included field samples, museum samples and already published sequences from genbank. with this multilocus data set and with references to recently collected morphological data, we aim to provide the best estimate of diversity in the genus cheirogaleus currently possible and test the exclusivity of the seven recognized species. if we view taxonomic classifications as scientific hypotheses that may be refined and revised with new data  <cit> , our study can contribute significantly towards clarification and interpretation of dwarf lemur diversity.

RESULTS
haplotype data
the concatenated cytb and cox <dig> sequences from the  <dig> field samples  amounted to  <dig> bp and contained no indels. there were  <dig> variable sites defining  <dig> haplotypes. a fragment of  <dig> bp was obtained from museum samples of  <dig> individuals . among these  <dig> samples, there were  <dig> variable sites defining  <dig> haplotypes.  <dig> cheirogaleus haplotypes from genbank, consisting of  <dig> complete and five partial  cytb sequences, and two complete and one partial  cox <dig> sequences , were aligned with the field and museum haplotypes resulting in an overall set of  <dig> haplotypes defined through  <dig> variable sites .

unique identifier, sampling locality, coordinates in decimal degrees, and number of sampling locality as marked on the map in fig.  <dig> are given.

museum the specimen is housed at, catalogue number of the specimen, species label as recorded by the museum , unique identifier, locality of provenance as indicated by the museum catalogues, and locality number as used in fig.  <dig> are given. * same individual as mu <dig> 

genbank accession numbers, species label as indicated in genbank, locality of provenance and or unique identifier of the individual, locality number as used in fig.  <dig>  locus and number of basepairs available for the respective locus are given. *same individual as ef <dig>  **listed in genbank as m. coquereli, but have to be reclassified as mirza zaza.

the data set, respective alignment length including outgroup, number of sequences in data set excluding outgroup, number of haplotypes excluding outgroup, and number of variable sites excluding outgroup, when gaps are considered missing data, except for the mtdna data set are given. nucleotide substitution models for each data set, as used in ml analyses and in bayesian analyses, are listed.

nuclear dna sequence data were generated from the  <dig> field samples. in all individuals both alleles were scored, amounting to a data set of  <dig> sequences for each locus. among cheirogaleus samples, the  <dig> bp exonic adora <dig> fragment had  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> haplotypes. the  <dig> bp intronic fragment fiba had  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> haplotypes. the  <dig> bp intronic fragment vwf had  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> haplotypes . the adora <dig> alignment contained no indels. both the fiba and vwf alignments contained a small number of 1– <dig> bp indels. in addition, the vwf alignment contained indels of  <dig> and  <dig> bp in six and three individuals, respectively.

the cytb, cox <dig>  and adora <dig> loci were each found to best fit a general time-reversible  model according to aic. the mtdna loci were best fit to a model with a proportion of invariant sites  and gamma distributed rate heterogeneity , whereas adora <dig> was best fit to a model with a proportion of invariant sites. a k81uf+i+Γ model was favored for the fiba locus, . the vwf locus was found to best fit an hky+i+Γ model .

mtdna gene tree
bayesian and ml analyses of the mtdna data set resulted in congruent trees with three main clades  that largely correspond to the three species recognized prior to the taxonomic revisions of groves  <cit> . clade a is strongly supported  and consists of haplotypes sampled from western madagascar, the southeastern tip  and two sampling sites in the northeast. all mtdna sequences generated from museum samples of c. medius, c. adipicaudatus, and c. sibreei are placed in clade a.

clade b is strongly supported  and is comprised of mtdna haplotypes sampled from localities along the east coast from the southeastern tip  to the maroantsetra peninsula in the northeast . all mtdna sequences generated from c. major and c. ravus samples fall into clade b. mtdna sequence generated from a museum sample of c. crossleyi  is also placed in clade b.

clade c is strongly supported  and also contains eastern-sampled haplotypes, ranging from the southeastern tip  up to the northern tip . clade c also contains haplotypes sampled from three localities in the northwestern portion of the island . the sole museum-generated sequence placed in clade c is the c. crossleyi individual from locality  <dig> 

the mtdna-based relationships among clades a, b and c are poorly supported and are best viewed as unresolved. uncorrected "p" distances based on the cytb locus  were calculated for the three main clades . pairwise distances between the three clades were fairly similar, with an average  <dig> % between clades b and c,  <dig> % between clades a and b and  <dig> % between clades a and c.

nuclear gene trees
bayesian, ml, and statistical parsimony analyses of the individual nuclear loci resulted in generally congruent gene trees with respect to the resolution of clades a, b, and c identified in the mtdna gene tree. bayesian and ml hierarchical nuclear gene trees are presented as figures in additional files  <dig>   <dig>  3: vwf, fiba and adora <dig> ml phylogram. statistical parsimony haplotype networks are presented in figs.  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  the adora <dig> haplotype network  resolves a clade of haplotypes corresponding to clade c in the mtdna gene tree. the remaining adora <dig> haplotypes collectively correspond to clades a and b in the mtdna gene tree. shared polymorphism of adora <dig> haplotypes exists among some individuals assigned to these two mtdna-based clades . adora <dig> haplotype  <dig> is found in individuals sampled from ambanja , ambato , and kirindy  in the west , and is also sampled from andrambovato  in the east . adora <dig> haplotype  <dig> is found in individuals sampled from bemaraha  in the west  and in the andrambovato locality .

the fiba haplotype network consists of two terminal clades that correspond to clades a and c in the mtdna gene tree. an internal clade is also resolved corresponding to mtdna clade b. all haplotypes in this latter clade have a common ancestor in fiba haplotype  <dig> found in a number of individuals sampled from marolambo . these three clades are shallowly diverged from each other. only two mutational steps separate sampled haplotypes in clades a and b. only four mutations separate clades b and c.

the vwf haplotype network consists of three clades of haplotypes that nearly completely correspond to clades a, b, and c in the mtdna gene tree. the sole exception to this pattern is individual rmr <dig> from andrambovato, which has a clade b mtdna haplotype, but is homozygous for a "clade a" vwf allele.

population genetic clustering
bayesian population structure analyses of a combined mtdna and nuclear data set and a data set comprised of only nuclear loci reveal very similar results , indicating that genetic structuring results are not being driven solely by the mtdna data. overall, differences between the results of the two data sets were only found in the number of identical solutions found for each k across replicates, in the exact contribution of each k to the genetic makeup of an individual and in the order that individuals split off to from a separate cluster at k =  <dig>  at k >  <dig> the number of identical solutions plummets to  <dig> at a 95% threshold. a k =  <dig> is the favored solution according to the estimated ln probability of the data , and according to the ad-hoc statistic Δk  <cit> , which detected a clear mode at k =  <dig> for the calculations based on four loci, but showed no clear signal for the three nuclear loci. the k =  <dig> results from analyses of the combined nuclear data set are described below in the context of the three main mtdna clades .

most individuals possessing clade a mtdna haplotypes are placed with high pps in two distinct population clusters . the genetic compositions of individuals from ambanja/ambato , kirindy , and ambanja/benavony  are almost entirely of a single population cluster . a subset of individuals from sambava  and the single individual sampled from bekaraoka  are placed almost entirely in a second distinct population cluster . together with two individuals from bemaraha , which do not fall into either of these two population clusters, the individuals forming these two distinct clusters correspond to clade a mtdna haplotypes.

all individuals containing clade c mtdna haplotypes are comprised of two population genetic clusters . the remaining sambava individuals are either completely comprised of, or contain high proportions of, a third population genetic cluster  and low proportions of a fourth population genetic cluster . this pattern is reversed in individuals sampled from andrambovato/oranjasty , montagne d'ambre , ambanja/beandroana , ankazomivady  and manantenina .

most individuals possessing clade b mtdna haplotypes constitute two population genetic clusters . all individuals from marolambo and two individuals from tampolo are either completely comprised of, or contain some proportion of, a fifth population genetic cluster . the individuals sampled from ivorona, manantantely, andrambovato/ambalavero and the remaining individual from tampolo, are placed entirely in a sixth cluster . the sole exception is one of the individuals from andrambovato/ambalavero, which is only placed in this cluster with a very low pp.

there is a clear indication that many individuals within mtdna clades contain a mixed nuclear genetic composition. for example, more than half of individuals with clade c mtdna haplotypes exhibit a genetic composition from two nuclear-defined clusters .

this pattern also extends across mtdna-defined clades. for example, some individuals from mtdna clades a and b can contain a high proportion of a nuclear genetic cluster  that is predominantly found in individuals with clade c mtdna haplotypes. overall, these patterns demonstrate the existence of two distinct nuclear genetic clusters within each mtdna-based clade, but demonstrate the potential for extensive shared genetic makeup within and among these clades.

discussion
groves  <cit>  accepted seven cheirogaleus species, based on morphological data, and interpreted them as separate genetic entities. in this study, mtdna and nuclear gene sequences clearly resolved only three main lineages within the genus cheirogaleus. using phylogenetic methods, no further monophyletic subdivisions based on mtdna and ndna could be resolved within each of the main lineages. however, a population genetic approach detected a further layer of differentiation, resolving six genetic clusters that largely correspond to, but are not strictly concordant with, the main lineages identified via gene trees. our results do not rule out the possibility of additional species of dwarf lemurs in madagascar. there are multiple accounts of sympatric species in areas, which either were not covered by our sampling scheme, or where our sample only contained one morph  <cit> . however, according to our data we can only define three clades that exhibit concordant genealogical patterns across loci.

the three genealogical clades  are largely congruent with three clusters found according to morphometric data . this morphometric data set consisted of data collected from the individuals included in this study and museum specimen and can therefore be directly compared to the genetic data. species names could be unambiguously assigned to morphometric clusters. cheirogaleus medius and c. major differed primarily in size and pelage coloration, while c. crossleyi differed from c. medius in size and pelage coloration and from c. major in pelage coloration and in the width of the skull and in dental characteristics of the premolars and canines  this is congruent with the most recent descriptions of the species  <cit> .

below we discuss the molecular and morphological resolution of evolutionary groups that correspond to population-level lineages and place these within the context of the existing cheirogaleus taxonomy.

clade a 
clade a is strongly supported in ml and bayesian analyses of mtdna sequence data and is also supported by genealogical and population genetic analysis of nuclear data, although shared polymorphism of adora <dig> and vwf haplotypes among mtdna-based clades a and b were detected. these patterns of shared polymorphism may be the result of a low mutation rate, incomplete lineage sorting, or hybridization. nonetheless, these patterns are limited and do not obscure the concordant patterns of divergence seen across all loci.

the genetically-derived clade a clearly corresponds to c. medius sensu lato according to morphometric and geographic data, as well as the mtdna sequences generated from c. medius museum samples. analyses of c. adipicaudatus museum specimens invariably place individuals into the c. medius morphometric cluster and mtdna clade. these results strongly suggest that c. adipicaudatus is synonymous with c. medius, with no evidence indicating that it is divergent from other populations of c. medius.

the c. sibreei individual included in this study is also placed into the c. medius clade a. in fact, it shares its mtdna haplotype with individual rmr <dig>  an individual most likely belonging to c. medius according to morphometric characters. these two individuals also cluster together in morphometric analyses . as with c. adipicaudatus, these results do not lend support to the hypothesis of c. sibreei as a distinct evolutionary group.

clade b 
clade b is strongly supported in ml and bayesian analyses of mtdna and corroborated by nuclear data, although with the patterns of shared polymorphism described above. according to analyses of morphological and mtdna sequence data generated from museum specimens, clade b corresponds to c. major. analyses of morphological and mtdna sequence data of c. ravus specimens are congruent and place these individuals into the c. major morphometric cluster and mtdna clade b. there is no evidence to suggest that c. ravus represents a distinct genetic lineage within the larger c. major group and we conclude that c. ravus is synonymous with c. major. interestingly, one of the museum-sampled individuals of c. crossleyi  contains an mtdna haplotype that is placed within mtdna clade b. however, it is difficult to infer anything else about this c. crossleyi museum specimen since this is a juvenile individual and was not included in the morphological analyses. other putatively c. crossleyi museum and field-collected individuals are consistently placed outside the c. major group, suggesting that the taxonomic designation of the mu <dig> museum individual may be incorrect.

clade c 
clade c is well supported in ml and bayesian mtdna gene trees and is unambiguously corroborated by all three nuclear markers. this group contains individuals identified as c. crossleyi in a previous mtdna-based study  <cit>  and also a single museum individual . in addition to the mtdna-based identification of this group, morphometric analyses find similarity between the new field-sampled individuals and the mu <dig> museum c. crossleyi individual .

it is important to note here a slight pattern of incongruence between the morphological and molecular results, with respect to c. crossleyi and c. major. two newly sampled individuals, rmr <dig> and rmr <dig>  are classified as c. crossleyi individuals according to all genetic data analyses, but cluster with c. major individuals in morphometric analyses. one of these individuals  is sampled from a locality  that contains both species, suggesting that hybrid introgression may in part be responsible for such a pattern.

cheirogaleus minusculus
we have no molecular data to directly assess the status of c. minusculus. the single specimen upon which this species was described is listed in the museum catalogue of the british museum of natural history  as being from ambositra/antsirabe  <cit> . our geographically closest sampling site to this locality is ankazomivady , which is about  <dig> km south of the town of ambositra. morphometric and genetic analyses indicate these are c. crossleyi individuals, and they do not cluster with the c. minusculus individual in morphometric analyses. thus, there is no indication that these individuals could represent c. minusculus. unfortunately, the nhm does not allow sampling of holotype material for molecular analyses, which would be crucial to assess the status of this proposed species. a discussion within the museum community and a change in policy regarding invasive sampling of holotype material for molecular studies is needed to solve this dilemma for future studies.

genetic structure within the main cheirogaleus lineages
within the three species-level evolutionary lineages further genetic substructuring was detected via population genetic clustering. genetic substructure was most tightly correlated with geography among populations within the clade a lineage, where some populations from the west and northwest  were placed in a distinct nuclear cluster, while populations from the northeast  were placed in a second distinct cluster. these patterns indicate the potential for the further geographic isolation and divergence of populations beyond the three main cheirogaleus lineages. however, the lack of concordant geographic patterns of divergence in the gene trees, especially in the mtdna gene tree, indicate that this divergence may be very recent in nature. it is important to note, however, that clade a is not entirely comprised of two genetic clusters, but also contains individuals that have cluster assignments more similar to individuals in the other two lineages. this same pattern is seen among individuals from clades b and c, despite the fact that none of these individuals share alleles. it is possible that this pattern may result from an insufficient level of variation to accurately assign individuals. additional molecular sampling in future studies is likely to be important in the adequate assessment of population-level structuring using genotypic clustering methods.

our results do indicate, however, the special status of the sambava locality; two species, c. medius and c. crossleyi, are found at this locality, and for both species the sambava individuals are assigned to a genotypic cluster that largely separates them from other individuals of the respective species. this is most strongly seen in the case of c. medius and also includes the single sampled individual from the geographically close locality of bekaraoka. posterior probabilities for cluster assignments for some c. crossleyi sambava individuals are low, but many individuals have high posterior probabilities  that clearly distinguish them from other populations of c. crossleyi. again, these patterns appear to be signatures of more recent episodes of geographic isolation and divergence within the three main lineages of cheirogaleus.

geographic distribution of the species
results from the new sampling sites identified by this study allow us to further clarify the distribution of the three species of cheirogaleus . all three species are present in forest fragments in the fort dauphin region , as described by hapke et al.  <cit> . the range of c. medius extends along the west coast up north to ankarana . this species is, however, also found at two sites, bekaraoka  and sambava , on the northeastern coast. this is consistent with a presumed c. medius population at daraina in northeastern madagascar, as listed in mittermeier et al.  <cit> . the distribution of c. medius is therefore not limited strictly to the western dry forests. the range of c. crossleyi extends from the southeastern tip of the island all the way north to montagne d'ambre  with many sampling sites being found inland along the eastern edge of the central plateau. there are a few exceptions in the north, both on the east and west coast: sambava , iharana/vohemar , ambanja/beandroana , manongarivo  and ampijoroa . cheirogaleus major is found, as previously described, in the eastern lowland forest, from the southeastern tip as far north as maroantsetra . additionally, there is one field  and one museum sampling site  along the eastern edge of the central plateau where c. major is found. we currently do not have any data to assess the populations mentioned in thalmann and rakotoarison  <cit> , ausilio and raveloanrinoro  <cit> , thalmann  <cit>  and rasolofoson et al.  <cit> .

multifaceted approach in species delimitation in lemurs
this study has shown that multiple independent lines of data can yield a robust estimate of species diversity. morphological data alone are not expected to provide resolution of previously cryptic species, but indeed have had the opposite effect of over estimating species diversity  <cit> . the sole use of mtdna might have diagnosed distinct populations, or even local matrilines as species and the use of any single nuclear marker would most likely lead to an underestimate of diversity. only through combining all of these sources of data were we able to achieve a robust estimate of lineage diversity in cheirogaleus and detect geographically structured patterns of genetic variation. of course, it would be desirable to add more geographic and ecological information to the current data set, in order to verify and refine our conclusions. one starting point would be to examine the distinct populations identified through the population genetic cluster analysis, with special emphasis on the sambava locality, where c. medius and c. crossleyi are found in sympatry. furthermore, a direct comparison of the speciation patterns found in dwarf lemurs and those known for mouse lemurs, with estimates of time divergence dates, would be valuable to answer questions about the mechanisms driving this species radiation in madagascar.

CONCLUSIONS
based on the general metapopulation lineage concept and multiple sources of data, we clarify the exclusivity of three of the seven recognized dwarf lemur species: c. major, c. medius and c. crossleyi. these three species were found to be genealogically exclusive in both mtdna and ndna loci, and furthermore, they exhibit morphological distinctiveness. molecular and morphometric data support the hypothesis that c. adipicaudatus and c. ravus are synonymous with c. medius and c. major, respectively. c. sibreei falls into the mtdna c. medius clade, but in morphological analyses the membership is not clearly resolved. we do not have sufficient data to assess the status of c. minusculus. population genetic subdivisons are detected within these three species, but are not conclusive enough to warrant specific status.

the concordance-based approach, based on multiple independent lines of data, yielded a robust estimate of diversity within the genus cheirogaleus and we conclude that this approach is well-suited for species delimitations. for dwarf lemur conservation this study implies that, since there are fewer species with greater individual abundances and distributions, dwarf lemurs should be less threatened than previously thought. whether this implies that dwarf lemurs are not suitable flagship species and need not be regarded as intensely as other lemur taxa, or whether more emphasis in conservation should be placed on other measures than species numbers  remains to be debated.

