BACKGROUND
the genus mannheimia includes strains previously classified as trehalose-negative  haemolytica and is one of the most well-defined and robust clusters within the gamma-proteobacterial family of pasteurellaceae pohl  <dig>  <cit> . the mannheimia species have taken divergent paths toward their distinct lifestyles. the majority of strains isolated from pulmonary infection in cattle belongs to m. haemolytica serotype a1/a <dig>  <cit> . these strains are sub-dominant to other serotypes  in the nasopharynx of healthy cattle but dominate when the host defences are at least partly compromised  <cit> . in the immunocompromised host, they have an increased capacity for proliferation and can achieve relatively high total numbers in the nasopharynx, where they are likely to be transmitted to the nasopharynx of new hosts or to spill over or otherwise enter the lungs  <cit> . however, pulmonary infection caused by m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> is considered to be non-communicable  and the continuous circulation of these bacteria in bovine populations seems to depend on their capacity for asymptomatic transmission to the nasopharynx, and not the lungs, of new hosts  <cit> . by contrast, bovine serotype a <dig> strains of m. haemolytica have had a long history in bovine populations, where they colonise the nasopharynx asymptomatically and rarely cause disease  <cit> . also strains of m. glucosida serotype a <dig> and m. ruminalis, the sister group to m. haemolytica + m. glucosida, appear to be adapted to a relatively benign lifestyle in the ovine nasopharynx and rumen, respectively  <cit> . in addition, bovine strains of m. varigena biogroup  <dig>  which is the most basal of the mannheimia species, colonise the nasopharynx asymptomatically, although they have the propensity to cause disease  <cit> . it therefore seems reasonable to conclude that the genes responsible for the virulence of mannheimia strains must evolve in response to the demands  associated with a commensal lifestyle rather than any advantages that might arise from causing disease.

previous works have revealed that the leukotoxin  protein produced by m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> provides protection from the circulating constitutive and inducible immune defences during pulmonary infection via interactions with host cells  <cit> . interestingly, much of the virulence can be blamed on the seemingly misguided overresponse of the immune defences  <cit> . the lkta protein induces the overwhelming activation of neutrophils leading to production of cytokines that mediate tissue injury  <cit> .

the leukotoxin  operon codes for four proteins: an internal acyltransferase, encoded by lktc  <cit> ; the structural toxin, encoded by lkta, which belongs to the escherichia coli hlya-like subfamily of cytotoxic rtx  proteins  <cit> ; an inner membrane protein with a cytoplasmic atp-binding cassette  domain, encoded by lktb, which pumps out the lkta protein via interaction with the c terminus of the lkta protein  <cit> ; and a membrane fusion protein, encoded by lktd, which forms a bridge between the inner and outer membranes  <cit> . the genes for these four proteins are physically adjacent on the chromosome and are transcribed as lktca or lktcabd messages  <cit> .

recent reports provided the first support for the view that the lkt operon was vertically inherited from the last common ancestor of genus mannheimia to any ancestor of the diverging species, while changes such as chromosomal rearrangements, pseudogene formation, and deletions of various sizes have occurred in the region upstream of the lkt genes in individual subclades/species  <cit> . however, the extent to which these molecular evolutionary forces affect lkt gene regulation is not known.

in this article, we analysed the lkt promoter among representatives of the five mannheimia species in order to identify changes in cis-regulatory systems that could have catalysed adaptive evolution. we started our study using multiple sequence alignment as a tool for the identification of orthologous sequences in the intergenic region upstream of the lkt genes . we also surveyed existing data on regulatory sequences in order to delineate the spatial and functional boundaries of the cp region. on the basis of the multiple sequence alignment, we estimated the rate of evolution for each cp sequence in order to infer the selective constraints. we finally consider how the evolution of the lkt operon fits with the evolution and maintenance of virulence.

RESULTS
a subclades refer to monophyletic groups based on phylogenetic analysis of 16s rrna sequences  <cit> .

b bt = bisgaard taxon.

c these sequences have been published elsewhere.

conservation and flexibility in the intergenic region upstream of the lkt genes
the alignment revealed 100% identity over the entire 406-bp intergenic region from m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> str. phl <dig> and str. phl <dig>  and previous reports  <cit>  allowed us to infer cis-regulatory sequences. the 406-bp region was shared among m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> and m. glucosida serotype a <dig> as reflected in figure  <dig>  the alignment showed significant sequence and positional conservation over a 225-bp stretch immediately proximal to the transcriptional start site of the lktc gene among all mannheimia strains , with the notable exception of the region corresponding to the repeat tract in m. haemolytica serotype a <dig>  <cit> , which accommodated many sequence variations .

in m. haemolytica + m. glucosida, the distal 180-bp stretch of sequence was juxtaposed to the transcriptional start site of the artj gene . no homology was detected between this 180-bp stretch and the noncoding regions upstream of the cp region in the remaining mannheimia species .

in order to gain some insight into the possible evolutionary mechanisms of this differential pattern, we performed for each species analysis of sequence and positional conservation in the noncoding region upstream of the cp region. in m. ruminalis and m. varigena, these regions contained stretches of sequence unique to the lapb genes . the region of m. granulomatis was adjacent to the xylb pseudogene and contained a fragment of about  <dig> bp corresponding to the distal region of the parental xylb gene as described elsewhere  <cit> . moreover, this region contained a 50-bp stretch of inverted sequence that was homologous to the hslv-hslu intergenic regions and stretches of sequence unique to the lapb genes .

these observations provide support for the view that the artj operon, including 180-bp of sequence upstream of the transcribed artj gene, was translocated into the intergenic region upstream of the lkt genes during early evolution of m. haemolytica + m. glucosida and that the hslvu and lapb operons has undergone pseudogene formation and deletions in m. granulomatis after divergence from the remaining mannheimia species  <cit> .

these observations illustrate how a few evolutionary events in closely related strains can alter dramatically an intergenic region. in the case of m. haemolytica + m. glucosida, the alteration coincided with an evolutionary success. interestingly, transcriptional coupling has been reported for the divergently transcribed artj and lkt promoters  <cit> . however, the role of this regulatory feature during transmission of bacteria through host populations is not known. the chimeric promoter was found in all m. haemolytica + m. glucosida strains in the present study, irregardless of their propensity to cause disease, suggesting that it evolved in response to selection for something else than making their hosts sick.

evolutionary rates for cp sequences
the role for natural selection in the evolution of regulatory regions is quite unclear  <cit> . recognisable features and motifs are often labile, small in size, and may depend on the sequence context  <cit> . therefore, the complex structure of these regions could be due to alternative evolutionary forces  <cit> :  compensatory selection occurring when a pair of mutations at different sites that would be singly deleterious produces normal fitness in combination;  stabilising selection could maintain stable levels of gene expression while allowing mutational turnover of functional important sites;  purifying selection could facilitate maintenance of specific functional sites.

the evolutionary rates for cp sequences were tested for deviations from expectations derived from the null hypothesis of neutral evolution. the overall length of the 16s rrna tree  was  <dig>  substitutions per site, while the overall length of the cp tree  was  <dig>  substitutions per site. the null hypothesis predicts that the expected length of any given branch on the cp tree  can be calculated by multiplying the observed length of the corresponding branch on the 16s rrna tree  by  <dig> / <dig>  =  <dig> . the observed and the expected lengths for any given branch on the cp tree and their pairwise differences are summarised in table  <dig> 

a greek letters indicate individual branches as in figure  <dig> 

b two-tailed p-value.

c two-tailed p-values <  <dig>  adjusted by the bonferroni correction for multiple tests were considered significant.

for three of four branches ancestral to m. haemolytica serotype a <dig>  the differences between the observed and the expected branch lengths were significantly smaller than zero  . this is in accord with the operation of stronger levels of purifying selection and possibly reflects an ancient balance between the immune system and these primarily commensal bacteria and their expression of the lkta protein during asymptomatic colonisation of the nasopharynx. the difference between the observed and the expected branch lengths ancestral to m. haemolytica + m. glucosida was not significantly different from zero . this coincided with the translocation of the artj operon, including 180-bp of sequence upstream of the transcribed artj gene, into the intergenic region upstream of the lkt genes  <cit> . it is possible that this relatively short window of time was dominated by stabilizing selection on this chimeric region, maintaining stable levels of lkt  expression and thus the ancient balance between the immune system and bacteria during asymptomatic colonisation of the nasopharynx.

the difference between the observed and the expected branch lengths ancestral to m. granulomatis was significantly greater than zero . moreover, the cp region appeared to be more variable in m. granulomatis, especially in terms of the overall conservation of cis-regulatory sequences . most notably, there was a high level of sequence degeneracy in the core promoter, which was highly conserved among the other mannheimia species. strains belonging to the bovine taxon of m. granulomatis, including m. granulomatis str. p1135/26t, cause severe skin infection   <cit> . interestingly, these strains have never been isolated from healthy cattle, including the nasopharynx, and the disease seems to be acquired by contact with the human botfly , i.e. there is no direct transmission between cattle or transmission is short-lived  <cit> . moreover, comparison of lkta genes from different taxa within m. granulomatis have shown that those from bovine strains are under significantly relaxed selective constraints . we propose that genetic diversity of the cp sequence in this strain reflects functional decay due to relaxed selection outside the nasopharynx, enabling mutations to accumulate in the portions of the genome that encode unused functions in the integumentary system. however, it is also possible that positive darwinian selection for alternative cis-regulatory sequences has acted as a mechanism for coordinating expression of the lkta protein with the nutritional and environmental conditions of the integument. for example, larsen et al.  <cit>  have shown that the β-haemolytic phenotype, a marker of the lkta genotype in m. haemolytica  <cit> , is present in this strain, suggesting at least some functional conservation of the lkt operon.

evolution of repeat sequences
tandem repeats of 5'-acaaaaaaca-3' upstream of the core promoter were first identified in m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> str. phl <dig>  <cit> . our preliminary analysis revealed three and two repeat units per promoter in m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> and serotype a <dig>  respectively . in the latter case, the two repeat units varied from the consensus sequence by one nucleotide change each . because this region accommodated many sequence variations in the remaining mannheimia species, the unit sequence could not be determined, suggesting that repeat sequences are confined to m. haemolytica.

the relatively recent appearance of three repeat units  may provide us with an opportunity to trace the entire evolutionary process back to its origin. therefore, we examined the number of repeat units per promoter in  <dig> additional m. haemolytica strains, which represent the diversity within this species based on mlee, geographic origin, and host association . the distribution of the number of repeat units per promoter showed that there were three or more repeat units in  <dig> out of  <dig> m. haemolytica strains belonging to mlee lineage a . in the two other strains belonging to mlee lineage a as well as strains belonging to mlee lineages b  and c , there were only two repeat units per promoter .

a multilocus enzyme electrophoresis  lineages and types have been published previously  <cit> .

the phylogenetic tree of the distal two repeat units from m. haemolytica showed a strong association between the sequence of the repeat units, the number of repeat units per promoter, and the phylogenetic history of this species . first, repeat tracts containing three or more repeat units were restricted to mlee lineage a as described above and belonged to a cluster  of perfect repeat units. second, repeat tracts containing two repeat units were localised in two clusters  according to the number of repeat units that varied from the consensus sequence  and to the mlee lineage  . these observations are consistent with the generally accepted view that tandem arrays of perfect repeats, such as those present in m. haemolytica strains belonging to mlee lineage a, are hotspots for replication errors, resulting in high rates of expansions/contractions.

role of repeat sequences
m. haemolytica, like other usually commensal bacteria, must overcome a variety of environmental hurdles to successfully colonise a host, evade the constitutive and inducible defences of this host, migrate from one within-host habitat to another, and be transmitted to another genetically and immunologically distinct host. presumably to meet these challenges, some bacteria have highly mutable contingency genes that undergo phenotypic switching   <cit> .

although the lkta protein plays a role in evading host immunity in the lungs, it may also function as a nasopharyngeal colonization and survival factor. we propose that, in response to the selective pressures associated with the host immune system, expression of the lkta protein is maintained at a baseline level during nasopharyngeal colonisation within individual hosts and asymptomatic nose-to-nose transmission between hosts, while expression is above the baseline level during pulmonary infection.

we further propose that expansions/contractions in the number of perfect repeat units in the lkt promoter are associated with phase-variable expression of the lkta protein. the repeat units contain the characteristic sequences of the so-called a-tracts, which are in phase with the helical repeat . these upstream a-tracts function together as transcriptional enhancers and appear to exhibit inherent dna curvature  <cit> . although the precise mechanism of action of these bacterial enhancers is still unknown, this theory is at least partly supported by previous empirical works  <cit> , which demonstrated a strong, but not necessarily direct, relationship between the number of a-tracts per promoter and the level of promoter strength.

the hypothesis that phase shifting is correlated with pulmonary infection rests on the idea that virulence is a consequence of the within-host evolution for proliferation into new tissues. we tested this hypothesis retrospectively by analysing the frequency distribution of genetic variants among  <dig> m. haemolytica serotype a <dig> strains isolated from the two within-host habitats .

a outer membrane protein  and lipopolysaccharide  types have been published previously  <cit> .

the alignment showed significant sequence and positional conservation over the entire 406-bp stretch among all strains, with the exception that they contained different numbers of repeat units per promoter . all strains isolated from the nasopharynx of healthy cattle and representing at least two epidemiological clones based on outer membrane protein  typing  contained three perfect repeat units per promoter . the majority of strains isolated from the lungs of cattle with pulmonary infection and representing at least three epidemiological clones  also contained three perfect repeat units per promoter, with the exception of two strains , which contained four perfect repeat units per promoter .

the presence of three repeat units per promoter in strains from both within-host habitats suggests that this pattern is associated with a commensal lifestyle in the nasopharynx and that the occasional movement of these bacteria into the lungs may be due to coincidental spill over from the nasopharynx. by contrast, strains containing four repeat units per promoter were confined to the lungs. this observation supports the view that genetic change is  required for successful colonisation of the lungs under certain conditions.

consider an inoculum of m. haemolytica that has entered the nasopharynx of a host. furthermore, assume that successful colonisation of the lungs requires  one change  to generate the necessary phenotype . whether or not these mutants exist in the potentially colonising population depends on the total number of cells in the nasopharynx, the fraction of the inoculum that enters the lungs, the rates at which the required genetic change is generated by mutation, and the duration of the carrier state .

this analysis has several potential limitations. first, strain pairs collected from the nasopharynx and lungs of individual hosts with pulmonary infection  should be used to infer within-host evolution. second, we were unable to perform in vivo tests of the predictions generated from this analysis because of the lack of a good animal model for m. haemolytica.

selection for phase shifting
whether or not virulence associated with phase shifting will be selected at an epidemiological level depends on the trade-off between the transmission advantage accruing to the cell during short bouts of symptoms  and the loss in long-term asymptomatic nose-to-nose transmission due to either increased clearance, rapid host death, or reduced fitness in the nasopharynx, which is the port-of-entry in new hosts.

if symptoms  and transmission are coupled so the more rapid phase shifting  bacteria are transmitted at higher rates than the more slow  ones, phase shifting  would be favoured in the bacterial population. this epidemiological selection model is supported by the apparent evolutionary success of the high virulence m. haemolytica serotype a1/a <dig>  <cit> .

however, if the genetic and phenotypic changes associated with enhanced fitness in the lungs are detrimental to the bacteria back in the nasopharynx, they are unlikely to confer any long-term advantage in their ability to spread from the lungs of one host to the nasopharynx of another unless revertant changes occur. in this case, disease is a dead end for these bacteria and is a consequence of short-sighted within-host evolution.

if the asymptomatic and symptomatic sites overlap as in the case of respiratory disease, sneezing and coughing generated by the lung-adapted phenotype could favour transmission of freeriders that remain adapted to the nasopharynx, even when disease is a dead end . in other words, freeriders benefit from the collective action without paying the necessary cost associated with the transmission-enhancing feature.

finally, we present a second model of the epidemiology and within-host infection dynamics of m. haemolytica not considered above. our association analysis showed that the nucleotide change leading to the origin of short tandem arrays of perfect repeat units coincided with the evolutionary success of m. haemolytica strains belonging to mlee lineage a, including relatively benign ones that colonise the ovine nasopharynx asymptomatically and rarely cause disease. to understand the selective forces responsible for phase shifting in these bacteria, which are not invariably pathogenic, it is important to consider its relevance to the commensal existence of these bacteria at an epidemiological level, as a mechanism to facilitate colonisation of genetically and immunologically diverse hosts.

CONCLUSIONS
the continuous circulation of mannheimia bacteria in host populations seems to depend on their capacity for asymptomatic nose-to-nose transmission, although other routes of transmission may exist for some species. our analysis suggests that the origin of short tandem arrays of perfect repeat units have contributed to the derived virulence phenotype of m. haemolytica serotype a1/a <dig> by allowing phase-variable expression of the lkta protein. further studies are required to better understand the epidemiology of these opportunistic pathogens. areas of study should include testing the predictions generated from this analysis using both prospective  and retrospective  methods.

