BACKGROUND
many evolutionary models  <cit>  are tightly linked to absolute timescales. a reliable temporal framework is therefore required for understanding the tempo  of biological evolution. there are two complementary sources of information for dating ancient biological divergences:  physical historical remains ; and  molecular sequence differences among extant taxa, the analysis of which requires assumptions about the processes and rates of sequence evolution. unfortunately, these two sources of information  often yield starkly disparate estimates of the timing of major biological divergences  <cit> .

of course, some discrepancy is expected, as these two sources of data concern different stages during the process of cladogenesis . as fossils document products of evolution, they necessarily post-date speciation events. the underestimation of speciation times from fossil data  can be partitioned into two components:  the interval, following speciation, required for diagnostic characters to evolve ; and  the time, following the evolution of diagnostic characters, realized for the deposition of a sampled fossil . here, δdiagnostic character can be regarded as a fixed value , however δoldest fossil can be reduced with subsequently older fossil finds. in contrast to fossils, molecular data instead reflect genetic divergence, which must predate speciation events because genetic lineages present in two newly evolved sister lineages coalesce  2ne generations prior to speciation  <cit> . however, the errors associated with molecular age estimates  are more complex than analogous fossil errors. for example, if no polymorphism exists for a particular locus at speciation, then inferred genetic divergence times based on that locus will actually post-date speciation, as no information exists to trace the underlying genealogy. furthermore, molecular data may overestimate or underestimate the true speciation time because of stochastic errors associated with divergence time estimation , and this uncertainty will increase as one extrapolates backwards through time, even with an infinite amount of data  <cit> . regardless, for a given node with a minimum age constraint derived from the fossil record, the realized discrepancy between the two estimates  will always be positive, and is a parameter that both paleontologists and molecular biologists are working to minimize  <cit> .

strictly speaking, any molecular estimate that generates a positive value of δrealized ma-fa is consistent with the fossil record. it is instead the magnitude of δrealized ma-fa that suggests conflict, and distressingly large values sometimes exist. conflict between the two sources of information is especially evident with respect to the ages of extant avian lineages . based on a strict interpretation of the fossil record , feduccia  <cit>  proposed an explosive cenozoic origin for most modern avian lineages, presumably a result of open niches left by newly extinct non-avian dinosaurs and other taxa. although a recent fossil find  <cit>  forces a minimum of five of the earliest neornithes divergences into the late cretaceous, the fossil record generally supports the view that most modern lineages originated in the cenozoic  <cit> . in contrast, molecular estimates all indicate that these same lineages are considerably older, sometimes as much as twice as old as analogous paleontological estimates  <cit> . between these two extremes lies the cretaceous-paleogene  boundary, a period when as many as 50% of land-dwelling species went extinct  <cit> . the conflicting age estimates thus have different implications regarding the influence of the k-pg mass extinctions on the evolutionary radiation of modern birds.

although resolution of this conflict is clearly important for understanding avian diversification, it is hindered by compelling arguments from both sides. the supposition that the quality of the fossil record deteriorates backwards in time, for example, is contradicted by the observed congruence between stratigraphic and phylogenetic ordering of taxa  <cit> . sophisticated stratigraphic analyses indicate that fossils of the antiquity necessary to produce congruence with molecular studies are extremely improbable  <cit>  . furthermore, of the known mesozoic avian fossils  <cit> , the vast majority unambiguously lay outside neornithes  <cit> . although a few cretaceous fossils putatively represent modern lineages  these have largely been dismissed as fragmentary and inconclusive  <cit> . one the molecular side, the recognition that rates of molecular evolution are often not clock-like , and that lineage-specific heterogeneity is common  <cit> , has spurred the development of numerous 'relaxed' molecular clock methods . in support of molecular genetic data, these methods perform well in simulation  <cit>  and, when applied to empirical data, deliver cretaceous ages for the origin of modern birds  <cit> .

given these arguments, the paleontological and molecular phylogenetic communities are currently at an impasse regarding the application of an absolute temporal axis for early organismal evolution  <cit> , and a range of evolutionary models  <cit>  remain viable for birds. here we endeavour to determine whether a more rigorous treatment of molecular genetic data lessens the 'rock-clock' discrepancy . in particular, we incorporate large fossil and taxon data sets, two components of molecular dating that have been shown to have a strong impact on the resulting divergence time estimates  <cit> . in addition, we accommodate and explore the impact of uncertainty in both tree topology and molecular dating strategy. finally, we test for signals of episodic molecular evolution related to both speciation events and absolute geologic time, processes that could potentially mislead molecular-based age estimates by systematically inflating branch lengths within speciose clades  <cit> .

RESULTS
phylogenetic inference
our optimal phylogenetic reconstruction  is a significantly better fit to the mtdna matrix than a recent consensus topology derived from the literature . nevertheless, the two topologies agree in many instances. for example, several traditional orders identified as having little support for monophyly  were also polyphyletic in our analyses. however, the two trees also differ in many respects, most notably in the placement of passeriformes. in tconsensus, the clade is relatively derived in the tree, whereas in toptimal it forms the basal-most clade in neoaves. several traditionally hard-to-classify lineages  are of suspect placement in toptimal. these and other uncertainties tend to be localized and do not  overly influence date estimates for the basal nodes in the avian tree. some of the topological differences, however, are of operational importance, as they cause either redundancy or obsolescence of some fossil constraints used in estimating divergence times. overall, of the  <dig> total internal fossil calibrations considered,  <dig> were used on tconsensus, and  <dig> on toptimal .

divergence time estimation
a substantial signal was present for both a departure from a molecular clock and a lack of ancestor-descendant autocorrelation of substitution rates. using penalized likelihood in r8s, both topologies tconsensus and toptimal were found to be unclock-like, with optimal smoothing values  of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. analyses in dating <dig> clearly rejected the constant-rate poisson model  but could not reject the stationary  rate model  which produced a large index of dispersion r =  <dig> . bayesian analyses in multidivtime delivered positive but very small values for the degree of autocorrelation of substitution rates across both topologies . finally, analyses of tconsensus using beast indicated that non-autocorrelated models of rate variation fit the data significantly better than a molecular clock . of the non-autocorrelated models, the lognormal distribution  had a much better harmonic mean model likelihood than the exponential distribution , and relaxation  of a fixed topology further increased fit. using each of these uncorrelated models, the covariance of substitution rates between ancestor and descendent branches across the tree was not significantly different from zero.

given the extensive phylogenetic uncertainty within neornithes, we focus on divergence times of clades for which monophyly is not contentious . two key trends are recognized. first, for a given dating method, differences in topology tended to have a minor but systematic influence on inferred ages. in general, toptimal delivered older average date estimates than tconsensus using r8s  and multidivtime , but the opposite trend was found with pathd <dig> . when confidence/credibility intervals are considered, however, topology did not significantly influence most individual date estimates. overall, in terms of the degree of discrepancy between fossil and molecular dates on a whole-tree basis , topology had a noticeable  influence on divergence estimates for only the pathd <dig> analyses .

second, the choice of the relaxed clock method had a strong influence on inferred ages. r8s, multidivtime and beast tended to deliver similar estimates for most clades of interest . in contrast, pathd <dig> generated considerably younger dates with much smaller confidence intervals, despite using the same bootstrapped phylograms and fossil constraints as r8s. dating <dig> tended to produce the most extreme results, with inferred basal split estimates similar to those from multidivtime, but some derived split estimates younger than those from pathd <dig>  most significantly, pathd <dig> and dating <dig> together identified five of these major clades as having crown diversification restricted to the cenozoic , although the remaining methods generate estimates for these same nodes that are on average more than 50% older. in terms of comparing molecular and fossil age estimates , r8s, multidivtime and beast all show considerable discordance between the two sources of data, with the average molecular estimates for the major nodes  being 36– <dig> my older than corresponding fossil ages. pathd <dig> and dating <dig>  in contrast, exhibit greater agreement between estimates from 'rocks' and 'clocks', with an average discrepancy of 17– <dig> my.

despite these differences, all methods agree that the basal splits within neornithes occurred deep within the cretaceous . the youngest estimate for the root of neornithes  is of early cretaceous age,  <dig> my older than the oldest undisputed neornithean fossil  <cit> . conflict among methods instead involves the diversification of derived lineages . two patterns can be discerned. first, pathd <dig> and dating <dig> support bursts of speciation , whereas the remaining methods generally support more gradual diversification. second, and more germane to the 'rock-clock' problem, pathd <dig> alone supports an extensive post-k-pg radiation of neoaves. for example, from results of the non-autocorrelated rate models in beast allowing topological uncertainty , not only are the basal splits inferred to have occurred in the cretaceous, but  <dig> credibility intervals  do not overlap the k-pg boundary. finally, no support is shown for episodic evolution, either correlated with speciation events  or an increase in inferred substitution rate either during early diversification or following the k-pg mass extinction .

discussion
phylogenetic inference
whether using fossil or molecular data, a daunting impediment to divergence time estimation in birds is that resolution of many inter-ordinal phylogenetic relationships has proven obstinate, despite large data matrices with multiple character types  <cit> . although our reconstruction toptimal is overly optimistic in being fully resolved, it provides a useful alternative to the conservative tconsensus .

toptimal recovers several traditional orders as polyphyletic , consistent with expectations  <cit>  . although toptimal has caprimulgiform  families much more distantly related to one another than previous morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  investigations, differences in taxon sampling confounds direct comparison across studies. while coraciiformes  is not found to be monophyletic, the two recovered sub-groupings both fall within a larger clade containing owls , parrots  and woodpeckers and relatives . the monophyletic status of the order falconiformes has received mixed support in previous analyses  <cit> . placement of falconidae in toptimal is suspect and likely stems from insufficient taxon sampling from this family  <cit> . regardless, no support was found for hypotheses uniting falconiform taxa with owls   <cit>  or new world vultures  with storks   <cit> .

several monotypic avian families have traditionally proved difficult to classify. the enigmatic hoatzin  has variously been allied with at least four distantly related orders . we find here an alliance with doves , similar to joint analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences  <cit> . the taxonomically problematic sandgrouse  has alternatively been considered a member of charadriiformes  or columbiformes  <cit> . our reconstruction has the sandgrouse distantly related to both orders, and instead allied with falconiformes. this relationship is unsupported elsewhere and we have little confidence in this placement. the novel placement of the tropicbird  as sister to sphenisciformes is similarly suspect.

finally, we find no support in our mtdna analyses for the neoavian clades 'metaves' and 'coronaves' identified from nuclear β-fibrinogen intron analyses  <cit> , although our constraint tree allowed for this possibility . a major difference between these trees involves the phylogenetic position of the perching birds ; while nuclear dna analyses recover passeriformes as a relatively derived clade within 'coronaves'  <cit> , in toptimal they instead comprise the basal-most lineage of neoaves. this may be indicative of different phylogenetic signals in nuclear versus mtdna sequences, as other mtdna studies have also inferred a basal phylogenetic position of passeriformes in neoaves  <cit> .

uncertainty in tree topology and substitution rate evolution
while toptimal yields interesting hypotheses about avian relationships, the focus of this study is on estimating basal divergence times in neornithes and we might regard topology as a nuisance parameter . topological error is usually not considered in divergence time estimation, but potentially could systematically bias age estimates through:  incorrect placement of fossil calibrations; and  improper estimation of branch lengths. through our joint consideration of tconsensus and toptimal, we find that topology does have a systematic influence on inferred divergence times for nodes of interest , but that for the present data set this influence differed in direction across methods and was generally insignificant when confidence/credibility intervals were considered. removal of the restriction of a fixed topology in beast  yielded age estimates similar to those from multidivtime analyses assuming toptimal. although yielding diffuse estimates, this 'relaxed topology' approach better reflects uncertainty in the underlying data.

an interesting result reported here is that rates of molecular evolution are found to be non-autocorrelated across the neornithes tree , a result previously noted for virus and marsupial data sets  <cit> . an autocorrelation of rates would imply an inheritance of the trait 'rate of evolution'. this makes intuitive sense when considering that ancestor and descendant lineages are likely similar in body size, generation time, dna repair efficiency, population size and other traits influencing rates of sequence evolution, and the most popular molecular dating methods available indeed implicitly assume that rates are autocorrelated across a tree  <cit> . however, even if 'rate of evolution' is heritable, nodes separated by long periods of time may accumulate sufficient rate variation that autocorrelation in this trait will break down. alternatively, 'rate of evolution' may simply be more labile than we expect. regardless, violation of an implicit autocorrelation assumption did not have significant effects on inferred dates for nodes of interest . for example, r8s and multidivtime, which each deal with rate variation in an ancestor-descendant fashion, deliver age estimates that match quite closely to those generated by beast, which does not make such an assumption.

antiquity of basal avian lineages
all methods employed here agree that the basal divergences within neornithes occurred in the cretaceous , supporting the refutation of a cenozoic origin of modern lineages  <cit>  mandated by the discovery of the  <dig> my duck vegavis iaai  <cit> , which minimally forces five basal divergences into the cretaceous. moreover, our results are not dependent on this oldest fossil calibration, as analyses in r8s, pathd <dig> and multidivtime without using the vegavis constraint returned nearly identical results to those reported here ; indeed, we must paradoxically conclude that this oldest undisputed neornithean fossil was essentially uninformative in our molecular dating analyses. given the consensus across 'relaxed clock' methods employing very different assumptions about how molecular substitution rate evolves, we regard an early cretaceous origin of neornithes as robustly supported. this inferred cretaceous origin, and consequent survival of several avian lineages across the k-pg boundary  <cit> , is consistent with previous molecular studies  <cit>  and is supported by historical biogeography reconstructions  <cit> .

an explanation occasionally offered for the antiquity of molecular dates is that rates of sequence change may speed up during radiations  <cit> , consistent with a basic tenet of punctuated equilibrium theory where most character change is concomitant with speciation  <cit> , possibly resulting from stochastic effects during founder effect speciation  <cit> . if true, an elevated number of molecular substitutions recorded during diversification could erroneously be interpreted as a longer time span at a slower background rate, resulting in a systematic overestimation of divergence times for all nodes predating the radiation. some evidence exists for a correlation between speciation and character evolution  <cit> , although a study of island radiations failed to detect such an effect  <cit> . while punctuated molecular evolution may be less frequent in animals , this effect is nevertheless a prime candidate to explain the strong and persistent discrepancy between molecular- and fossil-based divergence estimates. however, we find no signal for punctuated  molecular evolution  <cit>  in the present data set. in addition, we fail to detect an accelerated rate associated with either the k-pg boundary or during the initial diversification of neornithes . if rates of sequence change were strongly influenced by diversification, we would expect clear departures from the inferred mean standardized substitution rate  <cit> . although cenozoic rates tend to be more variable than mesozoic  rates, we find no evidence for an obvious acceleration in substitution rate associated with any of the major nodes for any genetic partition. although these two approaches to identifying episodic evolution would ideally involve more comprehensive taxon sampling, if punctuated evolution were primarily responsible for inflating inferred molecular dates then we likely would have detected the effect with the present data matrix.

rather than narrowing the formidable 'rock-clock' gap through application of methods designed to minimize biases and accommodate uncertainty, we have instead considerably reinforced it. in part, the discordant age estimates can be explained through reference to the genuine time-lag  between the divergence of genetic lineages  and the evolution of diagnostic morphological characters . however, given the estimated magnitude of δrealized ma-fa , it is unlikely that δtrue ma-fa alone explains the dissonance. one the one hand, while the fossil record may be adequate for many evolutionary questions  <cit> , there are clear instances where it is not. the  <dig> my vegavis iaai  <cit> , for example, requires the coexistence of paleognathae representatives; however, cretaceous paleognaths are unknown. this may be a result of a geographical bias in fossil sampling favouring the northern hemisphere  <cit> , as many taxa are hypothesized as having southern hemisphere  origins  <cit> . although fossil gap analysis implies that a cretaceous origin of several avian orders is unlikely  <cit> , this method improperly assumes that fossils are randomly distributed  since the origin of a taxon; alternative fossil recovery curves can support very different scenarios, including scenarios that are more consistent with molecular genetic timelines  <cit> , even when the fossil record is particularly sparse  <cit> . although rightly considered with caution, the increasing number of fragmentary remains of putative neornithean lineages from the cretaceous  <cit>  lends credence to the ancient origin and diversification of neornithes. on the other hand, there may yet be some unrecognized biases in the analysis of molecular genetic sequences, and our results suggest new directions for future avian divergence time studies .

radiation of neornithes
despite broad agreement on the antiquity of basal divergences in neornithes, arbitration among macroevolutionary models  <cit>  to best describe the history of more derived lineages is complicated by disparity amongst various 'relaxed clock' results. two important points of distinction can be recognized . first, dating <dig>  and pathd <dig>  both infer bursts of speciation across the avian tree, while r8s , multidivtime  and beast  instead infer a more gradual diversification of neornithes. second, pathd <dig> alone supports a prominent radiation of avian families in the cenozoic, a scenario statistically rejected in many instances by the remaining four analyses. although published pathd <dig> divergence time estimates for neoaves using nuclear dna produced similarly young estimates  <cit> , a reanalysis of these same data using multidivtime roundly refuted the findings  <cit> , echoing the incongruence of pathd <dig> reported here. while the better reconciliation between molecular and fossil age estimates that pathd <dig> offers seems satisfying at first, the unique discrepancy of this method from the other much more rigorous and biologically realistic methods raises concern.

given the apparent lack of autocorrelation of substitution rates, together with the intrinsic topological uncertainty in the neornithes tree, the analyses in beast best reflect our current understanding of early avian evolution . without the restrictive assumptions inherent in other 'relaxed clock' methods, these analyses unambiguously support a cretaceous origin and diversification of basal avian lineages. even when considering large inferred credibility intervals,  <dig> early avian divergences are restricted to the cretaceous, similar to that found through the analysis of nuclear dna sequences  <cit> . it should be noted, however, that these nodes mostly represent order- and superfamily-level divergences; the majority of families sampled here  have their origins either overlapping or restricted to the paleogene, consistent with interpretations from the fossil record  <cit> . in this respect, our results are similar to those inferred from a comprehensive study of the tempo of early mammalian evolution  <cit> . the results of both studies indicate that significant cladogenesis occurred in the cretaceous, but that many crown groups diversified in the cenozoic.

future progress
while there is a growing consensus for the cretaceous origin of many neornithes orders and families, the rate and timing of their diversification  is not yet resolved. mtdna may have further utility in making progress on the problem, as our analysis of posterior credibility interval widths indicates that longer sequences would likely improve divergence time estimates . however, we recognize that mtdna is limited in that all sites belong to a single 'super-locus', and so a significant reduction of uncertainty  will ultimately require the supplement of multiple independent nuclear loci. in addition, while the present study was focused at the family level, increased taxon sampling will break up long branches  and improve branch length estimates. nevertheless, our results suggest fertile ground for future molecular research into this problem. for example, we find that:  variation in the number of substitutions across branches can be accommodated by a high variance stationary-rate model  <cit> ; and  rates are not autocorrelated across the avian tree in an ancestor-descendent fashion. this suggests potential for development of a hybrid model that accommodates both pieces of information and that future studies test assumptions of rate autocorrelation before invoking them, at least for the tree depth that we consider here.

in regards to the 'rock-clock' debate  <cit> , we feel that much of the perceived dissonance between fossil- and molecular-based age estimates stems from a comparison of different phylogenetic entities: molecular phylogeneticists generally deal with stem-group origins, while paleontologists generally concentrate on crown-group diversification  <cit> . moreover, it is too rarely emphasized that when dating the same node a genuine discrepancy is expected, as coalescent times  will predate cladogenesis while morphological diversification  will postdate cladogenesis. the reality is that in normal practice neither group directly addresses the main parameter of interest, the timing of speciation , the pattern of which is essential to the understanding of the origins of biodiversity. however, tools do exist to better estimate speciation times from both fossils  and genetic data . further, molecular methods can be augmented with greater information from the fossil record, possibly by incorporating models of preservation bias into temporal constraints  <cit> . newly developed methods exist where probability distributions can be applied to calibrated nodes in a bayesian framework  <cit> . although we recognize that this approach is superior in that it can lend more credence to the fossil record than standard minimum-age constraints, we refrained from using such methods here as there is currently insufficient information with which to specify meaningful prior distributions for most avian diversification times. realization of such distributions will require more communication between paleontologists and molecular phylogeneticists  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
one possible explanation for the discrepancy between molecular and fossil data in dating early divergences of avian lineages has been that the genetic data have been misinterpreted. in this vein, the ancient age estimates reported from previous molecular studies are seen as artefacts of oversimplified or improperly executed methods. here we have examined this conjecture by accommodating uncertainty in genetic divergence time estimates. through analyses of a large mtdna matrix using multiple cladistically tested calibrations, alterative tree topologies and several sophisticated relaxed clock methods we have found that the molecular estimates are robust to varying assumptions about the evolution of evolutionary rates and consistent with those from previous studies. our findings thus strongly support pre-k-pg genetic origins for multiple modern bird lineages, including various extant orders and families, in contrast to the model of post-k-pg diversification derived from a narrow interpretation of the fossil record.

