BACKGROUND
nuclear dbf-related/large tumor suppressor  kinases have been shown recently to control pathways regulating mitotic exit, cytokinesis, cell proliferation, morphological changes and apoptosis  <cit> . work over the past decade has revealed that lats kinases are core components of the hippo signaling pathway that has been shown to have a tumor suppressor function and to control tissue growth in flies and mammals  <cit> . loss of ndr/lats kinase activity has been related to the development of various human malignancies  <cit> .

the hippo pathway was identified first by genetic screens in drosophila melanogaster. the ste <dig> kinase hippo  and the ndr family kinase warts  constitute the core of the signaling cascade. the elucidation of the mechanisms that regulate the hippo pathway and the identification of interactors contributes to our understanding how growth and organ size in flies and mammals are controlled and why misregulation leads to the formation of cancer. recent studies in drosophila and mammalian cells have suggested that lats kinases are involved in the density-dependent control of cell proliferation through a cell morphology-based mechanism which is mediated by stress fibers and cooperates with a cell adhesion-based mechanism  <cit> .

homologs of the hippo pathway components have been shown to be present in yeast  <cit> , dictyostelium discoideum <cit> , and capsaspora owczarzaki <cit> , thus providing an opportunity for the genetic analysis of the essential and evolutionary functions of these important regulators. in particular dictyostelium is an easily accessible eukaryotic model system to gain insights into a variety of basic cellular processes, including the regulatory machinery controlling cell division  <cit> . the lats/ndr family of dictyostelium consists of two lats-related kinases, ndrc and ndrd, as well as two ndr-related kinases, ndra and ndrb  <cit> . in the present study, we have explored the function of ndrc, and provide evidence that ndrc plays an important role in cell division. based on the data presented, we propose that its activity is antagonistically controlled by rasb and rasg, two members of the ras subfamily of gtpases.

RESULTS
identification of ndrc as a ras gtpase interacting protein
dictyostelium discoideum ndrc  belongs to the lats/ndr kinase family, which constitutes a subgroup of agc  kinases  <cit> . the dictyostelium lats/ndr family consists of four kinases, two ‘shorter’ ndr kinases , and two ‘larger’ lats/ndr-related kinases  that are characterized by an extended n-terminus  <cit> . similarly, the mammalian lats/ndr kinase family is subdivided into two ‘larger’ lats kinases  and two ‘shorter’ ndr kinases  . the dictyostelium ndrc kinase is made up of  <dig>  amino acids , and its protein sequence comprises the general features described for other lats/ndr kinases, which include an n-terminal regulatory domain , an insert sequence  between subdomain vii and viii of the catalytic domain, an activation segment  as well as a conserved hydrophobic motif  .

when the dictyostelium gtpases rasg, rasc and rap <dig> were employed as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, ndrc was identified as a novel interacting protein that exhibited strong positive interactions with all three proteins. this screen also revealed that rasg and rap <dig> exhibited strong positive interactions with the previously described ras-binding domain  containing proteins pl3k and rip <dig>  in contrast, ndrc was the only protein that bound rasc in the yeast two-hybrid screen. the rbd of ndrc was localized between amino acid residues  <dig> and  <dig>  the sequence that interacted with all three ras proteins in the yeast two-hybrid assays . the minimal ras-binding domain of ndrc was not defined further by additional experiments. a bioinformatics analysis did not reveal evidence of a rbd sequence in this region, but this is not surprising since the rbd sequences of a number of other rbd proteins were not detected by bioinformatic analyses  <cit> .

ras protein binding to ndrc was confirmed by pull-down assays using the identified rbd of ndrc tagged to gst and dictyostelium lysates . bound ras proteins were detected by western blot analysis using specific anti-ras polyclonal antibodies. the experiment revealed that the ndrc-rbd interacted not only with rasg, rasc and rap <dig>  but also with rasb . this result was confirmed and extended by pull-down experiments using gst-tagged ndrc-rbd in combination with his-tagged ras subfamily proteins that allowed a more quantifiable comparison of the binding. these interaction studies showed that ndrc bound to the activated ras proteins but not to the wild type , although the wild-type proteins did bind in the presence of gtpγs . ndrc bound best to activated rasg and rasb, with lower levels of binding to activated rap <dig> and rasc . ndrc did not interact with either rasd or rass .

ndrc-null cells exhibit a severe defect in cytokinesis and aberrant numbers of centrosomes
to investigate the cellular function of ndrc, a knockout strain of the ndrc gene was generated by homologous recombination using a disruption construct carrying an inverted blasticidin-s resistance cassette within the partial ndrc gene sequence . the most striking phenotype of the ndrc-null cells when compared to the wild type was that the majority of mutant cells were larger and multinucleated . when wild-type and ndrc-null cells were fixed and stained with to-pro- <dig> to visualize the nuclei, and counterstained for actin using alexa fluor 488-coupled phalloidin, the increased number of nuclei in the mutant was clearly revealed , and this increase was quantified by nuclei counts of fixed, dapi-stained cell preparations . the percentage of mono-nucleated cells in wild type was 95% compared to only 29% in ndrc-null cells . the number of nuclei per cell in the ndrc-nulls peaked at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> indicating concerted mitosis .

an analysis of living cells lacking ndrc revealed that they were able to perform mitosis, but an impairment of cell division resulted in the formation of multinuclear cells. frequently, putative daughter cells were still connected by thin cellular bridges suggesting division by cytofission rather than mitosis-coupled cytokinesis . the generation times, measured for ndrc-null and wild-type cells were almost identical, regardless of whether cells were grown in shaking culture in rich axenic medium or on a solid substrate with bacterial lawns . since ndrc-null cells are considerably larger than wild-type cells, their cell masses increase at considerably faster rates indicating an additional defect in the control of cell growth.

inspection of multinucleated ndrc-null cells, fixed and stained with to-pro- <dig> for visualization of nuclei and immunostained with anti-α-tubulin antibodies to visualize microtubules and centrosomes, revealed a high percentage of mutant cells carrying increased numbers of centrosomes . frequently, the supernumerous centrosomes were not connected to the nuclei . to quantify the disruption of centrosome integrity, the ratio of centrosomes visualized by anti-α-tubulin staining to nuclei visualized by dapi staining, was determined for wild-type and ndrc-null cells . about one third  of the ndrc-null cells had more than one centrosome per nucleus, compared to only  <dig> % in wild-type cells. ndrc-null cells with evenly distributed centrosomes underwent mitosis in a synchronized manner  , but although the increased ratio of centrosomes per nuclei did not affect the ability of cells to perform concerted mitosis, the unattached surplus centrosomes were not capable of forming mitotic spindles .

aberrant numbers of centrosomes have also been observed for knockout strains of mouse lats <dig>  <cit>  and human ndr1/ <dig>  <cit> . the cell division defect in mammalian cells has been attributed to a disruption of the signaling cascade controlling cytokinesis on the one hand  <cit> , and a control of nuclear division on the other  <cit> . human lats <dig> was also reported to act as mitotic exit network kinase  <cit> , responsible for regulation of the g2/m-arrest  <cit> . in addition, the drosophila lats-homolog warts regulates mitotic progression  <cit> . however, despite these clear indications for a role of ndr/lats kinases in regulation of the cell cycle and/or cell division, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown.

subcellular localization of ndrc
gene expression profiling data indicated that ndrc is expressed at very low levels throughout the developmental cycle of dictyostelium   <cit> . in order to specify the cellular localization of ndrc, polyclonal antibodies were raised against ndrc. immunolabeling experiments with fixed dictyostelium cells indicated that ndrc is preferentially enriched at the centrosome . this localization was confirmed by co-staining with a monoclonal antibody directed against a genuine centrosomal component, the corona protein cp <dig>  <cit> . the centrosomal localization of ndrc was detectable only in a subfraction of cells, suggesting a cell cycle-dependent enrichment. expression of full-length ndrc with a n-terminal gfp-tag confirmed the localization at the centrosome. ndrc had not been detected in a previous proteome screen of the dictyostelium centrosome  <cit> , but was found to co-purify with centrosomes that were isolated from dictyostelium wild-type and cells expressing gfp-ndrc .

over-expression of a fusion protein comprising gfp and the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids of ndrc containing the rbd domain, showed a very similar localization as that reported previously for the ras-binding domain of human raf <dig> that relocates upon stimulation to active zones of the cell cortex  <cit>  . this finding indicates a preferential binding of rbd of ndrc to membrane-associated ras proteins. a gfp-fusion protein comprising the catalytic domain and the c-terminus of ndrc  localized to the cytoplasm and showed no specific enrichment .

putative control of ndrc by ras gtpase family members
we have shown previously that rasg-null cells or cells overexpressing rasb- exhibit a multinucleated cell phenotype that is similar to the one exhibited by the ndrc-null cells  <cit> . in addition, severe defects in cytokinesis in cells overexpressing the exchange factor rasgef-q, which acts specifically upstream of rasb have been described  <cit> . given that ndrc contains a rbd, it is conceivable that rasb or rasg exert regulatory functions on ndrc.

to further investigate the possible roles of rasg or rasb in ndrc function, we determined the subcellular localization of rasg and rasb. wild-type cells overexpressing gfp-tagged rasb or rasg were normal in respect to cell size and nuclei number, and the gfp-tagged proteins predominately localized to the cortex . the gfp-tagged activated forms of the proteins, rasb- and rasg-, also localized predominately to the cortex . however, whereas rasg- overexpression did not affect the cell phenotype , overexpression of rasb- caused disturbed cytokinesis characterized by an impairment of cells to sever the connection between daughter cells . this resulted in enlarged, multinucleated cells , a defect similar to that described previously for cells expressing an untagged rasb-  <cit> .

both, gfp-tagged rasb and gfp-rasg bound to the gst-ndrc-rbd, as shown by in vitro pull-down assays of wild-type ax <dig> cells expressing gfp-tagged ras proteins . although ndrc also binds rasc and rap <dig>  cell division is not affected by either the loss or up-regulation of rap <dig>  <cit> , or by the loss or up-regulation of rasc  <cit> . thus the significance of the binding of rap <dig> and rasc to ndrc remains to be established.

further evidence for a possible functional connection between the ras-gtpases and ndrc was obtained by measuring the levels of activated ras protein in the ndrc-null cells by western blot analysis of gst-byr2-rbd pull-downs using specific antibodies for the ras family members. levels of activated rasb and rasg were increased in the absence of ndrc compared to wild-type cells, indicating that ndrc acts as a negative regulator for activation of rasg and rasb . in contrast, the levels of activated rap <dig> and the total levels of all the ras gtpases were found to be identical in lysates of wild-type and ndrc-null cells . the mechanism involved in the feedback inhibition of rasg and rasb activation by ndrc, presumably at the level of rasgef activity, is not known at this time, but it appears to be a general mechanism for downstream ras effectors in dictyostelium, since similar results have been observed for pik null and ripa null cells.

the findings that an absence of rasg and the overexpression of activated rasb both result in a multinucleate phenotype suggest the possibility that rasb and rasg play antagonistic roles in regulating ndrc during cytokinesis . the multinucleate phenotype of rasg-null cells  <cit>  is consistent with a role for rasg in activating ndrc, whereas the multinucleate phenotype generated by over-expression of either activated rasb  <cit> , or the rasb-specific exchange factor gefq  <cit> , indicates that rasb is a negative regulator of cytokinesis and cell division.

the regulation of ndrc by rasg and rasb implies that these ras proteins would also be localized at the centrosome or in the nucleus. when cells were labeled with gfp-tagged ras proteins, we find wild-type rasb and rasg, as well as constitutively active forms of the two proteins, are localized predominantly at the plasma membrane. this result contrasts somewhat with a previous study, using antibody staining, that revealed rasb clearly localized at the nucleus  <cit> . when we stained cells with an antibody highly specific to rasg, the majority of the stain was associated with the cell cortex, but some stain was also detected in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus . these results imply that only a small proportion of the cellular rasg and rasb is localized in the nucleus, and are consistent with rasg and rasb both having other functions in the cell. in fact, rasg is not only involved in cytokinesis, but also in folate chemotaxis, in maintenance of cell shape, and in cell motility  <cit> . in addition, it has been shown recently that rasg, acting through pi3k, is important for pinocytosis  <cit> . evidence for other specific functions for rasb is less direct, but gefq-null cells exhibit myosin-ii over-assembly and defects in polarity  <cit> , implying a possible role for rasb in these functions, and rasb appears to be an essential gene  <cit> , suggesting an additional vital function for rasb.

CONCLUSIONS
we present evidence for a novel mechanism for the regulation of cell division in dictyostelium, involving the lats2-homolog ndrc and members of the ras subfamily of gtpases, rasb and rasg. we propose an antagonistic regulation, whereby the ndrc is activated by rasg and inactivated by rasb. the previously described interaction between the schizosaccharomyces pombe cdc <dig>  a small gtpase, and orb <dig>  a member of the lats/ndr group of kinases  <cit>  suggests the possible generality of this type of mechanism, and it will be important to investigate whether the mammalian lats kinases are also regulated by small gtpases during cell division.

