BACKGROUND
recent studies indicate that during the neonatal period oxytocin  has an organizational effect within the cns. neonatal manipulation of ot affects neuronal activity, as indicated by the expression of c-fos in neonates  <cit> , alters the number of ot neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus  of weanlings  <cit> , and the distribution of estrogen receptor alpha  in weanlings  <cit> . the effects of neonatal manipulation of ot are sexually dimorphic and site specific  <cit> . given that neonatal manipulation of ot affects mechanisms that regulate physiological and behavioral responses it is not surprising that neonatal manipulations also affect a variety of behaviors, many of which occur in adults  <cit> . neonatal manipulations of ot affect behaviors such as mating bout frequency  <cit> , alloparental behavior  <cit> , and behavioral reactivity to social isolation  <cit> . aside from a recent report on developmental effects of ot on the pituitary in adults  <cit> , the effects of early exposure to ot on the cns have been characterized primarily during the early postnatal development period up to and including weaning  <cit> . much remains to be known about the developmental effects of ot on the adult cns. therefore one of the goals of this study was to determine the effects of neonatal manipulation of ot on the production of ot in the pvn and the central distribution of erα over a longer period of time. previous studies of the effects on neonatal manipulation of ot have used a single dose of ot , and while these studies have produced significant results the dose is pharmacological. although no data are available on endogenous plasma ot levels in pups, data from adults suggest that a dose of  <dig> μg likely results in very high ot levels as it is  <dig> orders of magnitude higher than plasma concentrations in adult prairie voles  <cit> . thus, a second objective was to determine whether developmental effects are also observed with lower doses. below, we report the developmental effects of neonatal administration of ot or antagonist on central patterns of erα and ot neurons as observed in adult male and female prairie voles.

RESULTS
treatment effects were site-specific, sexually dimorphic, and dose-dependent. in males, treatment with ot antagonist  increased erα-immunoreactivity  in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis  . in females, treatment with low ot  resulted in a significant increase in erα-ir in the ventral lateral septum , while med ot  increased erα-ir in the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus  and the central amygdala  . there were no apparent treatment effects in the medial preoptic area , medial amygdala , central amygdala , or arcuate  in either males or females. however, in males, there was a tendency for ota to increase erα-ir in the arc . in contrast to erα-ir, there was no treatment effect on the number of ot-ir cells in the pvn or supraoptic nucleus  of the hypothalamus in either males or females .

discussion
previous studies have demonstrated that neonatal manipulation of ot affects the central production of ot  <cit>  and the number and distribution of erα-ir neurons  <cit>  during the neonatal period, at least up to  <dig> days after birth. other studies have shown that neonatal manipulation of ot can have long-term behavioral effects that are expressed a week to months after the initial treatment such as changes in response to social stimuli or reductions in parental care  <cit> . taken together these studies predict that the early effects of ot on the organization of the cns are long-term, and should not only be apparent in neonates, but also in adults. this is supported by a recent study that found alterations in ot content of the pituitary of adult rats resulting from neonatal ot and ota  <cit> . the results from our study further support the prediction that neonatal manipulation of ot can alter the adult cns, as neonatal manipulation of ot on the day of birth affected erα-ir in both males and females. the results from this study extend the previous findings indicating that the effects of increased or decreased ot during the neonatal period on the cns are long term. the organizational effects of ot vary with age and are dose-dependent and sexually dimorphic. the results also suggest that interactions between ot and erα during development are important in the regulation of behavior later in life.

developmental effects of ot vary with age and dose
previous studies, using c-fos as an indicator of neural activation, demonstrated that neonatal manipulation of ot has immediate effects on the cns  <cit> . it is unclear whether the immediate and developmental effects of neonatal ot or ota result from direct effects on the cns or result from indirect effects, perhaps through an afferent feedback response to ot stimulation of peripheral organs. if the differential neural activation seen in response to ot or ota treatment results from direct effects of ot on the brain, there is good reason to expect it to have developmental effects. there is ample opportunity for ot to affect the organization of the cns as ot receptor  distributions are still developing during the early postnatal period  <cit> . the opportunity for ot to alter the cns also is greater than that predicted by the adult distribution of otr as some regions such as the cingulate cortex and the medial mammilary nucleus express otr during the neonatal period but not during adulthood  <cit> . recent work has demonstrated that developmental effects of neonatal ot are evident as late as day  <dig>  <cit> . neonatal treatment with either high ot  or ota increased the number of ot-ir cells in the pvn of females at day  <dig>  <cit> , however the present results indicate these effects do not last into adulthood. this is somewhat surprising given that in rats, the same neonatal manipulations alter ot content of the pituitary in adulthood  <cit> , however the regulation of the oxytocinergic system is expected to differ between species showing a high degree of social interactions outside of copulation and species with more limited social interactions such as the rat. additionally, pituitary ot content and number of ot neurons in the pvn could be differentially regulated. it is possible that alterations in ot-ir were not observed in adult prairie voles because some aspect of physiological and neural maturation from weanling to adult reduces any differences in ot production. alternatively, differences in ot production might be lost as a result of the changing social environment, from a nest with contact with parents to housing with a single sibling. finally, an increased sample size could reveal treatment effects but, if so, would suggest the effects are not as robust as those seen at day  <dig> 

ot does, however, have lasting developmental effects on the distribution and number of erα-ir neurons. both neonatal ot and ota altered erα-ir in adult females, however the regions affected differed from those reported in 21-day old females. in day  <dig> females, high ot increased erα-ir in the vmh and ota decreased erα-ir in the mpoa  <cit>  but only lower doses, low ot and med ot, had effects on erα-ir lasting into adulthood. the lower doses moved erα-ir in the same direction as those observed by yamamoto et al.  <cit> , with both increasing erα-ir, however the lsv and vmh were affected, not the mpoa. in males, effects also varied depending upon age. neonatal treatment with ota had no apparent effects in males at day  <dig>  but by adulthood increases in erα were evident in the bst.

it is not surprising that the observable effects of neonatal manipulation of ot vary with age. development of neuroendocrine systems, both in terms of production of neuropeptides and sensitivity to hormones, can occur over a relatively long period of time , thus the organizational effects hormones on various brain regions or behaviors might be apparent at different time points. for example, it is clear that in prairie voles, the distribution of erα continues to change during the second and third postnatal weeks  <cit>  and changes may occur beyond that point. additionally, some sexual maturation occurs between day  <dig> and day 60– <dig>  the two ages for which data are available. it is expected that during intermediate ages there are some additional changes in the neuroendocrine system and the developmental effects of ot might be manifested differently after sexual maturation. dose-dependent effects of ot also were expected given that this is common for many biologically active chemicals and hormones. in order to put the dose-dependent effects observed here into context, future studies measuring endogenous levels of ot and natural variation in central ot will be necessary.

sexually dimorphic effects of neonatal ot/ota
sexually dimorphic responses to neonatal ot/ota is consistent with previous studies of the developmental effects of ot on both neuroanatomy  <cit>  and behavior  <cit> . most studies reporting data for both sexes have found females to be more sensitive than males to the developmental effects of ot on neuroanatomy and behavior  <cit> . sexually dimorphic effects on erα-ir, in particular, were expected based on sexual dimorphism in erα evident in adult prairie voles  <cit>  and on differences in ontogeny of the erα distribution in males versus females  <cit> . in the present study, developmental effects of ot were observed in both sexes but the regions and the direction of effect were different for males and for females. in males, ota increased erα-ir while in females, ot increased erα-ir. in light of the regions affected, the direction of response fits with behavioral traits associated with manipulation of ot. ota increased erα-ir in the bst of males. behavioral data suggests that ota treatment might generally increase anxiety or aggression  <cit>  and it has been hypothesized that an increase in erα in the bst is correlated with increased aggression  <cit> .

ot regulation of steroid sensitivity
in many species, the effects of ot are steroid-dependent and estrogen increases sensitivity to ot  <cit> . however, in highly social species, such as the prairie vole, it appears that ot regulates sensitivity to steroids. such an interaction is in keeping with the events leading up to copulation; prairie vole females require a prolonged period of social contact with a male before becoming sexually receptive  <cit> . social contact is regulated by ot  <cit>  while e regulates sexual receptivity, thus in a species requiring social contact prior to copulation, ot affects sensitivity to e  <cit> . additionally, evidence for ot regulation of e sensitivity come from studies of human breast cancer cell lines in which ot down regulates both erα mrna and erα protein expression  <cit> . furthermore, variations in maternal care that are associated with increased otr also increase erα expression in the mpoa  <cit> . it is becoming increasingly clear that neuropeptides interact with steroids to regulate behavior  and the results of this study indicate one more way in which neuropeptides might alter sensitivity to steroids. the fact that manipulations of ot early in life alter erα-ir in adulthood, suggests that ot might not simply regulate sensitivity to e through activational effects, but that organizational effects of ot produce lasting changes in sensitivity to steroids. our data provide an additional mechanism by which neuropeptides might act to alter or regulate sensitivity to steroids. this in turn has the potential to alter sociosexual behaviors mediated by ot and erα.

CONCLUSIONS
the results from this study advance findings from the previous studies that demonstrated organizational effects of ot during the neonatal period on erα and ot expression. first, the effects on erα expression/organization are long-term, being expressed in adulthood. second, the effects were not only sexually dimorphic, but the observed effect changed with age. significant changes in erα expression in males occurred at some point between weaning and adulthood while in females, significant changes were observed at both ages. in contrast to the observed organizational effects on erα, the effect on ot neurons in the pvn reported in juveniles were no longer observed in adults, suggesting that changes to the oxytocinergic system are temporary. third, alterations in erα-ir were site-specific and likely to be behaviourally relevant. for example, antagonist increased erα-ir in the bst and high levels of erα are associated with decreases in social behavior, as is blockade of otr early in life. there is mounting evidence for the role of ot in the development of the cns, perhaps mediating social behavior later in life. the data reported here provide further support for this hypothesis. more important, these data demonstrate that a neuropeptide can act during developmental periods to affect sensitivity to steroids later in life and indicates the importance of considering both neuropeptides and steroids in examining developmental effects of hormones on subsequent social behavior and underlying neuroanatomy.

