BACKGROUND
enrichment/depletion analysis of gene lists derived from high-throughput experiments is nowadays an established and important procedure which helps to analyze and interpret the output of an experiment under a system biology point of view  <cit> . a textbook example is the differential expression of genes under pathologic conditions like cancer. the differential expressed genes are likely to be important in the development of the pathology and it is therefore important to link them to biological knowledge available in databases. the enrichment or depletion of functional ontologies for these genes gives a valuable overview on the molecular bases of the analyzed pathology.

the first tool developed for this kind of analysis was onto-express which used functional annotations from the gene ontology  <cit> . since then many different tools have been developed like fatigo+  <cit> , david  <cit> , the further development of onto-express  <cit>  or recently annotation-modules  <cit>  . the goal of these methods is to detect gene/protein properties which are significantly over or underrepresented in a user given input list. the exact null distribution for this problem is the hypergeometric distribution  <cit> , and statistical tests like the fisher exact test can be implemented to calculate the statistical significance of the depletion/enrichment. the dichotomous character of these statistical tests imply directly that just qualitative gene properties can be used as annotations, e.g. those which can be assigned as a label like 'transcription' or 'mir-1'. however, many biologically interesting gene properties may not be qualitative but quantitative, e.g. continuously distributed . an important example is the number of protein-protein-interactions  in which a gene product is involved. the number of interactions can reach from  <dig> to hundreds in the case of hub proteins. in such cases, dichotomous statistical tests  cannot be directly applied unless the data is transformed . the discretization of continuous data potentially removes noise but will also suffer the loss of information and the effects of arbitrary classification . the analysis of the ppi is currently only available in fatigo+  <cit>  implementing a parameter free kolmogorov-smirnov test.

apart from the mentioned protein-protein-interactions, many other important quantitative gene properties can be conceived. examples of continuously distributed quantitative features are those related to sequence evolution such as the ka/ks ratio or substitution rates, the sequence composition like the g+c content or the codon bias. moreover, most of the tools for the analysis of gene lists focus on the gene products and less attention is paid to the promoter regions despite its importance in the regulation of gene expression. thus ignoring important features like helical deformations , dinucleotides densities, base composition or the degree of overlap with genomic elements like transposable elements or phylogenetically conserved elements  <cit> . moreover, current improvements in high-throughput techniques have a higher emphasis on the promoter region allowing now the experimental determination of methylation states, epigenetic marks or rna polymerase occupancy of thousands of promoters simultaneously. therefore, to further characterize the resulting genes and its promoters , a tool which can handle quantitative features and with a strong focus on the promoter regions would be of great importance.

we developed contdist, a web based tool which analyses and compares user provided gene lists. the novelty of the tool is that all the available features are quantitative annotations which cannot be analyzed in any existing tool. furthermore, no other tools have a strong focus on the promoter region. currently, the tool implements approx.  <dig> different annotations. several of these annotations are highly relevant in many studies such as ka/ks ratio, physical dna properties and base composition of promoter regions, overlap with genomic elements and gene expression. we demonstrate the usefulness and functionality of this tool, by means of two case studies. the first case study, a comparison of a list of genes with unmethylated promoters with a list of differentially methylated promoters, confirms some recent findings like markedly different cg, ca and tg densities. in both case studies we also identified new significant correlations which are detailed in the "results and discussion" section.

RESULTS
algorithm and data flow
three different input options are available : i) comparison of an input gene list to a background reference gene set ; ii) comparison of two user provided gene lists; and iii) comparison of an input gene list to the corresponding homologous genes in another specie . depending on the input different statistical tests are performed.

annotations
the current version of the annotation database holds information on  <dig> species, human , mouse , rat , fruit fly , chimpanzee , zebrafish  and cow . depending on the species between  <dig> and  <dig> annotations are available. these annotations can be clustered into six different categories: i) physical properties of dna and chromatin, ii) base composition, iii) evolution, iv) general gene/protein properties, v) overlap with genomic elements and vi) gene expression. a short summary of the available annotation features are provided in table  <dig>  a more detailed description of the annotations can be found on .

numerous properties are assigned in a genomic context and therefore a classification of the gene and promoter regions is needed. apart from the "intrinsic" gene regions like exons, introns and untranslated regions, several promoter regions are defined which are described in  <cit> .

physical dna and chromatin properties
the positioning of the nucleosomes plays an important role in cellular processes like the regulation of gene expression by means of modulating the accessibility of dna   <cit> . there is evidence that the nucleosome formation and/or positioning depends on intrinsic properties of the dna sequence such as flexibility or natural bending of adjacent base pairs  <cit> . in particular, the repetition of curved dna motifs positioned at intervals of one turn of the double helix can contribute to dna curvature and facilitates its wrapping around the histone surface. therefore the mean values for  <dig> helical deformations  were computed in different promoter regions by using the stiffness constants given in  <cit> . additional features related to dna methylation are also implemented as it has been described that the methylation of the 5'cythosine of cpg dinucleotides is related to compact and inaccessible chromatin state  <cit> . two predictions on the methylation probabilities and epigenetic states were subsequently considered. das et al  <cit>  predict a methylation probability for each single cpg in the human autosomes of the human genome assembly hg <dig> . the coordinates were first mapped to the most recent genome assembly  using the liftover tool from ucsc . next, the mean probability to remain unmethylated was computed for the cpgs located within the promoter regions . recently, bock et al proposed a method capable of predicting the "cpg island strength" by considering the epigenetic states, histone modifications and chromatin accessibility  <cit> . using this prediction it was possible to assign an epigenetic score to each promoter region containing at least one cpg island.

base composition
the base composition category contains basically the gc-content and dinucleotide densities in different gene and promoter regions. the density of methylable dinucleotides  may be of special interest as it is known that it correlates with the probability to become methylated  <cit> . on the other site, dinucleotides like tg and ca frequently arise by methylation and posterior mutation of cpgs and therefore the densities of these dinucleotides may also be interesting in evolutionary terms.

evolution
an interesting feature is the ka/ks ratio which allows the user to detect if different selective constraints acted on the genes in the input list  <cit> . the ka/ks ratios between different species were extracted out of the homologene.xml file provided by homologene . furthermore, several other values regarding the nucleotide and amino acid substitution rates were obtained from this file.

snps
the snp density in different gene and promoter regions is also available in the annotation database for human, mouse and rat. the snp information was retrieved from dbsnp <dig> for human and mouse and version  <dig> for rat.

general gene/protein properties
this category holds some miscellaneous features like the number of protein-protein interactions a gene product is involved in or the codon bias. the mortality or lethality of specific protein mutations in yeast have been shown to correlate with the number of protein-protein interactions   <cit> . based on this knowledge we extracted the number of protein interactions for every protein based on the information in the interact database  without distinguishing between the types of interaction. this means that contdist can be used to test the hypothesis that proteins with many interactions correlate with severe phenotypes. the effective number of codons was calculated by means of wright's formula  <cit>  as explained in  <cit> .

overlap with genomic elements
the presence of transposable elements in untranslated and promoter regions is believed to affect gene expression through the donation of transcriptional regulatory signals  <cit> . therefore, the differential degree of overlap with transposable elements between two gene lists might be an interesting biological feature to be considered. therefore the coverage of different gene and promoter regions with transposable elements and repeats was computed by using the appropriate data from the ucsc table browser . furthermore, particular cpg island properties were assigned to all genes which have an island overlapping its tss . in concrete the gc-content, the observed/expected ratio, the cpg density and the length of the islands predicted by cpgcluster  <cit>  were assigned.

gene expression
the percentage of tissues where the gene is expressed, the mean expression over all tissues and the peak expression rate was computed from the gene atlas for human and mouse transcripts  <cit> . the expression data was downloaded from the ucsc table browser . all probes with lower expression values than  <dig> units  <cit>  were filtered out and the remaining probes were subsequently averaged over different probes of the same gene.

ids and gene lists
for human, mouse and rat the mapping concept introduced in annotation-modules  was reused allowing many different identifiers as input for these species. given the strong focus on the promoter regions of the genes, the available annotations have been calculated mainly for two different gene tables, refseq genes  <cit>  and ensembl genes  <cit> . for the fruit fly, flybase gene tables were considered as well  <cit> .

homologous genes
the data from homologene is used to generate the mapping from the input gene identifiers to genes in the other species . these mappings allow cross-species mapping between all homologous gene clusters for currently  <dig> species. homologene uses refseq protein identifiers  which are internally mapped to refseq genomic identifiers . the cross species mapping option is therefore currently only available when genomic refseq identifiers are given as input.

statistical analysis
the disadvantage of many statistical tests is that they are only applicable if the tested random variable is gaussian. many of the gene or promoter properties which are stored in the annotation database, however; are not normally distributed. to obtain unbiased statistical tests, we implemented both, non parametric tests  and randomization/bootstrap tests of the mean. contdist applies three different sets of statistical tests depending on the type of user input and additionally calculates basic statistical parameters estimated from the input samples .

the kolmogorov -smirnov test can be applied in the same way for the first two input options , however; the randomization/bootstrap tests change slightly between the different options as explained in materials and methods. for the third option where two lists of homologous genes are compared  a paired t-test is used as described in detail in the methods section.

case studies
contdist is a user friendly tool which dynamically generates the input pages depending on the previous steps. the contdist webpage contains a step-by-step tutorial . the input procedure is divided into three steps: 1) choose the species from which the input data is derived, 2) choose the gene table and the analysis type , and 3) select the annotations for analysis . figure  <dig> shows an output page for a comparison of two input lists. the output pages differ for the different analyses and are explained in more detail on the tutorial page.

the main purpose of this section is to illustrate the general functionality of the tool and its usefulness. as mentioned above, the tool has a strong focus on the promoter regions, and therefore many cases can be conceived in which this tool might deliver important information. for example, for differentially expressed genes it might provide valuable additional information for characterization of the promoter properties of these genes. furthermore, this tool will help to characterize and further analyze genes obtained by many of the emerging high-throughput techniques . finally, this tool can be used to carry out in silico research which we demonstrate by means of the second case study; the analysis of housekeeping vs. tissue specific genes.

case study 1: genes with unmethylated vs. differentially methylated promoter
as mentioned above, the tool has a strong focus on the promoter regions. in the first case study we therefore used two gene lists derived from the methylation states of the promoter regions. for this aim we used the data from the human epigenome project  which recently released methylation data of approx.  <dig>  million cpgs over  <dig> tissues in the chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . from this data we obtained two gene lists: one with unmethylated promoter regions  and another one with differentially methylated promoter regions .

significant differences are highlighted in bold. "r" is used to specify different promoter regions: r <dig> is the transcription start site , r <dig>  and r <dig> . g+c stands for the gc-content, bock-comb is the combinatorial score  of bock cpg islands overlapping the tss  and "unmeth prob in r3" is the mean probability of the r <dig> region to remain unmethylated. nucc and protc are the substitution probabilities per base/amino acid  and nc is the codon bias. m is the abbreviation of "methylated".

in first place we analysed the differences in gc-content between the two gene lists in several gene regions. we found the differences to be highly significant in the r <dig> region . promoters which are generally unmethylated are by far gc-richer than those which show differential methylation . interestingly, this difference vanishes when analyzing a larger upstream region r <dig>  and also the gc-content of the introns does not show a significant difference between the two gene lists. this suggest firstly, that the difference in gc-content is highly concentrated in a short region around the tss  <cit>  and secondly, that these differences are not due to the location in different isochores but real differences in the promoter type. furthermore, another indicator of isochore membership, the gc-content in the third position of the codons  <cit> , seems to confirm this as it does not show a significant difference between the two gene lists.

recently it has been shown that strong cpg promoters  are mostly unmethylated even when inactive while cpg poor promoters seem to be the preferential targets for de novo methylation in somatic cells  <cit> . our results in table  <dig> seem to confirm this finding. the mean cpg density in r <dig> promoter regions of unmethylated genes is twice as high as the corresponding density in differentially methylated promoters . methylated cpgs are prone to mutate towards tg/ca, and table  <dig> shows that the densities of these dinucleotides are higher in differentially methylated promoters. this indeed suggests higher de novo methylation and evolutionary loss of cpgs .

next, we analyzed the differences in dna properties like bending and curvature  which to our knowledge have not been analyzed in this context. table  <dig> shows that a large difference exists in the twist . this means that differentially methylated promoters are significantly stiffer than unmethylated promoters under this rotation. on the contrary, another rotational deformation, tilt, does not show a significant difference between the two methylation gene lists. this is interesting as it means that a difference in gc-content does not necessarily implies a difference in the mean dna properties.

two predictions on methylation probabilities and chromatin states were also analyzed. the mean probability to remain unmethylated is  <dig>  in the unmethylated gene list while it is just half as much,  <dig>  in the differentially methylated promoters. the epigenetic scores given by bock et al.  <cit>  can range from  <dig> to 1:  <dig> indicates completely silenced and inaccessible regions and  <dig> means completely unmethylated and highly accessible regions. table  <dig> shows additionally that the epigenetic score indicate also less methylation and a more open chromatin structure for the unmethylated promoters.

another interesting outcome is related to the conservation of the genes. the results indicate that the genes with unmethylated promoters are more conserved  than genes with differentially methylated promoters. this applies to both the substitution probability per base and amino acids and it is also reflected in the ka/ks ratios. values near  <dig> indicate strong negative selection while values higher than one might point out positive selection  <cit> . the mean ka/ks ratio of unmethylated promoters  is just half as high as in the case of differentially methylated promoters .

finally, we found that neither the peak expression  nor the mean expression  show significant differences between the two gene lists. however, the expression breadth  shows a significant difference . it is known that approx. 60% of all genes posses a cpg island overlapping its tss and that cpg islands are higher correlated with housekeeping genes than with tissue specific genes  <cit> . given the higher cpg density observed in unmethylated promoters, it can be assumed that they are also more correlated to cpg islands. however, a higher correlation towards cpg islands implies also a higher correlation to housekeeping genes, what in turn can explain the higher observed expression breath in unmethylated genes.

case study 2: housekeeping  vs. tissue specific genes 
the lists of housekeeping and tissue specific genes where derived from the expression data described above in the section 'gene expression'. we considered a gene as housekeeping if it is expressed in all  <dig> tissues . on the other hand, we define the tissue specific genes to have an expression breadth lower than 10% .

the differences between housekeeping and tissue specific genes have been intensively studied over the last years . the understanding of the differences between these two groups regarding its genomic structure, evolutionary rate and transcriptional regulation is fundamental to understand transcriptomics in general. we have chosen this example to demonstrate that the presented tool can also be used to carry out in silico research.

several well established differences do exist between hk and ts genes, like the higher expression rates, the high association of hk genes with cpg islands and the higher conservation of the coding region in hk genes. in table  <dig> we confirm these well established differences between these two groups, showing in this way that by means of the presented tool many fundamental gene properties can be analyzed and compared in an easy and quick way. no consensus does exist on the lengths of the coding regions and mrnas. the results shown in table  <dig> coincide with studies based on microarray expression data  showing that ts genes seem to have slightly longer cds than hk genes. finally we also analyzed the differences in the number of protein-protein interactions. we found a significant difference between the two gene groups showing the hk genes have more ppi than the ts genes, a result which to our knowledge has not been reported before.

subst. per aa
the tool permits to confirm quickly some known aspects like the difference in expression levels, association to cpg islands and higher conservation of hk genes. the tool also detects that hk genes products have on average more interaction partners, a finding which to our knowledge has not been reported so far.

CONCLUSIONS
we present contdist, a tool which can analyze and compare continuously distributed gene and promoter properties. thus, the novelty of our tool resides in its strong focus on the promoter regions, which have been widely disregarded so far by others, and the fact that contdist uses quantitative features instead of labelled annotations . currently, the annotation database holds around  <dig> different gene and promoter features for each of the  <dig> species which are currently available. it implements  <dig> different analysis options: comparison of two input gene lists, a gene list vs. a reference list and the comparison of an input list with its corresponding homologous genes. for each of the analysis types, the appropriate statistical tests are implemented like the kolmogorov-smirnov test, randomization tests of the mean or paired t-test. the output displays in a concise way the statistical significances, graphical representation of both the annotated input data and the statistical tests and a basic statistics of the input data. moreover, it also provides the annotated gene lists for download. therefore, this tool can also be used for annotation purposes.

we showed the usefulness of the tool by means of two case studies. in the first one, we compared genes with unmethylated to those with differentially methylated promoters and in the second one we analysed the fundamental differences between housekeeping and tissue specific genes. the latter also demonstrates the usefulness of this tool in fundamental in silico studies. in both case studies we could quickly confirm some recent findings like the increased probability of de-novo methylation for less cpg-dens promoters  <cit>  or the higher expression levels of hg genes. however, we also demonstrated that contdist can reveal new insight to biology function. we reported striking differences in the mean stiffness of different helical deformations of dna between unmethylated and differentially methylated promoters. it turned out that the rotation around the center line of the dna helix  is much stiffer in differentially methylated promoters. on the contrary, no significant difference could be found for another rotational deformation  which shows that base composition cannot account for the differences found for twist. finally, the tool also revealed that genes with unmethylated promoters are much more conserved than genes with differentially methylated promoters and a significant difference in the number of protein-protein interactions between housekeeping and tissue specific genes.

