BACKGROUND
in  <dig>  baas-becking stated with respect to microbes that 'everything is everywhere' with the important qualification 'the environment selects'  <cit> . this ubiquitous dispersal hypothesis  of global dispersal with transient local occurrence is the focus of increasingly active debate  <cit> . it is supported by many surveys of protist morphospecies on a global scale, but exceptions have been proposed  <cit> . microbial cosmopolitanism is thought to be driven primarily by the random dispersal pressure generated by vast population sizes of cells below a body-size of approximately  <dig> mm  <cit> . a dependent hypothesis states that global protist species richness is consequently relatively low, as opportunities for allopatric divergence are limited or absent, and that the local to global species ratio is high, theoretically approaching  <dig>  <cit> . in other words, the diversity of microbial species found in one locality generally represents global levels of diversity within that habitat. however, recent molecular studies have contributed several new perspectives  <cit> , mainly 1) that diversity of 18s rdna genotypes  within morphospecies can be very high; 2) that many 18s-types have cosmopolitan distributions, and 3) some 18s-types within morphospecies have ecologically and/or geographically restricted distributions. these and other investigations indicate that protist morphospecies usually offer too crude an evolutionary resolution to be ecologically informative  <cit> , reinvigorating the debate about at what level of taxonomic distinction are protists in fact cosmopolitan  <cit> . foissner and colleagues promote a moderate endemicity model  <cit> , which proposes that while some protist morphospecies have cosmopolitan distributions, other, perhaps rarer protists have restricted distributions. evidence for this hypothesis is comprehensively reviewed in  <cit> . our culture-independent, molecular screening approach provides a robust framework for testing the moderate endemicity model at high phylogenetic resolution, as it does not distinguish between protists which differ in ease of propagation in the laboratory, or ease of detection and study by microscopy.

cercomonads are benthic heterotrophic flagellates  comprising the genera cercomonas, eocercomonas, and paracercomonas  <cit> . they are abundant in soils  <cit>  and aquatic environments, being among the most prominent bacterivorous protozoa. as global dispersal should theoretically be easier for marine protists, making endemicity less likely, we preferentially sampled soil and freshwater environments to test the udh more rigorously. as some cercomonad 18s-types are globally distributed  <cit> , we used its <dig> rdna sequences, which evolve significantly faster than 18s rdna sequence , to determine whether geographically restricted distributions could be detected within cercomonad 18s-types at this higher level of resolution. as there are hundreds of different cercomonad 18s-types  <cit> , we used pcr primers targeted to three very narrow taxonomic groups comprising  <dig> to  <dig> 18s-types each . this approach enabled us to maximize the chances of detecting the same genotypes in different samples even when rare. to be representative, we targeted three different regions of the cercomonad tree incorporating at least one genus from each of the two main cercomonad clades   <cit> . our intensive sampling of the rapidly-evolving its <dig> rdna marker reveals both ubiquitous and restricted distributions and thus demonstrates that biogeography in microbes and macro-organisms differs only in degree. we also show that cercomonad strains within a single 18s-type can differ in terms of phenotype and ecological preferences.

RESULTS
fig.  <dig> is a general tree of cercomonad diversity, showing the positions of the three very narrow lineages targeted in this study. in order to achieve a very intense sampling of these lineages and avoid amplifying a vast number of intermediate lineages  irrelevant to our present purpose we used pcr primer pairs including one primer highly specific for each narrow lineage . fig.  <dig> shows that despite the extreme narrowness of our primer specificity we recovered up to  <dig> distinct its-types within a single 18s-type, and that two groups  have some globally distributed its-types . the other group  was sampled from only three biogeographical regions , and revealed many its-types from two regions but only one from all three. most its-types  were detected only in one region. the provenances of all 18s- and its-types are shown in table  <dig>  as more libraries were screened within each clade, individual its-types were increasingly recovered from more than one continent. this suggested that the true diversity present in the environment remained undersampled. to explore this further, we did two things.



 these additional genotypes were also detected, and were not recovered from any other site. 

firstly, for group α, which contains the largest number of putatively geographically restricted its-types, more clones were sequenced from the libraries constructed from the largest number of successfully amplified ednas  – those from europe marine and panama marine – and those producing the highest number of putatively 'endemic'  its-types – new zealand and australia; see table  <dig>  all  <dig> new sequences from these four libraries matched its-types previously recovered; suggesting that sampling of these libraries was at or near saturation . one of these its-types , previously only recovered from panama, was thereby shown to be present in european samples. secondly, primers specific to subclades of α  were designed in order to probe intensively previously untested ednas to determine whether its types retrieved from only one or two locations in the original analysis were in fact more widely distributed. pcr screening and sequencing showed that clade a , previously detected only from peru was also present in new zealand, although clade f, originally from australia/new zealand could still only be found in australasian samples. these additional experiments show that there was at least some undersampling in our initial data set. thus some its-types are probably actually more widely distributed than figs 3b–d suggests, especially for groups β and γ where this more intensive additional sampling was not done. however, this extra sampling of group α increased the geographic distribution for only two clades.

furthermore, of  <dig> its-types detected from only one biogeographical region , five were retrieved from more than one library, all within group α. given the high level of our sampling, this suggests that these its-types are biogeographically restricted . it is particularly striking that sequence db-0505- <dig> on fig. 3b was detected in three separate freshwater australasian libraries and in no others. one should therefore not extrapolate from our finding four clear examples of global ubiquity to the conclusion that this is true of all cercomonad its-types. it cannot reasonably be argued that all genotypes are both globally distributed and equally abundant on all continents. if they were, we should easily have found db-0505- <dig> in libraries constructed from other continents. it seems probable that it is either really restricted to australasia or else dramatically more abundant there at the time of sampling. even the latter is contrary to the core assumptions of the udh, unless it could be demonstrated that none of the samples on any other continents were from ecologically similar sites to those sampled from australasia. it is possible that such its-types have a patchier distribution than those that are easily found at many sites globally; but although patchiness combined with rarity and undersampling might account for the restricted distribution of some of the sequences we encountered in single libraries, it is unlikely to explain all examples of apparent biogeographic restriction. three of the five its-types detected in more than one library but from only one biogeographical region were from australasia. these are shown in figs 3b and 3c as clusters x  and z. both putative clades are supported by multiple unique and identical sequence motifs in conserved alignment regions of its <dig>  as shown in fig.  <dig>  x and z are illustrative of the dominance of australasian-derived sequences  in the set of  <dig> its-types recovered from only one biogeographical region . as is well known, australasia is the most geographically isolated continent and shows exceptionally high endemicity for higher animals, e.g. monotremes and marsupials, and plants  <cit> . perhaps it also has an unusually high level of endemic cercomonad genotypes.

it is theoretically possible that seasonal differences in cercomonad strain occurrence and/or relative abundance could account for some of the distribution patterns described here. however, unpublished data from comprehensive sampling of cercomonads at several sites in the uk suggest that if such shifts in abundance occur they would certainly not preclude detection by the very specific primers used in this study . many, if not all, genotypes detected at these sites were present in both winter and summer. the times of sample collection for the present study are given in table  <dig> 

nine its-types were recovered from both marine and non-marine environments . though only a small proportion of the total, this suggests that the marine/non-marine transition is unusually easy and rapid for these cercomonads. protozoa in marine and non-marine habitats are largely distinct  <cit> . many major taxa are restricted to one or the other environment: radiozoa, phaeodarea, xenophyophorea, pelagophyceae, and most foraminiferan subgroups are exclusively marine, whereas mycetozoa  are never marine. even in groups where some marine/freshwater shifts have occurred, there are many substantial subclades that are apparently exclusively one or the other, for example in bodonids and goniomonas  <cit> . some lineages have clearly undergone such shifts more frequently than others and are apparently more adaptable in this respect. yet even in such groups not all strains can be encouraged to adapt physiologically from 'marine' to 'non-marine'  conditions in laboratory cultures, and even where this can be achieved there is no guarantee that it can and does happen in nature. on present evidence the fraction of protist lineages able to live in both marine and non-marine habitats is very small.

the unusual capacity of some cercomonads to make relatively rapid switches between marine and non-marine environments might greatly facilitate their global dispersal. to see if an ability to grow in marine habitats is a general property of these cercomonads, we tested strains from clades α and γ isolated from soil or freshwater in marine media: strains xt <dig>  nz <dig> c, xt <dig>  ec south africa, 5a new zealand, and panama  <dig> , and c <dig>  xt <dig>   <dig> e, and c <dig>  were inoculated into media at different concentrations, and observed for five weeks. the results are summarized in table  <dig>  none of the strains could grow in full strength seawater medium , showing that not all strains with the same 18s rdna sequence can grow in both marine and non-marine media, even though some its genotypes can be found in both habitats . in fact, only strain  <dig> e grew at all well in 50% swm, although the cells were unusually inactive. all other strains tested grew very poorly or not at all in 50% swm, and grew with highly varying degrees of vigour in 25% swm. our observations, based on replicated, standardized cultures, show that cercomonad strains with identical 18s rdna but different its <dig> sequences can differ in several respects: salinity tolerance, propensity to form cysts, vigour in standard non-saline media , size and basic cell morphology . in our experiments the greatest differences in salinity tolerance were between strains with slightly different 18s sequences, even when the degree of genetic difference was at or below our threshold for defining unique 18s-types. this reinforces the growing awareness that taxonomic units based on 18s rdna identity are at least sometimes insufficiently resolving to identify distinct ecological entities  <cit> . given the very close rdna similarity between the strains studied, it appears that the evolution of many physiologically and evolutionarily significant characters may be relatively rapid in cercomonads.

n/a = no data

* although the its <dig> sequences for ec and 5a are identical, and 18s rdna is identical in the v <dig> region , ec has an insert near the 3' end of 18s and is therefore clearly a different strain. this is the only strain in this study known to have such an insert.

a see figs  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

b identical numbers indicate strains with identical sequences.

c identical numbers indicate strains with strain traits other than size  which were indistinguishable from others in the same medium under light microscopy .

d overall performance of strains under a range of saline medium regimens, as described in methods. x means that no living cells were seen.

e size range determined from 3+ independent cultures observed over a period of  <dig> months.

f indicates the propensity of the strain to form cysts in volvic & grain cultures, summarized from observations of 3+ independent cultures observed over a period of  <dig> months. x = no cysts seen,  = cysts infrequent and sparse,  = cysts regular at low to medium densities,  = cysts readily formed and seen at high densities.

g a measure of the ability of the strain to form dense cultures in volvic & grain medium, which persist well over time , summarized from observations of 3+ independent cultures observed over a period of  <dig> months.  = rarely or never reach high density,  = may reach medium to high density but do not persist,  = usually reach high densities and/or persist for long periods without encysting or disappearing from the culture.

h see ref.  <dig>  not included on figs  <dig> and  <dig> as there is no its <dig> sequence available. not included in culture experiments.

the strains used for the culture experiments were all isolated from soil and freshwater and we had no prior evidence suggesting that any could grow in marine media; none of these cultured its-types correspond to those retrieved from the libraries . the culture experiments suggest that some its-types are tolerant to a wider range of salinity levels than others, and that there are its-types which are genuinely restricted to non-marine environments. of the  <dig> its-types detected in more than one library, none was exclusively marine, whereas nine were found only in non-marine libraries. this suggests a freshwater ancestry for these cercomonad groups and that only a minority of its-types tolerate high salinity. many protists persist in unfavourable environments by encysting. different its-types may also differ in propensity to form cysts; for example in paracercomonas ekelundi  they are 'formed readily'  <cit> , whereas this is not true of all other its-types within that 18s-type . our culture experiments also showed that cultures of identical its-types were more similar to each other than those with different its <dig> sequences in respect of a suite of traits, which are likely to be ecologically significant .

these observations suggest that differences in its sequence may be useful as markers for identifying clearly distinct biological/taxonomic units. it has been shown for strains from a broad range of taxa  that boundaries of sexual compatibility appear to coincide with phylogenetic groups defined by individual compensatory base changes in its <dig> rdna  <cit> . more recently, amato et al.  <cit>  have shown that cryptic sister species are profuse in the diatom genus pseudo-nitzschia, where biological species correspond to strains with identical helix regions of its <dig>  in pseudo-nitzschia the degree of differentiation between strains was similar for its <dig> and its <dig>  although in at least one case divergence in its <dig> sequences was more marked than that in its <dig>  <cit> . with this one exception, its <dig> sequences within a biological species were identical. if cercomonads are similar to diatoms, ciliates, and green algae in this respect, then the majority of 'species' would have no detectable variation in its <dig>  and the majority of separate its <dig> types would be separate species. in this scenario it would be unsurprising that distinct its1-types respond differently to culture variations. however, it is not known whether cercomonads are sexual, and there are insufficient morphological characters  that could be robustly related to its divergence. thus biological species cannot currently be defined for cercomonads.

CONCLUSIONS
our study is so far unique in screening such large numbers of globally distributed ednas with pcr primers so narrowly targeted as likely to include relatively few 'sibling species'. our data demonstrate on the one hand that global dispersal of at least some cercomonad its-types occurs faster than divergences among these relatively fast-evolving markers. on the other hand, many its-types appear to be more restricted in distribution; several are candidates for being genuinely endemic to one biogeographic region. still more intensive sampling would be necessary to decide whether the majority of strains found only once in this study fall in the cosmopolitan or endemic category. however, our results are more decisive than earlier indications in the ciliate paramecium that one sibling species of the p. aurelia complex may be endemic to eurasia  <cit> ), whereas many are cosmopolitan. some assertions of endemicity in paramecium  <cit>  were attributable to undersampling  <cit> . several species are almost certainly genuinely geographically restricted , though in some cases apparently because of latitudinal/climatic factors  <cit>  rather than limited dispersibility, and thus not counter-examples to the ubiquitous dispersal theory. targeted species-specific environmental dna sampling is needed in these ciliates along the lines of our present study to distinguish between undersampling, latitudinal/climatic geographic restriction, and genuine historically based endemicity. thus, just as for animals and plants, some protist species or reasonable surrogate markers for species such as its genotypes are genuinely cosmopolitan, whereas others show continental endemism. in this respect our results support the moderate endemicity model described above.

to measure true levels of endemism in microbial eukaryotes would require extensive testing of a large number of protist groups from across the eukaryote tree with at least as much intensity as we demonstrate in this paper. what is now clear is that some of the perception of greater cosmopolitanism in microbes  <cit>  is attributable to the taxonomic artefact of lumping huge numbers of genetically very different organisms into a single crude 'morphospecies'. our study confirms that the 18s-type, currently the most frequently used marker for distinguishing protist strains, is too coarse for distinguishing between ecologically and biogeographically significant units in cercomonads. the next key question is whether cercomonad its-types correspond to biological species. if they do, cercomonad species numbers are likely to be at least  <dig> times greater than yet described. thus currently the number of protozoan species is probably hugely underestimated.

