BACKGROUND
filamentous fungi are among the most widely used whole cell biocatalysts in a host of agricultural, food, environmental and bioenergy related applications  <cit> . not surprisingly, there is tremendous interest in manipulating the genetics of fungi to improve their industrial performance. unfortunately, traditional methods of genetic engineering are expensive, slow and manually intensive. moreover, fungi possess complex regulatory circuits that intimately control cellular growth and metabolism. consequently, single, or even multiple directed mutations often fail to produce the desired results. newer methods, such as gene prospecting  <cit> , have been developed that are higher throughput, however such methods are still limited by the fact that many favorable phenotypes, like sustained thermotolerance, often require genome-wide changes  <cit>  that are difficult to select for by inserting individual genes or even groups of genes. the only practical way to alter such complex phenotypes is using continuous culture to select for genetic variants that can adapt to gradual changes in environmental conditions – in essence, harnessing the power of evolution by natural selection  <cit> .

there are two widely used methods for continuous culture, serial dilution and chemostats, both of which are plagued by serious limitations that prevent their use for experimental evolution. for a detailed discussion of these limitations see de crécy et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . serial dilution requires the periodic transfer of a random sampling of cells to a new vessel and, consequently, is troubled by contamination problems. while serial dilution has been used to experimentally evolve filamentous microbes on plates  <cit> , this methodology cannot be used in liquid cultures because the cells form aggregates and individual cells cannot be randomly chosen for dilution. chemostats and similar continuous culture devices are closed systems and are not plagued by contamination. indeed, filamentous fungi have been cultured in chemostats  <cit> . however, filamentous fungi prefer to grow on solid surfaces and they readily adhere to the walls of chemostats, thus evading dilution as well as forming heterogeneous populations. wall growth, even small amounts of it, limits the length of time cells can spend adapting in a chemostat, making the technology inadequate for long-term adaptation.

a new method of continuous culture, called the evolugator™, has been developed that circumvents many of the problems associated with serial dilution and chemostat technology  <cit> . more importantly, the evolugator™ is, in principle, capable of culturing filamentous fungi continuously ad infinitum without wall growth becoming problematic. this technology represents a critical breakthrough for industrial mycology, allowing the development of fungal strains for virtually any application.

herein, we report the first application of the evolugator™ technology for the evolutionary adaptation of filamentous fungi of commercial importance. the use of the entomopathogenic fungus metarhizium anisopliae as a biological alternative to chemical pesticides has gained prominence and commercialized products based upon the fungus are available worldwide  <cit> . as a species, m. anisopliae has a broad host range that includes over  <dig> insects species and includes ticks, mites, and other members of the class arachnida, although many individual strains have a narrower host range  <cit> . commercial m. anisopliae formulations have been developed as biological control agents for various beetles, cockroaches, weevils, termites, flies, gnats, thrips and ticks  <cit> . in other countries, m. anisopliae has been applied for the control of grasshoppers, locusts, cockchafers, grubs, borers and even malaria-vectoring mosquitoes  <cit> .

despite their potential, however, several factors have hindered widespread adoption of fungi as part of biological control regimes. in particular, efficacy against certain insects is impeded by the relatively low resistance of these fungi to elevated temperatures  <cit> . thermotolerance is important because some insects can elevate their body temperatures above ambient, particularly when diseased, either as part of their innate immune response or by basking in sunlight; a phenomenon termed "behavioral fever"  <cit> . since the upper thermal limit for conidial germination and growth of many commercially useful fungi is generally 32–34°c  <cit> , this represents an effective means of staving off fungal infections. it is also important to note that non-thermotolerant fungi are not effective in tropical and subtropical climates where ambient temperatures exceed those that permit fungal growth.

not surprisingly, significant resources have been dedicated to developing methods for genetic engineering and other manipulation of m. anisopliae to improve its efficacy as a biocontrol agent  <cit> . of particular interest is the development of thermotolerant strains that can both evade the host thermal response and retain efficacy in hot climates. this is the ideal problem to test the power of the evolugator™ technology, which uses flexible tubing as a culture chamber. since both the tubing and medium is changed with every dilution cycle, the evolugator™ can, in principle, allow the growth and selection of fast-growing variants of filamentous fungal cells that could use the tubing as a solid surface upon which to grow  <cit> . as a proof-of-principle regarding the evolugator™ technology, we adapted metarhizium anisopliae strain arsef <dig> , whose normal upper thermal limit for growth is 32°c, to grow at 37°c.

RESULTS
selection of thermostable m. anisopliae isolates
an actively growing culture of m. anisopliae was inoculated inside the evolugator™ growth chamber at 28°c as described in the methods section. growth was monitored by optical density  and dilution cycles were initiated according to od or cycle duration. figure  <dig> presents a detailed description of  <dig> successive selection cycles over a  <dig> month period. for each cycle, the temperature of the culture chamber was recorded as well as the starting od and ending od. the starting od is always low because the cells have just been diluted with fresh medium. the ending od is higher because the cells have multiplied. figure  <dig> also shows the duration of each dilution cycle, which is the length of time the cells are allowed to grow prior to initiating a new dilution cycle.

the fungus displayed rapid growth characteristics in cycles 1– <dig> where the temperature increased from 28°c to 30°c. during these cycles the culture duration was 1– <dig> days. beginning at cycle  <dig>  however, the growth rate slowed down – as evidenced by an increase in the amount of time it takes to grow enough cells to initiate a dilution. this indicated that it was taking longer for favorable variants to take over the population. moreover, the maximal cell yield  dropped significantly during cycles  <dig>  and  <dig> , even though cells were allowed to grow for over  <dig> hours each time, indicating decreased overall fitness. in cycles  <dig> and  <dig>  the chamber temperature was not varied significantly in order to allow variants that can grow rapidly at this temperature to take over the population. similar phenomena, where cycle duration needed to be increased and temperature stabilized to allow fast growing variants to take over, were also seen in cycles  <dig>  and  <dig> . two strains, termed evg <dig> and evg <dig> were isolated from cells cultured in cycles  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. sequencing of the its <dig> and a fragment of the m. anisopliae specific protease pr <dig> genes revealed that both isolates were derivatives of the original wild type strain.

phenotypic characterization of m. anisopliae thermostable isolates
isolates evg <dig> and evg <dig> were streaked on potato-dextrose agar  plates. wild-type m. anisopliae  typically produces green pigmented spores  within 3– <dig> days of cultivation on these plates. evg <dig> produced colonies that appeared less green than the wild-type, whereas evg <dig> produced white colonies with occasional spores visible at colony fringes or at the center of the colony. microscopic examination revealed reduced spore production in evg <dig>  conidial production in replicated solid substrate fermentation confirmed reduced sporulation. evg <dig> produced a mean of  <dig>  ×  <dig> conidia/kg barley substrate versus  <dig>  ×  <dig> for the parent strain, a statistically significant difference . evg <dig> produced less than 1% of the spores of the wild-type strain. we isolated a variant of evg <dig>  named evg017g, that retained thermotolerance but was as capable of conidiation as wild type .

the growth characteristics of the wild-type parent, evg <dig> and evg <dig> in liquid media were examined at various temperatures. all three strains displayed similar growth kinetics at 28°c, whereas only evg <dig> and evg <dig> displayed robust growth at  <dig> °c . only evg <dig> grew at 37°c and no growth was evident for any of the strains at 38°c, indicating a narrow threshold for the adaptive response. in contrast, neither the wild-type nor the heat adapted strains displayed appreciable radial growth at 36–37°c when plated on solid  media, although all displayed similar growth kinetics at 28°c. the strains did remain viable, and radial growth on plates was evident after a short lag period when plates were shifted from 37°c to 28°c . microscopic examination of the growth of the adapted and wild-type strains revealed that whereas both the wild-type and evg <dig> germinated and grew across the surface of the agar, evg <dig> displayed more rapid formation of appressoria than the parent and the fungal hyphae of this strain appeared to begin to penetrate the agar during the initial stages of growth. the two adapted strains also displayed different hyphal morphologies. microscopic examination of the growing cells  revealed short-tubular growth of evg <dig> at 37°c, whereas evg <dig> at 37°c appeared similar to wild-type grown at 28°c . interestingly, our results indicate that the wild-type strain was able to germinate at 37°c, but failed to subsequently grow.

insect bioassays
insect bioassays against the migratory grasshopper, melanoplus sanguinipes, were performed using the wild-type and adapted strains. due to the reduced sporulation of evg <dig>  not enough spores could be directly harvested for insect bioassays. therefore, the strain was passaged once through m. sanguinipes by rubbing the abdomen of host insects on an agar culture of evg <dig>  the fungus was then re-isolated from an insect cadaver after  <dig> d incubation and single spores isolated. the resultant strain, evg017g, yielded satisfactory sporulation on solid substrate at 28°c , displayed the same growth kinetics and morphology as evg <dig>  and was therefore used for the insect bioassays.

infectivity and virulence of the wild type, evg <dig> and evg017g was evaluated using a topical 5-dose bioassay with doses bracketing the approximate ld <dig> based on exploratory assays . both evg <dig> and evg017g displayed lowered infectivity as expressed by greater ld <dig> values compared to the wild-type parent, although due to the slopes of the dose-response curves the effect was dramatically reduced at ld <dig> values . given that most biological control regimes require >90% mortality towards target insect in order to be effective, the latter values, may in fact be more important.

units for ld and confidence levels: conidia/insect. data are derived from two replicate bioassays using a total of 120– <dig> insects/bioassay.

virulence at 28°c, in terms of median survival time  calculated using kaplan meier survivorship analysis  <cit> , showed overall significant differences among the three fungal strains . evg017g had a significantly faster kill ,  <dig>  d , compared to  <dig> d  for the wild-type parent , for a decrease of 20%. the st <dig> value for evg <dig>   <dig>  d , was also significantly lower than that of the wild type . evg <dig> and evg017g were not significantly different from each other . the ld <dig> and st <dig> of evg017g may have been affected by its passage through and reisolation from a grasshopper. nevertheless, evg017g still demonstrated reduced infectivity as did evg <dig>  none of the strains were pathogenic or able to cause mortality in hosts at 36°c. however, when insects infected at 36°c were subsequently placed at 28°c, the hosts were rapidly killed by all three fungal strains, indicating that the wild type and adapted strains remained viable at 36°c, but could not cause pathogenicity and death.

discussion
although there are a few technologies that can be used to experimentally adapt and/or select organisms for specific characteristics, these have been for the most part limited to short-term experiments. both serial dilution and chemostats have critical limitations that make long-term evolutionary adaptation impossible. for serial dilution, this limitation is the high probability of contamination. for chemostats, this limitation is the "wall growth" problem. these problems are particularly problematic for continuously culturing adherent cells like filamentous fungi, although there are examples of both being used for the short term selection of filamentous fungi  <cit> . the evolugator™ circumvents the contamination problem because the culture chamber is a continuous length of flexible tubing and cultures are never exposed to the outside. furthermore, wall growth is not an issue for the evolugator™ because the majority of the "wall" is replaced with each dilution. this means that cells can be cultured continuously for very long periods of time, allowing for the selection of complicated traits that cannot be achieved with short-term experimental evolution.

the evolugator™ is the ideal method for selecting variants of filamentous fungi with complex phenotypes. the availability of a robust selection method for filamentous fungi is an important new tool for directed adaptation that could have significant applications ranging from improved industrial strains to the examinations of the mechanisms that underlie evolution in eukaryotic organisms. in this report, we demonstrate the successful adaptation of a filamentous fungus for thermotolerance as proof-of-principle that the technology can be applied for this purpose. samples taken during the adaptation phase yielded two thermostable isolates with different phenotypic characteristics, although both were able to grow at  <dig> °c, whereas the parental isolate could not. to our knowledge, this is the first report of the directed adaptation of a filamentous fungus for a complex phenotype via continuous culture.

analysis of secondary non-selected traits, such as conidiation and virulence, revealed complex consequences of thermal adaptation. for example, evg <dig> showed decreased infectivity when compared to wild type as measured by ld <dig>  yet was not significantly less infective than wild type as measured by ld <dig>  these results could simply be due to the long term culture of evg <dig> in rich liquid media, conditions that are known to be able to cause attenuation of pathogenicity. however, the st <dig> value for evg <dig> was significantly lower than that of wild-type, i.e. it was a better pathogen. absent additional thermotolerant isolates it is difficult to determine if the increased pathogenicity is associated with the thermotolerant phenotype or was a trait that was selected for serendipitously. evg <dig>  our second isolate from the same lineage, showed greatly impaired conidiation that could, in part, be offset or recovered by passage of the adapted isolate through an insect host. remarkably, the resulting variant, evg017g, maintained thermotolerance after passage through the insect and showed increased virulence compared to the non-insect passaged parent strain as measured by st <dig>  the ld <dig> remained higher than wild-type, but was lower than that of evg <dig>  the most likely explanation for these results is that the increased virulence of evg017g was acquired during passage through the insect rather than during the thermal adaptation. another possibility is that the increased infectivity  is an independent trait that arose in the lineage prior to the isolation of evg <dig>  a final possibility is that the enhanced infectivity is linked to the thermolerant trait. much more work needs to be done to distinguish between these possibilities. however, we have shown that virulence can be recovered following loss due to the thermal adaptation protocol.

while the purpose of this experiment was to produce thermotolerant strains, the eventual goal is to produce better entomopathogens by generating variants that can sustain the insect thermal response. it is intriguing to speculate that the changes we measured in virulence parameters are related to the acquisition of thermotolerance. to test this, we reared the infected m. sanguinipes at 36–37°c to mimic the insects' ability to thermoregulate to a temperature that is the new upper threshold of the evolved strains. measurements of body temperature revealed that the insects maintained a constant body temperature that was in equilibrium with the cage temperature . despite their confirmed thermotolerance, the adapted variants did not show increased virulence at 36–37°c, indicating that the ability to grow in vitro at 36–37°c does not necessarily mean that in vivo growth and pathogenesis will occur.

it should be noted that the selection was not directed towards an insect target, simply for growth in a rich broth liquid medium at previously non-permissive temperatures. we hypothesize that insect target specificity and/or virulence might be increased via continuous culture adaptation on specific insect cuticular extracts as the growth substrate. alternately, the technology can be applied to adapt strains for greater resistance to abiotic stresses such as uv-irradiation. all of these approaches can be employed be obtain better biocontrol agents via continuous culture.

from a population biology and genetic framework, within our experimental set-up any novel mutation in a population of cells will spread, ultimately replacing the wild-type, at a rate dependant upon the growth advantage it has. this growth advantage is itself a variable dependant upon the selective pressure. thus, for a given mutation with a frequency of 1/n, where n is the number of cells in the population, the ability of the observer to detect an overall population of cells with the altered growth rate may appear to be stepwise although it is likely to be a reflection of changes in the frequency of the mutant in the population, since it takes as long to change from a frequency of 1/ <dig> to 1/ <dig> as it takes to change from 1/ <dig> to 1/ <dig>  with the former change likely undetectable, whereas the latter would be visible by the observer. this issue would be further complicated by instances in which multiple variants with ranges of growth advantages might arise, resulting in mixed populations of variants at discrete stages, although presumably if the selection occurs for long enough one variant will take over.

it is likely that more than one evolutionary pathway to thermotolerance exists and the evolugator™ could be used to probe this interesting question. essentially, the evolugator™ selects for variants with positive growth rates over those with zero or negative growth rates. during our adaptation experiment it was noted that it takes longer for favorable variants to take over during certain cycles, appearing to indicate that the evolution is occurring in discrete steps, although this may be inaccurate. for example, we observed that for most incremental increases in temperature, the selection for faster growing variants was rapid and took roughly the same amount of time. however, at certain temperatures , it took longer for favorable variants to take over, hence these temperatures were considered as thermal barriers, perhaps requiring multiple or complex mutations to arise in the population. it is possible that a different evolutionary pathway might encounter different thermal barriers. more experiments are needed to determine if these temperatures represent concrete barriers or if they are an artifact of the peculiar evolutionary pathway taken in our experiment. it will also be important to compare the genome sequence of the thermotolerant variants with that of wild type to determine the genetic changes involved in the acquisition of thermotolerance.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the successful directed adaption of a eukaryotic organism, namely the filamentous fungus, m. anisopliae, for increased thermotolerance using a novel continuous culture machine whose operation is fundamentally different from chemostats and other current methods. the selection regime had no a priori suppositions regarding the mutation required and it remains to be seen how many different mutational pathways can lead to thermotolerance. experiments isolating additional thermotolerant mutants should be able to shed light on this issue. selected mutants displayed complex phenotypes with respect to non-selected attributes such as conidiation and virulence, although both parameters could be retained or recovered while maintaining the thermotolerant phenotype.

the immediate goal of future research will be to generate "designer" strains of entomopathogenic fungi that are more efficient biocontrol agents than currently used wild type strains for specific insect infestations and defined environmental conditions. such strains would have significant advantages over other types of insecticide currently in use. first, because these strains are more specific for insect species and environmental conditions, less agent would be required to achieve the same result. second, since they are biological control agents, they would lack the environmental impact of chemical pesticides. third, these strains would be generated by the same mechanism that drives natural selection and, consequently, they will not carry the stigma of genetically-engineered products.

in theory, this technology can be applied for the adaptation of any cultivatable eukaryotic organism to specific selection and growth conditions. for example, the thermostability of eukaryotic microorganisms remains an important engineering constraint in a variety of biocatalytic applications, such as the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to desirable end-products like biofuels. accordingly, long-term research goals involve expanding the use of this technology to other important biotechnological problems.

