BACKGROUND
degenerative diseases affect increasing numbers of people, particularly in developed countries with aging populations. despite advancements in medicine, modalities to cure advanced diseases are often not available. therefore, regenerative therapy may become the standard treatment option in cardiovascular medicine. recent developments in stem cell biology, including those related to induced pluripotent stem cells  and tissue-derived stem/progenitor cells, are a giant leap toward the goal. recently, myocardium-derived stem/progenitor cells were isolated by several institutes
 <cit> . these cell populations have the potential to repair the diseased heart, and clinical trials are currently ongoing.

in tandem with these developments in stem cell biology and the large number of completed and ongoing clinical trials, attempts have been made to commercialize these therapies
 <cit> . the most prominent therapeutic strategy is cell transplantation. however, harvested cells or tissues are usually limited in quantity and stem cells properties may vary from batch to batch, hindering the reliability for clinical applications. moreover, current cell therapy protocols are laboratory centered and labor intensive, requiring highly skilled personnel and weeks to months to harvest sufficient quantities of stem/progenitor cells from the isolated tissues. these manual procedures are expensive and can result in high phenotypic and yield variability between different trials and institutions
 <cit> .

strategies to validate advanced medicinal products have been established; however, these “best practices” still depend on the ability of personnel to perform them, such as the cultivation of stem/progenitor cells under strictly controlled conditions
 <cit> . high process reproducibility can be achieved by automation, and several effective automatic cell culture systems have been reported
 <cit> . these automated platforms have the potential to provide cost-effective, large-scale expansion of stem/progenitor cells with consistent phenotype for clinical use and improved operational safety
 <cit> . progress in robot platforms for cell culture has resulted in several prototypes to implement large-scale expansion and harvesting of stem/progenitor cells with yield and phenotypic reproducibility. an automated culture system by “the automation partnership biosystems ” has cultivated human embryonic stem cells and bone marrow-derived cells
 <cit> . kawasaki heavy industries  has created autoculture® , which can automate many manual steps in cell culture, including media exchange, centrifugation of cells, splitting and passaging, and recording of cell morphology . to the best of our knowledge, no cell products obtained from an automated culture apparatus have actually been transplanted into humans for regenerative therapy.

our institute recently completed a phase i clinical trial using autologous cardiac stem cells  isolated by manual cell culture techniques to treat ischemic cardiomyopathy
 <cit> . the trial is registered in the japanese government database for clinical trials using human stem cells and clinicaltrials.gov, which is a world-wide registry and results database for clinical trials involving humans, as autologous human cardiac-derived stem cell to treat ischemic cardiomyopathy . cscs are manually cultivated by a single experienced investigator for approximately 1 month to minimize variability of the final cell products. to advance this trial from a single-center to a multi-center randomized trial, we evaluated autoculture® by comparing the growth rate, morphology, and phenotype of cells cultivated using this method with those of manually cultured cscs.

RESULTS
cellular morphology and growth
calculations based on the net cell number and doubling time obtained in the alcadia trial  indicated that a culture duration of 2 weeks was sufficient to obtain the appropriate cell number for clinical trial when cells after the second passage  were used as the starting material. identically seeded culture plates were maintained manually or by automation using autoculture® . the morphology of cscs cultured using the automated system was similar to that of manually cultured cscs on day  <dig> and  <dig> after seeding . under both the conditions, the cells were of similar size, exhibited a low nucleus/cytoplasm ratio, and had a spindle-like shape. in addition, the growth rate was not significantly different, as indicated by cell counts at passage . trypan blue staining revealed no significant difference in cell viability between the culture methods. moreover, both the methods effectively washed out the cells, as indicated by the paucity of adherent cells on discarded culture dishes . these results suggest that manual passage was effectively replicated using autoculture®.

gene expression
to investigate the gene expression profiles, rt-pcr analysis was performed according to the shipping criteria for cultivated cells in the current clinical trial . we examined expression levels of the pluripotency related genes nanog, oct <dig>  sox <dig>  and rex <dig> and  <dig> transcription factor genes involved in cardiomyocyte development, nkx <dig>  and gata <dig> . the stem cell markers oct <dig>  rex <dig>  and gata <dig> were expressed by both cell populations; however, neither nanog nor nkx <dig>  expression was detectable. moreover, expression levels were not significantly different between the  <dig> groups on either day  <dig> or day  <dig> 

cell surface marker expression profiles
cell surface markers indicative of cscs and other phenotypes were detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting  . under both the culture conditions, the cells were positive for the mesenchymal stem cell  markers cd <dig> and cd <dig> and the vascular endothelial marker cd <dig> and negative for the hematopoietic lineage marker cd <dig> and mhc class ii. in addition, fluorescent intensities measured by facs were similar for all positive markers, indicating that equal proportions of cells in both the populations expressed these proteins. moreover, almost all the cells were cd <dig> positive, whereas at least  <dig> populations were distinguished on the basis of cd <dig> expression. furthermore, stro- <dig>  which is expressed by mesenchymal stem cells in the bone marrow, was negative in both the populations. although the surface expression profiles of cscs and bone marrow-derived stem cells overlap, stro- <dig> expression can discriminate cardiac mscs from bone marrow-derived mscs.

surface glycan expression profile by lectin microarray analysis
recently, glycan expression profiling has been reported to be an effective cell validation tool to complement phenotype analysis by epigenetic and gene expression analyses
 <cit> . these lectin profiles showed similar patterns, and no significant differences in expression intensities were observed between the  <dig> culture groups on either day  <dig> or day 13/ <dig> after seeding . the washing process used to harvest adherent cells may have profound effects on the cell surface structure and expression. cscs harvested from the autoculture® system exhibited similar surface expression profiles and overall viability to those cultured manually.

analysis of array comparative genomic hybridization  and microarray
to detect genomic dna mutations on autoculture®, we performed acgh analysis  on day  <dig> and day  <dig> and compared them with the tissue derived from human right atrial appendage  . there were no differences in genomic dna mutation between cscs in autoculture® and raa. to investigate the global gene expression profile changes between cscs in manual culture and cscs in autoculture®, we performed a pairwise comparison of gene expression microarray data using nia array analysis
 <cit> . the results revealed a similar gene pattern between them . the “symbol” of  <dig> gene probes was left blank in  <dig> overexpressed gene probes.

discussion
cell-based regenerative medicine is still in the early stages of development
 <cit> . the quality of cells for transplant depends on the ability of skilled personnel to isolate, expand, and harvest cultured cells. for consistency of cell yield and phenotype, it is imperative that methodological consistency is strictly maintained. automation greatly enhances the consistency of culture conditions and may thus reduce the variability in cell quality that is one of the great impediments to the widespread application of cell-based therapy till date. in this study, we used the automated cell culture system autoculture® to expand human cscs isolated from the raa for use in the alcadia clinical trial designed to assess the safety of cell-based therapy for patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. raa-derived cells containing cscs exhibited similar growth rates and gene expression profiles between manual and automated cultures. thus, the autoculture® system effectively replicated manual culture and demonstrated scalability and stability in addition to safety and cost-effectiveness. indeed, we found no significant differences in phenotype between the two culture methods. cells in both the populations had similar morphologies, mean growth rates, and expression levels of genes associated with pluripotency and the mesenchymal lineage. in addition, the surface glycan profile was virtually identical, while acgh analysis revealed no difference in genomic dna mutation frequency. finally, the approximately  <dig> -probe agilent whole human genome microarray chip g4112f showed that only approximately 1% of transcripts measured were significantly under- or overexpressed. the successful transfer of manual to automated cell culture may be attributable to the high flexibility of the machine, which can faithfully copy every step and condition, including media changes, splitting, and passaging in a controlled environment.

autoculture® is an all-in-one automated cell culture system consisting of robot arms, tube and flask decappers, flask holders, flask tappers, media pumps, a pipette head, a centrifugal separator, a rotating plate, and a co <dig> incubator. in addition to media change and passage, it permits routine observation. to automate these culture steps, it is necessary to program the humidity, temperature, volume and flow of liquid, and robot arm motion that transfers flasks from or into the co <dig> incubator or flask holder. another automated cell culture platform, tap compact, was also shown to be an effective system for culture of adherent cells by the healthcare engineering group
 <cit> . however, the lack of a centrifugal separator in that system may result in differences between the manual and automated processes, possibly explaining why automation resulted in a smaller population of stro-1+ cells and overall lower cell yield after the first passage
 <cit> . stro- <dig> expression is not a necessary or specific marker for stem or progenitor cells, and somatic stem cells may be more resistant to nutritional and chemical stress
 <cit> . residual trypsin in the culture media may have adversely affected the survival of differentiated cells, but it is not clear whether stem or progenitor cells can survive or not. on the other hand, the autoculture® system efficiently removes trypsin/edta by washing and centrifugation. there were no significant differences in the surface marker expression profile or the mean rate of proliferation between these cells and those maintained manually, strongly suggesting that both populations of raa-derived cscs contain equal properties.

the autoculture® system can save labor and costs by expanding the scale of production and maintaining uniformity of results. in addition, this system can simultaneously cultivate different cells without cross-contamination because it can be equipped with a connecting hatch to multiple co <dig> incubators. large-scale production and multisample cell culture capacity for cell transplantation may be a prerequisite for commercialization of cell products under current good manufacturing practice  grade. production methods for cell therapy should be designed to ensure that the end product is standardized and safe. cgmp is a quality assurance system that ensures that the cell product meets preset specifications with minimal lot-to-lot variability
 <cit> . it requires traceability of raw materials used in cell culture and validated standard operating procedures  throughout the process
 <cit> . current good tissue practice  is intended to prevent human cells, tissues, and cellular and tissue-based products from contamination by infectious disease agents and to ensure that these cells and tissues maintain their integrity and function. the controlled environment of a carefully designed, constructed, validated, and maintained clean room will minimize the risks of environmental contamination and decrease the possibility of cross-contamination
 <cit> . based on cgmp, aseptic handling and filling of raw materials should be performed in a grade a environment  with a grade b background . clean room disciplines, gowning procedures, cleaning programs, and maintenance of air handling units are included in sops. environmental monitoring is essential in clean room quality control. proper cleaning, maintenance, repair, and attire are major issues for cgmp
 <cit> .

construction and maintenance of a cgmp facility is so expensive that it may be difficult to conform to these standards on a large scale without automation. unlike manual culture, the robots enabled the environment in the cell culture cabinet to be completely separated from the external environment. moreover, automated cell culture machines can be equipped with cleaning and monitoring systems to prevent contamination by microorganisms and cross-contamination by other cell types cultured in tandem. these properties may meet the stringent conditions for a human cell processing facility while reducing both construction and maintenance costs.

in japan, the regulatory path of a regenerative cell therapy using this automated machine will be to obtain an approval for the end products, such as cells or tissues, based on the new guidelines and philosophy at an initial phase. an important requirement for obtaining approval is publication of the safety and reliability of the machine to produce the final biological products in a peer-reviewed journal. the similar properties of cell products between those obtained by machine and those obtained by manual culture, as demonstrated in this study, could support approval of a clinical trial using this machine, which is currently being planned.

CONCLUSIONS
autoculture® is one of the best candidates to solve the problems inherent in large-scale production and harvesting of human cells for clinical applications. the automated cell processing system can reproduce many complex operations performed by professional staff and can maintain multiple cell lines automatically. thus, this automation system will be a powerful tool for both clinical trials exploring the potential of autologous or allogeneic cell-based regeneration therapies and for the commercialization.

