BACKGROUND
articular cartilage has a poor intrinsic capacity for regeneration because of its avascularity and very slow turnover both at the cellular and molecular levels. as consequence, defects occurring as a result of trauma or joint disease tend to be repaired with fibrocartilage rather than hyaline cartilage. with time, degenerative processes frequently occur in the regenerated tissue  <cit> , which may stabilize or progress in relation to  <dig> main factors: the width and depth of the defect. it has been demonstrated that sheep articular cartilage osteochondral defects 3 mm wide or less re-fill with normal hyaline cartilage, whereas wider defects are replaced by fibrocartilage which, eventually, degenerates into fibrous tissue  <cit> . this inferior regenerated tissue is not capable of withstanding the mechanical loads exerted on the tissue during locomotion and the result is eburnation of the subchondral bone  <cit> . in relation to the depth, superficial defects involving only the articular cartilage do not heal spontaneously  <cit> , while osteochondral defects, penetrating the subchondral bone and thus, gaining access to the mesenchymal stem cells  that reside in the bone marrow space, can give rise to regenerated cartilage  <cit> .

surgical treatments used to stimulate cartilage regeneration, in most cases, result only in a delay in the onset of degenerative processes  <cit> . thus, there is a search for alternative solutions, and cell engraftment is among the most advanced new technologies in cartilage regeneration  <cit> . considering that in certain degenerative diseases, autologous stem cells are depleted and have reduced proliferative capacity and chondrogenic ability  <cit> , the delivery of heterologous cells may enhance regeneration or inhibit the progressive loss of joint tissue  <cit> . among the several factors to be considered in the choice of the type of cells, there are the ease of harvest, the cell yield and purity and their proliferative and chondrogenic capacity  <cit> . autologous chondrocyte implantation , the first technique used to repair focal cartilage defects  <cit> , is associated with donor site morbidity, loss of chondrocyte phenotype upon ex vivo expansion and inferior fibrocartilage formation at the defect site  <cit> . thus, new extracorporeal cell sources are sought, mainly stem cells. among them, mscs  <cit>  have the advantages of their immunoevasivity  <cit>  and immunosuppressive effect  <cit> , but they have a limited capacity for self-renewal and proliferation, and differentiation potential decreases with increasing donor age  <cit> . on the contrary, embryonic stem cells  are able to self-renew for prolonged periods without differentiation and, most importantly, to differentiate into a large variety of tissues derived from all  <dig> germ layers  <cit> . despite the fact that their use is complicated by immunologic incompatibility and possible development of teratomas  <cit> , as well as the existence of ethical problems in human application, in the future, the establishment of escs lines from ungulates could allow their employment in bulk for basic research and for producing animal models of human diseases  <cit> . indeed, the histological appearance of the articular regenerated tissue is essential for the validation of therapeutic interventions  <cit>  and it is likely to be predictive of its functionality and durability  <cit> . since in humans it is possible to perform only small arthroscopic sampling to evaluate the histological aspect of the regenerated tissue, deep histological studies can be performed in vivo only in animal models. to date few studies concerning cartilage regeneration have been performed in animal models in vivo  <cit>  and, until recently, most of the research on stem cells has been carried out in small laboratory animals  <cit> . however, these species do not represent an optimal model for achieving cartilage regeneration in human. on the contrary, the larger size and weight of adult sheep, which place greater weight-bearing loads on the healing site, as well as the structural, biochemical, physiological and immunological similarities to man and the ease and low cost of their management with respect to other species, make sheep an optimal experimental model for future clinical applications in humans  <cit> .

the stem origin of the in situ differentiated cells in the regenerated tissue was confirmed by the fish technique.

this experiment aims to evaluate if the treatment with es-like cells into osteochondral defects in the medial femoral condyles of adult sheep can enhance the regeneration process of articular cartilage over a long time period, without formation of teratomas.

RESULTS
only  <dig> animals were included in the statistical analysis, because  <dig> sheep died from toxaemic gastroenteritis after breaking through paddock fencing and freely consuming grass covered with frost. one sheep belonging to the 24 month group died at about 12 months post-surgery, and hence was included with the 12 month group. analysis was thus performed on  <dig> sheep in the 1 month group,  <dig> sheep each in the  <dig> and 6 month groups,  <dig> sheep in the 12 month group and  <dig> sheep in the 24 month group.

embryo sexing and es-like cell characterization
sexing pcr allowed selection of male embryos for production of male es-like cells. male embryos showed  <dig> bands corresponding to the sex-determining region y-linked gene  and the sheep sat  <dig>  dna repeat unit  sequences, while female embryos showed only the band corresponding to the autosomal sequence sat . es-like colonies demonstrated their staminality state by positive immunostaining for sseas monoclonal antibodies  and positive gene expression for oct  <dig>  nanog, sox  <dig> and stat  <dig> genes , and their undifferentiated state by the absence of staining with any of the anti-cytokeratin- <dig>  fe-c <dig>  f1- <dig> and forse- <dig> mabs.figure  <dig> 
embryo sex determination and es-like colonies gene expression
.
a): embryo sex determination. lanes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  16: dna marker 100–1000 bp ladder ; lane 2: negative control ; lane 3: female positive control ; lane 4: male positive control ; lanes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  13: female embryos; lanes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  15: male embryos. b,c, d, e) es-like colonies gene expression. b)
oct4gene expression; c)
sox <dig> gene expression; d)
nanog gene expression; e)
stat <dig> gene expression. lane 1: dna marker 100–1000 bp ladder ; lane 2: negative control ; lane 3: in vitro produced sheep blastocyst, used as positive control; lane 4: es-like cells.



clinical assessment
eight sheep were moderately lame in both hind limbs the day after surgery, but they all walked normally by day  <dig>  no further problems with locomotion were noted in any of the animals during the remainder of the study.

macroscopic assessment
since the interaction between time and treatment was not significant for any of the analysed variables, it was removed from the statistical model, to test the effect of the main factors . no significant effect of treatment was observed in the macroscopic assessment, either in the total or in the single category scores throughout all considered time periods  . however, es samples showed higher least square means with respect to empty defects  samples, both in the total macroscopic score, in the surface appearance and in the filling of the defect, while the integration of edges was slightly better in the ed animals . for sake of clarity in the presentation of results, the interaction was maintained in the statistical model in order to estimate the least square means for each period per treatment level .table  <dig> least square means ± standard error of es and ed macroscopic scores compared from  <dig> to 24 months 


categories
treatments

es
*
ed
†
p value

*embryonic stem-like cells engrafted in the medial femoral condyle; †empty defect; ‡not significant.



evaluation at 1 month
the total macroscopic score showed better healing in the es samples than in the ed. the es samples had a better surface appearance and had greater filling with a soft, red tissue  than the ed samples , where only the bottom and the sides of the defect were covered by the proliferating tissue . edge integration was absent in all samples.figure  <dig> 
femur, sheep. embryonic stem-like cells engraftment in the medial femoral condyle  and empty defects  at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> months from surgery. a-d) ed at  <dig> month from surgery. e-h) es at  <dig> months from surgery. i-l) ed at  <dig> months from surgery. m-p) es at  <dig> months from surgery. q-t) ed at  <dig> months from surgery. u-x) es at  <dig> months from surgery. a-e-i-m-q-u) macroscopic appearance; b-j-n-r-v) histological sections, azan-mallory staining. 2x magnification; bar:  <dig> mm. f) haematoxylin-eosin staining, c-g-k-o-s-w) safranine-o staining. d-h-l-p-t-x) collagen type ii immunostaining.



evaluation at 2 months
the overall healing process decreased in the es samples with respect to the control group. surface appearance showed a flat whitish tissue with a regular and smooth surface which completely filled the es , while it only partially filled the ed , despite the fact that both treated and control groups showed the same least square mean in both categories. in both samples the newly proliferating tissue still lacked continuity with the host cartilage, though the ed group showed a better least square mean .

evaluation at 6 months
both samples had opalescent-appearing regenerated tissue with extended superficial cracks , showing the same least square means in the total macroscopic score and in the filling of the defect. es samples had slightly higher scores for surface appearance, and slightly lower scores for edge integration .

evaluation at 12 months
regenerated tissue, which appeared similar to pre-existing cartilage, completely filled both defects, and was continuous with the host tissue . all examined categories showed higher least square means in es samples with respect to the control group .figure  <dig> 
femur, sheep. embryonic stem-like cells engraftment in the medial femoral condyle  and empty defects  at  <dig> and  <dig> months from surgery. a-d) ed at  <dig> months from surgery. e-h) es at  <dig> months from surgery. i-l) ed at  <dig> months from surgery. m-p) es at  <dig> months from surgery. a-e-i-m) macroscopic aspect; b-f-j-n) histological sections, azan-mallory staining, 2x magnification; bar:  <dig> mm. c-g-k-o) safranine-o staining. d-h-l-p) collagen type ii immunostaining.



evaluation at 24 months
both defects were completely filled by a newly formed tissue, smooth and white like hyaline cartilage. edges were totally integrated with the host tissue, with the exception of one ed which showed a small fissure near the edge . once again, all examined categories showed higher least square means in es samples with respect to the control group, and a slight overall decrease with respect to the 12 month time period .

histological assessment
as for the macroscopic assessment, the interaction between time and treatment was not significant for any of the histological variables and was removed from the model to test the effect of the main factors . es performed significantly better in the total histological score  and in the filling of defect, cartilage, matrix, bone and edge categories  with respect to ed, while no significant differences were observed between treated and control groups in degeneration or vascularity , though higher least square means were reached by es samples than control . once again, to better clarify the evolution of the regeneration process, the least square means for each period and treatment were calculated .table  <dig> 
least square means ± standard error of histological scores compared throughout all considered periods



categories
treatments
p value

es
*
ed
†

*embryonic stem-like cells engrafted in the left medial femoral condyle; †empty defect created in the right medial femoral condyle. ‡not significant.



evaluation at 1 month
proliferating granulation tissue rich in vessels and fibroblasts completely filled the cavity in the es samples, while it covered the bottom and the walls only of the ed samples. foci of endochondral ossification were detected at the bottom of the es samples; there was no integration between new and host tissue, despite their close proximity. regenerated tissue was negative for proteoglycans and collagen type ii production in both groups . higher least square means were reached by es samples with respect to controls in the total histological score, filling of defect, cartilage, matrix and degeneration categories, while they were equal in both treated and control groups in bone and edges categories .

evaluation at 2 months
es were superficially filled by fibrous tissue and by subchondral ossification at the bottom, while ed were less completely filled and one sample showed a deep hole covered by a thin bridge formed by the tangential layer. integration between new and host tissues was present only at one edge in the es. an initial production of proteoglycans and a mild staining for collagen type ii were detectable at the bottom of both defects, while the fibrous tissue in the top was negative . higher least square means were reached by es samples with respect to controls in all the histological categories .

evaluation at 6 months
both samples contained fibrocartilage in the superficial part. there was woven bone with foci of subchondral ossification at the bottom of the ed samples. cartilage clefts and small subchondral cysts were sometimes present. clefts were deeper and localized at the edges with surrounding degenerated matrix in the ed, in which continuity between tangential layer proliferation and subchondral ossification was sometimes interrupted. proteoglycans were conspicuous in the es, especially in the deeper part of fibrocartilage, while an initial production was detected within the foci of subchondral ossification in the ed. a marked staining for collagen type ii was present in the regenerated tissue of both samples, together with some negative areas in the middle and deeper parts . higher least square means were reached by es samples with respect to controls in the total histological score, matrix, bone and edges categories, while they were equal in both es and ed groups in the filling of defect category, and slightly lower in es in respect to ed in the cartilage and degeneration categories .

evaluation at 12 months
es samples showed immature hyaline cartilage and lamellar bone, and the ed group had immature hyaline cartilage spaced out by fibrocartilage and woven bone, where continuity between tangential layer proliferation and subchondral ossification was often absent, and only one edge was integrated. ed samples sometimes showed deep cracks involving the whole depth of the cartilage. proteoglycan staining was strong in the es group and minimal in the ed, while collagen type ii immunostaining was intense in both groups, with some negative areas in the centre of the regenerated cartilage in the ed animals . higher least square means were reached by es samples with respect to controls in all the histological categories .

evaluation at 24 months
the appearance of the newly formed tissue in es animals was comparable to mature hyaline cartilage, lying on a well-reconstituted subchondral plate formed by lamellar bone; integration between regenerated and host tissue was present at both edges and mild to moderate articular deterioration was seen . the healed cartilage consisted of a superficial zone with proliferating germinal cells and collagen fibres distributed parallel to the articular surface, overwhelming an area rich in chondrocytes organized in large clones, and a transitional zone characterized by palisading chondrocytes and spring-shaped arrangements of collagen fibres. subjacent to this was a radial zone with hypertrophic chondrocytes and collagen fibres arranged perpendicular to the articular surface, and a deep zone with calcification and formation of tidemark, still discontinuous . on the contrary, ed were filled by immature hyaline cartilage in the upper part and woven bone at the bottom, where moderate subchondral cysts were sometimes detected . intense proteoglycan and collagen type ii staining was detected in the newly formed cartilage . higher least square means were reached by es samples with respect to the control group in all the histological categories .figure  <dig> 
femur, sheep. embryonic stem-like cells engraftment at 24 months from surgery. a) histological aspect: azan-mallory staining; 2× magnification; bar: 500 μm. b) fluorescent in situ hybridization : positive signals in chondrocytes derived from es-like cells. 40× magnification; bar: 50 μm. c) same field, 60× magnification; bar: 10 μm. d) normal female adult articular cartilage from the right lateral femoral condyle . no signals are detected within chondrocytes. 20× magnification; bar: 30 μm. e) same field, 40× magnification; bar: 20 μm. f) dot-blot test with sry probe. k-: spot female sheep fibroblasts , k+: spot male sheep fibroblasts , 1–2: spot female es-like cells, 3: spot male es-like cells.



fish detection
dot-blot showed positive spots with both dna derived from es-like cell samples and male fibroblasts , whereas female fibroblasts dna  was negative, confirming the specificity of the chosen probe . fish showed positive intranuclear signals only in the es-like derived cells found in the newly formed tissue at all-time points, while controls were always negative .

discussion
in this study es showed significantly better histological evidence of healing when compared to ed in most of the examined categories. to our knowledge, this is the first time that es-like cells have been engrafted in sheep and then evaluated out to 24 months post-surgery. previously, engraftments had been assessed at a maximum period of 18 months in sheep  <cit> , 12 months in goats  <cit> , 8 months in horses  <cit>  and 6 months in laboratory animals  <cit> .

sheep have been shown to be a valid model for human translational research when compared with laboratory animals, due to the increased stifle size, less effective native cartilage regeneration and longer lifespan. moreover, a recent study comparing the differences in geometry and biomechanical properties of human, porcine, bovine and ovine articular cartilage, found that human cartilage had a significantly larger flexibility with respect to porcine and bovine cartilage, but not to ovine cartilage  <cit> . in addition, from the regulatory point of view, the ovine model is one of the suggested large animal models for pre-clinical studies  <cit> . however, in previous studies in small ruminants , most animals were euthanized at 6 months, paralleling the time frame of experiments in laboratory animals. according to the authors, this is insufficient time to observe complete regeneration in large animals. schneider-wald  <cit>  states that the follow-up period for assessment of the effectiveness of cartilage regeneration is 12 months. moreover, in sheep, several authors  <cit>  worked with chondral defects, despite the fact that this type of defect can’t heal spontaneously  <cit> . most of the experiments performed in sheep employed surgical techniques only without the use of cells  <cit>  and, even when stem cells were used, the methods of delivery to the cartilage varied from direct injection to implantation with a large variety of scaffolds  <cit> . for these reasons, it is difficult to compare results obtained in this experiment with previously reported trials.

sexing pcr performed on trophoblastic cells lysed during the immunosurgery procedure confirmed that the choice of the sex-determining region y-linked gene sequence  as a marker for es-like cells was effective and reliable for this purpose  <cit> . to detect the stem origin of differentiated cells, several authors  <cit>  employ green fluorescent protein  transduced cells. however, this procedure is applicable only on cells that can be expanded ex-vivo in large amounts, such as mscs  <cit>  and rodent escs  <cit> . on the contrary, ungulate embryonic stem cells show an early in vitro differentiation  <cit> , which does not allow production of the needed amount of cells for the application of this technique. to overcome this problem, the authors engrafted only male es-like cells in female sheep, and the sry sequence was used as a marker for the fish technique, which allowed to confirm the stem origin of differentiated cells.

es-like colonies were positive for the sseas mabs and the gene expression for oct  <dig>  nanog, sox  <dig> and stat  <dig> genes, and negative for any of the mabs marking the differentiated state, demonstrating that the engrafted cells were stem cells, in agreement with others  <cit> . the low number of es-like cells engrafted was due to the early in vitro differentiation of sheep es-like cells, as mentioned above  <cit>  which does not provide the higher numbers of cells used in other studies  <cit> . this forced us to use cells derived from the first passage, when they were still in an undifferentiated state. the establishment of es cell lines of domesticated ungulates is of interest both for basic research, such as the study of comparative embryology and the comprehension of the mechanisms of cell biology related to stem cell maintenance and differentiation  <cit> , and applied research, such as the creation of models of human genetic diseases and cell transplantation therapy  <cit> .

the lateral para-patellar approach was shown to be reproducible in a standardized fashion and reliable for long-term success of the cell therapy. indeed, all animals walked normally 9 days after surgery and no signs of major wound infection or limited range of motion were detected, similar to previous reports in sheep  <cit> , goats  <cit>  and rabbits  <cit>  . medial patellar dislocation was necessary to reach the medial femoral condyle. lateral access guarantees greater resistance of the sutures in the various layers of the closure, thanks to the presence of the fascia lata. arthroscopy was not used because it did not allow the deposition of the cell-fibrin graft in the defect. the surgeons noted that this technique was quite invasive and could have negatively influenced the results, due to the loss of synovial fluid during the surgical procedure and consequent dehydration of articular cartilage. these problems have been overcome in later studies  with the introduction of the mini-arthrotomy technique. particular attention has been paid to meticulously removing all calcified cartilage between the tidemark and the osteochondral junction, according to hurtig  <cit> . this cartilage layer appears to be an effective barrier to the invasion of the blood and precursor cells from the subchondral bone, resulting in a lack of attachment of the regenerated tissue to subchondral bone  <cit> .

no significant macroscopic differences were observed between es and ed samples. this is probably because of the absence of the assessment of transverse sections, perpendicular to the articular surface and about 1–2 cm deep, which could have allowed evaluation of the quality of the newly formed tissue deep in the samples, together with the detection of subchondral cysts. in any case, this experiment demonstrates that, in sheep, tissue resembling cartilage appears only at 6 months post-surgery, as noted by other authors  <cit> , and integration of edges is complete at 12 months, as reported by akens  <cit>  but in contrast to the findings of schleicher  <cit> . it is interesting to note that at 24 months there was a slight overall decrease in the regeneration process in both groups  as compared to 12 months.

the es group performed significantly better in most categories of histological assessment with respect to ed. beginning at the earliest time points, this group had more normal architecture and a better quality of matrix in the newly formed cartilage, similar to the findings of akens  <cit> . these findings suggest the enhancement of the physiological regeneration process exerted by es-like cells, probably by means of paracrine signals  <cit> . several authors  <cit>  outline the complex interplay existing between proteoglycans and collagen type ii, the two most important components of the hyaline cartilage matrix: the collagen fibrils serve to anchor the proteoglycan matrix and contribute to resisting extrinsic forces during loading and the intrinsic swelling that occurs within the proteoglycan domain, while proteoglycans are responsible for the generation of a hydrostatic pressure within cartilage matrix, which allows it to counteract the loads transmitted to it from the long bones during normal joint articulation.

tidemark appeared at 12 months after surgery, without statistically significant differences between treatment groups. it was still discontinuous in most of samples at 24 months post surgery, suggesting that the regenerative process was not yet complete. the presence of the tidemark is an important finding: it has been reported that this calcification front is in a state of dynamic equilibrium, where factors promoting mineralization are probably counterbalanced by substances that inhibit or limit the extent of calcification, and this process of active calcification and subsequent endochondral ossification seems to be integral to the shape of the joint and, therefore, to the distribution of load  <cit> .

in relation to bone remodeling, lamellar bone was detected 12 months after surgery in most of the es samples, while ed controls showed mostly woven bone. this last finding is in contrast with jackson  <cit>  who, in empty defects in goats at 13 months, found sclerotic bone surrounding the defect adjacent to subchondral areas, sparse bone resorption and marked endochondral bone formation, probably because of the difference in the anatomy and ambulation between sheep and goats. these results further confirm the benefits that occurred in the defects treated with es-like engraftments, considering that a good remodeling of subchondral bone provides the right biomechanical support for the hydrostatic compression in the cartilage, which is of critical importance for the differentiation of hyaline cartilage  <cit> .

es samples showed very good integration between the newly formed cartilage and the host tissue as compared to ed samples, particularly evident at  <dig> and 24 months. these findings, similar to those reported by akens  <cit> , seem likely to be predictive of the functionality and durability of the regenerated tissue. it is well known that the gap between implant and host tissue is responsible for the initiation of cartilage degeneration, as a result of a penetration of the synovial fluid into the host-graft interface which results in resorption within the subchondral bone area and cyst formation  <cit> .

mild to moderate signs of articular deterioration  predominated in the ed samples. subchondral bone cysts, varying from mild to severe, were detected in both groups, with a higher incidence at 6 months, similar to previously published reports  <cit> . this could be due to the particular texture of the regenerated tissue at this time point, enough hard to allow the penetrating synovial fluid to reach high pressures but, at the same time, too soft to counteract it, with consequent collapse of the walls and enhancing of the cyst formation.

no signs of immune rejection or teratoma occurred in any of the es-like engraftments, despite the fact that engrafted animals were not immunosuppressed. it could be due to the osteochondral microenvironment, which may have forced the implanted cells to differentiate toward the osteogenic and chondrogenic lineage  <cit>  or to the small number of cells implanted  <cit> . a recent study  <cit>  hypothesizes that cycling loading may affect the differentiation of stem cells in osteochondral defects to the osteocyte and chondrocyte phenotypes.

CONCLUSIONS
heterologous embryonic stem-like cells implanted into osteochondral defects in sheep femoral condyles enhanced the regeneration of the articular hyaline cartilage, without the occurrence of immune rejection or teratoma formation even at 24 months post-surgery. these findings are encouraging for safe translation to human clinical trials.

