BACKGROUND
the actin cytoskeleton is a highly dynamic network of protein polymers extending throughout the cytoplasm. it not only provides structural support for the cell, but also plays a central role in key cell processes including cellular morphogenesis, migration, division and cell communication. the actin cytoskeleton generates forces required for membrane extension and remodelling, motor protein-dependent cell contraction or membrane trafficking  <cit> . recently, a nuclear function was identified for actin in the organisation of chromatin and gene expression  <cit> . in cells, the assembly and disassembly of actin filaments and their organisation into higher-order networks is regulated by actin-associated proteins which, in turn, are controlled by specific signalling pathways  <cit> . the formation of membrane-cytoskeleton specialisations not only depends on the spatio-temporal controlled recruitment of actin-binding proteins to cellular subdomains, but also on the repertoire of specific sets of cytoskeleton and regulatory proteins that cells express at a given state. in line, timely and spatially regulated expression of cytoskeletal genes is observed during embryonic development or terminal differentiation of cells in adults.

the central role of the actin cytoskeleton in many essential cellular processes makes the system susceptible to mutations and alterations of gene expression level that may cause a wide range of diseases, including muscular dystrophies, amyloidosis, haematological disorders and cancers  <cit> . many of these diseases arise from aberrant cell morphogenesis, motility or communication caused by deregulation of actin dynamics or organisation. for example, deregulated cell motility is a typical hallmark of tumour invasion and metastasis characterising cancer malignancy. recent studies demonstrated that tumour cell progression correlates with alterations of the expression profile of actin cytoskeleton genes and genes of upstream regulatory pathways  <cit> . similarly, altered expression of genes encoding cytoskeletal proteins of the contractile system of muscle cells is observed in cardio-vascular disorders like heart failure  <cit> . therefore, cytoskeleton proteins are potential markers for cell differentiation or disease, and might constitute promising novel targets for therapeutic treatments  <cit> .

the basic set of structural and signalling protein components of the actin cytoskeleton is now identified and information on their biochemical or biological activities is available. however, gaps and controversies remain on how qualitative or quantitative changes in expression of these proteins are integrated to control actin dynamics and organisation in space and time. elucidating the intricate interplay between the cytoskeletal components that cells use to build-up various cellular structures is hampered by the complexity of the actin cytoskeleton system. in this context, gene expression profiling using microarrays has the potential to yield a global overview on the set of actin cytoskeleton genes expressed by a cell at a given physiological or pathological state. the technique allows global and parallel investigations of cellular activity, and was used successfully to characterise the molecular basis of a variety of complex experimental models and diseases. results obtained in previous profiling studies with high-density microarrays underline the potential of this approach for detecting changes in the repertoire of expression of the cytoskeleton genes  <cit> .

using an optimised experimental approach, we developed actichip, a custom oligonucleotide microarray designed to study the expression of actin cytoskeleton genes in various cell systems. actichip represents  <dig> human genes, most of them encoding proteins that bind directly to actin and control actin dynamics or organisation, while the others are involved in signalling, cell-cell or cell-matrix adhesion. in parallel, we developed actinome, a knowledge database that integrates information on the target genes, including genomic data and sequence analysis features retrieved from genbank, and biological function, when available. we determined the performance characteristics of actichip and compared them with those of two other academic or commercial oligonucleotide arrays. our data indicate that actichip exhibits solid performance that makes it a valid platform for studying the human transcriptome of the actin cytoskeleton.

RESULTS
actinome database
to facilitate the setting up of actichip, an integrative database called actinome was implemented cataloguing genomic data and sequence analysis features of the human genes related to the actin cytoskeleton. we also considered some key marker genes including adhesion receptors, metalloproteases or extracellular matrix proteins that are involved in actin-based proccesses like morphogenesis or cell migration. gene selection was performed using the genbank database , and was based on a combination of biological knowledge, literature data, gene ontology  terms  <cit>  and keywords in the ncbi database. searches were restricted to genes encoding proteins of the major functional groups regulating the dynamics and organisation of the actin cytoskeleton . actinome was built following a robust protocole as described in the "method" section. to date, the database compiles a set of  <dig> non redundant entries and related data such as mrna and protein identifiers, gene names and descriptions, cytobands and gene ontology annotations. actinome is freely available  <cit> .

a set of  <dig> long oligonucleotides  were designed to represent  <dig> genes encoding proteins implicated in the actin cytoskeleton machinery or  <dig> genes involved in actin-based processes. most of the genes  are represented by a unique probe,  <dig> genes by two probes,  <dig> genes by  <dig> probes and one gene by  <dig> probes.

oligonucleotide probe design
we decided to use long oligonucleotide probes to build actichip because of the numerous advantages they offer when compared to pcr amplicons. being fully custom-designed, they have more uniform hybridisation characteristics, they yield less non-specific hybridisation and misidentification of gene transcripts, while exhibiting similar sensitivity  <cit> .

genomic databases are still prone to modifications. while reorganisations and changes in transcript sequences or identifiers may account for erroneous results in microarray studies, using sequence-verified probes was shown to improve microarray measurement accuracy and consistency  <cit> . therefore, we decided mining transcript information for probe design from several databases. although many programs to design oligonucleotide probes were publicly available at the time of our study  <cit> , none of these programs allowed such an application. therefore, we implemented a new, freely available program named cado4mi   <cit> . as most of the existing programs, cado4mi uses variations of the same algorithm and common criteria to design specific oligonucleotides with optimised hybridisation features through a multistep procedure . contrary to these programs however, cado4mi has the potential to compute probe sets for the same query genes using simultaneously two or more databases in order to select optimal sequences. visualisation, comparison and integration of the different probe sets are greatly facilitated by a powerful graphical user interface. the program also incorporates several other interesting features such as an automatic search for missing sequences in the reference databases and the possibility to compute and display melting temperature  or gc content curves for individual gene query or, alternatively, for the entire set of sequences. these curves are helpful in selecting the appropriate parameters for the design of probes. cado4mi was used successfully in a recent study to select automatically a set of pcr primers designed for the resequencing of interrupted coding sequences   <cit> .

we designed 60-mer oligonucleotides using the reference sequence database   <cit>  and the unigene database  <cit>  because of their complementary features. while the former gives access to non-redundant and well-annotated sequences including pseudogenes and splice variants, but is not yet exhaustive, the latter compiles comprehensive gene-oriented clusters of sequences but with more redundancy and incomplete or erroneous annotations. the actichip probe set was designed to target each of the  <dig> genes defined in the actinome database with a single oligonucleotide without discriminating splice variants. this was achieved for  <dig> entries while the probes designed for  <dig> genes were shown to target more than one sequence in at least one reference database. we therefore selected either  <dig> oligonucleotides for  <dig> genes,  <dig> for  <dig> genes or  <dig> for one gene resulting in a total set of  <dig> oligonucleotides . in addition, we used part of a set of viral and bacterial probes described as having no similarity with human transcripts  <cit>  and sequences of human genes reported as being housekeeping genes  <cit>  to generate  <dig> negative and  <dig> positive controls, respectively.

evaluation of actichip performance
experimental design
to evaluate the experimental performance of actichip microarrays, a series of repeated hybridisation experiments, including dye swaps, were carried out with optimised target labeling, hybridisation, scanning and data analysis protocols . all the procedures were standardised to limit the impact of experimental bias or biological variations on data. the same series of high quality rna samples purified from human breast adenocarcinoma mcf- <dig> cells and from human skeletal muscle was used in our experiments. epithelial cells and skeletal muscle tissue were chosen because they express well-characterised sets of cytoskeleton genes, and were anticipated to give well-contrasted differential expression data when analysed with actichip.

actichip image quality and data reproducibility
microarray images exhibited good and reproducible quality parameters in both channels . background values were low and signals showed maximum dynamic range, resulting in signal-to-background and signal-to-noise ratios higher than  <dig> and  <dig> in each channel, respectively. actichip microarray images were quantified using the genepix pro  <dig>  software. negative and irrelevant spots were removed from the dataset as described in the "methods" section, yielding approximately  <dig> % of positive features of which 55– <dig> % were found to be relevant.

to assess the reproducibility of actichip data, we analysed triplicate spots on the actichip array  and repeated hybridisations . focusing on the intrinsic performance of actichip, we did not investigate the impact of the hybridisation of different samples . we calculated the standard deviation  and coefficient of variation  between the normalised log <dig> ratios values excluding the irrelevant signals. as shown in table  <dig>  the microarrays gave reproducible results with good intra- and inter-assay std and cv. analysis of variance  showed that the series of normalised signal ratios was highly similar . the variability in data was also examined in the acuity  <dig>  program using the hierarchical clustering of array experiments with the average linkage and the pearson correlation coefficient as similarity metric. two main clusters were identified for correlation coefficients >  <dig>  in the dendogram resulting from this analysis, each corresponding to either normal or dye-swap experiments . the correlation coefficients calculated from microarray hybridisations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  indicating that the assays were highly comparable. data from assays performed at different time periods were undistinguishable. although limited, the greatest source of variability in our dataset was the dye exchange, indicating that a slightly uneven incorporation of the dyes in samples occurred during our experiments. this dye bias was compensated through a ratio-based, global normalisation of the data.

 intra-array reproducibility was estimated from two representative array experiments performed simultaneously . standard deviation  and coefficient of variation  of log <dig> signal ratios were calculated for each measurable triplicate spots, and the mean values of all repeated measurements were computed for each array. the median of mean stds and cvs obtained from the two arrays are indicated.  inter-array reproducibility as determined from  <dig> arrays performed at two distinct time periods . median std and cv were calculated from the mean log <dig> signal ratios obtained for each measurable gene over the series of arrays.

signal linearity and detection limit
to investigate the dynamic range of actichip and to determine the span of this dynamic range, we used seven arabidopsis thaliana polyadenylated rna species referred to as spike rnas that were in vitro synthesised from plasmids provided by the institute for genomic research  <cit> . the spike rnas were calibrated and were combined to construct seven complex mixes, each mix containing six of the seven spike rnas in staggered concentration ranging from 10- <dig> to  <dig> copies per cell . an eighth sample was prepared, called the reference sample, consisting of the mix of all spike rnas at a concentration of  <dig> cpc . thereby, the comparison of any of the seven rna samples to the reference sample should theoretically yield signal ratios ranging from 10-3-fold to 102-fold.

the graph shown in figure  <dig> is a summary of a complete hybridisation series where each curve represents the signal ratios associated with one of the seven spike rnas. actichip arrays displayed a near perfect dynamic range over three logs  and the experimental log <dig> ratios match well the expected theoretical values. a wider spread of the curves was observed for some spike rnas indicating that their sequences might favour hybridisation signal accuracy. actichip arrays accurately yielded ratios for spike rnas at the highest concentration  with no saturation effect. the lower limit of linearity of the dynamic range was around  <dig> cpc, and the signals reached a bottom plateau with values close to background noise, marking the limit of sensitivity between  <dig> and  <dig> cpc.

actichip reliability
to validate the reliability of actichip data, we analysed our dataset using the significance analysis of microarrays algorithm . sam analysis resulted in a list of  <dig> and  <dig> genes found significantly expressed in skeletal muscle and mcf- <dig> cells, respectively . this list was highly enriched in marker genes characteristic for either epithelial or skeletal muscle cells , in good agreement with the expression patterns expected from an a priori reasoning based on biological knowledge. importantly, we obtained similar results through sam analysis using three randomly chosen experiments over the entire series of assays  revealing that a limited number of repeats would be sufficient to obtain reliable data with actichip.

the gene list was established from our dataset through sam analysis  <cit> . in sam, the significant genes are represented on a plot by points displaced by a distance denoted as the score  from a line on which genes identified simply by chance are aligned. log <dig> expression ratios were determined by averaging the log <dig> ratios calculated from fluorescence intensities of  <dig> repeated hybridisations.

actichip specificity
the major difficulty in designing oligonucleotide probes for actichip arised from the appreciable number of highly similar genes found in the actin cytoskeleton gene family  <cit> . this is exemplified by the actin gene family which is composed of six different isoform genes sharing not only high sequence identity at the protein level , but also at the nucleic acid level . for these genes, sequence identity ranges between  <dig> and 99% of the coding sequence , and between  <dig> and 83% of the total mrna sequence hampering the design of specific probes.

to evaluate the specificity of the actichip probes targeting the actin isoforms, pcr fragments corresponding to the target regions of the transcripts were obtained using as template cdna generated from hela cell polyrna. the purified pcr products were labeled with alexa dyes through direct covalent linkage and hybridised to actichip microarrays. as shown in figure  <dig>  each pcr fragment bound to the corresponding probe. no cross-hybridisation was observed neither within the set of actin probes nor with the other oligonucleotides included in the chip. these results demonstrated that the oligonucleotide probes were fully specific and indicated that the procedure used to design the probes in cado4mi was robust.

cross platform comparison
to further evaluate the performance of actichip, we compared the microarray with two other well-established oligonucleotide-based platforms . we used 25-mer oligonucleotide commercial chips  and academic arrays prepared with a 70-mer oligonucleotide set . pcr-amplicon arrays were not considered to avoid bias generated by this format of probe, as a result of either sequence errors or cross-hybridisations  <cit> . hybridisation replicates were carried out under optimised and standardised protocols specific to each platform using the rna sample sets analysed with actichip. microarray image analysis and data extraction were performed using dedicated methods and software .

the table summarises the main characteristics of the two microarray platforms compared to the actichip array. data are from the description facts provided by the manufacturers.

results obtained with actichip, affymetrix and operon arrays were markedly comparable . the percentage of probes found to be relevant in genepix ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> % for mcf-7-derived rnas whereas it varied from  <dig> to  <dig> % for the skeletal muscle sample. compared to the operon platform, the actichip and affymetrix arrays gave the best inter-assay reproducibility with only  <dig> % of discordant data between the series of experiments.

cross-platform comparison was achieved considering only the genes represented simultaneously on each of the three arrays. these genes were identified by comparing the target gene accession numbers and/or the sequences used to design the probes as detailed in the "methods" section. among the  <dig> genes represented on actichip,  <dig> were also targeted by the affymetrix u133a  <dig>  array and  <dig> by the operon array, while  <dig> genes were represented simultaneously on the three platforms. we calculated the degree of concordance between the expression patterns as the ratio of the number of genes simultaneously found expressed or not expressed in our samples by two or three of the microarray platforms to the total number of genes commonly represented by these platforms. we found  <dig> % of concordant genes between actichip and affymetrix,  <dig> % between actichip and operon,  <dig> % between affymetrix and operon, and  <dig> % when considering all platforms. results were comparable for the two rna samples we analysed. the pearson correlation coefficients  calculated using the median expression log <dig> ratios of the set of concordant genes were  <dig>  between actichip and affymetrix,  <dig>  between actichip and operon, and  <dig>  between affymetrix and operon. these data indicated that actichip microarrays performed equally well as affymetrix platform while operon arrays were less reliable under our experimental conditions.

as a good indicator of platform specificity, we found that the expression patterns obtained with actichip for the actin isoforms perfectly matched the profiles described in the literature  <cit> . cytoplasmic actin isoforms  were detected in both samples as anticipated from their ubiquitous expression . two of the four muscle actin isoforms  were found to be expressed in skeletal muscle but not in mcf- <dig> cells while the others  were not detected in any sample. these expression patterns were further confirmed by pcr using cdnas obtained from our samples . conversely, the aortic smooth muscle  and gamma enteric smooth muscle  actin isoforms were incorrectly identified in the mcf- <dig> and skeletal muscle samples using the affymetrix chips. with the operon arrays, the alpha skeletal muscle  and aortic smooth muscle  actins were inaccurately detected in the mcf- <dig> or skeletal muscle rnas, respectively. in addition, operon arrays were unable to detect the gamma actin  in both samples.

hybridisation data were treated following the procedure specific for each platform  to identify genes reproducibly deemed expressed  or not expressed . the table summarises the expression data obtained for the different actin isoforms. Ø : isoform not represented on the array.

discussion
microarray analysis is a powerful methodology for high throughput gene expression study which contributes to the understanding of complex events or biological systems  <cit> . in the present paper we describe the design and benchmarking of a custom-made oligonucleotide microarray named actichip as a tool to study the actin cytoskeleton in normal or pathological situations.

we designed, produced and evaluated actichip using optimised and standardised experimental procedures and a data evaluation pipeline we established according to the guidelines developed by the microarray gene expression data  society  <cit> . actichip hybridisation signals obtained with our optimised experimental settings were of high quality  leading to accurate and highly reproducible quantification of gene expression levels . importantly, our data indicated that two or three replicates would be sufficient for reliable measurements when applying the standardised procedures we established. consistent with recent studies  <cit> , our results show that a thorough standardisation of the array and experiment design, protocols and data analysis procedures, can greatly improve microarray data quality and comparability. this is crucial for the generation of meaningful universal gene expression index based on the exchange and integration of data between microarray platforms and laboratories.

the reliability and sensitivity of gene expression measurements are other important issues when using microarrays. in this study, we analysed two well-contrasted rna samples, each characterised by a specific organisation of their actin cytoskeleton and by known marker genes. many of these genes were found significantly expressed using actichip , underlining the reliability of this array as a transcriptome analysis platform and its value for the characterisation and classification of biological samples based on their transcriptome profiles. our data further showed that actichip not only detects reliably qualitative gene expression changes, but has also the potential to accurately measure the amplitude of these variations . in addition, we determined that actichip has the potential to identify transcripts over a biologically meaningful range including high, intermediate and rare abundance classes of rnas.

the fraction of probes on an array that yield a significant hybridisation signal can be used as a measure of platform sensitivity. we found a magnitude of detectable genes ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> % with both the actichip, affymetrix and operon microarrays , indicating that the reactivity of the three platforms is similar. these results are in good agreement with data from similar studies  <cit> , and suggest that a significant fraction of cytoskeletal genes were not or very lowly expressed in our samples, consistent with the concept that only part of the genome is usually expressed in a given differentiated cell line or tissue  <cit> .

comparison of the expression profiles obtained from the three platforms revealed a moderate concordance between the datasets, the best score  being observed between the actichip and affymetrix arrays. nevertheless, we found good correlations between the relative expression data from the different arrays when considering the subset of concordant genes. the correlation in gene expression levels between the actichip and affymetrix arrays was particularly strong and was comparable to those reported in similar studies for best performing arrays  <cit> . identifying the source of variability between the different microarray platforms was not straightforward since many factors could have influenced the expression data. indeed, microarray platforms differ on numerous technological aspects including array format and fabrication, protocols and instrumentation, as well as computational and statistical tools. it has been shown that these differences could account, at least in part, for discrepancy in the data generated by different array technologies  <cit> . although we carefully standardised our protocols, we could not avoid some differences in the procedures specific for each platform. biases in our data may partly result from dissimilarities between the methods we used to generate and label the samples or from differences in sensitivity between the procedures we applied to acquire and analyse the data.

we found that  <dig>  % or  <dig>  % of the actichip targets were not represented in the affymetrix genechip or operon array, respectively . this result is not surprising considering that the three array platforms were implemented using different databases or different releases of the same database  harbouring modifications of transcript sequences, identifiers or annotations. however, our data question the reliability of the high throughput design of pangenomic probe libraries. focusing on a limited, easy-to-handle set of genes constitutes a more careful and robust approach. in line, several focused microarrays were recently described as powerful alternatives to whole genome arrays to study complex biological systems  <cit> .

on the other hand, many of the genes represented on actichip are highly similar and are not easy to discriminate using long oligonucleotide microarrays. when considering the actin gene family, only very limited regions of the transcript sequences can be used for the design of probes with convenient physical properties and specificity. to design high quality probes, we developed the cado4mi program which allows a validation of oligonucleotides by cross-comparison of their sequences with data from several reference databases. for  <dig> of the  <dig> target genes represented on actichip, combining information available from the unigene and refseq databases actually allowed us to select probes with an enhanced specificity compared to those obtained using only one database. the fact that actichip was able to differentiate the highly similar actin isoforms confirms that cado4mi generates highly specific probes . by contrast, some probes specific for the actin isoforms in the affymetrix genechip and in the operon set target regions having a high degree of similarity with several unrelated transcripts. as a consequence, these probes may generate false positive data due to cross-reactivity. this could explain the erroneous detections of some actin isoforms we observed with the affymetrix or operon platforms. in line, probe sequence alignment showed that the acta <dig> operon probe has actually the potential to cross-hybridise with several transcripts . by using the probe match tool at the netaffx analysis center, we also found that the acta <dig> and actg <dig> probe sets from the u133a genechip both perfectly match with the acta <dig> mrna. however, our data showed that the specificity of a probe can not be simply inferred from its design characteristics. although giving false positives in our study, the acta <dig> operon probe appeared to be specific as judged by sequence alignment , and the actg <dig> affymetrix probe set perfectly matched with the corresponding transcript sequence.

it is conceivable that using latest versions of commercial arrays based on better-quality genome assembly and annotations or on new design concept may improve measurement accuracy and sensitivity. as an illustration, the genechip exon array recently designed by affymetrix with over six million probes targeting all annotated and predicted exons in the human genome appears as a promising tool to investigate both gene expression and alternative splicing with a high resolution. data from the literature show that this chip may provide more accurate gene expression measurements than traditional microarrays  <cit> , but requires a more complex strategy for the analysis of expression data  <cit> . complex and time-consuming analysis is a typical trait of high densitiy microarrays and often represents the bottleneck of pangenomic expression studies. in the particular context of studies focusing on a limited number of genes, thematic arrays offer the possibility to overcome these limitations.

CONCLUSIONS
altogether, our data indicate that the tools and procedures we implemented in the course of our study constitute a powerful approach for the design of thematic arrays. our data show that actichip displays solid performance characteristics that make it a valid platform for functional genomics studies of the actin cytoskeleton in the context of basic or clinical research. compared to high density microarrays, actichip has the potential to facilitate gene expression data analysis because of its reasonable size. with the capacity to screen up to four samples in parallel, actichip also contributes to lower the cost of the analysis.

