BACKGROUND
accurate characterization of as many genes as possible is a central challenge of the post-genomic era and an essential precondition for progress in systems biology  <cit> . but this characterization is very far from completion. by various estimates, at least 30-50% of the genes of any given organism are of unknown function  <cit> , incorrectly annotated  <cit> , or have only a generic annotation such as ‘atpase’  <cit> . this problem is particularly acute for eukaryotic genomes, which are in general less well annotated than prokaryotic ones  <cit> .

moreover, with more than  <dig>  genomes now  in the pipeline,  <dig>  of them eukaryotic , the numbers of unknown genes continue to increase  <cit>  and annotation errors continue to increase even faster  <cit> . for some gene families up to 60% of the annotations are wrong  <cit> . without specific functional annotation efforts, present and future genome information will become ever more corrupt and hard to analyze, and will thus be greatly underexploited.

the first step in linking gene to function is to define what constitutes a function, and this is not trivial. full definition of a protein’s function requires a combination of two features or ‘dimensions’:  a molecular function  and  a functional context  comprising other proteins involved in the same process. currently most annotations in public archives convey only molecular functions, mainly assigned by homology. however, when an enzymatic activity has been annotated in this way, it may well be wrong if other genes of the same pathway are not in the genome  <cit> . to decide whether a protein has a truly known function, it is therefore essential to take into account both the molecular and functional context dimensions. most automated annotation platforms use only the molecular function, but when metabolic reconstruction  is included in the annotation process this greatly improves annotation quality  <cit> .

we and others have previously emphasized the power of cross-kingdom comparative genomics approaches to link gene and function  <cit> . this strategy was applied in the work presented here to families of unknown function shared by arabidopsis thaliana and prokaryotes. using the series of sieves summarized in fig.  <dig>  we combined comparative genomic and experimental validation approaches to discover the function of ‘unknowns’. throughout this work, our primary comparative genomics platform was the seed database and its tools  <cit> ; the seed is publicly available at http://www.theseed.org/papers/20101120/.

RESULTS
selecting candidate hypothetical genes families conserved in plants and prokaryotes
generation of the starting arabidopsis gene set
the full set of  <dig>  arabidopsis genes was extracted from the re-annotated genome  <cit> . to predict functions for ‘unknown’ genes conserved among prokaryotes and plants, it is important to avoid large gene families because their members often have different functions. the tribe  <cit>  and tigr  <cit>  algorithms were therefore used to filter out genes belonging to families having four or more members in arabidopsis, leaving  <dig>  genes corresponding to  <dig>  gene families .

a includes several arabidopsis gene families with  <dig> or more paralogs

b one candidate was not in the arabidopsis set .

c includes  <dig> families with functions experimentally validated,  <dig> invalidated, and  <dig> for which experimental validation is currently in progress .

selecting gene families conserved between plants and prokaryotes
a second filter was applied to the  <dig>  genes to retain those whose products have prokaryotic homologs. blastp  <cit>  searches were performed in summer  <dig> against the approximately  <dig> complete or almost complete microbial genomes then available in the seed database. the probability threshold  of better than 10- <dig> was imposed to ensure sufficient functional conservation between amino acid sequences included in the analysis  <cit> . approximately one quarter of the  <dig>  arabidopsis genes tested were found to be similar to at least one prokaryotic gene . prokaryotic homologs for additional arabidopsis genes would most probably be detected were this comparison to be repeated with the more numerous  and more diverse microbial genomes now available.

selecting hypothetical arabidopsis/prokaryotic gene families
several strategies were combined to extract from the set of  <dig>  conserved arabidopsis genes those whose functions are unknown or poorly known. the following sources of evidence  were considered:  arabidopsis gene annotations in the tair database  <cit> ;  seed annotations of prokaryotic orthologs of arabidopsis genes;  the list of arabidopsis proteins of unknown function   <cit>  ; and  publications in pubmed and tair databases .

we relied mainly on the second of these sources, i.e. seed annotations of prokaryotic orthologs of the candidate arabidopsis genes. the nontrivial task of establishing gene orthology is greatly aided in seed by the subsystem-based organization of annotations . we considered arabidopsis genes to be ‘known’ and excluded them from further analysis if they or any of their prokaryotic orthologs were associated with seed subsystems that are classified as non-hypothetical; i.e. encoding established metabolic pathways, physiological processes, or structural complexes 

the list of arabidopsis pufs  <cit>  served as a secondary resource. three distinct puf identification methods, complementary to our approach, have been used to compile this list:  blastp searches against proteins of known function in swiss-prot;  hidden markov model-derived searches against the pfam domain database; and  retrieval of the 'unknown' annotations from the gene ontology system  <cit> . finally, to keep abreast of discoveries of functions for arabidopsis genes, publications associated with selected arabidopsis genes were extracted from the tair database and pubmed repeatedly during the course of this project.

this analysis yielded a set of  <dig> hypothetical arabidopsis genes, corresponding to about  <dig> gene families common to arabidopsis and prokaryotes that were highly enriched in those specifying proteins of unknown function. this gene set was then prioritized for in-depth in silico analysis as described below.

prioritizing arabidopsis/prokaryotic gene families for detailed in silico analysis
general strategy
as the pool of  <dig> gene families was still too large for the labor-intensive process of in-depth comparative genomic analysis, we prioritized the candidates for further analysis based on several characteristics associated with each protein-encoding gene in the seed database. the main such characteristic was the presence of ‘functional coupling’ or ‘conserved gene clustering’  <cit>  for a prokaryotic member of the family, but other criteria were also computed when available as detailed below.

detecting and analyzing gene clustering
physical gene clustering is the tendency of functionally associated genes to be located near each other on the chromosome. although not entirely absent in eukaryotes  <cit> , such clustering is far more marked in prokaryotes, in which functionally related genes are often arranged in operons  <cit>  or divergently transcribed from the same promoter region  <cit> , or are simply neighbours or near-neighbours  <cit> . on average, ~35% of bacterial metabolic genes are in clusters  <cit> . a key point is that the more taxonomically diverse the genomes in which a cluster occurs, the more informative the cluster becomes  <cit> . a single gene family can be involved in different clusters in different taxa , even if it is not clustered with informative genes in all taxa.

several software tools in seed that take advantage of gene clustering were used to select promising candidates, as well as to link unknown gene families to general metabolic pathways and to generate specific functional predictions during the next phase of the project:

 strength of ‘functional coupling’  – measures the number of distantly related organisms  in which two genes are located in each other’s vicinity. close strains are not taken into account in this parameter, for example: all sequenced escherichia coli genomes in seed in which two particular genes are co-localized on the chromosome are counted as one when computing fc .

 length of cluster – reflects the number of genes involved in a specific cluster.

 evidence code ‘in cluster with non-hypothetical’  – indicates that a gene family is functionally coupled to  at least one other gene family that has been assigned a function that is considered ‘non-hypothetical’. the functional coupling score must be five or more for this code to apply.

 evidence code ‘in cluster with hypothetical’  – as above, except it labels gene families that tend to co-localize with at least one other hypothetical gene family;

 association of a gene family with a ‘clustering based’ subsystem in seed . these subsystems group hypothetical protein families solely on the grounds of co-localization patterns conserved across multiple genomes; however, manual subsystem encoding takes automatically pre-computed leads  to the next level. for example, comprehensive phyletic spread is determined for protein families that might have been labeled as ‘in cluster with hypothetical’ in merely a fraction of genomes. cbss subsystems provided a useful starting point for the next phase of in silico analysis.

other filtering factors
other factors that were considered included:

 phyletic spread – the number of distinct microbial species that harbored members of each hypothetical family under consideration, whether or not they were functionally coupled . widely distributed families were preferred over narrowly distributed ones.

 whether or not well studied model organisms such as e. coli, bacillus subtilis, pseudomonas aeruginosa, cyanobacteria, or yeast contained a member of the gene family in question, indicating likely availability of functional genomics data  that could provide clues linking candidate families to general metabolic areas and aid specific functional predictions.

comprehensive tables summarizing all types of association evidence  were used for manual sorting and evaluation to prioritize hypothetical plant/prokaryote gene families and to select candidates for further detailed in silico analysis.

linking unknown gene families to general metabolic areas
our first goal was to link the prioritized gene families to a particular metabolic or functional area. for this, we built on the gene clustering associations captured as described above, using these to construct a corresponding experimental subsystem in the seed database for each family . each such subsystem included all members of the focus gene family across all genomes available in the database, as well as gene families potentially associated with it . such integration of biological functions with genome sequences provided by subsystems allowed us to discard or strengthen the clustering associations and to evaluate the phylogenetic co-distribution between the gene family of interest and the associated families. we then further explored the associations by extending the analysis to arabidopsis. indeed, organization of genomic data in subsystems allows accurate extrapolation of functional associations between genes detected in microbial genomes onto other prokaryotes and even eukaryotes , albeit with caution. for example, in our study the degree of similarity between an arabidopsis gene and its nearest prokaryotic homolog involved in gene clustering played an important role in evaluating the validity of such cross-kingdom projections. additional ‘checks and balances’ were used in projecting functional leads and hypotheses developed via comparative analysis of prokaryotic genomes back to plant genes, which might not have preserved the function of their prokaryotic counterparts. for example, when linking unknown gene families to general metabolic areas, or to individual protein families via gene clustering, the validity of such associations in the context of plant physiology and biochemistry was considered, as well as its correspondence to arabidopsis expression array data  <cit> , protein localization  <cit> , mutant phenotypes, and other functional genomics data . this first analysis yielded a list of  <dig> gene families linked to diverse metabolic areas , including fatty acids, terpenes, vitamins, aromatic compounds, and sulfur, as well as iron-sulfur cluster assembly, oxidative damage protection, glutathione s-transferase-dependent detoxification, dna repair, plastid/cell division, signalling systems, and metal homoeostasis. however, a clear bias reflecting the investigators’ areas of expertise was observed, with some ten in vitamin/cofactor metabolism and another fourteen in trna/rna modifications. this emphasizes the value of combining multiple types of expertise to accurately predict and validate gene function.

predicting and testing precise molecular and biological functions
general strategy
the next step in the pipeline was creating a functional hypothesis that could be tested by genetic and/or biochemical experiments. this is by far the most labor intensive and intellectually challenging step in the pipeline. multiple types of data need to be queried and integrated with biochemical insights in order to make reasonable and testable predictions. clues can come from high-throughput data  from any organism, from the literature , or from analysis of the structure of a member of the family . biochemical insight can come from cataloguing globally or locally missing genes, i.e. those that encode enzymes for which a gene has never been identified in any species or is absent in certain species  <cit> .

an example of globally missing gene identified in this work is the sua5/yrdc family involved in the universal carbamoylthreonyladenosine  modification in trna . an example of a locally missing gene is the ptps-iii family  that replaces the folate biosynthesis enzyme folb in many bacteria and certain eukaryotes  <cit> . biochemical insights can also come from noting the presence of two gene families annotated as fulfilling the same role, suggesting a possible duplication followed by functional divergence  <cit> . one such example is the cog <dig> family, previously annotated in many genomes as the folate-dependent glycine cleavage system t protein , but in reality a protein involved in the repair of iron-sulfur clusters . for some families very precise functions could be predicted, e.g. methylation of a specific position in ribosomal rna  whereas for others the prediction remained more general but testable nonetheless. for instance, we were able to link certain members of the cog <dig> family  to zinc homeostasis  <cit>  and this general prediction was borne out by demonstrating that some members of the family have a role in survival in low zinc conditions . we were able to make testable functional predictions for  <dig> families ; the rationales for these predictions are summarized in the subsystem notes for each family in the seed database. table  <dig> lists the  <dig> families for which the prediction has been experimentally confirmed by us or others. table  <dig> lists four families that were experimentally invalidated and another eight for which experiments are well advanced, for a total of  <dig> families. three illustrative examples of validated predictions are described briefly below. the first and second of these are fully described elsewhere  <cit> .

a numbers in italics are for members of families for which the prediction has been invalidated or is in progress, they have not been included in the final count.

b s. fournier and w. decatur, university of massachusetts 

cog <dig> 
bacterial genes encoding cog <dig> , the gcvt paralog noted above, often cluster with diverse iron/sulfur  proteins , and proteomic data  <cit>  show induction by oxidative stress and confirm an fe/s association. moreover, the cog <dig> protein is required for full activity of certain fe/s enzymes in e. coli <cit>  and yeast  <cit> . we therefore predicted that cog <dig> is a folate-dependent enzyme  involved in assembly or repair of fe/s proteins, particularly under oxidative stress. consistent with this prediction, deleting the gene encoding cog <dig> in e. coli  increased oxidative stress sensitivity, and the stress-sensitive phenotype was complemented by expressing a plant cog <dig> protein . folate-dependence was established by using nmr to demonstrate stereoselective folate binding by recombinant e. coli cog <dig>  and by showing that in vivo activity of the e. coli fe/s protein miab is as seriously impaired by deleting the folate synthesis gene fole  as by deleting ygfz, i.e. removing folates had the same impact as removing cog <dig>  <cit> .

cog <dig> 
the histidine utilization  pathway occurs in certain bacteria and animals, but not plants. the hut pathway up to the intermediate n-formiminoglutamate is invariant, but thereafter there are three routes to the end-product glutamate, one of which involves a formiminotransferase, cog <dig> . comparative genomics analysis showed that bacteria that have a formiminotransferase-type hut pathway generally lack the ygfa gene encoding 5-formyltetrahydrofolate cycloligase, the key enzyme required to recycle 5-formyltetrahydrofolate, which inhibits various folate-dependent enzymes and is formed by a side reaction of serine hydroxymethyltransferase in the presence of glycine . this striking observation led us to predict that formiminotransferase or formiminotransferase paralogs can replace ygfa. this prediction fits with classical biochemical data showing that mammalian formiminotransferase can mediate formyl transfer from 5-formyltetrahydrofolate to glutamate, albeit at a low rate  <cit> . the prediction was supported by showing that various prokaryotic cog <dig> genes  complement the growth phenotype of an e. coli ygfa deletion mutant . representative data for the acidobacterium cog <dig> gene are shown in fig. 3c. folate analysis of the ygfa deletant with and without complementing cog <dig> genes confirmed that the deletant accumulated 5-formyltetrahydrofolate and that cog <dig> genes reversed this accumulation  <cit> . furthermore, characterization of recombinant cog <dig> proteins showed their kinetic characteristics to be consistent with an in vivo role in 5-formyltetrahydrofolate recycling  <cit> ; this biochemical corroboration is important since functions carried out by ectopically overexpressed genes do not necessarily reflect their native function. taken together, this evidence suggests that cog <dig> paralogs in plants may likewise replace ygfa. consistent with this possibility, the ygfa knockout in arabidopsis has a mild phenotype, pointing to the existence of an alternative route for disposal of 5-formyltetrahydrofolate  <cit> .

yrdc/sua <dig> 
the universal base modification t6a occurs at position  <dig> in a subset of trnas decoding ann codons. the biogenesis of this complex modification is yet to be elucidated but is known to require threonine, atp, and bicarbonate  <cit> . cog <dig> was predicted as a possible candidate for a missing t6a biosynthesis family because it occurs in all genomes sequenced to date, is known to bind double-stranded rna  <cit> , and has been linked to defects in translation in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . this conjecture was supported by sequence homology with the  hydrogenase maturation protein hypf, which catalyzes a reaction analogous to the one expected for a t6a enzyme  <cit> . the cog <dig> family can be further split based on sequence comparison into three subfamilies: yrdc, sua <dig> , and ycio. one or two members of this family are present in each genome; for example, the arabidopsis and e. coli genomes contain two, yrdc  and ycio , while the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome contains only one, sua <dig>  <cit> . we showed that  trnas from s. cerevisiae strains lacking sua <dig> do not contain t6a and that this phenotype is complemented by transforming with a plasmid encoding the wild type gene ;  the homologs from b. subtilis, m. maripaludis, e. coli yrdc, but not e. coli ycio also complement the phenotype;  the yrdc homolog is essential in e. coli, whereas ycio is not;  s. cerevisiae, b. subtilis, m. maripaludis yrdc genes but not e. coli ycio are able to complement the lethality phenotype of yrdc in e coli ; and  e. coli yrdc is able to bind t6a apomodified trnathr but not unmodified transcript  <cit> . therefore, members of the yrdc/sua <dig> family are involved in t6a biosynthesis. in arabidopsis, at5g <dig> and at3g <dig> are annotated as related to the yrdc family. however, based on comparative sequence analysis combined with genetic orthologous complementation tests these can be distinguished. as depicted in fig. 4c, the yrdc family is characterized by the kxr/g …sxn signature sequence; at5g <dig> is therefore most probably part of the yrdc family while at3g <dig> is not.

propagating validated and predicted gene functions to other organisms
subsystem-based organization of genomic data in seed implies delineation and maintenance of isofunctional gene groups  <cit> . this strategy greatly facilitates not only the development of functional predictions for uncharacterized genes, but also accurate projection of this knowledge, once verified, to other species. for example, annotations for the  <dig> families developed in the course of this study and experimentally confirmed by us or others have been propagated to a total of  <dig>  genes in some  <dig> complete or nearly complete bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic genomes currently available in the seed database . furthermore, we believe there is merit in accurate and exhaustive propagation of yet untested predictions to all orthologs in all available genomes, early in the process of in silico analysis. this allows complete and accurate cataloguing of functional homologs for each gene family under study, thus revealing its phyletic spread, co-occurrence with known gene families, potential associations with specific features of an environmental niche – all of which can serve as additional clues for developing specific functional hypotheses. for this reason we have built subsystems in the public seed database for  <dig> families  so that readers can produce and test their own predictions for gene families that fall in their area of expertise. the total number of annotated genes in these families exceeds  <dig> .

comparing results to those from automated functional prediction platforms
several recently developed platforms seek to automatically integrate comparative genomics, high-throughput experimental data, and literature reports to make gene function predictions  <cit> . for ten gene families that were predicted and validated, we analyzed the accuracy of the corresponding predictions from the two most relevant predictions platforms, enet   <cit>  and aranet   <cit>  . the predictions from these automated platforms were mostly wrong. at best, they produced a general annotation that was in the right functional area such as ‘folate dependent regulatory protein’ by enet and ‘iron-sulfur assembly protein’ by aranet for the cog <dig> family. however, both of these came straight from the literature, not from associations, and can thus hardly be called predictions; furthermore, these two correct ‘predictions’ were buried in long lists of incorrect ones. thus, whenever a prediction was possible, the automated platforms failed to make a correct and precise one.

a only a few top predictions  for aranet are shown. they are sorted by the aranet score estimating the gene’s association with each particular process .

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis presented here shows that combining comparative genomics with expert intellectual input enabled correct functional annotation of  <dig> gene families by only a few researchers, in a short time , and at a moderate cost . this number of successful functional predictions is roughly comparable to the number made through the entire structural genomics effort  <cit> , involving many more people, a much longer period, and far greater expense. the cost-effectiveness of our approach is thus perhaps its most striking feature.

our analysis also underscores the imperative of combining molecular function and biological context to annotate function as shown in the cog <dig> example. homology and even in vitro assays would have labeled this family – correctly, but incompletely and misleadingly – as a formiminotransferase. only by interpreting phylogenetic distribution data with biochemical insight and then applying complementation tests was this family correctly annotated as an alternative to 5-formyltetrahydrofolate cycloligase to metabolize 5-formyltetrahydrofolate. it is noteworthy that in this and most of our other successful predictions, there is a strong bias towards the authors’ areas of expertise – from which the obvious inference is that other experts would, equally easily, have been able to predict additional sets of functions. for this reason we have built subsystems in the public seed database for  <dig> families and made available the raw comparative genomic data for all gene families shared between arabidopsis and prokaryotes  so that other experts can bring their insight to our analysis in order to make and test their own predictions.

finally, the only plant genomes available when this effort started were arabidopsis, rice, and poplar, and rich post-genomic resources were available only for arabidopsis. we accordingly focused our work on gene families common to arabidopsis and prokaryotes. however, now that other plant genomes are pouring in  it is clear that almost all of the families we investigated have orthologs in other plants, making our work of immediate value in annotating other plant genomes. furthermore, the rapid growth of microarray databases and other post-genomic resources for plants besides arabidopsis  is providing many sources of association evidence to reinforce the approach that we have pioneered here.

