BACKGROUND
programmed cell death
programmed cell death  occurs in both plants and animals, and is a highly regulated process that happens either as a part of normal development or in response to environmental influences  <cit> . examples of environmentally induced pcd include, but are not limited to: heat shock  <cit>  and the hypersensitive response   <cit> . examples of developmentally regulated pcd include, but are not limited to: deletion of the embryonic suspensor  <cit> , tracheary element  differentiation  <cit> , leaf senescence  <cit> , and leaf morphogenesis  <cit> .

the classification of plant pcd into categories based on morphological characteristics has been challenging in the past  <cit> . in  <dig> fukuda  <cit>  defined three different forms of plant pcd  <dig>  apoptotic-like  <dig>  cell death during senescence and  <dig>  pcd in which the vacuole plays a central role. in  <dig> van doorn and woltering  <cit>  compared plant pcd with three previously established morphological categories of metazoan cell death  <dig>  apoptosis  <dig>  autophagy and  <dig>  non-lysosomal pcd; these authors found that no plant examples conformed to the apoptotic type  <cit> . in  <dig> reape and mccabe  <cit>  reverted to the use of fukudas’  term, apoptotic-like cell death, referring to examples from both induced and developmentally regulated pcd. recently, plant pcd has been classified into two main categories based on morphological characteristics: necrotic and vacuolar cell death  <cit> . however, these authors agree with van doorn et al  <dig>  <cit> , that biochemical and molecular data are needed to classify the categories of plant pcd more accurately.

autophagy is known to play a major role in the regulation of death in animal cells, but the extent to which autophagy is involved in plant pcd has yet to be concretized  <cit> . autophagy has been divided into three forms within plants: micro-, macro-, and mega-autophagy  <cit> . micro-autophagy is the uptake of organelles or other cellular contents by a lytic compartment, usually the vacuole in plant cells  <cit> . macro-autophagy involves the creation of a double membraned structure containing cytosolic contents, called an autophagosome; this organelle will then fuse with a compartment, such as the vacuole, containing lytic enzymes  <cit> . lastly, mega-autophagy involves the permeabilization or rupture of the tonoplast and the release of hydrolytic enzymes into the cell, causing total degradation  <cit> .

processes such as leaf senescence, te differentiation, and the deletion of the embryonic suspensor have emerged as valuable examples used to study plant cell death  <cit> . however, to date very little research has been conducted in vivo to understand the order of organelle changes, which occur during developmentally regulated pcd in planta. therefore, this study focused on establishing the sequence of cellular changes during plant pcd, to begin understanding cause and effect relationships between plant organelles.

the lace plant as a novel model organism to study pcd in vivo
the aquatic lace plant is a submerged monocot endemic to madagascar  <cit> , that acquires its name from its unique perforated leaf morphology. in lace plant leaves, pcd begins in the center of areas known as areoles, between transverse and longitudinal veins and continues outwards, stopping four to five cells from the vasculature  <cit> . this system lends predictability to both the time and location of cell death, and in combination with its transparent and thin leaf, makes the plant an ideal specimen for live cell imaging  <cit> . as well, a technique has been developed to culture the lace plant in sterile conditions, providing ample experimental material without contamination   <cit> . collectively, these qualities make the lace plant an excellent system to study developmentally regulated plant pcd in vivo <cit>  .

the process of perforation formation in lace plant leaves has been divided into five stages, as outlined in gunawardena et al   <cit> . the present study will focus on stage  <dig>  or window stage leaves, where pcd is actively occurring . this window stage leaf is then examined at the level of a single areole . the window stage areole is subdivided into three groups of cells along a gradient of pcd, based on morphological characteristics  <cit> . these groups include: non-pcd or control cells , early-pcd cells  and late-pcd cells . npcd stage cells possess pink colouration, indicating the presence of the pigment anthocyanin. epcd cells display chlorophyll pigmentation but no longer display large amounts of anthocyanin, indicating that this is one of the earliest changes in lace plant pcd  <cit> . the length of time between anthocyanin disappearance and chlorophyll reduction is still under investigation. note that the leaves used in this study have previously lost most visible anthocyanin as this is a precise way to ensure that the area of interest will perforate. in the lace plant, various cellular morphological characteristics have been examined throughout the process of cell death  <cit> , however the detailed characterization of the order of events occurring throughout the entire process has not yet been investigated. the aim of this paper is to use the novel lace plant system to delineate the possible order of organelle changes that occur throughout developmental pcd using both in vivo long- and short-term live cell imaging. this study will also employ experiments using fixed tissue samples in order to supplement this data. as a subset of this goal, this paper will provide visual evidence for autophagy during developmental pcd in the lace plant.

RESULTS
window formation
the gradient of cell death seen simultaneously in one areole of a window stage leaf was used to classify cells into groups . thus, each cell that underwent pcd during perforation formation transitioned from epcd to lpcd . therefore, long-term live cell imaging was used to focus on individual cells  initially containing chlorophyll pigmentation in epcd  until the collapse of the plasma membrane in lpcd . the time between the reduction in visible chlorophyll in epcd  to pm collapse in lpcd  in a typical individual cell was determined to be approximately  <dig> hours.

changes in f-actin, chloroplasts, mitochondria and nuclei
following anthocyanin loss, evidence depicted an initial reduction in chlorophyll content, as well as a reduction in the size and number of chloroplasts . the actin cytoskeleton also underwent changes at this time, as demonstrated by alexa fluor  <dig> phalloidin staining . control, or npcd cells, displayed thin groups of actin filaments that appeared to underlay each pm . cells in the early stages of pcd displayed the first visible changes in actin arrangement; notably, the filaments re-organized into thicker cables . there was also an increased number of visible transvacuolar strands  in epcd stage cells . the arrangement of the actin looked increasingly haphazard until lpcd, at which point there was less visible overall cytoskeleton stained .

the gradient of tunel positive nuclei that could be seen in a lace plant areole began at the border of epcd to lpcd cells, indicating that it is one of the earlier cell death characteristics that occurred in lpcd ; note that the gradient division seen in figure 3d corresponds to that seen in figure 3a. also at this time, organelle aggregates were still seen undergoing brownian motion in the vacuole until tonoplast rupture initiated the cessation of movement during the late stages of cell death . later, mitochondria exhibited the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential , as denoted by the lack of cmxros staining . overall, the presence of tunel positive nuclei supports the notion that lpcd cells contain fragmented ndna .

evidence for autophagy and aggregate formation
window stage leaves stained with fm1- <dig> displayed vivid staining of the tonoplast and plasma membranes . small amounts of this stain also localized to the outside of organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts, due to their surrounding phospholipid membranes. vesicle-like objects were rarely present in npcd stage cells , and increased in number from the early stages  to the later stages  of pcd. to support the notion that vesicles were more commonly seen in lpcd cells than epcd or npcd cells, the percentage of cells that contained vesicles was quantified . these results depicted that the percent of cells containing vesicles differed significantly between each group , with 66% of lpcd stage cells, 38% of epcd and 22% of npcd cells containing vesicles.

in order to more closely examine these vesicles, lace plant cells in later stages of pcd were observed via tem and similar membrane-bounded bodies were found . rarely, results displayed double-membraned bodies, sometimes containing organelle material . additionally, in several instances, vesicles, with or without contents, appeared to be fusing with the tonoplast membrane . further evidence of autophagic-like processes was seen using live-cell imaging; fm1- <dig> staining displayed vesiculation of lpcd lace plant cells that occasionally contained organelle material .

in this study, aggregates were observed with dic optics, tem imaging, fm1- <dig>  cmxros staining and via long and short-term live cell imaging . aggregates appeared to be formed within epcd cells, and were most prominent in lpcd stage cells. they were irregularly shaped and seemed to be composed of organelle materials. live cell imaging suggested that these aggregates are chloroplasts or chlorophyll-containing objects due to their colour . within individual cells, the size of the aggregate appeared to increase as pcd progressed. individual or small groups of organelles undergoing brownian motion independently of the aggregate were seen to attach to the aggregate and then move in unison with the cluster . also, it is important to note that brownian motion was also seen in npcd stage cells, albeit to a much lesser extent . using tem imaging, it was apparent that the aggregates were mostly electron-dense . using fm1- <dig>  it was confirmed that these aggregates consisted of organelles surrounded by phospholipid bilayers . using the mitochondria-specific stain cmxros, it was also apparent that there were mitochondria present within the aggregates .

through the use of 3d analysis it was revealed that the aggregates  were in the vacuole in later stages of cell death . these aggregates of mitochondria and chloroplasts were also infrequently observed within vesicles . in addition, tem imaging depicted organelle material in an invagination of the tonoplast  and within the vacuole . in contrast, in npcd stage cells, these organelles were normally dispersed throughout the cytosol and less commonly seen in the vacuole .

tonoplast rupture to cell wall degradation
in lpcd, nuclei were observed to be displaced, visibly smaller and pushed against the pm . this was followed by rupture of the tonoplast and vacuolar collapse . following vacuolar collapse, the nucleus was liberated and then shrunk, the aggregate of organelles stopped moving , and the pm collapsed ; the process from tonoplast rupture to pm collapse took approximately  <dig> minutes . plasma membrane collapse is visualized in additional file  <dig>  at this stage, plasma membrane collapse was also made apparent by positive evans blue staining . in late lpcd cells, it was apparent that mitochondria had lost their ΔΨm, as evident in figure 3c. initial cell wall changes were also observed early in lpcd via lightening of cell walls in the centermost cells . additionally, live cell imaging depicted visual evidence of cell wall disappearance occurred within  <dig> hours following pm collapse . it is important to note that this experiment began with cells with intact pms and followed them throughout cell wall degradation.

discussion
the lace plant window provides a spatially and temporally predictable system within which to study developmental pcd in vivo. similar studies have used mesophyll cells isolated from zinnia elegans to study developmentally regulated pcd in the past; however, these studies are considered in vitro as differentiation into tes was induced following cell isolation  <cit> . therefore, these authors consider the live-cell imaging reported within this manuscript as a unique data set. results presented here elucidate the sequence of cellular events occurring during developmentally regulated pcd in the lace plant using long- and short-term live cell imaging techniques . 

the first visible change noted in lace plant cells undergoing pcd is the reduction/disappearance of anthocyanin  <cit> . it is unclear whether this reduction is due to early changes in the ph of the vacuole following variations in tonoplast permeability, as seen in petal senescence  <cit> , or due to the actual degradation of the pigment. more research is needed to determine the reason for these colour changes that occur early in the pcd process. this loss of pigment in the center of a perforation occurs very early in the pcd process, and is often already reduced when the leaf unfurls. following this, the pigment chlorophyll becomes less abundant  <cit> . this is due to the decrease in chlorophyll within the chloroplasts and the significant reduction in both chloroplast size and number  <cit>  that is seen in epcd cells . lim et al   <cit>  also reported that loss of chlorophyll is a characteristic of leaf senescence, where initial changes occur within the chloroplasts  <cit> .

perhaps concurrently with chlorophyll reduction, actin filament organization begins to change. the actin filaments of the cytoskeleton are known to play major roles in cell expansion, division and differentiation; however, less is known about their role in pcd  <cit> . at the border of npcd-epcd, filaments changed from thin, organized structures coating the periphery of each protoplast , to thicker cables that are more haphazard in arrangement ; this was also seen in picea abies embryos  <cit> . also at this stage an increase in the number of tvs becomes apparent. this increase in tvs has been reported during developmentally regulated pcd in the lace plant and during induced cell death in both lace plant protoplasts and tobacco suspension cultures  <cit> . previous work in the gunawardena lab showed organelles moving along tvs  <cit> ; additional evidence of this is provided in the present study . the movement of organelles along these tvs may result in the perinuclear accumulation of organelles seen in epcd stage lace plant cells   <cit> .

it was determined via fm1- <dig> staining that vesicles begin increasing in prevalence in epcd stage cells. the majority of observed vesicle structures were membrane-bound bodies that may or may not contain organelle material. it is probable that the vesicles seen via fm1- <dig> staining and confocal imaging are the same vesicles seen in the cytosol and joining with the tonoplast via tem imaging . the present study also noted several instances of multi-membraned structures that sometimes contained organelle material. similar swirled cytoplasmic membranes were seen by filonova et al   <cit>  during pcd in embryogenesis in norway spruce and were called ‘whorls’  <cit> . liu et al   <cit>  also observed similar vesicle-containing membranous structures as seen in lace plant pcd, during the hr response in nicotiana plants  <cit> . in addition, it has been determined that autophagy is necessary for developmental pcd in te formation in arabidopsis, which may provide further evidence for the role autophagy plays in plant pcd  <cit> . overall, these membrane-bound structures represent evidence for autophagy during lace plant pcd.

as pcd progresses lace plant cells display aggregation of organelles. the early aggregation of mitochondria in cells undergoing pcd has been noted previously during induced cell death in arabidopsis <cit>  and also in previous developmental pcd studies within the lace plant  <cit> . the various forms of microscopy used here depict chlorophyll-containing organelles, as well as mitochondria in these aggregates. the association among and between mitochondria and plastids has been observed previously, where mitochondria were often seen touching and embedded within chloroplasts of senescing wheat leaves  <cit> .

long-term live cell imaging provides evidence suggesting that the aggregates, characteristic of epcd and lpcd stage cells, visibly increased in size, perhaps through the accumulation of individual organelles as pcd progresses . wright et al   <cit>  previously noted aggregates in the vacuole of lace plant cells undergoing pcd that displayed distorted thylakoid membranes, thus indicating the presence of chloroplasts  <cit> ; these aggregates appeared to be undergoing brownian motion as seen in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of this manuscript. through the use of confocal z-stack imaging and nis-elements volume view software, the present authors were able to determine that these aggregates were positioned in the vacuole during the later stages of pcd. presumably, these organelles are in the vacuole to be degraded; however, it is as of yet unknown how and exactly when this movement into the vacuole occurs. the authors believe that small aggregates of mitochondria, and perhaps individual chloroplasts, are brought to the vacuole independently, potentially aided by tvs, following which aggregation would occur . alternatively, the aggregate could be assembled in the cytosol and then brought into the vacuole as a whole. regardless, this phenomenon of organelles in the vacuole is likely indicative of some form of autophagy  <cit> .

in lpcd stage cells, it is also discernible in figure 3c and 3d that there are cells that have both cmxros staining and tunel positive nuclei. in addition, figure 3c and 3d also display cells, to the far left , that contain tunel positive nuclei without cmxros staining. therefore, it was deduced that dna fragmentation occurs prior to the loss of mitochondrial ΔΨm indicated by a loss in cmxros staining. perhaps concurrently with the appearance of tunel positive nuclei, the actin cytoskeleton appeared to breakdown. re-organization of actin into thick cables followed by its breakdown is a common feature of developmentally regulated plant pcd  <cit> . some authors proposed cytoskeleton alterations as a trigger for the onset of pcd in arabidopsis during the hr  <cit> . however current work in our lab suggests that cysteine-aspartate specific protease-like proteases  may act upon the actin cytoskeleton, suggesting the cytoskeleton may not be a initial trigger for pcd but instead a target of an upstream signal, although further research is required . in addition to cytoskeletal changes in lpcd stage cells, the current study provides live cell imaging evidence of visible cell wall changes, as reported originally by gunawardena et al   <cit>  via tem.

following the appearance of tunel positive nuclei and the breakdown of actin, visible changes in tonoplast dynamics became apparent. it is unknown whether this marks the first change in tonoplast integrity, as it is also possible that an early change in selective permeability of the tonoplast could have caused the subsequent anthocyanin colour change. the rupture of the tonoplast is known to be involved in several examples of plant pcd including te differentiation and aerenchyma formation  <cit> . the present study demonstrates, to the best of these authors’ knowledge, the first in vivo video recording of tonoplast rupture and subsequent visible cellular events . the rarity of the above observations is explained by the quick succession in which these events occur. additional file  <dig> depicts swelling of the vacuole resulting in the flattening of the nucleus against the pm, a characteristic also seen in te differentiation  <cit> . in lace plant cells, this step is followed closely by tonoplast rupture, visible nuclear liberation, and subsequent cessation of organelle aggregate brownian motion , loss of mitochondrial ΔΨm  and rapid nuclear shrinkage. although it was not possible to view cmxros stained cells and also see tonoplast rupture at the same time, the order for cessation of organelle aggregate movement and loss in mitochondrial ΔΨm was discerned from lord et al  <dig>  <cit> . this maintenance of mitochondrial integrity until late in lace plant pcd is reminiscent of leaf senescence and xylem differentiation  <cit> . a similar process is also seen in te differentiation, where studies report liberation of the nucleus followed by complete nuclear degradation 20 min post tonoplast rupture due to nucleases being released from the vacuole  <cit> . however, the current study does not provide evidence of complete nuclear degradation, as intact condensed nuclei can still be seen following cell wall degradation [figure 7;  <cit> .

tonoplast rupture is regarded as the decisive moment during plant pcd in which cytoplasmic streaming stops and the cell is considered dead  <cit> ; more recently, tonoplast rupture has also been coined as the process of ‘mega-autophagy’ by van doorn and woltering   <cit> . within this manuscript we have presented evidence supporting van doorn’s latest classification of the lace plant into vacuolar type pcd, especially with regards to the presence of autophagy characteristics. however, it is still unclear whether mega-autophagy by van doorns and woltering’s   <cit>  definition applies to the lace plant given that most organelles have been degraded prior to tonoplast rupture.

following tonoplast rupture within the lace plant system, pm collapse is observed . additional evidence of pm collapse is seen via positive evans blue staining, that is only able to enter cells with compromised pms . in the lace plant, there is approximately  <dig> hours between initial chlorophyll reduction and pm collapse . depending on the form of pcd, pm collapse may or may not be followed by cell wall degradation  <cit> . during te differentiation, the cell wall is partially degraded and modified, leaving an empty tube  <cit> . conversely, during leaf senescence in arabidopsis, increasing leaf weight is seen up until approximately 30 days following sowing, suggesting no visible wall degradation  <cit> . in contrast to both of these systems, gunawardena et al   <cit>  showed changes in wall structure as early as in stage  <dig>  or in window stage leaves during lace plant leaf morphogenesis via tem. these results were complemented by results presented in this manuscript in which cell wall disappearance was shown to occur within  <dig> hours of pm collapse using live cell imaging   <cit> . the inset in figure  <dig> displays an lpcd stage cell with a blebbed pm and intact cell wall, indicating pm collapse precedes visible cell wall degradation. however, the extent of cell wall degradation was examined only qualitatively here and thus represents a possible area for future research.

CONCLUSIONS
this study aimed to employ the novel in vivo system of a single areole in a window stage lace plant leaf, to elucidate the sequence of organelle changes occurring throughout developmentally regulated pcd in plants. the first visible change observed was the reduction in visible anthocyanin, then initial reduction of chlorophyll pigmentation within chloroplasts along with changes in chloroplast size and number. perhaps concurrently with chloroplast changes, actin filaments re-organized into bundles, and there were increased numbers of tvs and additional instances of organelles travelling along tvs. mitochondria then tended to form small groupings in the cytosol, and cells often possessed rings of chloroplasts surrounding the nucleus. live cell imaging revealed single-layered membranous structures while tem imaging revealed both single and multi-layered membranous structures; each of which were seen to occasionally contain organelle material. in addition, images depicting invaginations of the tonoplast and double membrane-bound vesicles indicating a role for micro- and macro- autophagy in lace plant pcd were also presented. later, the aggregate of mitochondria and chloroplasts could be seen within the vacuole undergoing brownian motion, and this aggregate visibly increased in size as pcd progressed. this study shows, for the first time, an in vivo video during developmentally regulated pcd, of vacuole swelling and tonoplast collapse, resembling mega-autophagy. this paper provided evidence of these events leading to the cessation of organelle aggregate movement, loss of mitochondrial ΔΨm, nuclear shrinkage and pm collapse. total time from reduction in visible chlorophyll to pm collapse is approximately  <dig> hours. cell wall disappearance followed the collapse of the pm within  <dig> hours. this study reports a consistent order of events that occur in lace plant cells undergoing pcd, in addition to providing visual evidence of autophagy.

