BACKGROUND
many phenotypic traits, ranging from disease susceptibility to development, are quantitative in nature and are studied in both animals and plants via quantitative trait locus  mapping  <cit> . qtls are regions of the genome associated with phenotypic variation for a trait. these regions may or may not contain genes that, when differentially expressed, control the associated phenotypic variation. one approach that explores the relationship of phenotypic trait variation with transcriptome variation employs microarrays to survey global gene expression across a sample of individuals from a segregating population, and then maps expression qtls   <cit> . an inventory of eqtls representing a population or species may provide the necessary information required for identifying genes that control quantitative phenotypes. categorizing eqtls has the potential to enable reverse  genetics approaches for the identification of genes controlling quantitative traits, and may also help to enhance the rate of qtl cloning  <cit> .

global eqtl analyses also allow evolutionary biologists and geneticists a broader view of molecular complexities. for example, what is the level of cis versus trans polymorphism controlling gene expression in a species, and which is more likely to cause a phenotypic alteration? initial observations from global transcriptome qtl mapping studies indicate that eqtls are located in cis or trans relative to the gene's physical position, but neither the cis nor trans eqtl positions have been directly linked to phenotypic consequences  <cit> . furthermore, at what regulatory level in the global gene expression networks are the trans polymorphisms typically acting? are they upstream in a regulatory network, and hence control large numbers of genes in trans? or, are they downstream in a network and thereby affect only a limited number of genes? finally, how is transcript variation and heritability related to the resulting phenotypic variation and heritability  <cit> ? addressing these questions requires the classification of eqtls with respect to their cis and trans effects, a quantification of the number of genes that trans eqtls control, and an assessment of whether the genes controlled by a single trans eqtl are functionally related.

one goal of global eqtl analysis is to identify loci controlling the expression variation of gene networks associated with various biological functions. one approach  <cit>  is to generate a mapping population, assess global gene expression using microarrays, and identify eqtls controlling the expression of each gene via individual statistical analyses. the eqtl locations from these individual analyses for all genes are then superimposed to identify common regions that control the expression of a large number of genes, i.e. contain 'broad effect' eqtls. this method is hereafter referred to as the summation approach   <cit> . it requires that genes exhibit expression variation and that there is both sufficient biological and technical replication, but it does not require the assignment of a priori network information. specifically, current approaches require a posteriori tests to assess whether the genes controlled by an identified trans eqtl regions share a common biological function   <cit> .

an approach to test global trans eqtl regions for common biological function is gene set enrichment analysis   <cit> . gsea utilizes gene ontology  annotations or other descriptors to define gene sets or gene networks for a posteriori tests. every gene in the transcriptome is ranked relative to the magnitude of its differential expression in response to a treatment. the gene networks are then tested to assess if they demonstrate group responses. statistical significance is defined by empirical methods where an enrichment score  is calculated for a randomized data set. after a large number of randomizations, the resulting enrichment scores provide a null distribution from which the critical value for a specified level of significance can be gained. gsea has been utilized for conducting a posteriori tests for non-random association in the network membership of genes controlled by specific qtls  <cit> . as one would expect, only those genes with sufficient replication and expression difference provide enough information to allow the identification of eqtls. because gsea is an a posteriori test that does not directly use the gene expression value per individual, it is not directly applicable for eqtl mapping. however, gsea does provide a theoretical foundation for using defined gene networks to analyze eqtls.

analysis of variance  is a useful parametric framework that can be used to test networks of genes for global associations. in doing so, a single estimated network expression value for each individual in the mapping population is provided  <cit> . for these applications, anova methods are based on an additive linear model that allows for the partitioning of the sources of variation . genes are considered nested variables that describe specific a priori-defined gene networks . an estimated network expression value can also be calculated by averaging across each individual gene's expression within a network. the use of a priori gene network assignment permits the same network to be evaluated and summarized into one value for each individual in a mapping population. for each individual, the resulting single  expression value for the network is then used as a quantitative trait in a subsequent qtl analysis that directly identifies eqtls controlling specific a priori-defined gene networks  . this averaging approach is analogous to traditional qtl studies where the average of n individuals from the same line or genotype is used to represent the quantitative trait value for that line. here, the average gene expression from the network represents the phenotype for that network. these networks can be defined a priori via go annotation, or they can be defined in other ways, such as co-regulation observed in other microarray experiments.

we employ anova to analyze microarray data for differential gene network expression among genotypes. we demonstrate that it is possible to identify significant differences in variation at the a priori-defined network level between two parental arabidopsis thaliana accessions. we also identify eqtls associated with networks of genes using a recombinant inbred line  mapping population derived from the same two parental accessions. our network averaging approach  for a priori-defined network eqtl analysis in the rils was compared with the summation approach  <cit> . from this investigation we discovered that network members with strong cis eqtls complicate our ability to identify network eqtls, therefore we explored analytical methods to address this issue. finally, we discuss candidate transcription factors with cis-eqtl that may control a portion of the network eqtls that are in trans, as well as phenotypic traits possibly controlled by the network eqtls.

RESULTS
network analysis of parental accession variation
we identified  <dig> gene expression networks a priori . a network was defined as an interconnected system of genes. these networks have been shown to be either the transcriptional response to plant/biotic signals or involved in the production of plant defense compounds; the  <dig> networks include  <dig> genes. statistically significant network expression variation between accessions bay- <dig> and shahdara was detected in eight of the  <dig> networks tested . four networks were expressed at higher levels in bay- <dig> and four networks were expressed at higher levels in sha . an anova with log <dig> normalized expression values showed that the variation due to differential gene expression was approximately the same as that controlled by differential network expression. however, the network × accession interaction was only a small source of variation, about 6% of the gene  × accession variation .

network analysis of glucosinolate gene expression
the well-studied glucosinolate gene network  was used to test the feasibility of an a priori-defined gene network approach to map network eqtls in  <dig> bay- <dig> × sha rils, and to compare the network eqtls to the eqtls for individual genes. glucosinolates are metabolites in the brassicaceae that are believed to control plant responses to insects and pathogens  <cit> . this a suitable candidate network for testing the network averaging approach since most of the genes in the glucosinolate biosynthetic pathway have been identified and shown to be co-regulated in response to several stimuli  <cit> .

the gs network's expression value per ril was determined using the mean log <dig> expression across the  <dig> gs genes in each ril . a large difference in the average log <dig> expression values for individual genes was evident; the more highly expressed genes contributed a greater proportion to the mean network expression value . the meanlog <dig> for the gs gene network identified five network eqtls . for four of these network eqtls, the bay- <dig> allele had a negative effect on the network's expression value, while for one network eqtl the bay- <dig> allele had a positive effect .

previous studies have shown that cis expression polymorphisms control glucosinolate gene activity and/or expression in other mapping populations  <cit> . genes with predominant cis effects have the potential to contribute disproportionately to the overall expression variation of a network. therefore, we expect this cis effect when estimating the gs network expression variation. we mapped eqtls controlling each of the  <dig> gs genes  and identified six transcripts where a cis eqtl controlled > 50% of the phenotypic variation  . all except the ugt74b <dig> transcript was previously known to have cis-controlled expression variation  <cit> . the cis eqtl for esp, aop <dig>  aop <dig>  mam <dig> and maml overlapped with three network eqtls identified using the meanlog <dig> network expression estimate, suggesting that the cis-eqtl for these highly expressed genes may be generating network eqtl with this network expression average.

large cis-eqtls would likely mask the network level control on an individual gene's expression due to the cis polymorphism's high level of expression variation, thus dominating the network average and obscuring the trans effects. to remove the impact of large cis-eqtls on the gs gene expression network, we estimated the gs network log <dig> mean expression value based on a filtered dataset that eliminated the six genes exhibiting large cis effect eqtl . a comparison of mean to median estimates in the presence and absence of the cis affected genes showed that removing them from the pathway brought the two measures in closer alignment . a comparison of eqtls detected with meanlog <dig> versus mean-cis showed that two of the network eqtls, in the middle of chromosomes i and v, disappeared; these were likely due solely to the effect of the esp, mam <dig> and maml cis-eqtls . in contrast, three other network eqtls were reproducible. the network eqtl at the top of chromosome ii had a slightly shifted position. without cloning of the underlying polymorphism, it is not possible to determine if this is a significant change in peak position or due to the use of an altered gene list for the network. an additional small network eqtl was identified with mean-cis at the bottom of chromosome v .

a wide range of log <dig> expression values for individual genes in a network  may also affect network eqtl identification. to evaluate the effect of rescaling gene expression data, the mean expression value for the gs network was estimated using the standardized z-values for all  <dig> genes in each ril . the mean and median for the pathway values were very similar for z-scaled gene expression values . an analysis of the gs network based on the meanz estimate identified nearly all the same network eqtls as the meanlog <dig> estimate, except that the putative cis-eqtl from esp, mam <dig> and maml disappeared . as expected, the network eqtl plots generated in the absence of the six genes that dominated the network  were comparable to the results based on the meanz estimates since the normalization procedure scaled the six genes exhibiting large effects .

network eqtl analysis
we implemented the a priori network eqtl approach to identify network eqtls for all  <dig> a priori defined gene expression networks  used for the comparison of the bay- <dig> and sha parental accessions. statistically significant network eqtls were detected in the  <dig> bay- <dig> × sha rils for  <dig> out of  <dig> networks . the analyses based on the mean-cis and meanz estimates generated very similar network eqtl plots for each of the  <dig> networks . multiple networks identified the network eqtls at the top of chromosome ii and the bottom of chromosome v, suggesting that these regions contain large global-effect network eqtls, but these regions did not affect all expression networks in the same way. the presence of the bay- <dig> allele at the network eqtl on the top of chromosome ii up-regulated the lg, wc, ns, nd, cm, tp and mtb networks, while the same allele down-regulated the gs, mt, wnm, lgb, cl and ic networks . interestingly, the bay- <dig> allele at the network eqtl on the bottom of chromosome v had the reverse effect on these same networks. network eqtls located at the bottom of chromosome i and iii also affected multiple gene expression networks, albeit not as many as the aforementioned regions. while most network eqtls appeared to be associated with multiple networks, there were network eqtls associated with only a single network, such as the network eqtl on chromosome i for the lg network.

to determine if physical clustering of genes in the same network affected the identification of network eqtls, we plotted the genomic position of each gene within a network and compared it to the position of the network eqtls detected with the meanz expression values . in the lg network, 20% of the genes are present in a single tandemly duplicated gene cluster on the top of chromosome i that co-localizes with a small effect network eqtl, suggesting that this network eqtl may be due to the sum of small cis-acting qtls . however, within our collection of  <dig> networks and  <dig> genes, there was no other instance of genomic clustering of network genes. thus, the vast majority of network eqtls cannot be explained by the additive effects of small cis-effect eqtls for tandemly duplicated genes, and are likely trans-acting network eqtls controlling the specific network in question.

summation analysis of eqtls
one approach to identifying trans-eqtls that affect the expression of multiple genes is to identify the eqtls for each individual gene and conduct a sliding window, or binning analysis, that scans the genome and adds together  the number of eqtls in each region  <cit> . permutation thresholds provide the ability to identify genomic regions that contain a significant enrichment for the number of genes with an eqtl in that region . we identified network eqtls using the summation approach and compared the results to those identified by our a priori network averaging approach . we used the  <dig> eqtls controlling the expression of the  <dig> genes in this study . this yielded an average of  <dig>  eqtls per gene , with only  <dig> genes having no identifiable eqtl . thirty-eight of the  <dig> genes had a cis-eqtl controlling > 50% of the phenotypic variance. the eqtls for all of the genes were then used for the summation approach to global eqtl analysis   <cit> . three genomic regions, on the top and middle of chromosome ii and the bottom of chromosome v, showed a significant enhancement in eqtl density above the  <dig>  significance threshold . the top of chromosome ii and the bottom of chromosome v were also associated with network eqtls using the meanz and mean-cis analysis . three other regions, the top and bottom of chromosome i and the bottom of chromosome iii, were suggestive in that they were barely above the  <dig>  significance threshold .

phenotypic qtl clustering
genomic regions containing trans-acting network eqtls may be more likely to control phenotypic trait variation. we combined  <dig> physiological, biochemical and morphological trait qtls detected in other studies of the bay- <dig> × sha ril population, and conducted the summation approach to search for genomic hotspots associated with an enriched number of phenotypic qtls. based on a permutation threshold, no statistically significant grouping of phenotypic qtls was identified . it is possible that these particular phenotypic traits are not controlled by the network eqtls identified in our study.

candidate transcription factor identification
trans-acting network eqtls are hypothesized to be regulated by transcription factor  variation. to determine if we could identify tfs with cis-acting eqtls that may control the trans-acting network eqtls, we used the fv  gene expression network since it is transcriptionally regulated by at least six transcription factors  <cit> . mapping of eqtls for six tfs known to control the fv network showed that three tfs, pap <dig>  ttg <dig> and ttg <dig>  were associated with large effect cis-eqtls . of these, only the pap <dig> cis-eqtl co-localized with a fv network eqtl . interestingly, pap <dig> also showed trans-acting eqtl in the same regions of chromosome ii as the fv network. thus, a priori information can be used to identify potential candidate transcription factor variation controlling expression networks. furthermore, the a priori information was helpful for only one of the fv network eqtls, suggesting that studying natural variation for polymorphic gene expression patterns is likely to identify unknown factors regulating expression networks.

discussion
the use of the network averaging approach based on a priori defined gene networks was effective in identifying network eqtls . we located a number of trans-acting network eqtls that controlled the expression of varying numbers of gene networks . these network eqtls were detected in similar genomic regions as those identified via the summation eqtl approach . thus, the use of a priori networks in combination with an efficient statistical analysis can serve to identify trans-acting regulatory eqtls.

the use of a priori networks in conjunction with an anova successfully identified network expression differences between two parental accessions, and indicated that about half of the  <dig> networks considered exhibited basal expression level differences between bay- <dig> and sha. these differences were split equally between bay- <dig> and sha. since these networks represent groups of genes, these results suggest that there is genetic variation that coordinately impacts the expression of these genes. the presence of network-level variation affects comparisons of the expression of specific genes across accessions such that if gene expression networks are differentially expressed between two accessions, then the genes within those networks will be subjected to different regulatory patterns. in this case, understanding network-level variation among genotypes will help elucidate how individual genes respond to a signal in comparison to their network response.

because the network averaging approach depends on a priori network information, it is only as robust as the defined gene networks. if the prior experiments were not properly designed, replicated, conducted and analyzed, then the networks defined by those experiments will not be reliable nor yield biologically meaningful eqtl results. biological sources of error are relevant to the underlying assumption that the variation utilized to generate the a priori networks is related to the variation being studied in the new experiment. for example, the use of a priori-defined networks identified by comparing gene expression in different tissues may not be appropriate for querying a new experiment focused on a single tissue's response to pathogen attack. instead, the use of networks defined by responses of a similar tissue challenged by a different pathogen would be more appropriate for a priori network analysis.

comparison of global eqtl approaches
we compared the results from an analysis based on the summation approach  <cit>  with the results from our network averaging approach analyses  using meanlog <dig>  mean-cis and meanz for a priori-defined networks. both approaches identified two genetic regions with broad effects on gene expression, located on top of chromosome ii and the bottom of chromosome v . the a priori-defined network approach also identified several regions that were detected as suggestive in that they were just above the permutation threshold for significance based on the summation approach. our comparison suggests that the summation approach is likely biased towards detecting global eqtls that have broad impacts on gene expression. in contrast, network averaging allows sub-classification of the genes prior to eqtl analysis, which can help identify underlying patterns associated with the global view obtained by the summation approach. in addition, an analysis based on network averaging with mean-cis and meanz estimates can be used to remove or reduce the effect of large cis-acting genes to reveal trans-acting eqtls and identify global regulatory eqtls. therefore, our results suggest that the summation and network averaging approaches should be viewed as complementary methods that in combination provide a more complete assessment of the genetic architecture of global transcriptome variation and the underlying complexity of gene networks.

transgressive expression variation
twenty networks containing  <dig> genes identified several broad-effect network eqtls in the bay- <dig> × sha ril population. interestingly, two of these network eqtls  show opposite allelic effects both with respect to each other and with respect to their impacts on the networks. the opposite allelic effects observed for these two network eqtls suggests that this ril population has transgressive segregation affecting gene expression network values such that bay- <dig> has a +/- allele combination and sha has a -/+ combination which negate each other. this agrees well with the relatively small differences we detected in gene network expression for the bay- <dig> and sha parental accessions. in contrast, some of the rils have recombinant  +/+ and -/- allele combinations at these network eqtls, which is not unexpected in a segregating population.

network eqtls versus phenotypic trait qtls
we did not observe a significant enrichment of phenotypic qtls within regions showing broad-effect network eqtls . this lack of association suggests that these network eqtl regions do not have detectable effects on these particular traits. however, two shoot growth qtls   <cit>  with opposite allelic effects co-localize with our two main network eqtls, suggesting that it may be more informative to examine network specific-eqtls and the phenotypic consequences expected from the predicted biological function of the networks. the use of a priori-defined gene expression networks allows generation of specific hypotheses about the phenotypic effect of network eqtls. the gs and cl networks are known to be repressed by oxidative stress and salicylic acid, while the ns, nd, cm and tp networks are known to be induced by these two factors, suggesting that the network eqtls associated with these networks may involve some facet of oxidative stress and/or salicylic acid homeostasis within the ril population. validating this hypothesis and determining network associations will require the cloning and characterization of the underlying genetic polymorphisms.

network-specific eqtls
our predominant interests in arabidopsis involve plant/pathogen and plant/pest interactions which are controlled by a variety of characterized transcriptional and metabolic response networks  <cit> . the ns, nd, cm and tp networks are involved in plant/pathogen responses and are known to be co-regulated in response to biotic attack . this agrees well with our observation that these networks are typically associated with similar genomic locations of network eqtls . interestingly, one network eqtl at the bottom of chromosome iii is specific to these networks, suggesting that it may specifically influence variation in plant/pathogen interactions in this population.

the fv, gs and ic networks are induced by both methyl jasmonate  and insect herbivory. while these networks did not show complete agreement in the location of their network eqtls, they were all affected by a network eqtl at the bottom of chromosome i which appeared to be specific for these three networks. interestingly, this region also influenced the nd and cm networks, albeit with opposite parental allele effects on the fv, gs and ic networks. the nd and cm networks are known to be meja-repressed. thus, the observed opposite parental allele effects on meja-inducible and meja-repressible gene networks suggests that this region may be controlling meja homeostasis and/or signaling.

the bottom regions of chromosomes i and iii exhibited a slightly significant enrichment for eqtls using the summation approach. this slight significance would typically lead to these qtls being noted but not necessarily pursued. however, the a priori network averaging analysis suggested that these regions may be specific for defined regulatory networks involved in plant/biotic pest interactions. this defined regulatory role will limit the number of transcripts that can be controlled by variation in these regions and minimize the ability to detect an eqtl enrichment signal on a global regulatory analysis with the summation approach. thus, by utilizing a priori information to sub-categorize the global gene expression network, it is possible to identify network-specific eqtls that might otherwise be overlooked.

CONCLUSIONS
the a priori network averaging approach uses a novel statistic to summarize each individual's  network in the mapping population. the actual statistical analyses are based on well-established statistical methods for identifying qtls. in this application, the identified qtls are controlling genes sharing a common biological function, and thus are referred to as network eqtls. this approach has the major advantage of allowing researchers to apply their biological knowledge of gene associations from previous work to the analysis of network eqtls. the a priori network averaging approach is also complementary to other methods, such as the summation approach and gsea, and as presented here provides a framework within which transcriptome data can be analyzed for the purpose of addressing hypothesis-driven questions. for example, one could define the networks based on genes expressed in specific cell types  to identify eqtls potentially controlling the development of these tissues. since it is likely that each gene is a member of multiple semi-independent networks, grouping genes into multiple different networks with subsequent eqtl analysis may enhance our understanding of how gene networks interact and control phenotypic outputs.

two major questions that remain to be addressed are: what is the relationship between the quantitative trait phenotype and gene expression values, and what is the relationship between phenotypic trait qtls and eqtls? using a priori network definitions, it may be possible to directly identify network eqtls for defined metabolic pathways or trait phenotypes such as pathogen resistance. thus, by mapping qtls for the specific metabolites and/or pathogen resistance in the same population under the same conditions that are used for global gene expression analysis, it may be possible to directly compare the genetic architecture of eqtls controlling the transcripts to the resulting measurable phenotype. the use of a priori definitions for network eqtl identification has enormous potential for providing direction toward future transcriptomics eqtl analyses, as it facilitates a direct test of the relationship between phenotypic trait and transcript genetic architecture.

