BACKGROUND
volvocine algae are a sub-group of green algae ranging from unicellular species such as chlamydomonas reinhardtii  to the multicellular genus volvox. v. carteri is a freshwater alga with female and male cells that can reproduce both sexually and asexually and is composed of two different cell types  <cit> . asexual forms are characterized by a spheroid that is composed of approx.  <dig> somatic cells and encloses several reproductive cells. each of these so called gonidia can undergo symmetric and asymmetric cell divisions to form a new colony of somatic cells and gonidia  <cit> . the sexual life cycle is started by a sex-inducing pheromone that can be secreted by male strains and is functional at very low concentrations  <cit> . pheromone signaling induces the sexual differentiation program and therefore the generation of egg cells in female strains, while male strains form sperm packages that are subsequently released into the water  <cit> . dimorphic sexes have evolved several times in plants, however their origins are unclear. the fact, that the sexually dimorphic and multicellular species v. carteri and the unicellular species c. reinhardtii had a common ancestor about  <dig> million years ago  <cit>  makes volvox an ideal system for studying the evolution of these processes  <cit> .

non-coding rnas, including small rnas, have been associated with processes that are crucial to eukaryotic evolution. small rnas are processed from longer precursor molecules to their mature forms that are subsequently bound by a member of the argonaute  protein family  <cit> . argonaute proteins are characterized by distinct domains that anchor both the 5′ and the 3′ end of the small rna  <cit> . some but not all argonaute proteins are endonucleases and can cleave target rnas that are complementary to the bound small rnas  <cit> . in many organisms, several argonaute protein genes exist and especially in plants each ago protein prefers and selects different small rnas  <cit> . in land plants, several different pathways that make use of specialized small rnas are known  <cit> . for example, short interfering rnas  are processed from transgene- or virus-derived double stranded  rnas and guide sequence-specific cleavage of complementary  rnas. furthermore, small rnas can direct dna methylation and subsequent gene silencing processes in a pathway known as rna-dependent dna methylation . micrornas  are processed from endogenous mirna genes and guide repression of complementary target mrna expression as a means of gene regulation. unlike in animals, where mirnas bind to partially complementary sequences, plant mirnas mainly repress their target mrnas by hybridizing to fully complementary sites followed by sequence-specific cleavage. so-called trans acting sirnas  are plant-specific and also regulate gene expression. this pathway is initiated by a mirna , which guides cleavage of a target. the cleaved transcript is used as template by rna-dependent rna polymerases  to generate a long dsrna, which is cleaved by dcl <dig> to produce many tasirnas thus amplifying the signal. these rnas, in turn, silence the respective locus by transcript cleavage  <cit> . recently, it has been shown in a. thaliana that a mirna can also guide cleavage of transposon transcripts and, similarly, the cleaved transcript serves as template for dsrna, which gives subsequently rise to sirnas that repress transposon expression  <cit> . sirnas and mirnas have been identified in c. reinhardtii, indicating that small rna pathways have evolved at early stages of plant evolution  <cit> . given the importance of different small rnas in processes closely associated with multicellular development in land plants, we speculated that they might have played a role in the transition from uni- to multicellularity in green algae. mirna candidates have been reported in v. carteri, but their function remains unknown  <cit> .

here, we have performed small rna-seq as well as rna-seq of mrnas from different stages of v. carteri providing a global and comprehensive atlas of gene expression in somatic and reproductive cells. to identify functional small rnas, we isolated vcago <dig> protein and cloned and deep sequenced associated small rnas. using this functional approach, we clearly define mirnas as well as their specific expression under different conditions. of note, the identified mirnas are not conserved in c. reinhardtii. furthermore, we find mirnas as well as sirnas originating from transposons such as jordan or kangaroo, for example. strikingly, mirnas are not only expressed from transposons but also seem to target such elements, suggesting mirna-guided repression of transposable elements. finally, we also provide evidence for loci that generate phased sirnas similar to tasirnas found in a. thaliana. although green algae and higher land plants including a. thaliana diverged very early and evolution proceeded independently, we provide evidence that many small rna pathways found in land plants have also evolved in v. carteri.

RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing and annotation
we sought to characterize expression activity and dynamics not only of small rnas, but also of mrnas in v. carteri, since these are often modulated by small rnas. when we started this study, only very little transcriptomic data had been available for v. carteri in general. we therefore cloned and sequenced rnas under various experimental conditions . we included somatic cells and gonidia under vegetative growth conditions, somatic cells as well as gonidia after induction of sexual reproduction, along with somatic and egg cells from a female culture . using all single-end as well as paired-end sequencing data, a transcriptome assembly was generated in order to analyze mrna transcripts in more detail. this comprehensive data set enabled us to analyze transcripts and their possible connection to small rnas in better detail. all rnaseq data are available at the ncbi sra under prjna <dig> for further analysis.

ago-associated small rnas of v. carteri
to identify functional small rna pathways in v. carteri, we first examined available transcriptome data and our own rna-seq data for the presence of potential factors that are known to be involved in rna silencing pathways and that are also known to be conserved proteins. we found a paz/piwi domain-containing gene, typical for argonaute genes, which we refer to as vcago <dig>  since a similar transcript had already been annotated at this locus  . furthermore, we found genes for an additional ago protein , one dicer, one rna-dependent rna polymerase  and a hen <dig> homolog , suggesting that several small rna pathways might operate in v. carteri  <cit> .fig.  <dig> characterization of small rnas associated with vcago <dig>  a domain structure of v. carteri vcago <dig>  vcago <dig> contains the canonical domains paz and piwi and a domain of unknown function . domain borders are indicated by the position of amino acid residues. b western blot showing the expression and successful immunoprecipitation  of over expressed, myc-tagged vcago <dig> and myc-tagged crgfp . t = total lysate; ip = immunoprecipitation. c size distribution of all small rna reads associated with vcago <dig> measured by deep sequencing , nt = nucleotide. d nucleotide frequencies of all small rnas associated with vcago <dig>  pie chart showing the categorization of all mapped reads. re, repetitive elements. f pie chart showing the distribution of all mapped, assigned reads. re, repetitive elements. g nucleotide frequencies of all mirna reads




to identify functional small rnas, we expressed myc-tagged vcago <dig> in v. carteri by gold particle-mediated plasmid delivery, isolated associated small rnas by anti-myc immunoprecipitation and cloned and sequenced them . the length of the vcago3-associated rnas peaks at  <dig> and 22 nt . while the gc content of the genome of v. carteri is about 60 %, the 5′ terminal nucleotide of the bound small rnas is mainly uridine, suggesting that the vcago <dig> mid domain accommodates preferentially 5′ terminal uridines, similar to human ago <dig> and arabidopsis ago <dig>  <cit>  . vcago3-associated small rnas that map to the genome can be grouped into different functional categories including repetitive elements , protein coding regions , phased sirnas or mirnas . since the transcriptome and rna classes in general are only poorly annotated in v. carteri, the identity of the largest part of our library cannot be deduced yet. however, these sequences are bound by vcago <dig> and therefore are presumably functional .

to predict mirnas in volvox, we utilized the novel mirna identification tool mira  <cit>  using criteria adopted from the prediction of mirnas in c. reinhardtii  <cit> . in total,  <dig> mirnas were predicted when running mira on the vcago <dig> data set as well as six libraries from different cells and life stages from v. carteri . these predicted mirnas fall into  <dig> mirna families , the largest one comprising  <dig> members and  <dig> families had two or more members. the nucleotide preference for vcago3-bound mirnas is even more pronounced towards a u at the 5′ end , indicating high specificity of our mirna identification approach. in conclusion, we identified vcago3-associated potential mirnas in different cell types and under different cellular conditions.

experimental validation of v. carteri mirnas
a general feature of small rnas or mirnas in particular in plants is a 2′o-methylation at the 3′ end  <cit> . to test whether our mirna candidates contain such characteristic modifications, we performed β-elimination experiments with total rna from somatic cells and reproductive cells . in this chemical reaction, an unmethylated 3′ end will lose its terminal base and as a consequence, migrate faster in polyacrylamide gels. as a positive control, an unrelated rna oligonucleotide with unprotected 3′ end was spiked in prior to the reaction. while the positive control clearly shifted after treatment , all analyzed small rnas from v. carteri migrated at the same length as before indicating that they are indeed modified at their 3’ ends . these findings are consistent with the presence of a hen <dig> homolog in the v. carteri genome  and suggest that our candidate rnas are most likely mirna.fig.  <dig> validation of vcago <dig> and small rna properties. a β-elimination experiment performed with total rna from gonidia  as well as from somatic cells showing that small rnas in v. carteri are modified and do not shift upon periodate treatment. control sirna carries an unprotected 3′oh and therefore shifts towards a smaller size. b total rna from somatic cells and reproductive cells in different life stages  was used to validate mirna by rna blot. u <dig> serves as a loading control. all blots shown originate from one membrane. see methods for details on stripping and re-probing of the membrane. c cleavage assay with vcago <dig>  arabidopsis thaliana  ago <dig>  and crgfp . for vcago <dig>  three different small rnas were selected according to read abundance in the vcago <dig> library, for atago <dig>  two known and abundant mirnas were chosen. immunoprecipitated ago proteins  were incubated with 5′ radiolabeled target rna carrying a perfectly complementary site to the respective small rna. after incubation, rna was extracted and run on a gel. to indicate the position of the cleavage product, each target rna was digested with rnase t <dig>  to serve as a ladder. the bar on the side of the gel indicates the site of the complementary sequence and putative cleavage site. d western blot showing the successful immunoprecipitation of myc-vcago <dig>  myc-crgfp and flag-athago <dig> used for the cleavage experiment in . western blot was performed with part of the immunoprecipitation reaction used for the cleavage assay. black bars on the side indicate the location of the bands




after identifying mirna sequences in v. carteri and establishing that they are modified at their 3′ end, we investigated mirna expression under varying physiological conditions . we harvested samples at different life stages of v. carteri , 16 h induction of the sexual program  and female sexual differentiation ) and the culture from each stage was split into the two different cell types of v. carteri . rna blots performed with these samples show that mirnas are indeed regulated between cell types and some are even regulated during development  indicating that v. carteri mirnas might play an important role not only for cellular maintenance but also during differentiation processes. of note, the u <dig> loading control signal is much weaker for the reproductive cells and therefore, only limited comparisons between somatic and reproductive cells can be made.

in plants, functional small rnas are incorporated into ago proteins and guide them to complementary target rnas for cleavage. the vcago <dig> protein has a putative catalytic triad composed of the amino acids ddd. although the canonical motif for a cleavage-competent ago protein is ddh, atago <dig> contains ddd as well and appears to be a catalytically active enzyme  <cit> . cleavage activity of ago proteins is usually necessary for gene silencing in plants, although mechanisms similar to mammalian ago proteins have also been proposed  <cit> . in order to test the cleavage activity of ago proteins, in vitro cleavage assays can be performed in which ago proteins are purified from cell lysates and incubated with radioactively 5′ end-labeled, artificial targets that are designed to be fully complementary to an endogenous small rna bound by the respective ago protein. after the catalytic reaction, the target rna is cleaved into two pieces with only the 5′ end being detectable due to its radiolabeled 5′ end. in order to test vcago <dig> for catalytic activity, v. carteri cultures were transformed with a plasmid carrying either myc-vcago <dig> or myc-crgfp . after a short selection period, the cultures were harvested, lysed and an immunoprecipitation  was performed using anti-myc antibodies. each ip was split into three reactions and cleavage assays were performed using three different small rna target sequences . none of the vcago <dig> reactions generated specific cleavage products , while a flag-tagged atago <dig>  showed clear and strong cleavage activity . all proteins were expressed and precipitated successfully as shown by protein blot . vcago <dig> appears to be inactive in standard in vitro cleavage assays. we cannot exclude, however, that vcago <dig> functions as slicer endonuclease under different in vivo conditions.

v. carteri small rnas associated with transposable elements
to further understand the putative functions of vcago3-bound small rnas, we analyzed their genomic origins in more detail. interestingly, mir178al and mir357b originate from a transposon termed jordan . jordan is a highly abundant transposable element, which resembles the transposable elements en/spm as well as members of the so-called “cacta” family found also in higher plants  <cit> . these elements transpose via a dna intermediate and contain terminal inverted repeats . in the case of jordan, the tirs cause a secondary structure that is similar to and recognized as a mirna precursor and each of these elements gives rise to a mirna . of note, the precursors of the mir <dig> and mir <dig> families are highly similar to each other, with one family showing a strong expression of the 5′ arm mirna sequence , while the other expresses the 3′ arm  more strongly. thus, both mirnas could target each other’s precursors with perfect complementarity . to support the inferences from our small rna-seq experiments, we performed rna blots using probes against the jordan-encoded mirnas , which readily validate our sequencing data.fig.  <dig> small rna mapping to transposable elements. a schematic view of the transposable element jordan. location of mirnas targeting jordan are marked with black bars. tir, terminal inverted repeat; nt, nucleotide. b rna blot validation of the expression two mirnas encoded by a jordan element. the hairpin structure of the respective putative precursor is shown to the right. the mature  mirna strand is depicted in red, the star strand in blue. c small rna coverage of the repetitive elements jordan , gypsy5-i  and gypsy4-i . diagrams show small rna coverage over the length of the element for the plus  and the minus  strand . the left column shows the reads measured in the vcago <dig> library, the middle column shows reads from the library of somatic cells during vegetative growth and the column on the right shows the reads from the library of reproductive cells during vegetative growth. for gypsy5-i, black arrows indicate mirna binding sites which are detailed in the panel below. grey arrows indicate mirna binding sites where the mirna expression itself is rather low




because transposon-derived mirnas can trigger a wave of secondary sirna species in a. thaliana  <cit> , we searched for additional vcago3-associated small rnas from jordan. we found many small rnas originating mainly from the 5′  <dig>  kb portion . whether these transposon-derived sirnas depend on the jordan-encoded mirnas is currently unknown. furthermore, we analyzed jordan for potential mirna target sites and found that several v. carteri mirnas can target jordan . again, these target sites are largely located in the 5′  <dig>  kb portion of jordan. taken together, our data suggest that the transposon jordan not only generates two mirnas and a number of sirnas, but might also be targeted by the vcago3-associated small rna system, presumably to repress jordan expression. of note, vcago <dig> appears to be catalytically inactive in vitro . this might suggest that cleavage-independent silencing mechanisms  could be active in this process.

we next analyzed whether other transposons are similar sources of different classes of small rnas. close examination of vcago3-associated small rnas did not reveal mirna genes that are encoded by transposons and pass our annotation criteria. however, transposons such as gypsy5-i  or gypsy4-i  produce a large number of vcago3-associated sirnas. furthermore, gypsy5-i is in addition targeted by mir <dig> and mir <dig>  strikingly, a global analysis of our sequencing data revealed that most transposons give rise to small rnas , suggesting control of expression through small rna-guided gene silencing pathways.

at least one mirna, mir178al, appears to be expressed more strongly in reproductive cells , which might suggest that jordan expression is generally lower in such cells. indeed, our rnaseq data reveals that less jordan-derived reads were cloned from reproductive cells compared to somatic cells. generally, we observe, with some exceptions, a tendency of reduced transposon activity in reproductive cells  suggesting repression of such elements in reproductive cells.

other v. carteri small rnas
in a. thaliana, tasirnas are produced from rnas that are specifically cleaved by mirnas such as mir <dig>  biogenesis involves dsrna synthesis by rdr <dig> and cleavage by dcl <dig>  which progressively cleaves the rna from the ends and produces phased tasirnas  <cit> . since we find a putative rdrp in the v. carteri genome, we examined our vcago3-associated sirnas for phased sirna signatures. indeed, we found several loci that produce phased sirnas. most prominently, phased sirna loci can be found within the transposon kangaroo . whether these sirnas require mirna-guided cleavage as observed for tasirnas in a. thaliana, is unclear. similar to other transposons, kangaroo produces various other vcago3-associated small rnas in addition to the phased sirnas . to further investigate phased sirnas, we performed rna blots . the two most abundant single phased sirnas were readily detectable, with the highest expression in reproductive female cells.fig.  <dig> phased sirnas and highly expressed small rnas of unknown function. a exemplary genetic locus of a kangaroo element harboring predicted phased sirna loci. upper panel: all reads measured in the vcago <dig> ip library, middle panel: read coverage of the predicted phased sirna loci, lower panel: bar depiction of phased sirna loci  and kangaroo . b coverage of small rnas associated with vcago <dig> of the consensus sequence  of the repetitive element kangaroo. red bars represent reads mapping to the plus strand, blue bars represent reads mapping to the negative strand. c validation of expression of small rna originating from a predicted phased rna locus. d all reads of the putative intergenic fraction that are associated with vcago <dig> are displayed. the x-axis of the diagram represents the length of an artificial genome sequence that was created by aligning all available genome scaffolds in a row. this sequence was divided into 50 kb long sections and all reads that were mapped falling into one section were summed up and displayed by blue bars. the location for an exceptionally high read count was marked next to the corresponding bar. the number below each scaffold indicates the starting point of that section within the scaffold. lower panel: blow-up of the section in scaffold  <dig> with the highest read count. e pie chart visualizing the amount of small rnas reads stemming from highly expressed hotspots from d with respect to all reads. f validation of expression by rna blot. the small rna with the highest read count within the respective scaffold section  was blotted. g total rna isolated from c. reinhardtii  or v. carteri  was blotted and robed for the indicated small rnas. srna sequences of c. reinhardtii were taken from molnar et al.  <cit> 




a large portion of the vcago3-bound small rnas did not fit into any known small rna category, but could be aligned to the genome, indicating that they originated from v. carteri, and not from a potential associated microbe. in fact, about 11 % of the putative intergenic reads  came from eight specific loci , further supporting that such sequences are likely not due to promiscuous binding of vcago <dig> to rna degradation products. the specificity is further supported by the observation that most of the small rnas within a peak are identical. it is also unlikely that these reads are unspecifically amplified during library construction since rna blots supported robust expression and stability . for expression analysis, we performed northern blotting of total rna obtained from somatic and reproductive cells. probes directed against the most prominent scaffolds  are readily detectable thus suggesting that these reads are indeed abundant small rnas . it is therefore tempting to speculate that these vcago3-associated reads might represent a novel class of small rnas.

comparative genomics of small rnas in green algae
our sequencing data demonstrate that v. carteri contains many mirna candidates. it has been shown before that c. reinhardtii expresses mirnas and other small rna classes  <cit> . since both species are closely related, we analyzed conservation of our vcago3-associated mirnas. for direct examination, total rna from v. carteri as well as c. reinhardtii was extracted and several mirnas were assayed with rna blots . indeed, v. carteri mir322a is not detected in c. reinhardtii. vice versa, a number of srnas were only found in c. reinhardtii but not in v. carteri samples. subsequently, a global analysis of mirna sequences was performed using multiple sequence alignments of every mirna of v. carteri with every mirna of c. reinhardtii  <cit>  or the liverwort pellia endiviifolia  <cit> . consistent with our rna blot experiments, these global analyses revealed very little conservation between v. carteri and c. reinhardtii  or v. carteri and p. endiviifolia . only three mirnas had before been reported as potentially conserved between c. reinhardtii and p. endiviifolia  <cit> .

discussion
we have cloned and sequenced vcago3-associated small rnas from different v. carteri stages. since we select for vcago3-bound small rnas only, it is very likely that we identify functional small rnas and minimize background cloning that would contaminate our libraries. indeed, our vcago <dig> pull down approach allows for a clear definition of v. carteri mirnas  <cit> . of note, our mirnas are distinct from those reported recently  <cit> . this might be due to different v. carteri strains that have been used or, more likely, to mis-annotation of mirnas as a result of background sequencing from total rna samples.

an intriguing observation from our small rna profiles was that many vcago3-bound small rnas originate from transposons. different classes including mirnas, sirnas and even phased sirnas have been identified in conjunction with transposons. since mirna genes are encoded by the transposon jordan, it is conceivable that this mobile genetic element influences spreading of mirna genes and might therefore contribute to evolution. furthermore, transposons are at the same time targeted by mirnas suggesting that mirnas might repress the expression of such elements. in addition, transposons appear to produce large numbers of sirnas especially in reproductive cells. it is therefore likely that transposon targeting by small rnas might be involved in repressing transposable elements in reproductive cells, a phenomenon that is often observed in animals  <cit> . interestingly, computational analyses have suggested that both a. thaliana and oryza sativa have transposable elements that encode simultaneously sirnas and mirnas  <cit> . whether this suggests a common origin, or convergent evolution of such mechanisms in algae and land plants is unclear.

our analyses reveal also interesting evolutionary aspects when analyzing conservation of closely related species. at least the vcago3-associated mirnas are not conserved in the closely related single cellular alga c. reinhardtii, suggesting evolution of different mirnas presumably required for multicellularity and division of labor between somatic and reproductive cells. this is remarkable given that so many protein-coding genes are well conserved between the two species. it will be interesting to analyze whether other small rnas, e.g. small rnas that target transposable elements such as jordan, are conserved. our findings suggest that targeting such mobile genetic elements by the small rna pathways developed very early during evolution and the last universal common ancestor of all eukaryotes used such strategies already.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude from our analyses that vcago <dig> not only associates with mirnas but also many other classes of functional small rnas. these small rnas are most likely not conserved in c. reinhardtii suggesting evolution of small rna repertoires that are important for multicellularity and the division of labor. interestingly, a distinct portion of the vcago3-associated small rnas is derived from transposable elements. these include mirnas, classical sirnas and even phased sirnas, which are common to higher land plants. taken together, our data identify an extended small rna system in v. carteri, which appears to be as complex as in higher plants.

