BACKGROUND
in the adult, two major, well-defined neurogenic regions persist  <cit> . in the subventricular zone , neural precursor cells  that arise mostly from the embryonic lateral ganglionic eminence   <cit> , continuously proliferate, and then migrate tangentially along the rostral migratory stream  towards the olfactory bulb  where they differentiate into granular and periglomerular inhibitory interneurons  <cit> . in the subgranular zone  of the hippocampus, newborn npcs also migrate, but for shorter distances, into the granule cell layer, where they become excitatory granule cells  <cit> . from these neurogenic sites, adult-generated neurons can migrate to regions of brain injury  <cit> , and establish synaptic contacts and functional connections  <cit> . decreased neurogenesis induced by prenatal or postnatal stresses is implicated in the development of seizures and disorders in learning, memory and cognition  <cit> . the possibility of preventing onset or progression of these neural diseases by therapeutically enhancing neurogenesis  <cit>  is prompting efforts to delineate the mechanisms and regulatory factors underlying npc survival, proliferation, differentiation, migration and function. indeed, numerous neuro-regulatory transcription factors, growth factors and receptors have been identified and characterized . however, in spite of advances, effective approaches to prevent and treat diseases of the central nervous system are lacking, underlining the urgent need to develop better models to elucidate the molecular mechanisms regulating integration of new neurons in the developing and adult brain. survivin is a member of the inhibitor of apoptotis protein  family, that also promotes the cell cycle and is a chromosome passenger protein  <cit> . during embryonic development, it is expressed by several tissues, but is particularly prominent in the nervous system  <cit> . inactivation of the survivin gene in neuroepithelial cells early in development  <cit>  results in massive apoptosis throughout the central nervous system, with total destruction of the architecture of the brain and lethality. the severity of this phenotype precluded investigators from delineating the specific role of neural precursor cell survivin on postnatal neural function.

therefore, to elucidate the properties of survivin in neural development and function, we inactivated the survivin gene in npcs in the late-midterm murine embryo and evaluated the effects post-natally. by this approach, we generated a unique in vivo mouse model in which reduced neurogenesis is associated with epilepsy and profound deficits in learning and memory. pilot rescue studies suggest that embryonic administration of survivin may enhance neurogenesis. the findings highlight the critical role that survivin plays during neural development, deficiencies of which dramatically impact on postnatal neural function.

RESULTS
survivin is expressed in precursor cells in the neurogenic areas of the brain
in situ hybridization using a probe against full length survivin allowed assessment of the spatiotemporal expression of survivin during embryonic development. survivin mrna was detected in the neurogenic areas of the dorsal and ventral telencephalon surrounding the ventricles ) . at e <dig> , expression of survivin overlapped with dlx <dig>  a marker for mitotic cells in the mge and lge  <cit>   and neurogenin  <dig>   <cit> , a marker for dividing precursors in the neocortex . there was minimal overlap with dlx <dig> , which is primarily expressed by postmitotic cells in the mantle zone of the mge and lge, less so in mitotic cells in the svz, and almost absent in the ventricular zone  <cit> . by e <dig> , survivin was additionally expressed in the rostral migratory stream  and at the center of the olfactory bulb  . survivin mrna was also present in the retina and lens of the developing eye .

postnatally, survivin expression was restricted largely to rapidly proliferating cells  <cit>  and migrating npcs  <cit> . at p <dig>  survivin mrna was detected in the svz, the rms, the ob, and the dentate gyrus  . within the svz, survivin was not expressed in the ependymal cells immediately adjacent to the lateral ventricle . during the first two postnatal weeks, survivin mrna was also detected in granule cell precursors in the external germinal layer  of the developing cerebellum . in the adult brain, survivin expression remained restricted to proliferating and migrating precursor cells in the svz, the rms, and the subgranular zone  of the dg .

in both the svz  and the sgz of the dg , >95% of survivin expressing cells were positive for the proliferation marker pcna, while at both sites, 25-50% of pcna positive cells expressed survivin. thus, survivin expressing cells represent a subpopulation of the mitotically active cells. doublecortin , present in immature, migrating neuroblasts  <cit>  also overlapped with survivin in the svz, the rms and the sgz. however, similar to pcna, not all dcx positive cells expressed survivin, indicating that survivin is restricted to a subpopulation of cells in the svz-rms . mature neuronal marker neun  <cit>  immunoreactivity did not overlap with survivin, consistent with the lack of survivin expression by mature neurons .

overall, survivin expression is restricted during fetal development to npcs in neurogenic regions of the telencephalon, of which a fraction populates the major neurogenic regions of the postnatal brain, i.e. the svz and the sgz. within these neurogenic regions, a subpopulation of npcs continues to express survivin, which is downregulated once the cells differentiate into neurons. in both the embryo or adult, survivin is not detected in neurons in the cortex, ob, or hippocampus.

in vivo prenatal survivin gene inactivation
to study the in vivo role of npc survivin, we generated mice in which the survivin gene is inactivated in the neurogenic regions of the brain prenatally. mice expressing cre recombinase driven by the camkiiα promoter  <cit>  were bred with mice in which the entire survivin gene is flanked by loxp sites  <cit> . the resultant camkiiα-cre:survivinlox/lox  mice were born in the expected mendelian distribution, i.e. there was no evidence of embryonic lethality.

we confirmed previous reports of cre recombinase activity in the camkiiα-cre embryos and mice  <cit>  by breeding the camkiiα-cre mice with the rosa <dig> reporter mice, followed by immunohistochemical detection of gfp. cre recombinase activity at e <dig>  was detected prominently in the ventral telencephalon , but less in the dorsal telencephalon, and not in the eye . postnatally, it was restricted to postmitotic neun positive neurons in the hippocampus and cortex, with lower levels in the striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus and amygdala  <cit> . postnatal cre expression was absent in npcs in the svz and sgz . thus, cross-breeding with the survivinlox/lox mice resulted in deletion of both survivin alleles in the neurogenic regions in the prenatal period .

neurogenesis defects in survivincamcre embryos
cre excision of survivin was assessed by in situ hybridization in survivincamcre and corresponding control survivinlox/lox embryos. at e <dig>  and e <dig> , survivin expression in the survivincamcre embyros was markedly reduced in the ganglionic eminences surrounding the lateral ventricles where mitotically active npcs normally reside, in the rms and in the ob . this was associated with increased tunel staining, most evident in the ganglionic eminences, and minimally in the dorsal telencephalon . brdu labeling studies revealed decreased npc proliferation in the svz, rms and ob of e <dig>  survivincamcre embryos . thus, lack of npc survivin results in increased embryonic npc death and decreased npc proliferation in specific embryonic neurogenic regions.

altered postnatal neurogenesis in survivincamcre mice
body weights of survivincamcre and control mice were not significantly different at birth. however, during the first month after birth, survivincamcre mice had a significantly higher mortality rate of 28%  compared to 0%  in control mice. adult survivincamcre mice also had significantly smaller brains, and the obs were strikingly hypoplastic  . in situ hybridization confirmed loss of survivin expression in the svz and rms . surprisingly, expression of survivin in the sgz was not decreased postnatally in survivincamcre mice . nissl stained brain sections from survivincamcre mice revealed loss of the rms, decreased cortical thickness , enlarged ventricles, yet no morphological changes in the hippocampus . the latter was confirmed by quantifying the volumes corresponding to the gcl and the hilus of the dg .

the hypoplastic ob and absent rms, in concert with reduced expression of npc survivin in the survivincamcre mice might be caused by decreased npc proliferation, increased cell death, and/or deficits in migration. accumulation of cells in the anterior svz of the survivincamcre mice was not observed, mitigating against a predominant migration defect. npc proliferation, assessed  <dig> hr after a single dose of brdu, revealed a significant reduction in brdu labeled cells in the svz of the survivincamcre mice  . furthermore, both brdu and dcx labeled cells were almost completely absent in the rms, in striking contrast to the controls . cell death in the svz of the survivincamcre mice was also significantly increased , as quantified by the number of tunel+ cells in the anterior svz  . in the rms and ob, there were some tunel+ cells identified in the brains of the control mice, but not in survivincamcre mice, the latter likely due to the lack of precursor cells in this region.

as noted above, survivin expression in the sgz of the dg was not appreciably diminished after cre excision. there was also no alteration in the number of proliferating or immature neurons in the sgz, as quantified by brdu labeling   or dcx immunoreactivity . nor could we detect changes in tunel+ staining  .

in summary, striking survivin-dependent defects in neurogenesis are evident postnatally in the rms and ob of survivincamcre mice, due to a combination of increased svz npc apoptosis and diminished cellular proliferation. despite the fetal abnormalities, and in striking contrast to the rms-ob, there were no obvious structural defects or alterations in hippocampal neurogenesis in the survivincamcre mice that had no appreciable reduction in survivin expression within the hippocampus.

embryonic survivin administration increases neurogenesis
in pilot studies, we assessed whether prenatal administration of survivin to increase expression in npcs could promote neurogenesis. e <dig>  control survivinlox/lox and survivincamcre embryos received an intracerebroventricular injection in utero with the lentiviral vector pchmws-egfp-t2a-srv <dig>  or pchmws-egfp-t2a-fluc . at p <dig>  immunohistochemical analysis of the control survivinlox/lox mice that received the survivin vector revealed an increased number of embryonic precursor cell-derived cells in the ob as compared with the control vector . with survivincamcre embryos, the survivin vector did not apparently reverse the ob hypoplasia when examined at p <dig>  but there were notably more embryonic precursor cell-derived cells in the ob of  <dig> out of  <dig> survivincamcre mice that received the survivin vector, as compared with the  <dig> survivincamcre mice that received the control vector . overall, these preliminary findings suggest that enhanced expression of npc survivin may increase neurogenesis.

survivincamcre mice have a thinner cortex with fewer gabaergic interneurons and a lower seizure threshold
although the average cortical thickness in the survivincamcre mice was reduced, in situ hybridization with cortical markers . moreover, and in line with limited expression of cre recombinase in the dorsal telencephalon of camkiiα-cre embryos, the density of cortical vglut1+ glutamatergic cells in the survivincamcre mice was not altered  . in contrast, and consistent with prominent apoptosis and diminished brdu labeling in the ganglionic eminences, prenatal depletion of survivin in the npcs of survivincamcre mice resulted in a significant reduction in the density of gad65/67+ gabaergic interneurons in the postnatal adult cortex  . this occurred in the absence of any changes in interneurons in the hippocampus . these data indicate an alteration in the excitatory/inhibitory balance in the brain of survivincamcre mice that might be associated with postnatal alterations in cognition and behavior, and a lower seizure threshold.

indeed, during routine handling,  <dig> %  of the survivincamcre mice were recorded to have spontaneous tonic-clonic, generalized motor seizures starting from  <dig> weeks of age . to investigate seizure susceptibility, the response of control and survivincamcre mice to kainic acid  was assessed over a period of  <dig> hours. control, saline-treated animals  showed no signs of epileptic activity. however, in response to ka, survivincamcre mice exhibited a lower threshold for seizures that were more severe. thus, at a subconvulsive dose of  <dig> mg/kg, ka induced limbic motor convulsions in 15%  of control mice and 81%  survivincamcre mice . the maximum seizure score was significantly higher in the survivincamcre mice . seizure severity over the  <dig> hr observation period was also significantly greater in the survivincamcre mice  . at a ka dose of  <dig> mg/kg, the mean latency to the first seizure was also shorter in the survivincamcre mice compared to control mice . at that dose, all survivincamcre mice rapidly developed status epilepticus  and died of severe generalized convulsions, while all control animals survived the ka treatment . thus, survivincamcre mice exhibit enhanced susceptibility to ka seizures.

neuropeptide y  is a multifunctional peptide that is expressed in gabaergic interneurons, regulates pre-synaptic excitatory transmission in the dg, and has anti-epileptic properties  <cit> . hilar npy interneuron degeneration, ectopic expression of npy in mossy fibers, and axonal sprouting are common features of limbic hyperexcitability  <cit> . due to the increased seizure activity in the survivincamcre mice, we examined npy expression under both basal conditions  and following induction of seizures . the number of hilar npy+ interneurons was not different between saline-treated control and survivincamcre mice . however, two weeks after  <dig> mg/kg ka treatment, there were significantly fewer npy+ cells in the hilus of the survivincamcre mice . moreover, ectopic npy expression in mossy fibers was readily detected in  <dig> out of  <dig> saline-treated survivincamcre mice but not in any of the corresponding controls  . this effect became more prominent after ka . in  <dig> of these survivincamcre mice, we furthermore observed ectopic npy immunoreactivity in the supragranular layer, likely reflecting sprouting of mossy fibers .

since seizure activity modulates hippocampal neurogenesis, we also evaluated the seizure-induced neurogenic response of the control and survivincamcre mice. the volumes of the gcl and the hilus were not different between control and survivincamcre mice , and ka had no effect on that relationship . to assess cell proliferation, brdu was injected  <dig> days after ka or saline injection, and mice were sacrificed  <dig> day later. after saline injection, the total number of sgz brdu+ cells was not different in control and survivincamcre mice  . compared to saline treated controls, ka treated mice exhibited an increase in the number of brdu+ cells in the sgz after ka injection. however, the neurogenic response was significantly dampened in the survivincamcre ka treated mice compared to control ka treated mice  . numbers of brdu+ cells remained reduced  <dig> weeks following ka in the survivincamcre mice as compared to controls . thus, despite the higher seizure scores following ka in the survivincamcre mice, there was less seizure-induced neurogenesis in the survivincamcre versus the control mice.

survivincamcre mice exhibit learning and memory defects
adult survivincamcre mice exhibited several defects that may contribute to disorders in behavior and cognition, including reduced svz-rms-ob neurogenesis  <cit> , ob hypoplasia  <cit> , diminution of cortical gabaergic neurons, and seizures. we therefore evaluated the effects of depleting npcs of survivin by subjecting the survivincamcre and matched controls to a range of behavioral studies.

there was no difference in body weight between the survivincamcre and control mice at the start of behavioral testing , and the survivincamcre mice had normal visual and auditory skills, grip strength, rotarod performance, pain response and cage activity .

in the open field test, the survivincamcre mice displayed significant disturbances in exploratory behavior, including delayed first entry to the center, fewer center entries, more corner crossings, and less time in the center . this type of behavioral outcome is often suggestive of increased anxiety, however the survivincamcre mice performed normally in the elevated plus maze test for anxiety. on the maze, there was no difference between control and survivincamcre mice in the total number of beam crossings , percent time spent in the open arms , nor percentage of entries into the open arms . the findings suggest that the poor performance of the survivincamcre mice in the open field test may not be due to increased anxiety, but rather due to a distinct defect in exploratory behavior.

the survivincamcre mice exhibited a significant impairment in passive avoidance learning. during the initial training trial, there was no difference in step-through latencies . however, during testing, the survivincamcre mice demonstrated significantly shorter latency to enter the dark compartment than the controls  , consistent with poor associative memory of aversive stimuli.

we examined auditory and contextual fear memory using an auditory cue as the conditioned stimulus , and a foot shock as an aversive stimulus. freezing times in baseline, pre-us, post-us, and pre-cs trials were not different between the groups . however, survivincamcre mice exhibited significantly less freezing response in the context and auditory cue  trials compared to control mice  .

lastly, we assessed hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and long-term memory in the survivincamcre mice using the morris water maze. swimming velocity was not different between the controls and the survivincamcre mice, excluding defects in motor ability. during acquisition training, the survivincamcre mice showed training-dependent reduction in escape latency and path length. however, the improvements were minimal as compared with controls, and the escape latency and path length were significantly increased in the survivincamcre mice  . notably, lengths of the escape paths were not different between the survivincamcre mice and control mice during  <dig> visible-platform training days . these results indicate that the survivincamcre mice were fully capable and motivated to choose the shortest pathway towards the platform in the cued, non-spatial condition of the task.

in the first probe trial performed after  <dig> days of training, the control mice already had a preference for the target quadrant compared to adjacent  <dig>  and opposite  quadrants, whereas the survivincamcre mice had no preference at all  . in the second probe trial after  <dig> days of training, the control mice continued to show a strong preference for the target quadrant compared to all other quadrants , whereas the survivincamcre mice equally favoured the target and adjacent  <dig> quadrants  versus the other  <dig> quadrants  . since the morris water maze test is a stress that might alter neural cell proliferation, we also quantified the number of ki67+ cells in the dentate gyrus of the survivincamcre mice  and the corresponding littermate controls  after the probe trials. there was no significant difference in the number of ki67+ cells between the two groups .

overall, the survivincamcre mice exhibited exploratory behavioral abnormalities, with global deficits in various forms of learning and memory.

discussion
in this report, we show that survivin is prominently expressed in the neurogenic regions of the embryonic mouse brain, and that its expression by a subpopulation of npcs is maintained postnatally in the two key sites of adult neurogenesis - the svz and the sgz. lack of expression of survivin in the npcs during embryonic development, was associated with profound svz-rms-ob postnatal defects in neurogenesis and loss of interneurons, manifest by major deficits in learning and memory, and heightened sensitivity to seizures. prenatal administration of survivin in the brain enhanced neurogenesis in the svz-rms-olfactory system. our findings position survivin as a central player in regulating neurogenesis during embryonic development, alterations of which impact on postnatal brain function.

the embryonic forebrain, the telencephalon, consists of two parts. the dorsal aspect is the origin of glutamatergic excitatory neurons of the cerebral cortex and hippocampus  <cit> . the ventral part, comprising the ganglionic eminences, gives rise to the basal ganglia. the lge provides neurons for the striatum  <cit> , interneurons of the olfactory bulb   <cit> , and most adult svz npcs  <cit> . the mge is the source of most neocortical  <cit>  and hippocampal interneurons  <cit> , as well as striatal interneurons. at e <dig> , survivin is widely expressed in the neurogenic region of the ventral and dorsal telencephalon. since cre recombinase expression in the camkiiα-cre mice is low in the dorsal telencephalon, generation of principal glutamatergic neurons was largely unaffected in the adult, and the overall integrity of the hippocampus and cortex was maintained, albeit the latter was thinner. in contrast, the number of cortical gabaergic neurons, which arise primarily in the ganglionic eminences and comprise 25-30% of cortical neurons, was significantly reduced in the survivincamcre mice. this reduction may have been further contributed to by the paucity of svz npcs, recently shown to be a continuous postnatal source of gabaergic interneurons in the cortex  <cit> .

imbalances in inhibitory and excitatory circuits due to decreases in numbers of interneurons, are well known to be associated with seizures in humans and experimental animal models  <cit> . this was clearly evident in the survivincamcre mice which, even under naïve conditions, displayed spontaneous, generalized tonic-clonic motor seizures, a phenotype that was more dramatically revealed following challenge with ka. indeed, survivincamcre mice showed a rapid and consistent generalization of seizures at ka doses that normally result in focal hippocampal epileptic activity  <cit> . thus, a defect in the cortical inhibitory system may explain the higher susceptibility to generalized convulsions in the survivincamcre mice.

our studies demonstrate that the loss of a subpopulation of npcs in the svz of neonatal and adult survivincamcre mice, with resultant near-absence of the rms and ob, was due to a combination of increased apoptosis and decreased cellular proliferation of npcs in the corresponding embryonic neurogenic region . indeed, this is in line with the fact that survivin is a pro-survival molecule with the capacity to inhibit apoptosis and to promote the cell cycle and mitosis . somewhat surprisingly, in spite of profound disturbances in neurogenesis in the svz, we did not detect baseline changes in neurogenesis in the sgz of the dg in the survivincamcre mice, or significant loss of survivin expressing dg npcs. although this may be due to cre recombinase inefficiency, the finding may also be due to the embryonic origin of sgz npcs being different from the svz npcs, which still remains to be clarified  <cit> . there is however, a defect in sgz neurogenesis in the survivincamcre mice that is only evident under stress conditions. this may mean that the baseline source of sgz npcs is different from that recruited during stress, an hypothesis that requires testing. in the survivincamcre mice, the neurogenic response was significantly impaired as compared to the controls after ka-induced seizures. alterations in gaba signaling in the survivincamcre mice may be implicated  <cit> , but other factors that are important in maintaining the function of the neurogenic niche in the hippocampus could also contribute to the dampened response  <cit> . further study to identify those that are relevant is ongoing.

although the integrity of the hippocampus was apparently maintained under baseline conditions, upon testing, the survivincamcre mice exhibited striking defects in memory and cognition, that are consistent with hippocampal dysfunction. in fact, the behavioral abnormalities were associated with a significant impairment of long-term potentiation  in the ca <dig> region of the hippocampus , a finding that frequently is associated with poor memory, and often with increased epileptic activity. as with the seizure disorder, a loss of cortical inhibitory interneurons likely contributed to the behavioral abnormalities and cognitive defects in the survivincamcre mice. we also cannot exclude a contribution of suboptimal neurogenic responses to the behavioral phenotype, as neurogenic defects in both the sgz and svz have been implicated in memory, cognition, mood, and hippocampal-dependent learning  <cit> . moreover, olfactory bulbectomy in rodents impairs neurogenesis in both the sgz and the svz, disrupts normal hippocampal ltp, and causes significant deficits in learning and memory. thus, the ob, which sends projections to the hippocampus  <cit> , also plays a role in normal behavior and cognition  <cit> . indeed, since the survivincamcre mice have major defects in neurogenesis, as well as notable hypoplasia of the ob, all of which are associated with epileptic activity and major alterations in behavior, it is reasonable to consider that the effective lack of an ob exacerbates the loss of svz and possibly sgz npcs, which in turn, contributes to the behavioral abnormalities and enhanced seizure activity.

CONCLUSIONS
we have established that prenatal expression of survivin in neurogenic regions of the developing brain plays a key role in learning and memory and in determining seizure susceptibility. prenatal stresses are recognized to suppress postnatal neurogenesis that in turn, induces behavioral abnormalities in the neonate and adult  <cit> . while the underlying molecular mechanisms have not been delineated, it is reasonable to consider that alterations in embryonic npc survivin expression might contribute to those phenotypic changes. pilot data indicate that prenatal administration of survivin can enhance neurogenesis in the olfactory system. we do not yet know whether the resultant new neurons differentiate or integrate, or whether the sgz is also affected. nonetheless, the findings are promising, supporting the critical nature of this molecule, and its potential as a therapeutic target. our mouse model provides the opportunity to elucidate the relevance of survivin-expressing npc subpopulations in vivo in response to a range of environmental stresses, and genetic or epigenetic factors.

