BACKGROUND
terpenoids are a large class of metabolites that are involved in the fragrance and aroma constituents of flowers and fruits, plant defense, and primary plant metabolism  <cit> . although all terpenoids arise from a few structurally simple prenyldiphosphate precursors, an enormous assortment of thousands of possible molecules comes to fruition. this chemical diversity of terpenoid structures is attributed, in large part, to the myriad ways of folding and the eventual quenching of reactive carbocation intermediates in the reaction catalyzed by terpenoid synthases   <cit> . the products of tps can be further modified by other enzymes such a cytochrome p <dig> dependent monooxygenases and various transferases.

the initial 8-fold sequencing and assembly of a grapevine  inbred pinot noir genome  lead to the prediction of  <dig> grapevine tps  genes, which mirrors a vibrant role for terpenoid secondary metabolism in grapevine biology  <cit> . for example, in wine made from aromatic grape varieties, monoterpene alcohols such as linalool, geraniol, and cis-rose oxide impart important floral flavour qualities  <cit> . sesquiterpenes have also been identified as important indicators of grape aroma. recently, parker et al.  <cit>  identified α-ylangene as a sesquiterpene metabolite marker associated with peppery aroma and taste in australian shiraz grape berries, and the sesquiterpene ketone, rotundone, was found to be the compound responsible for this attribute in peppery/spicy australian shiraz grapes and wines  <cit> . monoterpenes such as  <dig> -cineol, and sesquiterpenes such as α-humulene, β-caryophyllene as wells as α- and γ-muurolene have been described in cabernet sauvignon pre-veraison berries  <cit> . similar profiles of terpene volatiles have also been documented from the headspace above chardonnay leaves, flowers, and green berries  <cit> . the presence of some terpenes early in berry development and in other parts of the plant may indicate a role in defense. terpenoid volatiles are released from grapevines following insect feeding  <cit>  or the application of methyl jasmonate  <cit> .

of all plant species for which genome sequences are available, the tps gene family has been comprehensively explored only in arabidopsis thaliana, in which  <dig> intact attps genes were identified  <cit> ; functions have been established for several of these genes  <cit> . a number of tps genes have also been characterized against the background of the sequenced rice  genome  <cit>  which has at least  <dig> tps-like sequences identified . for comparison, genome sequence analysis of poplar  identified  <dig> tps genes  <cit> , only two of which have been functionally characterized  <cit> . prior to the sequencing of a grapevine genome, we reported on the cdna cloning and product profiles of three vvtps  <cit>  and we detailed the involvement of valencene synthase, a sesquiterpene synthase, in the evolution of grapevine floral scent  <cit> , but a comprehensive analysis of vvtps has not been reported thus far.

the importance of terpenoids in grapevine biology and wine flavour and quality motivated a genome-wide inventory and functional characterization of the vvtps gene family. we present the manually curated annotation of the vvtps gene family from the current 12-fold genome sequence coverage. this work defines  <dig> putatively functional vvtps,  <dig> partial vvtps, and  <dig> probable vvtps pseudogenes including vvtps gene architecture and chromosome localizations. the vvtps gene family shows extensive gene duplication and in many instances, functional diversification across all subfamilies except those involved in primary metabolism . conclusions regarding diversification are supported by phylogenetic analyses of the vvtps family and functional characterization of heterologously expressed vvtps proteins.

RESULTS
genome-wide identification of tps genes in vitis vinifera
screening of the predicted proteome and the six-frames-translated 12-fold genome sequence of v. vinifera with protein sequences of previously characterized tps identified  <dig> loci exhibiting significant similarities with known tps . our annotation of the  <dig> tps-like gene models  classified them into four types:   <dig> are complete vvtps genes that contain the expected functional motifs and domains  <cit>  required to render them functional;   <dig> are complete vvtps genes but the orfs contain a frameshift or premature stop codon either due to a point mutation or a possible sequencing error;   <dig> are partial tps genes disrupted by sequence gaps or located in scaffold extremities; and   <dig> are obvious pseudogenes disrupted by numerous deletions, frameshifts and/or stop codons . after removing the genes of this last type, the number of potentially functional vvtps ranges from a minimum of  <dig> up to  <dig> genes. the missing sequences of the partial genes  prevented meaningful sequence alignments and gene classification; therefore, we removed them from our further analysis which focused on the  <dig> vvtps genes of groups  and . the presence of cognate est and/or cdna sequences provides proof of transcription for  <dig>  of them .

the relatively high gene sequence and structure conservation across the plant tps family  <cit>  allow us to be confident in the result of the genome-wide vvtps gene prediction, combining automatic and manual annotations. manual curation and evaluation have substantially improved the identification of vvtps genes: for example, out of the  <dig> vvtps genes  <dig> were missed by the automated pipeline used for annotation of the grapevine genome  <cit> . furthermore, intron-exon structures of  <dig> vvtps genes required manual correction to obtain complete and consistent coding sequences. the results of the vvtps gene annotations confirmed a large vvtps gene family previously predicted from the 8-fold genome assembly  <cit>  and expand the previous estimation of the vvtps family size. while a lower estimate of only  <dig> vvtps genes was reported from the analysis of a second heterozygous pinot noir genome sequence  <cit> , the sequence information available for this genome in ncbi genbank http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank also revealed about  <dig> vvtps. a comparison with other plant genomes in which tps genes have been annotated showed that the grapevine vvtps gene family is the largest identified to date. the arabidopsis thaliana genome contains  <dig> complete attps genes and eight attps pseudogenes  <cit> , while the rice and poplar genomes are predicted to encode  <dig> to  <dig> tps-like genes according to  <cit>  and unpublished results .

annotation of vvtps relative to the overall plant tps gene family
the  <dig> candidate vvtps sequences identified as intact or potentially intact represent five of the seven plant tps gene subfamilies tps-a through tps-g previously described  <cit>  . the tps-f subfamily of clarkia brewerii linalool synthase-like genes and the gymnosperm-specific tps-d subfamily  <cit> , were the only subfamilies missing full-length vvtps members. although the previous 8-fold grapevine genome assembly  <cit>  contained one vvtps-f subfamily member, in the manually curated assembly and annotation of the 12-fold genome sequence, this gene was now fragmented into two partial tps .

the tps-a subfamily is substantially extended in grapevine with  <dig> vvtps existing on just two chromosomes, chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  compared to  <dig> attps of the tps-a subfamily in a. thaliana  <cit> . this subfamily typically contains sesquiterpene synthases and possibly diterpene synthases of secondary metabolism. a total of  <dig> vvtps were found in the tps-b subfamily of angiosperm monoterpene synthases and these were located on at least three chromosomes, chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the tps-g subfamily, which contains synthases for acyclic monoterpenes of floral scent  <cit>  is greatly extended in grapevine with  <dig> vvtps annotated compared to arabidopsis with just one attps gene in this subfamily. the chromosomal location of most of the vvtps of the tps-g subfamily is unknown. we found two vvtps of the tps-c subfamily and one vvtps of the tps-e subfamily. these two subfamilies contain tps genes of primary plant hormone metabolism that are not typically represented with multiple gene copies in plant genomes  <cit> .

chromosomal location of vvtps
the topological organization of the vvtps family in the grapevine genome is characterized by massively tandemly repeated genes. of the complete set of  <dig> vvtps loci identified in this study,  <dig>  are organized in  <dig> distinct clusters covering from  <dig> to  <dig> vvtps genes or pseudogenes . the largest vvtps cluster, localized on chromosome  <dig> and spanning  <dig> kb, contains  <dig> complete vvtps genes ,  <dig> vvtps pseudogenes and numerous traces of copia-like retrotransposons . although many vvtps cluster together, of the  <dig> vvtps loci, only  <dig> vvtps genes also localize in the vicinity of other putative terpenoid pathway genes with the same gene orientation: one  co-localizes with a prenyltranferase gene and the other  with a cytochrome p <dig> gene. dynamically expanding or contracting clusters of closely related genes can evolve as the result of unequal cross-over, which enriches genetic variability but limits the divergence through an opposing mechanism of gene conversion as has been shown for plant resistance genes  <cit> . these processes can be intensified by the presence of pseudogenes which contribute to the frequency of crossing-over and increase in gene diversity  <cit> . as previously shown for the drosophila melanogaster genome, a high density of repeat elements can also impact the recombination dynamic within gene clusters  <cit> . the genome architecture of the vvtps gene family  suggests a large potential for diversification and variation of terpenoid metabolism in this species, and may thus account for variability of terpenoid profiles among grapevine varieties and cultivars. the identification of vvtps gene clusters allows for future work in which resequencing of these regions in different varieties and testing for associations of gene cluster and terpenoid aroma traits can be undertaken.

intron-exon structure of vvtps genes
in agreement with highly conserved intron-exon structure of plant tps genes  <cit> , all but one of the  <dig> vvtps genes of the subfamilies tps-a, tps-b and tps-g contain seven coding exons . the only exception is vvtps <dig>  in which the 3'-most exon was disrupted by a large and probably recent intron insertion. the three genes of the subfamilies tps-c and tps-e are characterized by longer sequences  as a consequence of the presence of an additional exon encoding an ancestral  <dig> amino acid n-terminal domain of unknown function  <cit> .

conserved motifs of the v. vinifera tps protein family
the grapevine vvtps protein family is characterized by two large domains defined in the pfam resource  <cit> : pf <dig> corresponds to the n-terminal region and pf <dig> corresponds to the c-terminal metal cofactor binding domain  <cit> . just upstream of the pf <dig> n-terminal domain, in the region encoded by the first exon, all vvtps that putatively function as monoterpene synthases, also contain the rr8w motif. this motif may play a role in the initiation of the isomerization-cyclization reaction  <cit>  or act to stabilize the protein through electrostatic interactions  <cit> ; however, tps in subfamily tps-g, as well as two vvtps predicted in tps-a, and those in tps-c and tps-e do not consistently contain this motif or they have a highly modified version of it . several of the tps-g members are also truncated with the starting m at position five of this motif. this may effectively open up the three dimensional structure of these tps or it may affect subcellular compartmentation of these proteins. mono- and diterpene synthases typically contain an n-terminal plastidial targeting peptide upstream of the conserved or modified rr8w  <cit> , and such targeting peptides have been predicted in silico for  <dig> vvtps .

the c-terminal domain contains two highly conserved aspartate-rich motifs. the first of these, the ddxxd motif , is involved in the coordination of divalent ion, water molecules and the stabilization of the active site  <cit> . only four predicted vvtps  lack the exact ddxxd motif characteristic of class i tps which catalyze reactions initiated by cleavage of the diphosphate group of the prenyl diphosphate substrate. the tps-c proteins are not expected to have this domain as they do not cleave the prenyl diphosphate unit; however, they do contain the dxdd sequence critical to the protonation initiated reaction mechanism of class ii tps  <cit> .

a second important motif in the c-terminal domain is the nse/dte motif  <cit> . the reported consensus sequence of this motif is dxxxxe and a modified version, dxxxxe, is found in almost all vvtps of the subfamilies tps-a, -b, and -g . three predicted vvtps are lacking the terminal e. members of the tps-g subfamily have an altered and highly conserved sequence, lwddlxxxxe.

functional characterization of vvtps full length cdnas
since specific functions of tps genes cannot be accurately predicted from sequence analysis alone, it was important to clone and functionally characterize vvtps full length cdnas. we used the previously published 8-fold  <cit>  and the new 12-fold genome sequence  assembly of the pinot noir inbred line for primer design to clone vvtps flcdnas from three grapevine varieties, pinot noir , cabernet sauvignon , and gewürztraminer . flcdnas were expressed in e. coli using one of several cloning vectors , and recombinant vvtps proteins were functionally characterized via purified protein or in vivo recombinant e. coli assays with each of the following potential substrates, geranyl diphosphate , -farnesyl diphosphate , and -geranylgeranyl diphosphate . although a couple of recent studies identified two tomato tps which utilize neryl diphosphate or -farnesyl diphosphate as substrates  <cit> , these tps are members of the tps-e subfamily and none of the vvtps that we characterized belonged to this subfamily. in addition, a screen of the grapevine genome sequence did not reveal the presence of z-isoprenyl diphosphate synthases , therefore, we did not include these alternative substrates when assaying for vvtps activity. products were analyzed by gcms and the majority of vvtps analyzed produced multiple products , which is a common feature of plant tps  <cit> . since many of the vvtps flcdnas arose from cloning efforts in all three v. vinifera varieties pn, cs, and gw, a number of vvtps were uncovered as cultivar-specific variants, each differing by only a few amino acids. to ensure that these were not unique genes capable of producing a distinct product profile, each variant was functionally characterized. however, only one representative cdna clone will be described for its function following below, while the additional clones from the other cultivars are listed in table  <dig>  table  <dig>  table  <dig>  and table  <dig> 

terpenoids produced by individual vvtps clones when incubated with fpp are listed. flcdna clones with redundant functions are listed as well. clones marked with an * were characterized by in vitro assays with isolated recombinant vvtps; clones marked with ^ were characterized in vivo in metabolically engineered e. coli. the tissue specific cdna used to clone a particular gene is indicated in flcdna id with either b , f , or m  when appropriate. flcdna id in bold indicates clone came from cdna of methyl jasmonate treated tissue. of the clones labelled as -β-caryophyllene syn all produced an abundance of -β-caryophyllene, with minor components of α-humulene and germacrene d except can <dig> which did not produce germacrene d. bolded vvtps gene models indicate proof of transcript not previously known from the available ests.

terpenoids produced by individual vvtps clones when incubated with gpp are listed. where noted are bifunctional tps capable of producing products when incubated with gpp  or fpp . the tissue specific cdna used to clone a particular gene is indicated in flcdna id with either b , yb , f , s  or m . flcdna id in bold indicates clone came from cdna of methyl jasmonate treated tissue. clones with redundant functions are listed as well. bolded vvtps gene models indicate proof of transcript not previously known from the available ests.

terpenoids produced by individual vvtps clones when incubated with gpp  or fpp  are listed. where noted are trifunctional tps capable of producing products also with ggpp . the tissue specific cdna used to clone a particular gene is indicated in flcdna id with either yb , f , l  or m . flcdna id in bold indicates clone came from cdna of methyl jasmonate treated tissue. clones with redundant functions are listed. bolded vvtps gene models indicate proof of transcript not previously known from the available ests.

terpenoids produced by individual vvtps clones when incubated with fpp  or ggpp  are listed. the tissue specific cdna used to clone a particular gene is indicated in flcdna id with f . clones with redundant functions are listed also.

a subset of vvtps flcdnas of the tps-a subfamily  were chemically synthesized and characterized using an e. coli strain engineered to produce the fpp substrate from mevalonate. based on previous work  <cit> , an operon encoding the mevalonate lower pathway of streptoccoccus pneumoniae was subcloned into a bacterial expression vector together with the saccharomyces cerevisiae fpp synthase. vvtps flcdnas were additionally expressed into this engineered strain and product formation was measured by gcms in the culture extract as has been done for the characterization of other tps and cytochrome p <dig> s  <cit> .

nomenclature for functionally characterized vvtps flcdnas
we assigned gene identifiers that include references to both function and the cultivar  from which the gene was isolated . these functional gene identifiers will be used throughout the following sections to describe individual genes. table  <dig>  table  <dig>  table  <dig>  and table  <dig> provide additional detailed information for each flcdna regarding clone id, tissue origin , product profiles with relative quantitative information, as well as identification of the closest annotated vvtps gene model reported in this paper. in some instances multiple cdnas share the same functional gene identifier, but are represented as distinct genes because they occupy unique locations within the vvtps phylogeny. these functional gene ids are designated with numbers in both the tables and within the phylogenetic trees.

functions of vvtps flcdnas of the tps-a subfamily
the majority of vvtps genes belong to the tps-a subfamily for which we functionally characterized  <dig> unique flcdnas . all of the vvtps-a members were characterized as sesquiterpene synthases, and all but one formed multiple products with fpp as substrate. in several cases, the product profiles included both terpenoid hydrocarbons and alcohols. as a group, the vvtps of the tps-a subfamily produce a diverse array of sesquiterpene products.

all five individual vvgwecar and vvpnecar flcdna clones produced predominantly -β-caryophyllene. four of these clones also produced α-humulene and a small amount of germacrene d, while one clone  produced only -β-caryophyllene  and α-humulene . the two vvpnecar enzymes characterized in metabolically engineered e. coli  showed similar product profiles to vvgwecar clones characterized by in vitro enzyme assays. one of the vvpnecar enzyme  also produced a low amount  of an unknown sesquiterpene alcohol in addition to -β-caryophyllene, α-humulene and germacrene d. the tps vvgwgera  produced primarily germacrene a  and α-selinene  and a small amount of selin-11-en-4-α-ol . the product profile of vvgwaber  consisted of -α-bergamotene , zingiberenol  and nerolidol  as well as two minor compounds. germacrene d was the primary product of vvgwgerd . vvcsafar  was the only single-product member of the tps-a subfamily identified here, producing 100% -α-farnesene. two products, γ-cadinene  and an unidentified sesquiterpene , were the only detected products of vvgwgcad . vvpnbcur  produced β-curcumene  -γ-bisabolene , iso-italicene) , -α-bisabolol , and at least  <dig> additional products. the vvpnsesq  generated a sesquiterpene olefin as major product that was not identified unambiguously by gcms. the product was, therefore, produced in larger quantity, purified by preparative gc and identified by nmr spectroscopy as sesquithujene -2-methyl-5--6-methylhept-5-en-2-yl)bicyclohex-2-ene). additional reaction products of this tps included α-bergamotene, sesquisabinene, β- and γ-bisabolene, β-bisabolol and a trace amount of an unidentified sequiterpene alcohol. vvpnazin  is a zingiberene synthase that also produced β-sesquiphellandrene and β-bisabolene. the two major products generated by vvpnseint  were found to be selina  <dig> -diene and intermedeol. at least, five other sesquiterpenes including α-guaiene, selina  <dig> -diene, γ-selinene, and 7-epi-α-selinene, were identified as reaction products. vvpncucad  encodes a multi-product sesquiterpene synthase capable of producing cubebol, δ-cadinene, α-copaene, α-cubebene and an unknown sesquiterpene alcohol as dominant reaction products; additional minor products included α-gurjunene, γ-cadinene, β-cubebene and an unknown sesquiterpene. the vvpnahum  produced α-humulene , - β-caryophyllene  and a sesquiterpene alcohol  that we initially failed to identify by gcms; the latter compound was then produced in milligram quantities, purified by liquid chromatography and identified by 1h- and 13c-nmr spectroscopy as hyemalol  a humulane-type sesquiterpenoid recently discovered in zanthoxylum hyemale  <cit> . vvpneb/2epicar , was identified as a third type of caryophyllene synthase, which in contrast to vvpnecar and vvgwecar also catalyzed the formation of 2-epi--β-caryophyllene as a substantial  product.

collectively, these characterized vvtps-a enzymes produce some of the major sesquiterpenes identified from grapevine. furthermore, the prevalence of vvtps producing -β-caryophyllene, α-humulene and germacrene d may in part explain the reported prominence of these compounds in grapevine berries and vegetative tissues  <cit> .

functions of vvtps flcdnas of the tps-b subfamily
we functionally characterized seven unique vvtps  from the tps-b subfamily . all of the characterized vvtps genes of this group produce monoterpenes, and most are multi-product enzymes. the products of vvgwaphe included -α-phellandrene , myrcene , terpinolene , and seven other minor products. vvpnapin produced -α-pinene , -limonene , -camphene , and eight other minor products. five of the nine vvtps of the tps-b subfamily  produced -β-ocimene as a major product with individual variations of additional products. vvgwboci and vvcsboci produced additional minor amounts of -β-ocimene; vvcsbocim produced additional major amounts of myrcene  along with minor amounts of β-pinene and limonene; vvgwbocif and vvcsbocif also converted fpp into -α-farnesene. lastly, vvpnrlin produced a single oxygenated product, -linalool. together the vvtps-b subfamily members account for many of the acyclic and cyclic monoterpene hydrocarbons and a few of the monoterpene alcohols found in vitis vinifera.

functions of vvtps flcdnas of the tps-g subfamily
the tps-g subfamily is greatly expanded in v. vinifera . functional characterization of ten different flcdna clones of this subfamily identified three unique gene functions . all vvtps of this group produce exclusively acyclic terpene alcohols, but the three types differ by their range of substrates. the first type of vvtps gene function within the tps-g subfamily is represented by three genes, vvpnlinner <dig>  vvpnlinner <dig>  and vvcslinner. these enzymes accept two substrates, c <dig> gpp and c <dig> fpp, and produce -linalool and -nerolidol, respectively . the second group is represented by four vvpnlngl enzymes which also accept the additional c <dig> substrate ggpp to produce -geranyl linalool. the third unique function in this subfamily is represented by three genes, vvgwger, vvcsger and vvpnger, which had activity only with gpp to produce geraniol. while seven of the vvtps of the tps-g subfamily accept more than one substrate in vitro and contribute potentially to the formation of terpene alcohols of different chain lengths, it is not known whether these enzymes indeed encounter more than one type of substrate in vivo.

functions of vvtps flcdnas of the tps-f subfamily
although the analysis of the 12-fold genome sequence coverage did not identify any intact vvtps genes of the tps-f subfamily, a unique vvtps function of the tps-f subfamily was characterized with the two flcdnas vvcsenergl and vvpnenergl . these enzymes accepted either fpp or ggpp to produce -nerolidol or -geranyl linalool, respectively. unlike the vvtps of the tps-g these enzymes had no activity with gpp. vvcsenergl and vvpnenergl are only 62% identical and 76% similar on an amino acid level.

phylogeny of functionally characterized vvtps and vvtps gene models
the phylogenetic analyses presented here include v. vinifera tps from the 12-fold sequence assembly of the nearly homozygous pinot noir genotype  <cit>  and the functionally characterized vvtps described here. the analyses also included full-length tps sequences that contained the known tps motifs predicted from the genome assembly of the heterozygous pinot noir genotype  <cit>  for a more complete annotation of the vvtps family. in this way, we have integrated the predictions of vvtps gene models from the two grapevine genome sequences  <cit>  in a compatible fashion and we are proposing a unified vvtps classification and nomenclature.

within the tps-a subfamily of sesquiterpene synthases the functionally characterized vvtps are close to most of the vvtps predicted in the 12-fold genome sequence assembly . this topology suggests that the diversity of functions for grapevine sesquiterpene synthases is well represented with the functionally characterized vvtps described in this work. relative to tps-a enzymes of other plant species, the vvtps exhibit a large paralogous cluster with vvtps-a members more closely related to one another than they are to tps from other species, regardless of function. paralogous tps gene clusters were found previously for other species examined in depth such as a. thaliana  <cit>  and norway spruce  <cit>  and indicate post-speciation gene duplication events. the large number of vvtps-a suggests that this subfamily plays an important role in grapevine biology.

vvtps of the tps-b subfamily fall into two clades, vvtps-b clade i and vvtps-b clade ii, bifurcated by representative tps from other plants . the majority of the vvtps of clade i make cyclic products while those of clade ii produce only acyclic terpenoids. it is possible that clade-specific conserved sequence features determine whether a tps is able to produce cyclic or acyclic products  <cit> ; thus, the two clades may represent an evolutionary pattern of sub-functionalization from cyclic-product tps in clade i to those tps producing acyclic products in clade ii. in contrast to other tps subfamilies, the vvtps clades of the tps-b subfamily include members that have functional equivalents in distantly related species. for example, lotus japonica -β-ocimene synthase clusters closely with grapevine ocimene synthases. malus x domestica -α-farnesene synthases also clusters closest to vvtps of the same function. this pattern suggests that these functions arose prior to speciation events.

the tps-g subfamily of plant tps was defined by previous work on tps of floral scent biosynthesis in snapdragon   <cit> . phylogenetic analyses that include the large number of vvtps gene  conclusively resolved a bifurcation of the tps-b and tps-g subfamilies at a juncture that was previously ambiguous and had misclassified some tps-g genes as tps-b members. specifically, the newly characterized grapevine geraniol synthase vvpnger which matches gene model vvtps <dig>  as well as the geraniol and linalool synthases from basil  , clustered closely with the tps-g subfamily. the phylogenetic proximity between the basil and grapevine geraniol synthases indicates that these tps functions already existed in a common ancestor. in contrast, the remaining vvtps of the tps-g subfamily, which are all linalool/nerolidol synthases, cluster closest to other vvtps. as mentioned above, the entire predicted vvtps-g subfamily has a conserved nsf/dte motif . this same motif is present in the cloned vvtps cdnas as well as other members of the tps-g subfamily from different species. prominent in this motif of the vvtps-g members is a w in the second position; this residue may affect the magnesium binding and/or substrate orientation. also noteworthy is the highly modified or absent rrx8w motif from this group of tps  and which may imply that these acyclic products are formed via the geranyl cation rather than the linalyl cation  <cit> .

the tps-e and tps-c subfamilies in v. vinifera contain one and two members, respectively . although these were not functionally characterized in this paper, they are almost certainly involved as diterpene synthases in ent-kaurene biosynthesis  <cit> . surprisingly, the 12-fold sequence coverage of the grapevine genome did not reveal any members of the tps-f subfamily; however, our flcdna cloning identified two members of this subfamily and both were characterized as nerolidol/geranyl linalool synthases . these are related to the clarkia brewerii linalool synthases  <cit>  and the recently characterized a. thaliana geranyl linalool synthase  <cit> , each of which produces acyclic terpene alcohols as a functional signature of this subfamily.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study provides the first comprehensive annotation of the very large vvtps gene family with regard to chromosomal localization, enzyme functions, and phylogeny relative to the overall plant tps gene family. the vvtps gene family is one of the largest gene families of specialized  metabolism in grapevine where tps enzymes contribute to berry and wine flavour, floral scent and potentially a diversity of other biological functions such as defense and resistance. the emerging profile of the vvtps family described here illustrates how this large gene family has expanded across the genome through gene duplication events and functional diversification. notably, the large number of functionally diverse sesquiterpene synthases identified in our biochemical characterization of the vvtps-a genes suggests that these enzymes and their products may contribute substantially to grapevine biology and wine quality. the recent reports of sesquiterpenes in shiraz grapes and wine  <cit>  or the identification of sesquiterpene volatiles in anthers and pollen of grapevine flowers  <cit>  are early insights to the emerging roles for sesquiterpene metabolism in v. vinifera.

phylogenetic analyses of the vvtps show a result similar to many plant species studied thus far in that most of the vvtps form clusters of paralogous genes within the plant tps family. this finding indicates a dominant process of post-speciation gene duplications, although there are also examples of conserved tps functions of a more ancient order. furthermore, our analyses substantiate separation of the tps-b and the tps-g subfamilies. the separation based on sequence relatedness is matched by separation of gene functions, since all known members of the tps-g subfamily produce acyclic products.

of the monoterpene synthases presented here, those that produce -linalool , geraniol , and the previously identified α-terpineol synthase  will be of much interest to viticulturalists and wine makers as these are some of the most prevalent compounds responsible for the floral characteristics of aromatic varieties. furthermore, compounds such as geraniol and linalool can be further modified in grape musts and wine to produce citronellol, rose oxide, and wine lactone  <cit> . linalool and α-terpineol have also been found to contribute to the character of non-aromatic red grapevine varieties  <cit> . it is conceivable that different viticultural regimes may modify the expression of these tps in grape berries and can thereby impact the quality of the resultant wines.

while many of the terpenoid products of the vvtps enzymes characterized here have been described in the viticulture and oenology literature  <cit> , still several have yet to be associated with traits in grapes or wine. taken together, the present vvtps genomic annotations and the vvtps functional characterizations provide a reference framework for future studies, including transcript and protein expression profiling, as well as terpenoid molecular marker development through, for example association mapping.

