BACKGROUND
the lowering sequencing costs are resulting in an exponentially increasing amount of available genetic data  <cit> . the increase in genomic data is rapidly approaching the limit of what is possible to handle using today's computers. to overcome this challenge, the focus is shifting towards the development of methods capable of analyzing genomic data fast and efficiently. the advancement in sequencing technology is also responsible for the rapidly increasing field of metagenomics. metagenomics is the study of genetic material taken from microorganisms living in different environments. the field of metagenomics gives researches access to the genetic contents of all organisms in an environment, including a wide variety of previously uncultivable organisms  <cit> . metagenomic samples may therefore consist of genomic dna sequences with no homology matches or known taxonomic marker genes. methods that can classify unknown dna sequences are therefore of great interest to metagenomic research  <cit> .

in the present work we examine the "genomic signature" of an organism that can be found in an arbitrary fraction of genomic dna using dinucleotide relative abundance patterns  <cit> . by dividing genomic dinucleotide frequencies with the corresponding mononucleotide content, karlin and co-workers found a strong phylogenetic signal in the organisms tested. this signal was therefore referred to as a genomic signature  <cit> . an alternative view of this approach is that genomic at content bias is removed from dna word frequencies. this gives an odds-ratio of observed divided by approximated oligonucleotide frequencies. comparing prokaryotes using genomic signatures can be considered as a measure of how dna words are over- or underrepresented within genomes from what is expected from genomic at content alone. although genomic signatures were originally based on dinucleotide frequencies  <cit> , it has later been shown that tetranucleotide frequencies are better with respect to taxonomic classification  <cit> . in addition, the tetranucleotide based genomic signatures can distinguish between coding and non-coding regions within genomes which is difficult with dinucleotide based genomic signatures  <cit> . since the genomic signature method varies little within genomes, it can also be used to detect special intra-genomic dna regions  <cit> . such regions may include highly conserved genes, such as rrna operons, as well as horizontally transferred dna such as pathogenicity islands  <cit> .

genomic signatures are presumed to be shaped by factors such as dna structure, restriction and transcription systems, base-stacking energies, replication and repair, and more  <cit> . to what degree these factors influence the genomic signature, however, has not been resolved  <cit> . the aim of this study was therefore to explore the origin and the strength of the phylogenetic signal of genomic signatures. in addition, we analyzed how the genomic signature was affected by mutational pressure, measured as the oligonucleotide usage variance  in the methods section) between genomic oligonucleotide frequencies and corresponding mononucleotide approximated oligonucleotides frequencies  <cit> .

the ouv measure calculates the deviance between genomic oligonucleotide frequencies and approximated oligonucleotide frequencies using the considered oligonucleotide's mononucleotide frequencies. this reflects how genomic oligonucleotide usage is biased compared to what is expected from genomic at content. in effect, since each considered oligonucleotide frequency is approximated by its corresponding mononucleotide frequencies, complete independence is assumed between the nucleotides in the approximated oligonucleotide. hence, the ouv measure approximates genomic oligonucleotide frequencies using genomic at content. large ouv values are therefore indicative of strong bias or selective pressure, while low ouv values are associated with mutagenesis.

additionally, we compared the phylogenetic signal of the genomic signature to factors such as at content, growth temperature, habitat, and chromosome size. to do this,  <dig> prokaryotic chromosomes and plasmids larger than  <dig> kb were compared pair-wise. the method of choice was hexanucleotide frequency based genomic signatures, since that particular method has been found to reflect a stronger phylogenetic signal than both di- and tetranucleotide based genomic signatures  <cit> . since the genomic signatures are metric-based, bootstrapping or related methods are not possible  <cit> . k-means hierarchical clustering was therefore performed on the resulting pair-wise comparisons of all included dna sequences. a multinomial regression model was subsequently fitted to the different cluster groups to assess the individual influences exerted by the different factors mentioned above.

RESULTS
bias in oligonucleotide usage
ouv scores were calculated for observed di-, tetra- and hexanucleotide frequencies for all dna sequences and fitted to regression models as response variables with genomic at content as the predictor. the equations resulting from the regression models can be found in table  <dig>  where it can also be observed that significant association between at content and ouv scores were found for all measures. highest '% coefficient of determination', or r <dig> score, was achieved for the hexanucleotide frequency based model, while the lowest score was found for the dinucleotide frequency based model.

pairwise comparisons of genomes using genomic signatures
the prokaryotic dna sequences compared pair-wise using hexanucleotide-based genomic signatures were analyzed using cluster and multinomial regression analysis. figure  <dig> shows the result of the cluster analysis and an overview of the different groupings. the full cluster diagram containing all the names of the included organisms can be found in additional file  <dig>  a graph depicting average ouv scores and at content for each group can be found in figure  <dig> 

the cluster diagram was divided into seven major groups, named groups  <dig> to  <dig>  based on the cluster diagram in figure  <dig>  the most varied groups in terms of phyla were  <dig> and  <dig>  both had, on average, similar at content and ouv scores. many of the organisms in these groups were host-associated at-rich bacteria like buchnera spp., mycoplasma spp., staphylococcus spp., streptococcus spp., the bacillus cereus group  <cit> , clostridium spp.  <cit> , etc.

groups  <dig> and  <dig> contained larger host associated bacteria predominantly from the γ-proteobacteria group. average ouv scores were similar to groups  <dig> and  <dig>  while at content was lower .

groups  <dig> and  <dig> contained metabolic diverse and free-living proteobacteria and actinobacteria. from actinobacteria we found genera such as rubrobacter, mycobacterium, nocardia, frankia, rhodococcus, thermobifida, bifidobacterium, streptomyces, symbiobacterium, propionibacterium, leifsonia and corynebacterium. the proteobacterial phylum was represented with α- and β-proteobacterial genomes including genera such as caulobacter, rhodobacter, novosphingobium, bradyrhizobium, azoarcus, burkholderia and rhodopseudomonas. the average at content was lowest in these groups while the ouv score was highest.

group  <dig> was the smallest of the groups discussed, and contained only twelve genomes. both average at content and ouv scores were fairly high compared to the other groups. the group obtained, on average, low correlation scores with the other groups and was therefore treated as a separate group. members of the group included thermotoga spp., rubrobacter × ylanophilus, methanopyrus kandlerii, methanosaete thermophila, thermococcus kodakaraensis, parabacteroidetes distasonis and leptospira spp.

the model
the different cluster groups were fitted as a categorical variable to a regression model using the factors: genome size, at content, ouv, phyla, growth temperature, oxygen requirement, and habitat. in table  <dig>  it can be concluded, based on the aic  and mcfadden r <dig> statistics, that a fairly good model, with high explanatory power, was obtained for the cluster groups. at content was the factor that had the largest impact on the model, followed by phyla. although the phyla factor improved the model considerably, the effect was noticeably weaker than what was observed by including at content as a factor. genome size, habitat and growth temperature were also significant factors, but the regression model improved only slightly in terms of aic and r <dig> scores. the ouv and oxygen requirement factors were the weakest predictors. a factor specifying whether the organisms were pathogenic was originally included in the model, but was not found significant and was therefore removed.

the table shows a forward fitting of a set of predictors to the response variable representing the cluster groups.

it should be noted that there is some co-linearity between the factors in the regression model. the predicted influences of each factor in table  <dig> may therefore not be completely accurate. the model should rather be considered as a more general estimate of the influences exerted by the different factors included.

discussion
selection pressure as measured by ouv
the calculation of ouv gives an indication of how random or biased the occurrences of oligonucleotides are in genomes . since only at content was used to approximate genomic oligonucleotide usage, the model assumes complete independence between all nucleotides in the genome. thus, lower ouv scores imply more random dna composition, and high variance scores can be taken to mean that stronger selection forces are affecting the distribution of genomic oligonucleotide frequencies. table  <dig> show that the differently sized oligomers are differently affected by selective forces as measured by ouv. in other words, ouv, measured using longer oligonucleotides, are more strongly associated with genomic at content than ouv based on shorter oligomers.

analysis of the model
the multinomial regression model gives a rough prediction of influences determining similarity with respect to the genomic signature discussed here. figure  <dig> indicates that at content and phyla appears to be associated with group formation in the cluster diagram.

it has been observed  <cit>  that genomic signatures grouped organisms progressively better, with respect to 16s rrna based phylogeny, when the oligonucleotide size increased. in addition, the number of wrong species identifications  dropped  <cit> . hexanucleotide based genomic signatures were therefore the only measure considered in this study. even though the genomic signature based comparisons cannot be directly compared to tree based phylogenetic methods  <cit> , the over  <dig> phylogenetic groups found in the cluster diagram  imply that the genomic signatures have limited taxonomic scope below genus level compared to rrna based methods. rrna based methods, on the other hand, are not optimal to compare strains  <cit> . therefore, as has been stated previously  <cit> , the genomic signature is a measure to be used together with rrna-based methods.

the categorical factors included in the model must be considered as rough, giving only inferential knowledge. this is especially noticeable in the factor describing a genome's habitat, where many host-associated genomes may be found in multiple environments and vice versa.

a model was also created with the addition of a pathogenicity factor. this factor was included since it is assumed that pathogenic bacteria exchange dna with the surroundings more often than non-pathogenic ones  <cit> . the pathogenicity factor was not found significant, and was therefore removed from the final model.

analysis of the cluster groups
by clustering bacteria according to codon usage it was found that genomes grouped according to their respective habitat and life-style  <cit> . although the hexanucleotide based genomic signatures gave clear and distinct clusters of soil/free-living bacteria, other niche specific groups similar to the ones found using codon bias  <cit>  were not detected. it should be stated that the methods employed here are not related to the codon bias-based methods described in  <cit> . codon bias is strongly associated with at content  <cit> , while genomic signatures are normalized with respect to at content. in other words, genomic signatures are not directly associated with at content, in contrast to codon bias measures, but indirectly as the regression models show.

the above examples illustrate that prokaryotic dna composition, expressed using hexanucleotide-based genomic signatures, can be similar regardless of kinship. the similar dna composition is, according to our results, a consequence of a collection of factors having acted on the genomes. thus, genomic analyses of organisms undergoing evolutionary transition between different environments may give many important clues concerning how differences in dna composition may arise in closely related organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
our results, based on hierarchical clustering and multinomial regression, indicate that genomes compared using genomic signatures are primarily grouped according to at content. in the model presented, at content was more strongly associated with the clustered groups than taxonomy. taxonomy was, in turn, found to be more strongly linked to the clustered groups than the other significant factors. the remaining factors found to significantly affect the regression model were, in order of importance, genome size, habitat, temperature, selection bias  and oxygen requirement. it can therefore be concluded that the genomic signature in prokaryotes is influenced by many factors which may explain the limited phylogenetic scope below genus level.

