BACKGROUND
influenza is a highly contagious, seasonal respiratory illness caused by the influenza virus. the progression and outcome of pathogenic infections are influenced by host genetic factors 
. further studies showed that this finding may also hold true for influenza a virus infection 
. thus host genetic factors should be identified to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying host resistance and accelerate the development of new therapeutic regimes for patients. several genome-wide quantitative trait locus  mapping studies have been conducted using different mouse strains to identify host genetic factors that contribute to the resistance to influenza virus infection 
. the identified qtls have greatly narrowed the scope of genetic factors from the whole genome to a set of genomic intervals. however, identifying the underlying genes from a large number of candidates within these regions remains a challenge. in this study, in silico approaches were used to prioritize a list of the most promising candidate genes from these qtl regions for future investigations.

the basic idea for most computational gene prioritization is that for a heritable trait with genetic heterogeneity, different trait-related genes should show similarities with one another based on some particular measure. assuming that the known disease genes  represent all of the genes responsible for a specific disease, then the unknown disease genes can potentially be distinguished from other candidates based on their similarities to the seeds . with the accumulation of high-throughput protein-protein interaction data, network-based similarity measures were demonstrated to be effective in prioritizing human disease genes using the seed-based strategy 
 <cit> . we first showed that a scoring method based on these measures could have reasonable power to predict known host resistance genes. however, the “seed-based” methods have several drawbacks stemming from an inherent limitation: these methods rely on known disease genes, which are incomplete in some studies and may introduce considerable bias. meanwhile, many microarray experiments comparing the gene expression profiles of cases and controls have been performed. these studies contained rich information regarding trait-related genetics, but the information has not been fully exploited. previous studies showed that disease genes are often surrounded by differentially expressed neighbors in a gene network, but not necessarily highly differentially expressed themselves 
 <cit> . we further demonstrated that host resistance genes also share this property in a protein association network. several scoring approaches using de levels of network neighbors were evaluated to prioritize known host resistance genes. our evaluation suggested that de-based methods could also effectively prioritize the genes responsible for host resistance to influenza.

by applying both strategies to prioritize genes within mouse qtls associated with host resistance to influenza, we identified functional relevant genes that were supported by multiple lines of evidence from previous studies. a list of promising candidate genes strongly supported by literatures was totally missed when seed-based methods were used. using the de-based method, we were able to identify these genes. this result indicated that the de-based strategy can complement the seed-based strategy to obtain novel candidates without the influence of limited knowledge. in addition, evidence-supported genes were significantly enriched in top-ranked genes prioritized by both seed- and de-based strategies. hence, de-based strategy can also enhance the credibility of the inference of a candidate’s role in the pathogenesis of a disease. the results of functional enrichment analysis further showed that genes prioritized by both strategies revealed several biological processes that may exert critical functions in influencing host outcomes after influenza virus infection. in summary, our results suggested that the de-based strategy can provide additional benefits and reduce the bias from a limited set of known disease genes. these results can also enhance our understanding of the pathological pathways of influenza.

RESULTS
the overall prioritization strategy was shown in figure 
 <dig>  each candidate gene within the qtl intervals associated with host resistance to influenza was scored using seed-  and de-based strategies . we used the gene association network compiled by the string database  
 <cit>  to derive the similarity measures and network neighbors. top 10% of the genes within each qtl region ranked by either seed- or de-based scoring strategy were considered as prioritized. all of the prioritized genes were then subject to systematic literature survey and gene set enrichment analysis.figure  <dig> 
overview of the network approaches based on seed genes and differential expression. the gene network is constructed from string database and represented by an undirected graph consisting of nodes  and weighed edges .  for the seed-based strategy, the score vector for all seeds and other genes within the genome is initialized with the entries corresponding to the seed genes assigned with equal scores whose sum is equal to  <dig>  the vector is iteratively updated by a random walk process over the network until it reaches convergence. candidate genes are ranked by their scores in the converged vector, which can be interpreted as the steady-state probabilities of staying at the nodes representing the candidate genes. a high probability for the candidate corresponds to a higher similarity to the seeds. as a computationally efficient alternative, a heat kernel diffusion matrix can be used to approximate the distances between all pairs of genes. the candidate genes are then scored according to their average distances to the seeds based on the kernel matrix.  the de-based method does not rely on the definition of seeds but uses a trait-related microarray expression profile to obtain the de levels of the genes. de levels were then mapped onto the network. for each candidate gene, the score is calculated as a weighted average of the de levels of the gene and its network neighbors with the weights derived from the network distances between genes. in this study, the candidate genes within each qtl were scored using two different strategies, and the top 10% ranked by each method was chosen as prioritized genes .



optimizing the network similarity measures for seed-based methods
for the first seed-based scoring strategy ,  <dig> genes were collected as seeds that harbor variants  associated with the traits related to host resistance after influenza virus infection . to best capture the relationships among host resistance genes, we evaluated the performance of several different network similarity measures: direct interaction ranking , string association ranking , random walk with restart , and seed-based heat kernel diffusion ranking . the dir measure for a gene corresponds to the number of direct interactions  with seeds; sar is the sum of direct interaction scores. more sophisticated methods were also applied. one method uses the arrival probability in the steady state of random walks with restart from seeds in the gene network ; the other measures the average distances to the seeds represented by a diffusion heat kernel matrix . the mathematical details of these scoring methods can be found in additional file 
 <dig>  to evaluate the model performance, we randomly chose  <dig> genes as background for each seed. each seed and its corresponding random background were then scored by the model built from the remaining seed genes. this step is called the leave-one-out cross validation  test . the model performance can be reflected by the ranks of the seed genes over the background and quantified as the area under the curve  of the receiver operating characteristic  
 <cit> . the model parameters in shkdr  were tuned to optimize the performance . figure 
 <dig> shows that rwr  and shkdr , both of which consider indirect interactions, exhibit similar performances and outperform sar  and dir  in terms of auc values. therefore, we chose rwr and shkdr as the measures for the seed-based scoring strategy. furthermore, the roc curves also suggested that known resistance genes can be ranked at the top 10%in the simulated candidate sets among 85% of total prioritization processes using rwr, which is superior to other measures at the same ranking percentage.table  <dig> 
the collection of  <dig> known host resistance genes


mx1
mx <dig>  mx2
ncr1
ncr1
ncr1
-/- 129/sv and c57bl/ <dig> mice were lethal after influenza virus infection 
ccr5
ccr5
-/- mice increase after infection with influenza a virus 
 <cit> . a large proportion of heterozygosity for the ccr5Δ <dig> allele among white patients with severe disease was also found 
nlrp3
nlrp3
 <cit> . gene polymorphisms in the nalp <dig> inflammasome are associated with interleukin- <dig> production and severe inflammation in human 
hla-a
h2-d1
hla-b
fcgr2a
fcgr3
rpain
rpain
ifnb1
ifnb1
ifn-β-deficient mice carrying functional mx <dig> alleles showed 20-fold lower in the 50% lethal dose of h7n7; and also substantially reduced resistance to h1n <dig> infection 
il10
il10
c1qbp
c1qbp
kir3dl1
kir3dl1
kir2dl2
kir3dl2
ifitm3
ifitm3performance evaluation of seed-based network strategy. the roc curves of the seed-based methods in loocv test on known host resistance genes. four different methods  as described in the main text were compared. the prioritization performance can be measured as auc presented next to each method.



evaluating the performance of de-based network strategy
to apply the de-based network strategy, we empirically surveyed the de levels of  <dig> known host resistance genes and their neighborhoods in the string network. we first obtained the whole-genome expression profiles of  <dig> pre-collaborative cross  mice after being infected by influenza virus . the de level was measured as the log <dig> ratios of the mean expression values between  <dig> susceptible strains and  <dig> resistant strains. a sub-network comprising all of the seed genes and their interacting neighbors was extracted from the string network . the node sizes and shades of colors were used to represent the de levels. we found that most of the seeds here were surrounded by differentially expressed neighbors. some of the seeds, such as c1qbp, which is not directly linked to other seed genes, may lose their priority when seed-based methods were used . some of the seed genes, such as h2-d <dig>  ifnar <dig>  and ifitm <dig>  were not highly differentially expressed, but these genes were surrounded by highly differentially expressed neighbors in the network . these observations suggested the feasibility of incorporating the de levels of network neighbors to prioritize host resistance genes.figure  <dig> 
empirical survey and performance evaluation of de-based network strategy.  the known influenza host resistance genes are surrounded by differentially expressed genes between resistant and susceptible mouse strains. to visualize the gene expression levels within a network context, a sub-network consisting of only the seed genes and their directly linked neighbors in the string database was extracted and visualized using cytoscape 
 <cit>  under the edge-weighed spring embedded layout. the distances between seeds and their neighbors were set proportional to their interaction scores. differential expression levels between resistance and susceptible mouse strains are mapped to the size and color shade of each node. the significant differentially expressed genes were highlighted by unifying the colors of genes with de levels that ranked at the top 5%  among the whole genome in red and the genes with de levels that ranked at the bottom 5%  in blue . all seed genes are highlighted using the same node size and bold fonts of their names.  the roc curves of de-based methods in the validation test on known host resistance genes. three methods  as described in the main text were compared. the performance measured as auc is shown next to the name of each method.



to quantitatively assess the hypothesis that the genes responsible for host resistance to influenza virus infection are surrounded by network neighbors differentially expressed between resistant and susceptible mouse strains, we evaluated three de-based scoring methods to prioritize known resistance genes. these methods include: differential expression ranking , direct neighborhood ranking , and de-based hkdr . the performances of de-based methods were also assessed by the ranks of seeds relative to the randomly sampled genes and quantified as the auc of roc. in contrast to the loocv used for seed-based methods, seeds and background genes were all scored using de-based methods.

the required parameters  were tuned to maximize the auc for each method . in figure 
3b, the method that aggregated weighted de levels of all surrounding genes  showed better performance than the ranking methods that relied on de alone  or the method that only considered the unweighted de levels of direct neighbors . the performance of dehkdr was comparable to that of the seed-based methods  in terms of auc. the roc curve also suggested that the known resistance gene can be found among the top 10% of the scored genes with probability higher than  <dig> . these results indicated that the known resistance genes were possibly surrounded by differentially expressed neighbors; therefore, de-based scoring methods can be applied to prioritize host resistance genes.

prioritizing candidate genes within mouse qtls
we applied seed- and de-based strategies to score and rank the candidate genes in  <dig> reported mouse qtls . we aimed to use a mouse model to inform human diseases; thus only conserved mouse genes with human orthologs were selected as candidates . for each qtl region, the candidate genes ranked at the top 10% by each method  were considered as prioritized genes for a specific method. the number of the genes prioritized using the three methods was shown as a venn diagram in figure 
4a . among the  <dig> genes,  <dig> were prioritized by at least one seed-based method  and a de-based method ; these genes were then termed as 2-strategy winners . to systematically collect supporting evidence for prioritized genes, we searched the following four types of studies that are related to host resistance or response to influenza virus infection : genetic association studies 
, qtl studies 
, rna interference  screenings 
, and microarray gene expression profiles 
. among the top-ranked genes,  <dig> of them were reporeted to harbor polymorphisms associated with the outcome related to influenza infection, including ace <cit> , hla-dqb <dig> <cit> , lta, tnf <cit> , psmb <dig> <cit> , eif2ak <dig> <cit> , c <dig> <cit> , il1rn <cit> , il12rb <dig> <cit> , mx <dig> <cit> , hla-a, and hla-b <cit> , which strongly support their roles as host genetic factors. mx <dig>  hla-a, and hla-b were the seeds used for the seed-based strategy; however, these genes, except for hla-a, were also identified using the de-based strategy. another  <dig> genes are considered as promising candidates responsible for host resistance by qtl studies or genes related to host response to influenza virus infection by rnai screenings or gene expression analysis . other literature supporting for the function of a gene in host resistance or response to influenza infection were listed in the last two columns of additional file 
2: table s <dig>  top-ranked genes supported by multiple types of studies , with a total of  <dig> genes, are listed in table 
 <dig>  among these genes, seven were identified by both seed- and de-based strategies; seven were specifically prioritized by the de-based strategy; the remaining genes were identified by the seed-based strategy . this observation suggested that the de-based strategy, using a completely different prioritization mechanism from seed-based strategy, can complement the seed-based strategy to identify promising disease genes.table  <dig> 
qtl studies for candidate genes collection


study*
toth et al.,  <dig> 
boon et al.,  <dig> 
nedelko et al.,  <dig> 
boivin et al.,  <dig> 
ferris et al.,  <dig> 

*the qtl regions were collected from genome-wide scans of phenotypes related to the outcome of influenza virus infection in inbred mouse.


†the genomic positions are based on the coordinates of ncbi build  <dig> 
an overview of the prioritized genes from mouse qtls.  a total of  <dig> genes  were ranked at the top 10% in each qtl region by the seed-  or de-based method . the numbers of winners identified by one, two, or all three methods are shown in a venn diagram. the winners identified by at least one of the seed-based methods and by the de-based method were termed 2-strategy winners. the remaining winners  were termed single-strategy winners.  2-strategy winners are better supported by the genetic or functional evidence compared with single-strategy winners. each set of winners was annotated by genetic evidence and functional evidence. the proportion of winners supported by one class of evidence or both was plotted as a stacked cylinder. one-tailed hypergeometric test was used to determine the enrichment significance of the supported winners  in a winner set, given all prioritized winners as background. p values were annotated above the corresponding cylinders.


prioritized genes supported by multiple types of studies



ifi35
ifi <dig> can be up-regulated upon exposure to interferon and modulate the cytokine signaling 
 <cit> . it also has antiviral properties against bovine foamy virus via inhibiting its replication 

eif2ak2

tnf

trim26

ifih1

tap2

folh1

hla-e

lst1

fam135a

pla2g7

tapbp

psmb9

il1rn

c5

daxx

hla-dqb1

mx1

hla-a

hla-b
*the following sources of supporting evidence were collected for each prioritized gene. genet-assoc: literature supporting for the gene’s genetic association with host resistance to influenza infection. qtl: candidate genes identified in the original qtl study with independent evidence . rnai: host genes important for influenza life circle identified through high-throughput rnai screens. expr: host genes robustly up- or down- regulated after influenza virus infection identified from multiple microarray experiments. detailed supporting evidence for each gene was listed in additional file 
2: table s <dig>  for more details of qtl, rnai and expression studies, see additional file 
2: table s <dig> 

to provide an overview of the functional significance of top-ranked genes from seed- and de-based strategies or both, we summarized the proportions of the winners supported by particular evidence in each winner set. the four types of supporting sources were catergorized into two classes of evidence: genetic evidence  and functional evidence . top-ranked genes specifically identified by the de-based strategy  or the seed-based strategy  or the winners prioritized by both strategies  were grouped into three winner sets and mapped to the genes supported by genetic evidence and functional evidence or both . we used the hypergeometric test to evaluate the statistical significance of observing a specific proportion of the supported winners in a winner set given all prioritized winners as background. a significant increase in the proportions of winners supported by all types of supporting sources was observed in the 2-strategy winner set  compared with the single-strategy winner set , with a hypergeometric p-value of  <dig> e– <dig>  the proportion of the de-only winners supported by genetic evidence  was similar to that of seed-only winners; by comparison, a higher percentage  of functional evidence was observed among the de-only winners compared with the seed-only winners . although microarray expression data were also used in our de-based strategy, they are independent of the data used in supporting evidence. this finding suggested that the de-based strategy can provide additional advantages in identifying promising candidates by fully exploiting the rich information from the microarray expression data.

pathways and biological functions revealed by top-ranked genes
the following gene sets deposited in the david knowledgebase 
 <cit>   were used in the functional enrichment analyses: biocarta , kegg , reactome , panther , and gene ontology fat . all of the gene sets enriched by each group of winners  at the nominal significance level of p <  <dig>  are shown in additional file 
 <dig>  figure 
 <dig> illustrates the pathways significantly enriched  by at least one winner group as a heatmap. the significant results of gene ontology  enrichment  are provided in additional file 
1: figure s <dig>  figure 
 <dig> further shows that the genes prioritized by seed-based methods were more enriched in immune-related pathways  compared with those prioritized by the de-based method. it may reflect the inherent bias of seed-based method: neighboring genes in the string network tended to share the same pathways, and seed genes were mostly immune related, so we expected to see winners of seed-based methods to enrich in general immune related pathways. alternatively, shared gene with other immune related processes can be interpreted as shared genetic causes  of immune related phenotypes. the genes prioritized by the de-based method specifically revealed two pathways: tnf/stress-related signaling  and signaling by gpcr . similar observation as pathway enrichment analysis could also be found in go enrichment analysis . in particular, tap complexes, tap-binding proteins , and mhc-i presentation  were highlighted with the introduction of the de-based prioritization. in addition, 2-strategy winners indicated the significance of several pathways: type i diabetes mellitus ; antigen processing and presentation ; tnfr <dig> signaling ; and apoptosis pathway .figure  <dig> 
pathways enriched by the prioritized genes. pathways  significantly enriched  by the winners of each method  or by 2-strategy winners are shown as a heatmap. the color intensity of each cell represents the fold enrichment of the corresponding winner group for each pathway. only the significantly enriched pathways for each winner group are shown.



the two pathways highlighted by 2-strategy winners, namely, tnfr <dig> and apoptosis signaling pathways , share three top-ranked genes: tnf, conserved helix-loop-helix ubiquitous kinase , and nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in b-cells inhibitor-epsilon . among these genes, the polymorphisms on tnf were reported to influence the severity of infection caused by h1n <dig> virus 
 <cit> . moreover, the genetic polymorphism on iκbϵ is associated with invasive pneumococcal disease 
 <cit> , a serious complication of seasonal and h1n <dig> influenza infection in  <dig> 
 <cit> . these observations have suggested that the two pathways containing these genes may exert an important function in influenza host genetics. the results of the expression analysis in a previous study 
 <cit>   further showed that tnf is significantly upregulated  in severely infected mice compared with mildly infected mice, suggesting that the tnf expression is associated with the severity of host outcomes after influenza infection. viral replication in lung epithelial cells is inhibited by tnf-α, and the virulence of h5n <dig> may be partly related to virus resistance to host tnf-α <cit> . as such, anti-tnf can be administered to treat influenza infections 
 <cit> . however, the effectiveness of the tnf treatment remains controversial 
 <cit> . the anti-tnf medicines demostrated efficacy in some patients but posed risk of increasing the severeity of influenza in others 
 <cit> . faustman, et al. <cit>  have summarized the functions of tnf-mediated tnfr <dig> signaling pathway in autoimmune diseases and provided some information that may shed light on this perplexing question. for instance, systemic toxicity observed in some cancer patients receiving tnf treatment may be attributed to the widespread expression of tnfr <dig> in contrast to the limited distribution of tnfr <dig>  tnf is a key signaling protein in the immune system 
 <cit>  and can bind to two structurally distinct membrane receptors on target cells; these receptors are tnfr <dig>  and tnfr <dig>  
 <cit> , for diverse functions. in particular, tnf depends on tnfr <dig> in apoptosis; tnf also depends on tnrf <dig> to perform t-cell survival-related functions. the basis for anti-tnf medicines is to reduce the concentration of free tnf that can bind to functional t cells and lower the concentrations of tnfr2; as a result, tnf-mediated inflammation is reduced. considering the relatively pervasive expression of tnfr <dig> compared with tnfr <dig>  reduced tnf expression may play an even greater role in affecting the tnfr1-mediated apoptosis signaling pathway. interestingly, the apoptosis signaling pathway was reported to play a role in ducks’ resistance  to h5n <dig> infection 
 <cit> . we assumed that the high dose of anti-tnf medicines may significantly influence the process of t cell apoptosis in addition to the tnfr <dig> signaling pathway; hence, the delicate balance between tnf pro-survival and apoptotic effects is disrupted 
 <cit> . a tnfr2-specific agonist therapeutic strategy, however, would be a valid alternative treatment, given the limited distribution of tnfr <dig> 
 <cit> . although few studies have been conducted to determine the exact functions of tnf in balancing the pro-survival effect and apoptosis during influenza infection, let alone the studies on investigating the possibility of applying tnfr2-specific antagonist in influenza treatment; we suggested that the relationship between apoptosis and tnfr <dig> signaling pathway would be a valuable topic in the field of influenza genetics study.figure  <dig> 
prioritized genes in apoptosis and tnfr <dig> signaling pathways. the graphical representation of the pathways is generated by the ingenuity pathway analysis  tool. the prioritized genes were highlighted by red dotted circles. the apoptosis and tnfr <dig> signaling pathways were extracted from the “canonical pathway” mappings. genes are color coded by their differential expression levels between resistance and susceptible mouse strains. in particular, the genes with higher expression in susceptible mice than in resistance mice were colored red; whereas those having lower expression in susceptible than resistance mice were shown in green. the symbols used to represent molecules and relationships were illustrated in the legend.



CONCLUSIONS
disease genes could be directly and efficiently predicted based on the prior knowledge of the biological processes involved in a particular disease. however, an alternative strategy, which could address the gaps left by the seed-based strategy, is needed when host genetics in resistance to influenza is partially understood and only a few known host resistance genes could be used as training set for the seed-based network strategy. in this study, we applied an integrated network analysis based on the known disease genes and de levels between resistant/susceptible mouse strains. the de-based strategy can overcome the inherent limitations of the seed-based strategy and complement the identification of promising candidates. in addition, the de-based strategy can also add the credibility of a candidate gene for its role in host resistance to influenza to some extent. a list of genes suggested by multiple types of studies was specifically prioritized using the de-based strategy. in our study, promising candidate genes supported by different types of evidence were significantly enriched in the 2-strategy winner set. furthermore, top-ranked genes from both strategies indicated the significance of several biological processes and molecular functions. these results will enhance our understanding of the pathways associated with host genetic factors.

