BACKGROUND
establishing robust gene delivery systems that result in efficient transfection of the pancreatic-beta cells is a prerequisite to the study of type  <dig> and  <dig> diabetes and may also represent a critical step toward clinical application. numerous report in the literature describe the application of gene over-expression and silencing in beta-cells derived cell-lines to study beta-cell function and the mechanisms behind type  <dig> and  <dig> diabetes pathologies. however, the findings in beta cell lines are not always congruous with results in primary islet beta cells, underlying the necessity of studying beta-cells in their native environment  <cit> .

modulation of gene expression in the context of intact pancreatic islets is particularly difficult because of their three dimensional structure , making physical access to the islet core difficult. islets are organized in organoid cell clusters of  <dig> to  <dig> cells made up of four types of endocrine secreting cells, the insulin containing β-cells, the glucagon containing α-cells, the somatostatin containing δ-cells and the pancreatic polypeptide-producing  cells  <cit> . over the past decades, numerous attempts have been made to transfect or transduce intact cells using lipid-mediated plasmid delivery  <cit> , adenovirus vectors  <cit> , lentivirus vectors  <cit>  and magnetic nanocarriers  <cit> . however, the major obstacle of these studies is that only cells at the periphery of islets become efficiently transfected or transduced.

in the present study, we herein demonstrate successful transfection of plasmids and sirna to whole suspension cultured rodent and human pancreatic islets. first, a mild digestion with accutase enzyme was found to be necessary to predistend  human islets and enhance accessibility to core cells. subsequently, rodent islets or predistended human islets were subjected to microporation in the presence of the plasmid of interest or sirna. using gfp vector and confocal microscopy, we have been able to show that most of the rodent and human islet cells  have been efficiently transfected. furthermore, we demonstrated that the viability and insulin secretory function of the human transfected islets were not altered in that they responded normally to a glucose challenging. as an example, efficacy of transfection and silencing in human islets has been confirmed using the recently identified diabetes-linked zinc transporter znt <dig>  taken together, our results demonstrated that microporation of rodent islets or human islets after predistension is a new robust tool to study gene functions in the context of whole islets.

RESULTS
demonstration of human core islet targeting after accutase treatment
to evaluate the transfection efficiency, confocal microscopy and estimation of islet viability and metabolism were used. adenoviruses -gfp or transfections were carried out as described in materials and methods. as shown in figure 1a, adenovirus was able to infect the intact human islets but egfp staining  revealed only surface expression, as previously reported  <cit> . in addition, we found a significant decrease in the atp level suggesting that adenoviral transduction altered islet viability .

electroporation  or microporation  technology demonstrated to be highly efficient in primary cells and cell lines that are very difficult to transfect  <cit> . as shown in figure 1b, mp of intact islet with egfp plasmid led to very low transfection efficiency . the same results were found for different electrical parameters . however, pretreatment with accutase greatly enhanced the number of gfp positive cells with a staining of peripheral cells as well as core islets . using the same parameters, 70% of mouse islet cells were found to be transfected observed by egfp staining without predistention step .

viability and human islet function were not impaired after accutase pretreatment and transfection
to determine whether gene transfer using accutase pretreatment and microporation altered islet viability, we first used trypan blue staining, atp level and dna fragmentation as indicators of viable cells. no significant differences were found in the viability, atp level  and apoptotic index  between control islets and  <dig> day post-transfected islets after accutase treatment.

islets regulate insulin release physiologically in response to glucose. to determine if mp of islets after accutase pretreatment maintains normal regulated insulin secretion, an essential requirement for any gene function studies, insulin content and glucose stimulated insulin secretion were determined on control and  <dig> day post-transfected islets. as shown in figure 2b and 2c, both insulin content and stimulation index were comparable between the two conditions.

these results demonstrated that accutase pretreatment combined with mp of islets does not affect the viability and function of human islets.

validation of gene transfer and silencing efficacy by quantitative rt-pcr
final validation of gene transfection and silencing efficacies was obtained by quantitative rt-pcr for zinc transporter znt <dig>  level of znt <dig> expression was first assessed on transfected human islets with egfp or egfp-znt <dig> plasmid. after two days, we observed a 500-fold increase in the level of znt <dig> mrna as compared to control . a significant > 70% reduction in endogenous znt <dig> mrna transcript levels was observed in human islets transfected with the siznt <dig>  as compared with control islets or transfected with scrambled sirna after  <dig> days.

taken together, these data demonstrate that accutase pretreatment and mp is an efficient method for gene expression and silencing in human islets.

discussion
as the beta-cell plays a central role in both type  <dig> and type  <dig> diabetes, the acquisition of tools to study beta cell function represents a key research for developing alternative therapies. one approach used was the development of beta-cells derived cell-lines. although they represent valuable tools for the study of molecular events underlying beta-cell function and dysfunction, the behavior of these cell lines does not perfectly mimic the beta-cell physiology  <cit> . to date, most islet transfections have been performed using viral vectors. however, limited loading capacity of genes has been observed in most of the cases  <cit> . in addition, our results suggested that adenovirus transduction perturbed human islet viability. liposomal gene carriers have often resulted in ineffective gene expression, islet toxicity at high liposome/plasmid ratios and poor insulin secretion after transfection  <cit> . the disadvantages of viral or liposomal vectors have triggered us to the development of alternative methods. first, to overcome the limited loading capacity of genes in human islets, we used mild digestion with accutase. by using this pretreatment, we achieved much higher transfection efficiency for all non-viral transfection procedure tested. efficient delivery in mouse islets did not require predistention and may be related to species differences in regard to cytoarchitecture  <cit> . in addition, we demonstrated that islet viability and function were not affected by this procedure. this distension technique was previously described in our lab to improve penetration of newport green, a fluorescent zinc chelator into the human islet core  <cit> . second, to overcome islet toxicity often observed during the transfection procedure, we used an electroroporation-based technology. we choose to test microporation technology, a capillary tip and pipette-based gene transfer technique which lacks the deleterious effects of cuvette-based electroporation methods including ph variation, temperature increase, turbulence, and generation of metal ions as described by nanoentek inc . in addition, it has been shown that this technology has beneficial features for transfecting slowly dividing cells such as primary cells  <cit> . by using the combine methodology of accutase pretreatment and microporation, we have been able to achieve high transfection efficiency without affecting human islet survival and function.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that transfection of human islets using accutase distention and microroporation can achieve efficient gene expression and silencing without impairing islet function and represents a suitable strategy to study gene function in human islets. microporation also works in rodent islets.

