BACKGROUND
efficient directed migration is assumed to rely on high directional persistence . indeed, in a stable chemotactic gradient, straight trajectories allow to reach the target in a minimal time. in contrast, lower directional persistence has been associated with poorly directed migration such as in the absence of chemotactic cues or in shallow chemotactic gradients  <cit> . for instance, the persistence of fibroblasts and dendritic cells has been shown to decrease in presence of a uniform concentration of chemoattractant when compared to migration of the same cells in a chemotactic gradient  <cit> . yet, cells undergoing directed migration in vivo often display trajectories with frequent direction changes and low persistence compared to directed migration in culture . such trajectories have been described as biased random walks or as series of runs and tumbles, i.e., alternating phases with high and low directional persistence . in zebrafish primordial germ cells, whose chemotactic migration during development can be described as a succession of run and tumbles, low persistence and frequent direction changes associated with tumbling have been proposed to fine-tune the migration of these cells, as they progress to intermediate targets during development  <cit> . however, the cellular mechanisms controlling directional persistence during animal cell migration in vivo are poorly understood, and the functional importance of a proper control of this parameter remains elusive.

here, we investigate the cellular control and function of directional persistence during cell migration in vivo. we use zebrafish early mesendoderm progenitor cells, which, during early gastrulation, predominantly migrate as single cells and display frequent direction changes  <cit> . we have previously shown that mesendoderm progenitors can form different protrusion types, including blebs and actin-polymerization driven ones, and that enhancing the formation of blebs decreases migration directional persistence  <cit> . therefore, we reasoned that mesendoderm progenitors represented a good model for investigating migration directionality in vivo.

we first show, using an unbiased trajectory analysis algorithm, that lateral progenitors migrating towards the forming body axis alternate run and tumbling phases. we then employ a transplantation assay to investigate how protrusion formation relates to migration directionality during single cell migration of progenitor cells. using custom-made cell segmentation and protrusion detection software, we show that run phases correlate with the formation of directed actin-rich protrusions, while enhanced blebbing is observed during tumbles. changing the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions changes the ratio of tumbling to run times. strikingly, we observe that both decreasing and increasing the ratio of tumbling to run times increase cell dispersion during migration, indicative of reduced migration precision. a theoretical model quantitatively recapitulating the characteristics of progenitor cell migration indicates that an optimal tumbling-to-run ratio enhances migration precision in a changing environment. together, our experiments and model suggest that the precision of mesendoderm progenitor cell migration depends on the ratio of tumbling to run times, and that this ratio is controlled by adjusting the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions formed by these cells.

RESULTS
zebrafish lateral mesendoderm progenitors display run-and-tumbling during directed migration
in order to investigate how migration directionality is determined in zebrafish mesendoderm progenitors, we transplanted mesendodermal cells , to induce mesendoderm cell fate  <cit> ) injected with a fluorescent histone in a wild type  host . the transplanted cells displayed mostly single cell migration, with only sporadic interaction with neighboring mesendoderm progenitors, for at least 3 hours following transplantation , as previously reported  <cit> . cell nuclei were tracked for over 2 hours during mid gastrulation stages , starting 30 min to 1 hour post-transplantation) . we found that the trajectories of transplanted mesendoderm progenitors displayed a mean persistence, i.e., ratio of the net displacement to cell trajectory length, of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , n =  <dig> cells), lower than the typical persistence values observed during chemotaxis in vitro  <cit> . an unbiased analysis of the trajectories’ cell scaled speed  and alignment index  revealed that the cells displayed a multi-modal behavior that can be described as alternating phases of relatively straight migration  and phases of slowed and poorly directed movement . accordingly, the cell trajectories could be divided into run and tumble phases, where the cut-off between phases was determined automatically, based on a quantitative analysis of the local persistence and speed of the cells . this automated analysis yielded an average ratio of tumbling to run times in mesendodermal progenitors of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the relatively large sd reflects the fact that both run and tumble times displayed exponential distributions, which are characterized by sds of the order of the mean . instantaneous cell speed, measured with a  <dig>  min time interval, was approximately  <dig>  times higher during run phases compared to tumble phases . finally, tumbles usually resulted in a significant direction change, with an average angle between successive runs of 56 ±  <dig> degrees .fig.  <dig> mesendodermal cells display runs and tumbles during directed migration. a schematic of the single cell transplantation experiments where mesendoderm progenitor cells are transplanted into a wt or mzoep host. b lateral view of a host embryo  at 60 % epiboly  with an example track of a control  mesendoderm cell transplanted into the lateral germ ring margin at 50 % epiboly . scale bar = 50 μm. c two-dimensional probability density of the alignment index  and scaled speed , p, calculated for mesendodermal cells transplanted into wt hosts . the blue dashed line shows the linear fit to the maximum values of p for a. the red dashed line is the line, perpendicular to the maximum, defining the threshold above which a portion of a trajectory is considered to be a run phase . the intersection point is at a =  <dig> , corresponding to the local minimum between the global maximum and the nearest local maximum of p along the maximum line . d one-dimensional cross-section of p along the maximum line, s*. e instantaneous speed of single mesendoderm cells transplanted into wt and mzoep hosts during run and tumble phases. n =  <dig> runs and  <dig> tumbles in mzoep hosts  and  <dig> runs and  <dig> tumbles in wt hosts . statistical significance by t-test. f exemplary three-dimensional cell trajectory displaying run  and tumbling phases . the points represent cell positions over time. scale bar = 50 μm. g two-dimensional probability density p, calculated for mesendodermal cells transplanted into mzoep hosts . lines as in c. the intersection point is at a =  <dig> . h like “d” for probability density in “g”



even though lateral progenitors display mostly single cell migration in early gastrulation  <cit> , they still transiently interact with neighboring mesendoderm progenitors, which could influence their trajectories. to investigate the migration of these cells in an in vivo environment while avoiding any influence of transient contacts with neighboring cells, we transplanted single mesendoderm cells, into the lateral side of maternal zygotic oep  mutant embryos, which lack mesendoderm progenitors  <cit> . transplanted cells display directed migration between the yolk and the overlying ectoderm towards the dorsal side of the embryo, as their wt counterparts, but do not have neighboring cells to interact with  <cit> . thus, they represent a good model system for the study of single cell migration in a complex in vivo environment. we acquired trajectories of mesendoderm progenitors injected with a fluorescent histone transplanted into mzoep hosts and applied the same automated analysis as described above to their trajectories. we found that, similarly to progenitors transplanted into wt hosts, the cells displayed multi-modal trajectories that can be described as successions of run and tumble phases . similar to progenitors migrating in wt hosts, the average ratio of tumbling to run times was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , instantaneous cell speed was approximately  <dig>  times higher during run phases compared to tumble phases , and tumbles resulted in a significant direction change, with an average angle between successive runs of 68 ±  <dig> degrees .

taken together, our analysis indicates that zebrafish mesendoderm progenitors alternate phases of directed migration  and reorientation events  during directed migration in vivo.

protrusion formation during run and tumbling phases
we have previously observed that enhancing bleb formation while reducing actin-rich protrusions in mesendoderm progenitors decreases the directional persistence of their migration  <cit> . we thus asked how the formation of different protrusion types relates to the run-and-tumbling behavior of mesendoderm progenitor cells. we acquired 10–30 min high-resolution two-photon microscopy movies of transplanted mesendoderm cells injected with alexa594-dextran to mark the cytoplasm and expressing lifeact-gfp  <cit>  to follow filamentous actin . we observed that, similarly to collectively migrating prechordal plate cells  <cit> , single mesendoderm progenitors formed blebs  and actin-rich protrusions  .fig.  <dig> analysis of protrusion orientation during single mesendoderm cell migration. a cell migration and protrusion formation analysis procedure, from single mesendoderm cell transplantation to automatic protrusion analyzer . b left: control cells displaying blebs  and actin-rich protrusions . right: corresponding cell outlines after apa processing, where the different protrusion types and the centers of mass  of cells and protrusions have been labeled. scale bar = 10 μm. c exemplary cell trajectory displaying unit vectors pointing from the cell com to the blebs com. blebs are classified as forming towards the front if they form in the local direction of cell displacement. d time lapse of a control mesendoderm cell transplanted in an mzoep host displaying run and tumbles during migration. white line: trajectory of the com of the cell; white arrowheads: actin-rich protrusion; black arrowheads: blebs. scale bar = 10 μm. time in min:sec. e frequency ratio of the formation of blebs and actin-rich protrusions during tumble versus run phases. the data points colored in blue correspond to cells where the reorientation events are associated with the formation of a new actin-rich protrusion at the leading edge. note that the bleb frequency also includes the false negatives not detected by apa . f orientation of actin-rich protrusion and bleb formation in run and tumble phases. arbitrary units  are used for actin-rich protrusions as they are weighted with the total intensity of the lifeact signal. the arrows below the diagrams indicate the local direction of cell migration. the overall orientation of each protrusion type was quantified using the polar order parameter . mean ± sem. in b and d cells express lifeact-gfp  and dextran-alexa  <dig> . number of cells in  =  <dig>  number of blebs in  =  <dig>  statistical significance by one-sided t-test  or by non-overlapping sem of the pop  



to analyze the orientation of each protrusion type with respect to the direction of cell migration, we developed a new software package for three-dimensional  cell and protrusion segmentation and automated detection and identification of individual protrusions , fig. 2a–c and additional file 4: figure s2). protrusion identification and classification is based on detection of changes in cell surface curvature and morphological differences between protrusion types. apa identifies two types of protrusions: blebs and actin-rich protrusions . actin-rich protrusions are distinguished from blebs by the presence of actin  in all phases of their expansion , and by a higher curvature than blebs . using apa, we could monitor the center of mass of the cells and each protrusion formed, as well as the intensity of actin in actin-rich protrusions during 3d migration . as lamellipodia size and actin content have been shown to correlate with migration speed  <cit> , we analyzed the angle distribution of actin-rich protrusions weighted with the total intensity of the lifeact signal in the protrusion. thus, this weighted distribution mostly reflects the orientation of larger actin-rich protrusions. the overall orientation of a specific protrusion type was quantified using the polar order parameter . the pop magnitude indicates how sharply focused the protrusion angle distribution is .

we then used these automated analysis tools to relate protrusion formation to mesendoderm progenitors’ run-and-tumbling behavior. run-and-tumbling was evident in  <dig> out of  <dig> two-photon high-resolution timelapses ; in the remaining timelapses, cells displayed directed motion only, likely because the shorter  high-resolution movies necessary for protrusion analysis are sometimes too short to capture the tumbling behavior. analysis of the timelapses where run-and-tumbling could be quantified showed that, during run phases, mesendoderm cells formed actin-rich protrusions in the direction of migration  and poorly oriented blebs, as evidenced by the clear difference in pop between the two protrusion types , fig. 2f). in contrast, tumble phases were associated with the formation of an increased number of randomly oriented blebs  and a decrease in the focus of actin-rich protrusion formation . in about 15 % of the tumble events, less blebbing was observed and a change in direction was achieved by the formation of a new leading edge actin-rich protrusion . taken together, our observations suggest that actin-rich protrusions may drive directed migration of mesendoderm progenitors whereas blebs mainly contribute to cell re-orientation.

modulating the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions changes the ratio of tumbling to run times without affecting protrusion orientation
to test whether the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions formed by mesendoderm progenitors determines their run-and-tumbling behavior, we aimed to change the frequency of bleb formation. we increased bleb formation by reducing membrane-to-cortex attachment using a morpholino  against ezrin  <cit> , a protein that binds the actin cortex to the plasma membrane. consistent with our previous observations in the prechordal plate  <cit> , we found that single transplanted mesendoderm cells with reduced ezrin activity showed a strong increase in the frequency and size of blebs and a reduction in actin-rich protrusions . we previously showed that enhancing bleb formation by reducing ezrin activity  significantly reduces migration directional persistence, leading to less straight cell migration tracks in transplanted mesendoderm cells  <cit> . we thus asked whether the decrease in directional persistence in ezrin-mo cells was due to increased tumbling. alternatively, reduced directional persistence could result from a change in the focus of protrusion expansion, as ezrin depletion affects the entire cell and could affect overall cell polarity. to distinguish between these two possibilities, we analyzed protrusion orientation in ezrin morphant cells. we observed that the angle distributions of blebs and actin-rich protrusions were not affected by ezrin depletion . we then analyzed the trajectories of transplanted progenitor cells during mid gastrulation stages  for control cells and ezrin morphant cells. we found that enhanced bleb formation in ezrin morphant mesendoderm progenitors significantly increased the ratio of the time spent tumbling to the time spent in run phases . this increase was due to a decrease in the duration of run phases , while the duration of individual tumble phases was not significantly changed .fig.  <dig> protrusion formation and orientation in ezrin morphant mesendoderm cells. a exemplary ezrin-mo-injected mesendoderm cells displaying blebs . cells express lifeact-gfp  and dextran-alexa  <dig> . scale bar = 10 μm. b, c quantification of bleb formation frequency  and bleb size at maximal expansion normalized to cell size  in control and ezrin-mo-injected mesendoderm cells. note that bleb frequency also includes the false negatives not detected by apa . d orientation of actin-rich protrusion formation in ezrin-mo-injected cells with respect to the local direction of migration. the arrows below the diagrams indicate the direction of migration. the orientation of actin-rich protrusions was weighted by their actin content  to account for size differences between protrusions, their number is thus given in arbitrary units. pop: mean ± sem of the magnitude of the polar order parameter. e ratio of tumbling to run times in migrating single lateral ezrin morphant mesendoderm cells . cells were tracked during the approximately first 2 hours after transplantation. the ratio was normalized to transplanted control cells in the same embryo  to account for experimental variability between different embryos. number of analyzed cells in  =  <dig> for control and  <dig> for ezrin-mo;  =  <dig> for ezrin-mo. number of blebs in  =  <dig> for control and  <dig> for ezrin-mo. statistical significance by mann–whitney test , by non-overlapping sem of the pop   or by one-sided t-test 



we next sought to investigate how increasing the formation of actin-rich protrusions at the expense of blebs affects the run-and-tumbling behavior of mesendoderm progenitors. to this end, we increased membrane-to-cortex attachment by expressing a constitutively active version of ezrin . caezrin-expressing transplanted single mesendoderm cells showed a strong decrease in blebbing activity and an increase in formation of actin-rich protrusions . we then investigated how expression of caezrin affected the migratory trajectories of single mesendoderm progenitors transplanted into mzoep hosts from mid-to-late gastrulation stages . we observed that single caezrin expressing mesendoderm progenitors showed an increase in migration directional persistence and net speed, while their instantaneous speed remained unchanged compared to co-transplanted control cells . we first checked whether this increase in directional persistence could result from an overall increase in the focus of protrusion formation upon expression of caezrin. we found that the angle distribution of actin-rich protrusion formation was less focused in caezrin-expressing cells than in control cells, indicating that the observed increase in cell directional persistence does not result from more focused actin-rich protrusions . bleb formation was rarely observed and only a few events could be analyzed . we then investigated whether expression of caezrin affected the run-and-tumbling behavior of mesendoderm progenitors, and found that the ratio of tumbling to run times was decreased in progenitors expressing caezrin . this decrease was due to an increase in the duration of run phases , while the duration of individual tumble phases was not significantly affected . together, these observations suggest that the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions controls the directional persistence of cell migration in mesendoderm progenitors by modulating the ratio of tumbling to run times.fig.  <dig> protrusion formation and migration directionality in mesendoderm cells expressing caezrin. a exemplary actin-rich protrusion  and bleb  in caezrin-expressing cells. cells express lifeact-gfp  and dextran-alexa  <dig> . scale bar = 10 μm. b, c quantification of bleb size at maximum expansion normalized to the cell size  and bleb formation frequency . note that bleb frequency also includes the false negatives not detected by apa . d quantification of the frequency of formation of actin-rich protrusions. e lateral view of a mzoep mutant embryo  at 60 % epiboly  with example tracks of control  and caezrin-expressing mesendoderm cells  transplanted into the lateral germ ring margin at 50 % epiboly . tracking time = 110 min. scale bar = 50 μm. f ratio of instantaneous speed, directional persistence, and net speed of transplanted caezrin-expressing single lateral mesendoderm cells. g orientation of actin-rich protrusion formation in control and caezrin cells. the arrows below the diagrams indicate the local direction of migration. pop: mean ± sem. h ratio of tumbling to run times in migrating single lateral mesendoderm cells expressing caezrin. cells were tracked during the approximately first 2 hours after transplantation. in f and h, values are ratio relative to transplanted control cells in the same embryo  to account for experimental variability between different embryos . in d and g, arbitrary units  are used as actin-rich protrusions weighted with the total intensity of the lifeact signal in the protrusion. number of blebs  =  <dig> for control and  <dig> for caezrin. number of cells in c, d, and g =  <dig> for control and  <dig> for caezrin;  =  <dig> and  =  <dig> caezrin compared to control. statistical significance by mann–whitney test , one-sided t-test , or by non-overlapping sem of the pop  



modulating the ratio of tumbling to run times affects migration precision
frequent direction changes have been proposed to enhance the precision of cell migration in complex environments, particularly during directed migration where the chemotactic target is moving or changing over time as might be the case during zebrafish gastrulation  <cit> . indeed, considering that mesendoderm cells migrate dorsally and vegetally towards the forming body axis, it is commonly believed that they follow a chemotactic signal from the epiboly front. we thus asked whether changing directional persistence affects the overall precision of mesendoderm progenitor migration. we assessed the precision of cell migration by quantifying the spatial dispersion after approximately 2 hours of migration of cells that were co-transplanted at the same location at 50 % epiboly, for cells with different levels of ezrin activity. interestingly, we found that both the cells displaying enhanced blebbing and tumbling, and the cells displaying enhanced formation of actin-rich protrusions and running, had a significantly higher spatial dispersion than control cells . these observations suggest that both decreasing and increasing the ratio of tumbling to run times in mesendoderm progenitors decreases the precision of cell migration.fig.  <dig> modulating the ratio of tumbling to run times affects migration precision. a positional variance of caezrin-expressing and ezrin-mo cells after approximately 2 hours of migration. values are the ratio relative to transplanted control cells in the same embryo  to account for experimental variability between different embryos. b schematic of chemotactic run-and-tumble migration: a cell  migrates towards a moving target  via runs and tumbles of duration τr and τt, respectively. after each tumble, the cell redirects towards the target. the target moves with a velocity v
target, and d is the initial cell-target distance. we evaluate the distance to the target after, te =  <dig>  h. simulation results for migration precision versus τr/τr, exp; τr is the run time in the model and τr, exp is the τr value extracted from fitting the model to experiments. other parameters were chosen based on experimental measurements . each point results from  <dig> simulations. blue curve ): mean target distance at time t
e. red curve: spatial dispersion of cells at t
e. the blue shaded region corresponds to the range of τr, compatible with experimental observations . c two-dimensional probability density of alignment and scaled speed, p, obtained from simulation of n =  <dig> model cells using parameters matching experimental data . the blue dashed line shows the linear fit to the maximum values of p for a. the red dashed line is the line, perpendicular to the maximum, defining the threshold above which a portion of a trajectory is considered to be a run phase. d one-dimensional cross-section of p along the maximum line from simulated cell trajectories in blue  and from experimental trajectories of controls transplanted into mzoep hosts in black . red dashed line as in c. e speed distributions p during runs and tumbles. comparison of experimental controls transplanted into mzoep hosts  and model results  for a single simulation run using parameters in additional file 1: table s1



to test whether the ratio of tumbling to run times observed in mesendoderm progenitors might indeed optimize migration precision, we developed a stochastic model of cells migrating towards a target moving at constant speed. we represented the moving cells by active brownian particles randomly switching between run and tumble phases . during run phases cells perform directed active brownian motion with stochastic speed and a direction fluctuating around a mean value oriented towards the target with a detection error. during tumble phases cells are randomly moving without any preferred direction. we constrained the model parameters by comparing characteristic observables of motion obtained from simulated tracks  to experimental measurements. specifically, several parameters describing cell velocity, as well as run and tumble durations were compared between simulations and experiments. a parameter search yielded a set of parameters very accurately accounting for measured experimental values in control mesendodermal cells . we found that, with this selected set of parameters, the combined 2d distribution of alignment and cell speed, and the probability distribution of cell speeds during run and tumble phases were well captured by the simulations without further fitting . these observations indicate that the numerical model accurately captures the aspects of cell migration relevant to the observed progenitor trajectories.

using the estimated parameters, we then systematically varied the run time of the model cells and assessed the precision of cell migration by computing the distance to target and the dispersion of the cell population at the end of the experiment . we found that the distance to target decreased as a function of the run time, indicating that longer runs are more favorable for overall cell velocity. strikingly, cell dispersion showed a clear minimum around the mean run time measured for control mesendoderm progenitors. this prediction is consistent with the increased cell dispersion measured for caezrin and ezrin-mo cells , which display run times longer and shorter than control cells, respectively. taken together, our experiments and model thus indicate that the ratio of tumbling to run times is a critical factor controlling the precision of cell migration in vivo.

discussion
low directional persistence is often thought to be a consequence of a shallow chemotactic gradient resulting in the formation of unfocused protrusions  <cit> . here, we show that the directional persistence of zebrafish mesendoderm progenitors migrating in vivo does not depend on the directional focus of protrusion formation, but rather is determined by the ratio of persistent run phases to tumble phases associated with cell reorientation. interestingly, progenitor cells appear to control the ratio of tumbling to run times by adjusting the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions formed during migration. blebs have previously been implicated in mediating directed migration of primordial germ cells during zebrafish embryogenesis  <cit> , and of a number of cancer lines in culture and in vivo  <cit> . in zebrafish primordial germ cells, bleb growth appears to expand the cell body forward, and subsequent anchoring of the bleb neck to the substrate by adhesive contacts to surrounding cells is thought to drive cell migration  <cit> . our finding that blebs in mesendoderm progenitor cells are predominantly associated with tumbling reorientation events suggests that, in these cells, blebs are primarily used for exploring the environment, whereas actin-rich protrusions drive directed migration during run phases. specifically, undirected bleb formation, as observed during tumble phases, induces displacement of the cell towards random directions and might thus provide a stochastic way of exploring the environment. this difference in bleb function between primordial germ cells and mesendoderm cells may be due to the fact that mesendoderm progenitors form directed actin-rich protrusions, whereas primordial germ cell migration appears to rely exclusively on blebs  <cit> .

the run and tumbling behavior of control mesendoderm progenitors appears highly similar for cells in wt and in mzoep hosts. furthermore, our experiments indicate that the ratio of run and tumbling can be modulated in single transplanted cells by tuning the amount of ezrin activity. to account for experimental variability between different embryos, cells with increased or decreased ezrin activity were always co-transplanted with control cells in the same mzoep embryo  . these observations indicate that run and tumbling is largely a cell autonomous behavior. nonetheless, it remains to be investigated whether extracellular factors, such as the distribution, organization and nature of extracellular matrix or the proximity to the chemotactic signal followed by the cells, influence run and/or tumbling in zebrafish mesendoderm progenitors.

run-and-tumbling is a common feature of bacterial chemotaxis, where it is a strategy for efficient gradient sensing  <cit> , but has also been observed in a variety of eukaryotic motile cells, including primordial germ cells  <cit> , chlamydomonas  <cit> , and mammary epithelial cells  <cit> . bacteria are too small to accurately measure a chemoattractant gradient without moving, and use temporal comparisons instead, leading to a biased random walk with longer run phases in the direction of the chemotactic gradient. animal cells are large enough to polarize in a gradient without motion  <cit>  and thus alternating run and tumbling phases during migration is likely to serve a different function than in bacterial chemotaxis. it has been speculated that tumble-associated direction changes might increase the precision of chemotactic cell migration in animal cells  <cit> . our observation that changing the ratio of tumbling to run times impairs the focus of cell migration provides direct experimental evidence supporting this hypothesis. indeed, both increasing and decreasing the tumbling to run ratio by modulating the bleb-to-actin-rich protrusion ratio led to impaired cell migration precision . distinct molecular pathways regulate the formation of blebs and actin-rich protrusions  <cit> , suggesting that the ratio between the two protrusion types could be readily tuned. such a sub-specialization of protrusion function would allow cells to easily modulate the frequency of re-orientation events during migration in complex and changing environments. our theoretical model, which recapitulated key features of mesendoderm progenitor migration, predicts that an optimal tumble to run ratio enhances migration precision. indeed, too long runs increase cell dispersion by overly amplifying initial errors in migration direction, whereas too short runs increases cell dispersion because frequent direction changes enhance heterogeneity in direction between cells. furthermore, it is possible that alternating run and tumbles enhances the robustness of migration to noise in, for example, lamellipodium orientation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our experiments and model indicate that mesendoderm progenitors may be operating close to an optimum tumbling to run ratio for precise migration in the in vivo context of the developing zebrafish embryo. taken together, our data suggest that, by adjusting the proportion of blebs to actin-rich protrusions, mesendoderm cells modulate the ratio of run to tumbling times, and thereby control the precision of their migration. a number of cell types have been reported to combine blebs and actin-rich protrusions during migration . future studies will have to investigate whether blebs and actin-rich protrusions also have distinct functions in these cells types.

