BACKGROUND
sex chromosomes have originated independently from a pair of autosomes in a variety of species  <cit> . a striking feature shared by different systems is a degenerate, gene-poor y/w chromosome lacking meiotic recombination. for example, the human y chromosome only contains  <dig> unique protein-coding genes compared to over  <dig> genes present on the x  <cit> . this raises the fundamental yet unresolved question of how and why the y chromosome is degenerating after recombination is inhibited with its former homolog, the x. the y chromosomes of most species, however, are too ancient to address this question, since only few traces of their evolutionary origin or of the processes that drove their degeneration remain . an alternative solution is to study sex chromosomes  of very recent origin  <cit> .

drosophila albomicans  has an extremely young neo-sex chromosome system created by the fusion of a pair of autosomes  to the ancient sex chromosomes  <cit> . this karyotype resembles the formation of the human sex chromosomes, which were also created by a sex chromosome-autosome fusion  <cit> . since male flies have achiasmate meiosis  <cit> , the y-linked autosome  cannot recombine with its homolog and thus evolves like a 'true' y. similarly, the x-linked autosome  co-segregates with the 'true' x, and spends more time in females than males. the species' closest relative, d. nasuta , lacks this fusion and diverged from d. albomicans only about  <dig>  million years  ago  <cit> , therefore setting an upper limit to the age of the neo-sex chromosome pair. compared to similar systems in other drosophila species  <cit> , the neo-sex chromosome of d. albomicans is the youngest reported to date and comprises almost 40% of the genome. nearly five thousand active, newly sex-linked protein-coding genes can be used to decipher the very early evolution of sex chromosomes, and should allow us to identify signatures of selective forces of sex chromosome differentiation that have long been eroded on well-studied ancient sex chromosomes  <cit> .

d. albomicans also contains recently-derived b chromosomes affecting its fertility which are absent from d. nasuta, thereby providing a rare opportunity to study the origin and functional significance of these bizarre chromosomes . b chromosomes are dispensable chromosomal elements exhibiting non-mendelian inheritance and have been widely reported in over  <dig> animal and plant taxa, but still remain an evolutionary mystery ever since their first discovery over a century ago  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that b chromosomes have contributed to the origin of the drosophila y chromosome  <cit> . recent studies show that, in some species, b chromosomes play an important role at sex determination or accounting for antibiotic resistance and pathogenicity  <cit> . these results are in contrast to the classic view of b chromosomes as 'selfish-elements' consisting mostly of heterochromatic sequences and few functional genes. interestingly, d. albomicans strains with 1- <dig> b's produce significantly more offspring than those with either no or more than two bs  <cit> . additionally, the frequency of b chromosomes in natural populations of d. albomicans shows a clear south to north geographic cline  <cit> . these observations suggest that some form of selection is involved in maintaining b chromosomes within the population  <cit> .

given the potential of d. albomicans to provide insights into these long-standing biological conundrums, we sequenced the whole genome of d. albomicans using illumina's massively parallel sequencing technology. a lack of available genomes for any species in the d. immigrans group, to which d. albomicans belongs, makes a genome assembly based on reference-guided re-sequencing unfeasible. we therefore carried out a strategy combining both de novo assembly of short reads and chromosomal mapping based on a multi-species comparisons. the analysis of the resulting genome sequence allows us to address several questions including: how and to what extent has the d. albomicans neo-y diverged from the neo-x within only  <dig>  my? does the neo-y show any signs of degeneration after such a short time scale? how did the b chromosomes originate, and can we identify any functional sequences? finally, we explore the possibility of a direct link between the origination of the neo-sex chromosomes and b chromosomes, since both systems are absent from all species closely related to d. albomicans  <cit> .

RESULTS
sequencing, assembly and annotation of the d. albomicans genome
we collected males from an isofemale strain containing 1- <dig> b chromosomes without prior purging of their polymorphisms, since inbreeding causes loss of b chromosomes. we further inbred the same strain to remove the b's, and then collected females lacking neo-y and b chromosomes so that they can be identified by their male-specificity. we sequenced the males to high coverage  and females to moderate coverage . reads from the inbred females were used to assemble contigs . male data was only used for connecting the contigs into longer scaffolds without introducing any reads from the highly heterochromatic y chromosome and possible divergent regions between the neo-sex chromosomes into the assembly . in fact, despite having a much deeper sequencing coverage, the draft genome assembly using male reads alone has a smaller n <dig> length  than that derived from female reads . we obtained  <dig> mb of male-specific non-redundant sequences which lack any significant homologies to the female genome and any publicly available sequences . these regions are candidate b-linked sequences, but could also represent highly divergent regions on the y/neo-y chromosome, or polymorphic regions only present in the less inbred male population.

* there are three versions of initial assemblies: one produced using only male reads, one using only female reads, and both of these assemblies were used to extract candidate b- or neo-y linked sequences. the reference assembly was produced using all the female reads and part of the male reads, using parameters to maximize the n <dig> statistics. the reference assembly was subjected to further optimization  by comparative analysis with other drosophila genomes and gene annotations. # n50: the length l where 50% of all nucleotides in the assembly are contained in contigs/scaffolds of size ≥ l.

the availability of  <dig> drosophila genomes helps us to optimize the assembly. we inferred that conserved syntenic protein-coding gene pairs whose order and orientation are the same among all the  <dig> drosophila genomes should have experienced few rearrangements in the d. albomicans genome. we then collected scaffolds that aligned to the same gene or to regions consisting of conserved syntenic gene pairs  <cit> , and merged  <dig>  scaffolds into  <dig> super-scaffolds. the final female reference genome assembly of d. albomicans has an improved scaffold n <dig> from  <dig>  kb to  <dig>  kb . to validate the assembly accuracy, we designed primer pairs for  <dig> fragments randomly selected throughout the genome, about half of which span at least one gap region.  <dig> pairs  successfully produced unique pcr products with expected lengths, with the remaining 4% all spanning a gap region that may be too long to be amplified. we also aligned the assembly against  <dig> est sequences derived from a male of another strain of d. albomicans  <cit> , and  <dig> % of ests aligned to the genome assembly with an overall identity of  <dig> %. contamination is low: only  <dig> scaffolds, comprising  <dig> kb  showed evidence for human or bacterial sources. these results show that we have produced a high-quality draft assembly of the d. albomicans genome.

we annotated  <dig>  protein-coding genes on non-b scaffolds and  <dig> genes in male-specific scaffolds , using both de novo gene prediction and homology-based methods. we found that  <dig> % of the d. albomicans genome consists of repetitive elements , suggesting that our short-read assembly has captured a sizeable fraction of repeat sequences. finally, previous analysis of  <dig> drosophila genomes has shown that 95% of genes exhibit no movement between chromosome arms  across species  <cit> . this allowed us to assign  <dig>   d. albomicans protein-coding genes or  <dig> scaffolds  into chromosome arms based on their alignments with the d. virilis genome.

genomic divergence between the neo-sex chromosomes
to investigate the divergence between the neo-sex chromosomes after recombination ceased, we mapped male and female reads separately to the female genome and characterized the level of variation for each chromosome. snp and short indel  densities calculated from female reads against the neo-x reference reflect segregating variation among different neo-x chromosomes, whereas those derived from the less inbred males reflect both neo-x/y divergence and segregating variation among different neo-x chromosomes. sequence coverage is similar across chromosomal arms and thus should not bias comparisons across chromosomes .

females generally show lower levels of variation relative to males , consistent with the more severe inbreeding of the females used for sequencing. the neo-x reveals a similarly low level of snp density as the ancient x chromosome relative to autosomes, either due to the bottleneck effect of inbreeding or very recent selective sweeps  <cit> . in contrast, snp density of the neo-sex chromosome calculated from male data is much higher than that of the ancient x . elevated snp density levels on the neo-sex chromosomes of males can mainly be attributed to sequence divergence between the neo-x and neo-y chromosome. indeed, the ratio of snp density in males versus females is significantly higher for the neo-sex chromosomes  relative to the ancient x and the autosomes . fixed neo-x/neo-y differences are necessarily present in the male reads pool at a roughly 1: <dig> ratio whereas segregating variation on either chromosome may be found at a variety of frequencies. consistent with many neo-sex-linked snps in males reflecting fixed differences between the neo-x and neo-y alleles, the fraction and density of snps present at a ratio around  <dig> is the highest on the neo-sex chromosomes in males . thus, these data demonstrate that the neo-x/neo-y chromosome pair has already started to diverge within only  <dig>  my. however, the non-recombining fourth chromosome shows similarly increased levels of diversity in males relative to females, indicating that some sampling effects on chromosome-specific differences in levels of diversity between the sexes cannot be ruled out. interestingly, although both neo-x polymorphisms and neo-x/neo-y divergence contribute to the overall snp density of the neo-sex chromosomes in males, it is still lower than that of autosome  <dig> . this could be explained by longer coalescent times for autosomes than neo-sex chromosomes, or by demographic factors or selective sweeps reducing neo-x diversity as mentioned above. also, excessive inversion polymorphisms of autosome  <dig>  could result in a higher overall snp density  <cit> . it will be of great interest to study patterns of diversity of the various chromosomes in more detail using a larger population sample.

* snp density  was calculated using exon or intron regions of scaffolds mapping to the respective chromosomes, and shown as snp density in male/snp density in female, and their ratio in parentheses.

# male-specific putative pseudogenes were identified by premature stop codons, frameshifts or mutations at start codons. shown are the pseudogene number/total mapped genes on each chromosome.

§ shown are nonsynonymous substitutions calculated in male/female. sd.: standard deviation.

|| shown are proportions of tandem duplications among all the sv events for each chromosome identified in male/female.

†due to the low number of genes on chr <dig>  inferences on this chromosome may be strongly affected by sampling effects.

early degeneration of neo-y coding regions
the divergence between the neo-x and neo-y is likely caused by the accumulation of deleterious mutations on the neo-y after the inhibition of homologous recombination  <cit> . to investigate this process, we compared patterns of snp densities in the coding regions of neo-x- and neo-y-linked sequences. we found that the male to female ratio of exonic snp density is higher on neo-sex chromosomes than on any other chromosome , suggesting an excess of mutations accumulating in coding regions of neo-y-linked genes. to evaluate their deleterious effects, we characterized putative pseudogenes on the neo-y chromosome whose coding regions contain premature stop codons or frame-shift mutations. we first identified ancestral pseudogenes  by mapping female reads to the reference genome and keeping only those genes that were not found to be pseudogenized in the female data. after applying the same procedure to all chromosomes, we identified a total of  <dig> putative pseudogenes that mapped to the neo-sex chromosome in males, a significantly higher fraction than on any other chromosome . these pseudogenized presumably neo-y-linked alleles did not show any significant enrichment for specific gene ontology  terms, suggesting that genes are inactivated randomly during early neo-y degeneration  <cit> . additionally, the neo-sex chromosome genes show slightly higher levels of pairwise nonsynonymous diversity  and slightly relaxed constraint on synonymous sites .

together, these data suggest that deleterious mutations have already begun to accumulate at some neo-y protein-coding genes. the proportion of pseudogenized neo-y loci in d. albomicans  is much lower than that in d. miranda , a species where a neo-sex chromosome originated about  <dig> my ago. the neo-x chromosome of d. miranda shows partial dosage compensation  <cit> , which can render some genes on the neo-y functionally redundant and speed up y degeneration of genes that are dosage compensated on the neo-x. also, the rate of degeneration is expected to be highly non-uniform over the course of y evolution, and different evolutionary processes causing mutation accumulation show different temporal dynamics  <cit> . in particular, muller's ratchet and background selection are more likely to dominate degeneration of y chromosomes at very early stages, such as that of d. albomicans, while genetic hitchhiking of deleterious mutations together with beneficial alleles is more likely to contribute to y degeneration at later stages  <cit> . it will be of great interest to test the role of these evolutionary models of y degeneration using population genomic studies of the d. albomicans neo-sex chromosomes.

the neo-y has an excess of tandem duplications
we also investigated structural variants  in the d. albomicans genome, including duplications, inversions and large-scale insertion/deletion events . to identify svs, we took advantage of abnormally aligned read mate-pairs mapped against our reference genome. for example, sequence reads from the same insert are supposed to have opposite orientations when aligned to the reference genome. however, reads surrounding the breakpoint of tandem duplications would instead face the same orientation  <cit>  . since females are more inbred and were used for the initial genome assembly, many fewer reads derived from females showed mate-pair violations .

by characterizing all the abnormally aligned mate-pairs against the reference genome, we detected a total of  <dig>  svs . we found deletions to be more common than insertions on all chromosomes , consistent with a previous report in other drosophila species  <cit> . intriguingly, we found the male-to-female ratio of tandem duplications to be highest on the neo-sex chromosome among all the chromosomes and types of svs investigated , suggesting an accumulation of tandem duplications on the neo-y. the lack of recombination on the neo-y implies that it is mechanistically harder to remove pre-existing duplicated sequences through a recombination event. in addition, reduced efficiency of purifying selection on the neo-y could lead to less efficient elimination of slightly deleterious duplicated sequences. notably, neo-y chromosomes have the highest proportion of tandem duplicates overlapping with coding regions, supporting the notion that slightly deleterious effects of extra gene or exon doses associated with these tandem duplications are not being effectively purged from the neo-y . interestingly, we found no bias in the chromosomal distribution of dispersed duplications . unlike for tandem duplications, the removal of dispersed duplications probably does not rely on homologous recombination between alleles, and thus their distribution may be less influenced by differences in the recombination environments of the neo-sex chromosomes.

origin and evolution of b chromosomes
to understand the genomic composition and functional significance of b chromosomes in d. albomicans, we attempted to isolate b chromosome sequences and identify b-linked genes. we first randomly selected scaffolds from the  <dig> mb of male-specific sequence and performed pcr amplification using females of different d. albomicans strains with and without bs. however, none of the  <dig> scaffolds tested showed clear linkage to b chromosomes, suggesting that b chromosomes either largely share sequences with standard chromosomes or that the identified scaffolds are either male-specific , located in heterochromatic sequences that could not be mapped or assembled with the lower-coverage female data, or represent polymorphisms segregating in the less inbred male data. we thus took advantage of a previously identified  <dig> bp b-linked fragment, which was cloned using subtractive hybridization , to bait b-specific sequences. four scaffolds showed high levels of sequence similarity to this probe, with scaffold s <dig> giving the best match . to validate the assembly of this scaffold and confirm that it is indeed b-specific, we designed ten primer pairs spanning and surrounding the aligned region on this scaffold. one pair of primers amplified a fragment of the expected length in all b-containing isofemale strains but not in strains lacking b chromosomes , thereby confirming that the amplified sequence is b-specific . all other primer pairs amplified products in both b and non-b strains, indicating that this scaffold is largely composed of sequences highly similar to standard chromosomes. this high level of sequence homology would explain why our genomic approach failed to identify b-linked sequences based on presence/absence of dna scaffolds in samples with and without b chromosomes. interestingly, we were able to successfully detect transcription from this b-linked fragment using an rt-pcr assay. this fragment carries a transcribing unit homologous to the gene shg on chr2r and contains a diagnostic snp in all the four b-containing strains but not in the four non-b strains, implying that functional genes may exist on this b chromosome.

intriguingly, almost all the sequences of the four scaffolds that show homology to the b-derived sequence are homologous to regions that are located on the ancient x and/or the neo-x chromosome of d. albomicans, and the scaffold with the highest sequence similarity to the b-specific probe  contains sequence mapping to both chromosomes . notably, different portions of s <dig> mapped to sub-centromeric and sub-telomeric regions of the ancient x and neo-sex chromosomes, respectively, and this mapping holds across a range of drosophila species . in addition, s <dig> shows three-fold elevation in simple repeat content compared to the rest of the genome . we also aligned male reads containing b sequences and female reads without b sequences to the reported drosophila centromeric sequences  <cit> . the proportion of male reads that align to these centromeric sequences is much higher than that of female reads , although it is unclear how much of this can be attributed to sequences contained in the neo-y or the ancestral y chromosome. taken together, these characteristics of candidate b-linked sequences suggest that d. albomicans b chromosomes may have originated as a byproduct from centromeric/telomeric fragments created by the fusion of the ancient third autosome and the ancestral sex chromosomes. consistent with an association between the formation of b and neo-sex chromosomes, all close relatives of d. albomicans within the d. immigrans species group lack the 'neo-sex' fusion  <cit>  as well as b chromosomes. b chromosomes may have subsequently acquired some unique sequences or genes after their origination by mutations or rearrangements.

these insights allow us to further develop a model of neo-sex and b chromosome evolution in d. albomicans. it has been hypothesized that centromere-fused chromosomes may be favored during asymmetrical female meiosis if the excess of centromeric satellites facilitates their entry into oocytes  <cit> . such a selective advantage would apply to the neo-x fusion, i.e., the fusion of the third autosome  to the ancestral x chromosome  but not the male-limited neo-y. indeed, the neo-x chromosome remains polymorphic within experimental hybrid populations from female d. albomicans and male d. nasuta, which contain both the fused chrx and chr <dig>  and unfused chrx and chr <dig> , but no neo-y chromosomes  <cit> . further, the neo-x can increase in frequency in such a hybrid population in a background with neo-y chromosomes  <cit> . in contrast, a polymorphic neo-y is excluded within a few generations in hybrids without the neo-x fusion. the formation of the neo-x could result in centromeric imbalances between paired chromosomes in males  <cit> , which could have been remedied by a second fusion producing the neo-y  <cit>  or by loss of centromeric fragments of the neo-x. indeed, a polymorphic neo-y can reach fixation within a few generations in hybrids containing the neo-x  <cit> . the lost centromeric fragments from these fusions could have given rise to the b chromosomes found in d. albomicans. this, of course, does not exclude the possibility that genes or genomic regions derived from other chromosomes also contributed to the formation of b chromosomes, and they may be maintained within the population because of newly acquired functions. this might explain the fact that d. albomicans strains with 1- <dig> b's produce significantly more offsprings than strains with no or more b chromosomes   <cit> . further identification of b-linked scaffolds and the genes they carry will help to understand the phenotypic effects of b chromosomes in d. albomicans.

CONCLUSIONS
we provide a draft genome sequence and evolutionary analyses of d. albomicans, a species that contains extremely young neo-sex chromosomes and b chromosomes, to address questions on the origination and evolution of these chromosomal systems. genomic comparison between males and females reveals that the neo-y chromosome has already begun to accumulate an excess of deleterious mutations, including nonsense mutations that presumably caused some genes to become non-functional. we also found that the neo-y chromosome harbors an excess of tandem duplications. comparative analysis also identified a b-linked sequence that is homologous to regions of both the neo-x and ancient x chromosome. this result is consistent with the idea that b chromosomes originated from the standard chromosomes as a product of the sex chromosome - autosome fusion. functional characterization of the transcribing unit located on the b chromosome and future studies of other b-linked genes should help to explain the fertility effects of these dispensable chromosomal elements in d. albomicans.

