BACKGROUND
in affymetrix genechips the dna sequences attached to the chip surface are synthesized in situ by photolitography  <cit> . the technology is limited to 25-mers, which are rather short oligos to provide a reliable measurement of the abundance of the complementary sequence in solution. fortunately the same technology allows to place many more different sequences on a same given surface area compared to spotted arrays. hence the loss of specificity due to the short length of the oligos can be compensated by the large number of sequences. for expression measurements typically a given mrna transcript is interrogated by a probe set constituted by  <dig> to  <dig> probe pairs. each probe pair is composed of two short oligonucleotides . one matches with a part of the given mrna transcript and it is called perfect match . the mismatch probe  has the same sequence, except at position  <dig>  i.e. exactly in the middle nucleotide of the 25-mer. we use here the standard nomenclature of probes for the single stranded sequences attached to the chip surface and of targets for the transcript in solution.

the original purpose of the pm/mm design was to use the differences ipm - imm as estimators of the probe specific binding. this is however problematic for two reasons: 1) for a fair amount of probes imm > ipm  and 2) in spike-in experiments, in which some target sequences are added in solution at well-known concentrations, imm increases with increasing target concentration. concerning point 1), binder and preibisch  <cit>  showed that bright mm are predominantly observed at low intensities, i.e. for weakly expressed genes. hence their origin is most likely correlated to non-specific binding favoring mm compared to pm. point 2) reveals a more fundamental problem: the increase of the mm signal following an increase of target concentration implies that hybridization of the almost complementary sequence to a target cannot be neglected. therefore mms cannot be used as estimators of non-specific hybridization.

in this paper we demonstrate that mms still hold some valuable information. in particular, we will focus on the average ratio of background subtracted pm and mm intensities. on general grounds, one expects that this ratio is constant and independent of the details of the type of experiment . our study focuses on three organisms: h. sapiens, a. thaliana, and d. melanogaster, for which in total more than  <dig> chips were analyzed, by means of the langscal package presented here. the data were obtained over a period of about  <dig> years at the microarray facility of the flemish institute for biotechnology . by investigating a large set of data from the same source we minimize the systematic variations between experiments that may arise from either slight differences in protocols or from different laboratories. the results presented here extend the findings of a previous study on some randomly selected experiments from the gene expression omnibus server . indeed, the data from the same laboratory show a much more coherent behavior compared to the previous analysis, although systematic deviations for different organisms are clearly observed.

the langmuir model, which has been used also in previous studies of affymetrix genechips , predicts that the background subtracted pm/mm ratio depends only on the difference in chemical affinities ) between the transcript sequence binding to a perfect matching probe and the same sequence binding to a probe with an internal mismatch. this quantity is related to the hybridization chemistry and depends only on the probe sequence. therefore the ratio is expected to be independent on the biological details, as the organism or tissue analyzed. our study shows that this is only partially true. through a scaling analysis of pm and mm histograms we show that experiments in same organism have a quite stable pm/mm ratios. however, when different chips are compared, this ratio differs considerably.

we argue that these differences are due to the chip design. in the three organisms analyzed we found that the human chip had the smallest pm/mm ratio, and this ratio varies in two different human chips considered: hgu <dig> and hgu <dig>  where the latter is based on a more recently annotated genome. in addition, the analysis of the pm/mm ratio and thermodynamic scaling can be used as a quality control for a global check of the performance of an experiment. langscal is an r-package designed for this kind of analysis  <cit> . it computes average pm/mm ratios and investigates scaling properties of intensity histograms. this information provides insights about the agreement of the experimental data with hybridization thermodynamics and also a global check of the quality of an experiment. langscal is freely available at .

RESULTS
global histograms
in fig.  <dig> we provide two examples of global histograms of the raw intensities of the pm and of the mm for a whole chip. the data are plotted in log-log scale, and the intensity values span almost three orders of magnitude. in the low intensity region the histograms present a bell-like shape, which is mainly expression of background signal and pm and mm histograms overlap. at higher intensities, as it could be expected, there are less mm probes compared to pm. similar types of histograms are found in the other experiments analyzed, although there are some variations from experiment to experiment and from organism to organism . the sudden drop of the histogram at intensities close to i ≈  <dig>   <dig> can be understood from the langmuir isotherm  in methods). this isotherm links the intensity to the target concentration c and binding affinity Δg. from eq.  one finds that at sufficiently high c and Δg the signal saturates at i = i <dig> + a ≈ a  is the background level, and it is typically much lower than the saturation value, hence i <dig> ≪ a). at saturation all available probes are hybridized and the signal can no longer increase. from the two plots in the figure a rough estimate of the saturation threshold is a ≈  <dig>   <dig> for the a. thaliana chip and a ≈  <dig>   <dig> for the d. melanogaster chip. note that there are only a few hundred probes whose intensities are close to the saturation value . hence, when analyzing the average pm/mm ratio it is safe, for practical purposes, to neglect the denominator of eq. , as mentioned in methods.

there has been some discussion about the variability of the saturation threshold ) for different probes  <cit>  and about the differences in the pm and mm saturation, possibly due to post-hybridization effects  <cit> . the sudden drop at high intensity in the histograms analyzed in our study, however, suggests a probe independent threshold as expected from the langmuir isotherm. in addition, the analysis of affymetrix spike-in data  <cit>  shows a good agreement with the langmuir model with a unique probe-independent saturation threshold a. it is difficult to assign a threshold to the mm histograms as they decay rapidly at high intensity: no mm probes have an intensity above  <dig>   <dig> in the a. thaliana chip of fig.  <dig>  while just a few mm probes are above this value in d. melanogaster. however the data are not inconsistent with a common saturation value for pm and mm histograms.

rescaling
after having presented some global features of the histograms we proceed with the illustration of the results of the computations of the pm/mm ratios, which are based on eq.  and  in methods. these equations, deduced from the langmuir model far from saturation, link the pm and mm histograms to each other by a simple scale transformation. the link holds for probes with a similar type of mismatch. as explained in methods, this boils down to separate the pm/mm pairs to those having a common central triplet. there are in total  <dig> different triplets, which we label with the symbol α. the starting point of the analysis is the calculation of the background level i <dig> 

the langscal package estimates i <dig> as the crossing point between the global pm and mm histograms of intensities, as it is shown in fig.  <dig>  the user can eventually refine this estimate by providing his own value of i <dig>  afterwards the  <dig> ratios aα are calculated from the median of the background subtracted pm/mm ratios, following eq. .

in fig.  <dig> we report the histograms of the background subtracted pm and mm intensities for different types of triplets for an experiment on the d. melanogaster chip. the triplets shown in the figure correspond to different mismatches and different flanking nucleotides. the values of aα are shown on top of each graph. they vary from  <dig>  for a cgt triplet up to  <dig>  for an acc triplet. these differences are related to the different values of ΔΔg associated to each mismatch type. note that for aa or gg mismatches aα 's are usually higher compared to tu or cc mismatches . this can be understood from steric effects: purines have a double aromatic ring and are more bulky than single ring pyrimidines, hence a purine-purine mismatch  is sterically unfavored compared to a mismatch pyrimidine-pyrimidine one  <cit> . additional file  <dig> shows a large collection of the pm/mm ratios aα for different triplets. the analysis of the large number of independent experiments on the three organisms shows a trend of hierarchies for the different triplets which is quite reproducible and it is also qualitatively consistent with the experimentally measured parameters ΔΔg, as reported previously  <cit> . note however that, quantitatively, the aα obtained from eq.  using the nearest neighbor model ΔΔg's as obtained in the experiments of  <cit>  is in the range  <dig> ≲ aα ≲  <dig>  while the typical values in microarrays experiments are  <dig> ≲ aα ≲  <dig>  the origin of these differences will be discussed in the next section.

to summarize the triplet analysis with a single chip parameter, we also performed the rescaling of eq.  for the histogram over the whole chip, i.e. ignoring the differences between triplets. the global factor a is then found by requiring the overlap between pm and shifted mm histograms. an example of such global rescaling is shown in fig.  <dig> for an experiment on d. melanogaster. in this case the average ratio between the background subtracted pm and mm intensities is a ≃  <dig> . note that the histograms are smoother than those shown in fig.  <dig>  as they are extended to the intensities of the whole chip. the rescaled mm histogram  overlaps well with the pm histogram in most of the intensity range. a deviation is observed in the high intensities regime where the pm histogram drops and splits from the rescaled mm histogram. this behavior is described by the denominator in the langmuir isotherm in eq. . as mentioned before, the histogram rescaling ) is only valid not too close to the saturation level, a regime in which the denominator of eq.  can be neglected. as also stated before, the saturation regime only involves a few hundred pm probes, a small fraction of the total number of probes.

very few outliers are observed outside the boxplot range. one example is a human chip with a ≃  <dig>  a value which implies overlapping pm and mm histograms. this is a chip with an anomalously high intensity background signal and it is as well flagged as unsatisfactory hybridization based on the affymetrix guidelines and from image inspection .

other outliers are found in the drosophila hybridizations. one chip has an anomalously low pm/mm ratio a ≃  <dig>  instead of the typical a ≃  <dig> for drosophila chips. figure  <dig> shows the global pm and mm histograms for this anomalous chip. from a comparison with the drosophila chip histograms in fig.  <dig> one can clearly see a difference between the two cases. indeed, the low value of a can be also visualized from the closeness of pm and mm histograms of fig.  <dig>  this chip is also flagged as hybridization of insufficient quality according to the affymetrix guidelines . an analysis of the fluorescence image in the whole chip shows a clear stain on the chip . the stain is not responsible for any clear high background value, but the anomaly is still well pointed out by the low value of the pm/mm ratio.

three other drosophila chips were found to have a substantially bigger value of the pm/mm ratio, compared to the average drosophila value a ≃  <dig>  the analysis of the standard quality checks according to the affymetrix guidelines for these three chips does not show any kind of low quality behavior. these chips come all from the same experimental batch, which suggests that the sample extraction, preparation and amplification may influence the value of a. in general  one expects that a large value of the pm/mm ratio is a signature of good hybridization quality. thus these  <dig> drosophila chips with high a's are probably the result of an experiment of particularly good quality.

in order to assess the influence of a chipset design on hybridizations within the same organism, we plotted in fig.  <dig> the values of a for two sets of experiments downloadable from the affymetrix web site. these are the latin square data, in which few genes are spiked-in at known concentration into a complex mixture. the two experiments were performed on the older chipset hgu <dig> and on the more recent hgu <dig>  they show a quite different value of the parameter a, implying that the chip design may influence pm/mm ratio. note also that the value of a ≃  <dig>  is the same in the hgu <dig> chipsets analyzed at the vib microarray facility  and from affymetrix spike-in data set .

CONCLUSIONS
one of the first concerns raised by dna microarrays was that of quality control and check of the reliability of the technology. a microarray experiment consists of many biochemical steps, which contain each many potential sources of variations, influencing the overall performance of the experiment. therefore it is extremely important to have tools for the quality assessment in order to be able to eventually discard experiments in which the quality does not meet certain standards. some of these tools indeed exist, as e.g. the bioconductor package affyplm  <cit> , which is based on probe level data analysis, and simpleaffy  <cit> , which allows to assess the affymetrix quality standards.

this paper presents another tool for the quality control of hybridization in affymetrix genechips, which relies on the analysis of pm and mm histograms. through this analysis one can check the agreement of the data with the hybridization thermodynamics, which predicts that the intensity is linked to the target concentration and hybridization free energy according to the langmuir isotherm of eq. . a consequence of the langmuir isotherm is that the background subtracted pm/mm ratio of eq.  is universal, i.e. it should depend only on the nature of the nucleotides neighboring the mismatch site and not on the biological details of the experiment, as organism or tissue investigated. the langmuir isotherm predicts that the histograms of background subtracted pm and mm intensities should scale on top of each other when a shift of the mm intensity scale is applied.

the langscal package presented here has been designed with the purpose of checking the validity of these hypothesis and to determine the pm/mm ratios for all different mismatches which are organized in triplets. in agreement with previous results  <cit>  the values of aα follow the hierarchy expected from experimental studies involving dna/rna hybridization in solution  <cit> . the previous study  <cit> , done on a series of randomly selected experiments, showed a large variability from experiment to experiment of the parameters aα. in the data presented here, and when focusing on the same organism, one finds stable values of the aα, except for a few outliers. this shows that the different protocols used, as hybridization characteristics or the stringency of washing may influence considerably the pm/mm ratio.

quantitatively there is, however, a difference of at least one order of magnitude between the values of aα deduced from hybridization studies in solution and those which are actually measured on the microarray.

there are several reasons for these differences. for instance, hybridization in solution is different from microarray hybridization which occurs in the vicinity of a solid surface and the value of ΔΔg obtained from hybridization in solution  <cit>  may not adequately describe hybridization in a chip. the fact that aα is lower than its solution counterpart is in agreement with the idea that hybridization is impeded by the vicinity of the surface, leading to an overall lowering of Δg. a second effect is that target sequences are typically fragmented before hybridization. such fragmentation may lead to hybridization to the mm probe of two fragments that skip the 13th mismatching nucleotide. if such events are frequent, then the estimate of eq. , which links the pm/mm ratio to ΔΔg is clearly inadequate. irrespectively of the origin of these differences, one could anyhow take the parameters aα as measurements of the hybridization quality.

high values for aα suggest that the hybridization took place in conditions close to the thermodynamic equilibrium in which both strands are in solution.

in order to summarize the analysis with a single quality parameter we have used the global pm/mm ratio over the whole chip, a, where no distinction is made between triplets. the boxplot of the a measured in different experiments for the three different organisms analyzed is shown in fig.  <dig>  the first surprising result is that the global pm/mm ratio depends on the organism studied, while hybridization thermodynamics  and ) suggests that it should only depend on the chemistry of the hybridization process and not on any other biological details as the tissue, organism, or the biological conditions used. this is however only true in the case of an optimal probe design in which stringent criteria for probe uniqueness would ensure a dominant specific hybridization with the desired target sequence. when these criteria are not met, other target sequences may bind significantly to the probe and they can do so more efficiently to a mm than to a pm and therefore modify the pm/mm ratio.

using a as a measurement for the hybridization quality and according to the large amount of data analyzed, we found that the best performance  is that of a. thaliana chips, with an average ratio of about  <dig> , while the poorest is that of the human chips . it is maybe not surprising to find the lowest values for a for the human chips. within the three organisms investigated, the human genome is by far the most complex one in terms, for instance, of alternative splicing events or of single nucleotide polymorphisms. these complications may lead to pm/mm pairs which do not perform as expected from hybridization thermodynamics.

the correlation between the average ratio a and the probe design can be clearly seen in fig.  <dig>  this shows an increase from a ≃  <dig>  for hgu <dig> to a ≃  <dig>  for hgu <dig>  the difference between these two human chipsets is that the hgu <dig> is more recent and has a more up to date annotation compared to the older chipset hgu <dig>  an improvement in the chip design leads thus to an increase in the parameter a, consistent with the idea that this parameter can be used as a measure of the quality of the hybridization.

there are several possible problems in an experiment as excessive target fragmentation or sample contamination. in addition, a chip can contain annotation errors, which could lead for instance for a mm sequence to be perfect matching to other transcripts. these effects, which are not considered in the present analysis, would typically lead to lower the intensity differences between pm and mm pairs hence to a lower than average pm/mm ratio. when comparing experiments from different laboratories one may find a wide range of values for the average pm/mm ratio, because the experimental protocols and sample preparation can considerably influence the ratio. nonetheless, a systematic study of this ratio in different chip organisms and experimental designs could be very useful for a better understanding of the origin of the lab-to-lab variability, which is a weakness to current microarrays.

in conclusion our work started from some theoretical predictions on the scaling behavior of pm and mm histograms. on the view of the fact that the analysis is based on a simple model, with only one adjustable parameter , we can conclude that the scaling hypothesis is satisfactorily verified in most of the experiments. also the hierarchy of values of triplet-dependent pm/mm ratios follows the same inequalities as expected from equilibrium thermodynamics  <cit> . these ratios are however rather constant only for experiments within the same chip, and not for different organisms chips. this result is at odds with thermodynamics and it is probably due to problems with the chip design. so far the analysis of the shape of microarray intensity histograms has received little attention in the literature. we think that such analysis provides interesting insights on the global performance of an experiment and on a better understanding to the relationship between pm and mm. the langscal package, designed to perform such an analysis, is useful for a global quality check, together with other quality control methods  <cit>  prior to expression level estimation.

