BACKGROUND
aspergillosis is the most common invasive mould disease worldwide. recently, molecular techniques have been applied to fungal diagnosis and to the identification of species, and new fungal species that are morphologically similar to a. fumigatus have been described, authenticated and included in section fumigati  <cit> . therefore, this section now includes a few anamorphous aspergillus species and teleomorphic species that are found in the genus neosartorya  <cit> . the characteristics of the colonies on standard culture media are often similar to a. fumigatus, but conidia may be rather distinct. neosartorya species produce heat-resistant ascospores  <cit> .

misidentification of fungal species within the section fumigati has been increasingly reported by clinical laboratories. species, such as aspergillus lentulus, aspergillus viridinutans, aspergillus fumigatiaffinis, aspergillus fumisynnematus, neosartorya pseudofischeri, neosartorya hiratsukae and neosartorya udagawae, are frequently reported as a. fumigatus  <cit> . some of these species have been described as human pathogens, particularly a. lentulus, a. viridinutans, n. pseudofischeri and n. udagawae, and some species have been reported to be resistant in vitro to the azole antifungals itraconazole, miconazole, posaconazole, ravuconazole and/or voriconazole  <cit> . therefore, molecular identification is currently recommended for the correct identification of species within the "a. fumigatus complex" group. sequencing of genes, such as actin, calmodulin, its, rodlet a  and/or β-tubulin , has been used to distinguish a. fumigatus from related species  <cit> . multilocus sequence typing can alternatively be used for the identification of those related species, which is a strategy that also involves sequencing of several gene fragments  <cit> . a few other techniques, such as random amplified polymorphic dna  <cit> , restriction fragment length polymorphisms  <cit>  and a new proposed microsphere-based luminex assay  <cit> , may enable molecular identification of a. fumigatus without sequencing. however, these methodologies are quite time consuming and labour demanding and are thus impractical in most clinical labs. in addition, they can be very expensive when employed to study collections of large numbers of isolates.

thus, a rapid, practical and cheap alternative method for the molecular identification of a. fumigatus and the distinction of the species within the section fumigati is required. in this study, a multiplex pcr was developed using prior information based on βtub and roda partial gene sequences. we propose a single pcr to target the molecular recognition of the a. fumigatus fungus, avoiding the use of restriction enzymes. additional sequencing of fragments of βtub and roda allowed the identification of several a. fumigatus related species.

RESULTS
multiplex optimization
the present strategy was proposed to simultaneously target βtub and roda gene fragments that are specific to a single species  and other gene fragments that are common to a group of species . a similar strategy was attempted with calmodulin sequences from species within the section fumigati, but we could not obtain primers that were specific for a. fumigatus . thus, pairs of primers were selected based on the information on polymorphic and conserved regions of βtub and roda genes among fungal species, as shown in table  <dig> . as primer specificity could be improved by increasing the amplification temperature, a range from 60°c to 72°c was tested with our multiplex; highly specific primers work at high temperatures , whereas the amplification of some regions  could only be observed in non-fumigatus species at 60°c. a region of the βtub gene of  <dig> bp was observed only in a. fumigatus even when low amplification temperatures were tested. the electrophoretic profile obtained for each fungal species was very clear, revealing few secondary and/or minor bands as a consequence of primer combinations in the multiplex pcr . those secondary bands did not reduce the performance of the multiplex pcr, as shown in figure  <dig> 

rapid identification of aspergillus fumigatus
multiplex pcr was successfully conducted in all fungal strains included in the study. the specificity of the primers at 69°c was confirmed by the results obtained with singleplex pcr and amplification of each gene fragment in a. fumigatus: partial sequences of  <dig> and  <dig> bp for βtub, and  <dig> and  <dig> bp for roda. the electrophoretic profile with four bands  was similar in all  <dig> tested strains of a. fumigatus. non-fumigatus isolates of section fumigati, specifically a. fumigatiaffinis, a. lentulus, a. novofumigatus, a. unilateralis, n. hiratsukae, and n. pseudofischeri, produced two discrete bands  corresponding to the conserved region of the section fumigati for which the primers were designed . neosartorya udagawae was an exception and formed a third band  in a location that was similar to the amplification of a. fumigatus. amplicon sizes were confirmed using automated electrophoresis with the primers stained with 6-fam. therefore, the present multiplex pcr targeting βtub and roda gene fragments resulted in a distinct band pattern in a. fumigatus compared to the band pattern obtained for the other species of section fumigati. in addition, a clear differentiation of n. udagawae was also observed. the electrophoretic profile of the aspergillus species of other taxonomic sections was distinct from the profile observed for a. fumigatus and was rarely similar to the profile obtained for species included in section fumigati .

identification of species within the section fumigati
the polymorphisms found in the small gene fragments of βtub  and roda  were compared among and between species of section fumigati. a group of  <dig> partial sequences of βtub and roda from fungal species of section fumigati available at genbank and embl-bank were downloaded . a detailed alignment of βtub and roda sequences of the species included in section fumigati is available in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the most relevant and exclusive polymorphic sites for each species within the section fumigati were registered. the  <dig> bp region of βtub was able to differentiate  <dig> fungal species of section fumigati  and two groups of species . the polymorphisms that were capable of distinguishing the pathogenic moulds of section fumigati are detailed in table  <dig>  a more limited number of sequences were available for roda  within the section fumigati; nevertheless, this small portion of dna allowed the distinction of a. viridinutans, n. hiratsukae and n. udagawae . sequencing of a roda fragment revealed no polymorphisms in a. novofumigatus .

* aspergillus fumisynnematus may also present these β-tubulin polymorphisms but very few sequences are still available.

# nomenclature: t <dig> - a thymine is present in position 24; delg <dig> - deletion of the guanine in position 93; insa <dig> - insertion of an adenine in position 87; a105g - replacement of an adenine by a guanine in position  <dig>  the position numbers result from the gene alignment  and position  <dig> is located in the beginning of forward primer. .

recognition of low sporulating isolates
we employed the present molecular strategy to identify two low sporulating aspergillus isolates that were available in our collection and are both able to grow at 45°c. the isolates showed two discrete bands of  <dig> and  <dig> bp on the electrophoretic profile with multiplex amplification. after sequencing, those isolates were identified as a. fumigatiaffinis .

discussion
recently, new fungal species have been identified within the section fumigati, some of which have been implicated in severe cases of trabecular bone invasion and cutaneous, cerebral, liver or pulmonary aspergillosis  <cit> . these species might be primarily resistant to azole antifungals or to amphotericin b, similar to a. fumigatiaffinis and a. lentulus  <cit> , whereas a. fumigatus is usually susceptible to the antifungals that are available for clinical treatment  <cit> . few clinical cases of invasive aspergillosis have been reported in which the antifungal treatment was repeatedly modified until the correct identification of the fungal agent and the administration of the appropriate antifungal treatment  <cit> . considering that a. fumigatus may represent a considerable part of all clinical cases of aspergillosis, molecular characterization is essential for the correct identification of species within the section fumigati. in this study, we developed a multiplex pcr strategy that was able to differentiate a. fumigatus from all the other related species within the section fumigati. we could not test all of the species of section fumigati, as some of them are extremely rare. however, we believe that the present multiplex pcr can be widely used, as a. lentulus is more closely related to a. fumigatus than most species in section fumigati   <cit> , and a distinct electrophoretic profile was observed with two strains of this species. it is expected that other species of section fumigati that are genetically distant from a. fumigatus can be distinguished by employing this multiplex pcr . a simple electrophoresis profile after pcr amplification clearly separates two species, a. fumigatus and n. udagawae, from a second group of fungal isolates of section fumigati. this method is furthermore amenable to automation. compared to previously described methodologies for a. fumigatus identification within its section  <cit> , the proposed method facilitates the molecular recognition of this species by employing a single multiplex pcr and avoiding the need for restriction enzymes and specialized equipment. this approach is cheap and simple and would be very useful in clinical labs that routinely screen and perform the molecular identification of several mould isolates. the proposed new assay proved to be specific and highly reproducible for targeting a. fumigatus within the section fumigati and outside this section.

a list of fungal species related to a. fumigatus could be identified by sequencing partial regions of βtub and roda. a group of  <dig> unique species and two groups of species of section fumigati were distinguished by point mutations in βtub and roda. this work presents the first record of polymorphic sites available for the rapid identification of species within the section fumigati following the analysis of more than  <dig> βtub and roda sequences. this list represents a practical guide for the molecular recognition of rare fungal species, and it can certainly be expanded in the near future when more sequences of βtub and roda are available. at present, there is a limited number of sequences that are still available at genbank and embl from species of section fumigati, particularly for the roda gene. the record of roda sequences at genbank has been improved by the addition of the information on a. novofumigatus.

CONCLUSIONS
as molecular diagnosis is being increasingly employed in clinical labs  <cit>  and some labs can only detect fungal dna , it will become increasingly important to possess molecular protocols for the identification of moulds while avoiding misidentification of fungal species. thus, a multiplex pcr strategy is now available that can easily differentiate a. fumigatus and n. udagawae from other fumigatus-related species. in addition, the proposed methodology can be used in cases of low sporulating fungal isolates frequently detected in culture, as in the case of two isolates from our collection. pathogenic species of section fumigati could be identified by sequencing βtub and roda fragments by following the list of polymorphic sites provided in this work.

molecular identification is at present recommended for the correct identification of species within the a. fumigatus complex group of species. the assay described in the present study proved to be specific and highly reproducible, representing a fast and economic way of targeting molecular identification of a. fumigatus in clinical laboratories.

