BACKGROUND
sexual selection is a general selective force that has been intensively investigated in the past decades . the form and intensity of sexual selection are highly variable among species. in species in which mating is non-random, females are often expected to be choosy, especially when male parental investment is low. however, choosiness may also occur in males and should be promoted in both sexes when variances in quality of potential mates and parental investment are high  <cit> . hence, mating preferences in each sex could generate a zone for sexual conflict, e.g. over mate quality  <cit> .

body size plays an important role in sexual selection of many species  <cit> , including humans  <cit> . usually, larger individuals are favored. for example, larger males may be preferred by females because of direct benefits, for instance better territorial defence , thereby providing better environmental conditions for raising offspring  <cit> . however, in the field and laboratory size-assortative mating is often reported and therefore much research has concentrated on its occurrence and the causal mechanisms . nevertheless, knowledge about assortment and its underlying mechanisms in mating systems with mutual mate choice is scarce.

many mechanisms may lead to assortative mating patterns, for example spatial or temporal distribution. however, mate choice is one important explanation for assortment , and provides several different mechanisms that may result in assortative mating patterns. first, one sex  or both sexes may show assortative mating preferences, e.g. with respect to body size  <cit> . second, assortment may be the consequence of intra-sexual competition  <cit> , so that only the larger winning individual is able to choose its mating partner. for example, in the curculionid beetle diaprepes abbreviatus only competitive large males chose large, highly fecund females, whereas the losers had to accept the females of lower quality  <cit> . third, mutual mate choice could explain assortment by resolving sexual conflict over mate quality traits  <cit> . when both sexes show preferences  <cit>  for high quality mates, irrespective of own quality, low quality mates may be unacceptable. as a consequence, only high quality individuals would find partners which meet their preference. in contrast, low quality individuals would fail to mate at all  <cit> , unless they show a choice threshold that accepts potential mates correlating to their own quality. in this case, resulting mating patterns would be assortative.

to test this hypothesis, it is necessary to show 1) directional mating preferences of both sexes, i.e. to exclude assortative preferences, and 2) size-assortative mating patterns independent of intra-sexual competition.

the study organism, pelvicachromis taeniatus, is a cave-breeding cichlid that is characterized by a high level of cooperative biparental care  <cit> . parental care often has high costs  <cit> , e.g. due to predation risk, and time and energy loss. thus, the probability of future mating may be negatively influenced by parental effort. when the costs of biparental care are high, males and females should be choosy  <cit> . both sexes of p. taeniatus make a large investment in brood care and were choosy in prior experiments  <cit> . pairs are socially monogamous and alternative mating tactics have not been observed yet. the males' testis size is very small, even suggesting genetic monogamy; however, the sperm length is extraordinarily long  <cit> . males and females show sexual dimorphism in body size. males are usually larger than females. furthermore, both sexes are conspicuously colored. males show, among others, a yellow nuptial coloration of their ventral body, while females develop a violet ventral coloration. during courtship, both sexes present their ventral region by arching it towards the partner while intensely quivering the whole body. after mutual mate choice and spawning the female cares for the eggs in the cave while the male defends the territory against intruders. the fry swims free after about one week and is then guarded by both parents.

the aim of our study was to test  whether mating preferences for body size of males and females are present in p. taeniatus and  the impact of size differences between potential mates on the likelihood to mate when partners are able to interact and assess each other mutually. in order to measure mating preferences for body size, we conducted a series of choice experiments using computer animations of digital images of different sizes of the opposite sex as stimuli. test fish that greatly varied in body size were chosen for the experiments, thus preferences for assortative mating could be tested. a general problem when investigating preferences for body size is that size is often correlated with other factors. for example, large individuals might differ in behavior from smaller ones. a striking advantage of computer-manipulated stimuli is a high degree of standardization between the stimuli  <cit> , thus minimizing the effects of confounding variables like rapid changes in coloration or different responses in stimuli fish.

in a second experiment, the consequences of size difference between the sexes on the likelihood to mate as well as the brood care intensity after successful mating were tested. furthermore, we investigated whether body size could signal potential mate quality by analyzing variables such as the amount of parental investment, egg number of females and the number of surviving offspring.

RESULTS
size preferences in computer animations
male mate choice
males showed a highly significant preference for the larger female stimulus in each treatment . the order of the treatments had no significant effect .

with the exception of the "medium vs. large" treatment, the males' standard length did not significantly correlate with the time spent in front of the stimuli . the males' standard length correlated significantly negative with the time spent in front of the large female stimulus in the "medium vs. large" treatment .

the preference for the larger female tended to be stronger in the "small vs. large" treatment compared to the "small vs. medium" treatment , as well as in the "small vs. large" compared to the "medium vs. large" treatment . no significant difference was found between the "small vs. medium" and "medium vs. large" treatment .

female mate choice
females associated high significantly longer with the larger male in the "small vs. large" treatment  but showed no significant preferences for the larger one in the two remaining treatments . however, a repeated measures analysis of variance revealed that females high significantly discriminated between the smaller or larger male stimulus . the order of the treatments had no significant effect . the females' standard length did not significantly correlate with the time spent in front of the stimuli .

the preference for the larger male was significantly stronger in the "small vs. large" than in both the "small vs. medium" treatment  and the "medium vs. large" treatment . no significant difference was found between the "small vs. medium" and "medium vs. large" treatments .

comparison of preferences between the sexes
in all treatments, males spent significantly relative more time than females with the larger stimulus of the opposite sex, whereas females spent significantly more absolute time in association zones than males .

differences between males and females concerning a) the relative amount of time at the larger stimulus side and b) the absolute time in both association zones. differences between the sexes were tested with wilcoxon or t-tests. t or z = test statistics; n = sample size; p = probability.

control experiment
both sexes significantly preferred the large stimulus  over the small stimulus  when the extent of nuptial coloration was kept constant between both stimuli .

mating and brood care experiment
overall,  <dig> pairs mated and nine pairs did not mate. the likelihood to mate was significantly explained by the distance of pairs  and the relative size difference of pairs . within the group of unmated pairs, females smaller than the mean female standard length of the population showed significantly more courtship behavior towards the males than females larger than the mean female standard length . the number of days until spawning was not significantly explained by the females' standard length . body size did not significantly correlate with different aspects of parental investment during brood care . the standard length of the females tended to explain the number of eggs  and significantly explained the number of surviving offspring .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
males, as well as females of p. taeniatus showed preference for larger mates. however, the likelihood to mate in p. taeniatus was higher, when the size difference between potential mates was low, thus resulting in size-assortative mating. this corresponds to previous findings in cichlids concerning assortative mating patterns  <cit>  and preference for larger mates  <cit> .

the results allow the discussion of the underlying mechanism of the assortment because both individual preferences for body size and their consequences on the likelihood to mate within the same species were investigated. the hypothesis of assortment as a consequence of individual preference for size-assortative mating can be ruled out because no significant positive relationships and one negative correlation between individual body size and preference for the larger stimulus were observed in both sexes. thus, when given free choice, both sexes of p. taeniatus show preference for large potential mates. furthermore, intra-sexual competition as a mechanism was excluded by the experimental design, although under natural conditions it might also play a role. due to the mutual character of courtship in the mating system, both males and females are able to accept or reject mates, depending on their individual size compared to that of the mating partner. consequently, large males could reject small females and vice versa. the rejection of relatively small mates is supported by our data since large males did not mate with small females, although these females showed intense courtship behavior. rejected individuals may fail to mate at all, or have a lower threshold to accept mates that are almost as small as themselves  <cit> . thus, the underlying mechanism of size-assortment in p. taeniatus is the resolution of sexual conflict over large mates by mutual mate choice  <cit> .

whereas males preferred the larger female in all treatments, females selected the larger male only when the size difference between both stimuli was maximal. females may not have been able to perceive small differences between stimuli due to the set-up, given that 2d-stimuli may look similar in size when the female is not in the middle of the tank. however, reference objects had been installed. moreover, males were able to discriminate between the smaller and the larger female stimulus in all treatments, although female stimuli were on average smaller than male models.

females had a less strong preference for larger mates than males, but spent more time in the association zones. on the one hand this could mean, that females may be less selective for the trait and must present themselves to the choosier sex  <cit> . on the other hand, each cave-occupying male may initially be attractive for females  <cit> , but an increase of size difference among males may enhance the importance of male body size for female mate choice. a greater difference between stimuli led to a significant preference for the larger male stimulus, indeed. thus, females may be choosy, but a smaller difference in male size may not be important. as paternal investment of p. taeniatus in brood care seems to be independent of males' body size in our study, the offspring may gain the same investment from a medium-sized or large male. however, other possible advantages of larger males, e.g. protection against predators, were not investigated in this study.

the adaptive significance of sexual selection on body size has been discussed in many studies  <cit> . in the present study, female body-size in p. taeniatus indicated the number of surviving offspring, thus supporting previous findings that females' body size reveals fecundity . thus, preference for large females could increase male fitness. the impact of large male body size was not investigated in the present study. larger males may be more successful in intra-sexual competition, offering better territories or protection against predators  <cit> . furthermore, if larger males in p. taeniatus have advantages in intra-sexual competition  like larger males in other species  females may prevent the loss of a brood when preferring the larger male.

the parental investment of males – as well as females – seemed to be independent of body size during brood care in p. taeniatus. on the one hand this could mean, that body size does not signal the quality of a potential mating partner concerning brood care. on the other hand, brood care may be performed by each sex on a constant high level independent of its own or the partner's body size. however, in our study parental investment of p. taeniatus was measured in size-assortative mated pairs which do not represent the largest individuals of the population used. of course, parental investment was assessed under optimal laboratory conditions leaving an influence of body size under more stressful conditions open.

there are two general problems when investigating the effects of body size on mating decisions. first, in many species body size may be correlated to other traits. thus, it is impossible to disentangle which trait is ultimately selected for. second, the relative proportion of other traits with respect to body size may be more important, making body size relevant as a combined trait . the control experiment in which the area of nuptial coloration was kept constant independent of body size revealed a strong preference for the larger stimulus in both sexes, underlining that body size is decisive for each sex independent of the extent of the nuptially colored area. we cannot exclude that there are unknown sexual traits that shift with the downscaling of the stimulus' body size. nonetheless, this method of investigating body size provides the highest possible degree of standardization.

in general, the sex with the higher reproductive costs is expected to be more selective which is usually assumed to be the female . our results show that p. taeniatus may be a good model species for research questions concerning mutual mate choice. a recent review revealed that mutual mate choice plays a role in many species . thus, assortment by mutual mate choice may be an important mechanism for the resolution of sexual conflict over quality traits in many species.

