BACKGROUND
sequencing the human genome is one of the great accomplishments in recent history. the knowledge gained through sequencing the human genome is vast and holds great implications for medical practice  <cit> . no single gene, however, decides how an organism grows and matures. genes form regulatory networks where many genes interact to produce an observable phenotype  <cit> . an understanding of gene regulatory networks is the key that will open the door to major breakthroughs in fields as diverse as agriculture  <cit>  and medicine  <cit> .

many factors can influence each gene’s expression at any moment. one or more proteins produced by other genes within the regulatory network can promote or inhibit the expression of a particular gene. an understanding of how genes interact with each other is essential to developing new drugs and treatments. in many studies where gene expression data is used, tens of samples from a diseased organism will be compared with tens of samples from normal individuals. average values from these two pools may not show statistically significant fold changes because the expression value for a gene may naturally vary significantly between individual samples at different time points. it can be difficult to infer signaling information based on these average values.

as an illustration of this problem, imagine a car race. two of the drivers have a wireless headset that allows them to communicate. although they may never be in the same absolute position at the same time, their velocity and acceleration could be correlated as they signal each other through their headsets. if you averaged the position of all cars throughout the race, these two cars may not appear to be more correlated in their position to each other than any other cars in the race. if you examine their velocity and acceleration, however, these two cars would appear to be much more correlated than other cars who may have more similar positions. the same effect can be observed in microarray data. the samples collected during an experiment may not show a correlation in their average values, but the changes  may be correlated. this correlation in changes can be an indicator that the genes are signaling each other, or that they are both being modulated by an external effect. this correlation can generate new hypotheses for connections that can be validated through biological experiments.

asynchronous inference of regulatory networks  unravels the complexity of regulatory networks using unsynchronized microarray data that is generally available to researchers to create a network based on the correlation of gene expression changes between microarray experiments. expression values for all pairs of samples in a data set are compared to determine the correlation in changes between all sets of genes in the sample. edges between genes whose changes appear to be correlated in the largest percentage of microarray pairs are inserted into the inferred gene regulatory network. airnet can then compare the network for the diseased and normal data sets to determine which pathways are being disrupted by the condition.

airnet has produced promising results when inferring realistic in-silico regulatory networks. in experiments with real mouse arrays, airnet has also produced a significant number of validated connections. research is currently underway to validate predicted connections through in-vivo techniques.

related work
many strategies have been formulated to deduce gene regulatory networks from microarray data. in a paper written by wang et al. <cit> , a strategy is proposed that uses multiple microarray samples from different experiments to find a gene regulatory network. each of these data sets represents a unique experiment. each experiment is assumed to represent a unique perturbation to the gene regulatory network. gene regulatory networks are also assumed to be sparse. differential equations are used to derive a general solution that is the best representation of the invariant parts of the different microarray data sets. their results show that they are successful in reconstructing small networks. our algorithm, unlike wang et al., does not utilize differential equations to form a model of the regulatory network, but employs a much simpler method that can be extended to whole genome studies. while differential equation based inference techniques are limited to tens of genes, airnet has been shown to be effective with  <dig>  gene probes. another popular strategy developed by liao et al. <cit> , called network component analysis, makes assumptions about power law relationships between genes and the factors that influence their expression. they explain that microarray data is frequently given as a log ratio, thus being pseudo-linear. then, based on these premises, a regulatory network can be written as e = a * p. where e is the microarray data, a represents prior information about the network, and p represents samples of regulatory signals. when there is no noise associated with this relationship, there is a unique analytic solution that can be found. in real applications, there is noise, and through the use of simulated and real data they are able to reconstruct gene relationships with acceptable accuracy. their results depend largely on the amount of noise present. a shortcoming of this approach is that prior information about a network needs to be known and expressed in matrix form. another problem is that there are very stringent constraints on the characteristics of matrix a. a has to have full column and row rank, and if any connections are removed, a still has to have full column and row rank. these restrictions make this method cumbersome to use and limits the datasets that it can be applied to. airnet’s algorithm can be applied to any set of microarray data and will extract as much of the signal that is present in the data.

a third method for discovering gene regulatory networks has been implemented by nathan barker  <cit>  in ibiosim. his method first divides the microarray expression data into three categories; high, medium and low. each gene is assigned one of these values based on its relative expression level when compared to each of the other genes’ expression levels. this categorization of genes assigns an approximately equal number of genes to each of the three categories. barker’s algorithm then uses these categories to build an influence vector that shows the degree of influence each gene at one time point has on every other gene in the next time point. barker’s algorithm assumes it has time series data when comparisons between samples are made. this assumption allows the algorithm to decide which gene is promoting or inhibiting another, rather than just find that there is a promoting or inhibiting relationship between two genes.

airnet takes a new approach to microarray analysis that avoids many of the pitfalls of existing approaches. the focus of the algorithm is on correlation between the changes of different genes instead of instantaneous probe values. this approach can be extended to full genome microarray studies, where differential equation based approaches are limited to small numbers of genes. airnet does not require prior information about gene interactions and through examining correlation in the changes in gene expression, it does not require time series data. methods that require time series data are not practical with real microarray data. the simple fact that several samples are taken sequentially does not guarantee that they are sequential as far as the biological model is concerned. the time taken for genes to interact with one another is too small for us to accurately measure, and certainly too small to be able to generate a microarray sample at each time step, which would be necessary to fulfill time series assumptions.

other methods of microarray analysis are based on statistical significance tests. gene set enrichment analysis, proposed by subramanian et al. <cit> , and significance analysis of microarray gene sets, proposed by dinu et al. <cit> , are two methods that apply statistical tests to previously selected groups of genes, such as genes in the same signaling pathway. these methods attempt to identify whether the gene sets are associated with a particular phenotype. similarly, airnet can highlight a subset of genes within the entire network, either treating the subset as the entire network, or showing only genes, which are highly correlated with one or more genes in the specified subset. airnet will also compare networks to identify phenotype-specific gene correlations.

RESULTS
results were gathered from in-silico regulatory network data originally created for the dream <dig> competition  <cit> . this data was generated from a true network, so inferred networks can be compared on an edge by edge basis to the original network. although this kind of comparison is easy to perform, it lacks some biological reality. the second set of results was generated by examining real mouse microarray data. edges in the network inferred by airnet were validated through public pathway databases. this approach is limited because a legitimate gene relationship inferred by airnet may not have been studied enough to make its way into a publication. but these results show that the accuracy of the algorithm is not limited to simulated data.

in-silico validation
three types of data are used to test airnet’s accuracy for each of the in-silico regulatory networks. the data types are labeled as heterozygous knock-down, null-mutant, and trajectory. the heterozygous knock-down and null-mutant data sets each contain data for the steady states of the wild-type as well as knock-down or knock-out data for each gene. trajectory data sets are comprised of time series data, with  <dig> time points, for each network recovering from external perturbations. each network is subjected to, and has data for, a number of perturbations equal to 46% of the number of genes within the network. figures  <dig> and  <dig> depict regulatory networks inferred by airnet using data produced by one of the networks generated for dream <dig>  the in-silico network is shown in figure  <dig>  figures  <dig> and  <dig> show that higher threshold values produce more selective networks by excluding connections for which the correlation between the two genes is not great enough. visual verification, however, is not always the best method for measuring the accuracy of an inferred regulatory network, especially if the network is large.

scoring metrics from the dream <dig> competition are used to verify the statistical significance of airnet’s reconstructed regulatory networks. the dream <dig> metrics calculate the auroc and aupr values and compare the resulting values with the auroc and aupr of  <dig>  randomly generated networks to compute the probability of randomly creating a network with equal or greater auroc and aupr values, producing a p-value for both the auroc and aupr. the auroc p-values are combined by averaging the scores for same-sized networks. the same is done for the aupr p-values. the averaged auroc and aupr p-values are subsequently combined as a log-transformed average, –log10/ <dig>  each log-transformed average provides a single value, which summarizes airnet’s accuracy for five individual, same-sized networks.

because the graphs airnet produces are signed and undirected, the standards, against which airnet is being measured, were modified to be undirected as well.

the score, along with the aurr and auroc p-values, are displayed in table  <dig>  the first row in each section of table  <dig>  the empty network, report the values obtained from a network with zero edges, or a network which assumes genes do not interact in any way with each other. the empty network is not produced by airnet, but is included as a baseline for comparing airnet’s accuracy using the supplied data types. other rows correspond to the type of data used to infer the networks, as specified by the first column.

as seen in table  <dig>  the null-mutant data produces significantly better results than either of the other two data types. the networks airnet infers using null-mutant data appear to be only marginally better when inferring small networks, however, as the network size grows, the null-mutant produced networks’ accuracy grows at a much faster rate than the accuracy for networks produced by either the heterozygous data, or the trajectory  data.

it is interesting to note, using the trajectories data to infer networks gave the lowest scores of all the data types, in one case, scoring even lower than the empty network even though the data was produced by a simulator with accurate time series outputs .

comparing the values in table  <dig> with the  <dig> submissions to the dream <dig> competition ranks airnet in the top  <dig> performers. this comparison ignores directionality, which would probably lower the airnet ranking. the results are promising and more importantly, are obtained using microarray assumptions that can be met by most biological experiments.

airnet results for  <dig> network sizes from the dream <dig> competition. the empty network row shows values for graphs with  <dig> edges and provide a baseline to interpret the scores for other networks. the empty network scores were generated by submitting an empty file with no predictions to the dream score evaluator. the other rows correspond to the type of data used to infer the networks. in the score column, larger values are better. in the other two columns, smaller values are better. scores reported are produced using an 80% threshold parameter for airnet.

real microarray data
microarray data was examined from an experiment with  <dig> euploid and  <dig> trisomic ts1cje mice to show the utility of airnet with real data. the euploid arrays were examined separately from the trisomic arrays and the resulting regulatory networks were then compared. one important feature of the airnet approach is the increased number comparisons that are possible. with  <dig> euploid arrays, there are  <dig> different pairs that can be examined for changes. if the data were treated as a time series, then only  <dig> comparisons could be made. if mean values were used, then there would be only one comparison between the euploid and trisomic groups. with  <dig> trisomic arrays, there are  <dig> pairs of arrays.

the airnet analysis found  <dig> genes with significantly correlated changes in expression between arrays. each edge in this network was then submitted to pathgen  <cit>  to determine which inferred connections have been verified through wet-lab experiments. the pathgen database was created using data from kegg pathway, pubmed abstracts, dip , hprd, reactome, mips, bind, intact and mint. there are currently, over two million interactions included in the pathgen database. pathgen returned the number of intermediate nodes in the pathway found in the database corresponding to a direct connection inferred by airnet. the results in table  <dig> show that nearly 70% of the interactions inferred by airnet exist with some number of intermediate genes in a public regulatory network database. it is difficult for most inference algorithms to identify all of the hops between two genes that are highly correlated. for this reason, we count an inferred connection as validated if there is multi-hop connection in a pathway database.

airnet inferred connections found in public databases. the table shows the number of connections in the airnet inferred network that have the given number of intermediate connections. a connection count of one indicates that the genes are directly connected in the graph. a count of two indicates that the genes have one intermediate gene between them in the pathway database. the percentage shows the percentage of connections in the inferred network that have this connection count. airnet connections were validated almost 70% of the time, where less than 30% of the connections in random networks were validated.

an inference rate of 70% is extremely good when compared to other inference algorithms. in order to quantify this quality an experiment was performed with  <dig> random networks of  <dig> genes. the same number of connections were made in these random networks as exist in the airnet results. these edges were then submitted to pathgen to determine how airnet results would compare to random networks. less than 30% of the connections in random networks were found in pathway databases, showing that airnet infers connections that are significantly more likely to be real than random networks. the pathgen database is biased towards more studied regulatory pathways, so actual accuracy of airnet is probably higher than the 70% reported.

another benefit of inferring a regulatory network based on changes in expression values between microarrays is the ability to compare the network generated by diseased and normal arrays. in this experiment we compared the network generated by the  <dig> euploid microarrays with the network generated by the  <dig> trisomic arrays. the results are plotted in figure  <dig>  the edge between adamts <dig> and gata <dig> is found only in the euploid inferred network. this may indicate that having three copies of the trisomic gene adamts <dig> may disrupt this connection to gata <dig>  further research is being performed to validate this kind of hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
airnet infers regulatory networks from microarray data with practical assumptions. the microarray data does not have to have time-series characteristics and no constraints are placed on the structure of the matrices. networks inferred by airnet are comparable in accuracy to the best algorithms participating in the dream <dig> competition even though many of these algorithms were more restrictive on the kind of data they could use. edges predicted by airnet also compare favorably with experimentally validated regulatory networks found public databases  <cit> . perhaps the most important aspect of this approach is scale. airnet can perform predictions on microarrays with  <dig>  gene probes in less than  <dig> hours, making it practical for most analysis needs. this new approach of looking at correlation in changes, rather than comparisons of mean values can provide the understanding of gene regulatory networks necessary for the impending major breakthroughs in agriculture and medicine.

in the analogy where race car drivers were signaling to each other to change velocity, an examination of instantaneous positions would not be able to detect this signaling. only by looking at velocity could the correlation be detected. airnet examined the analogous velocity of changes in microarray data to detect correlations that can not be inferred by methods that focus on absolute values. airnet can be downloaded from http://dna.cs.byu.edu/airnet/

