BACKGROUND
rna silencing phenomena, such as rna interference, post-transcriptional gene silencing  and quelling, are related mechanisms that have been shown to occur in a number of eukaryotic organisms including fungi, plants and animals. the common intermediate in all silencing phenomena is a dsrna molecule that is processed by the rnaseiii enzyme dicer into sirnas of 21– <dig> nucleotides in length  <cit> . these sirnas are subsequently used as guides by the rna induced silencing complex  which contains effector proteins belonging to the argonaute family that are able to cleave in a sequence specific manner transcripts with sequence complementary to sirnas  <cit> . the basic features of the mechanism are very conserved in a wide range of eukaryotic species, and it has been suggested that its ancestral function is to limit the expansion of repetitive selfish elements like transposons and viruses  <cit> . a large body of evidence supports the role of rna silencing in genome defence. in caenorhabditis elegans and chlamydomonas, several components of the rnai machinery have been found to be necessary in transposon control pathways  <cit> . in plants, the silencing of rna viruses depends on the rnai machinery and the silencing of transposons through dna methylation, mediated by the argonaute proteins and sirnas  <cit> . argonaute's role in transposon silencing is also conserved in flies and vertebrates  <cit> .

further to its conserved role in genome defence system in both animals and plants, rna silencing also plays an important role in regulating gene expression. a class of small rnas named micrornas , that are generated from endogenous hairpin transcripts, control gene expression either by inhibiting protein synthesis or by inducing degradation of target messenger rnas  <cit> . moreover, the rnai machinery has been found to be essential in controlling other cellular functions as the segregation of chromosomes during mitosis. for instance, in the fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe, the rnai machinery is required for the assembly of silent condensed heterochromatin at centromeres and at the mating-type locus  <cit> , and is essential for the correct association of chromosomes to the mitotic spindle  <cit> . this chromatin-based transcriptional silencing mediated by sirnas and based on the methylation of lysine  <dig> of histone h <dig>  also occurs in drosophila and arabidopsis and is directed by argonaute proteins and sirnas  <cit> .

the filamentous fungus neurospora crassa possesses a post-transcription gene silencing mechanism  that can be activated upon the introduction of transgenic dna  <cit> . it has been observed that quelling targets preferentially transgenes arranged in large tandem arrays, suggesting that the quelling machinery is designed to detect such large repetitive sequences  <cit> . quelling is also activated to limit the expansion of mobile elements, since mutations in the argonaute gene qde- <dig> lead to an increase of mobilization of retroelements  <cit> . in contrast to most other eukaryotic species, in neurospora crassa, quelling has been shown to be involved exclusively in genome defence and until now no additional biological roles for this mechanism have been identified. since quelling was found to act on exogenous repetitive sequences such as transposons and transgenes, we decided to investigate whether neurospora quelling machinery could also target endogenous repetitive genes. the neurospora genome contains very few repetitive sequences as a consequence of repeated-induced point mutation  a mechanism by which during the premeiotic phase, duplicated sequences are mutagenized via c:g to t:a transitions with very high efficiency  <cit> . thus, the action of rip has prevented the accumulation in the neurospora genome of large endogenous repetitive loci as well as repetitive gene families  <cit> . the only large repetitive sequence known to have survived rip is the rdna tandem repeat locus that contains approximately 175– <dig> copies of ribosomal rna  transcription units  <cit> . each repeat is about  <dig> kb in length and contains the 17s,  <dig> s and 25s rrna genes, all transcribed by rna poli, and a non transcribed spacer  . the nts region, although not transcribed by rna poli, contains some non-coding functional elements that regulate the rate of recombination between each rdna units and therefore the stability of the rdna locus  <cit> . moreover, recent studies in fission yeast and insects suggest a possible role for rna silencing in controlling the integrity of the rdna locus by preventing recombination between tandem repeat units and for genome stability  <cit> . in s. pombe, it has been demonstrated that mitotic recombination events at rdna repeats occur more frequently in mutants defective in rnai, leading to a decrease in the number of tandem rdna repeats  <cit> . similarly, in drosophila, it has been shown that dicer is important for the integrity of both the nucleolus and the rdna tandem repeats  <cit> .

we, therefore, decided to investigate whether the endogenous repetitive rdna locus in neurospora could be a target of quelling and, as suggested in other systems, whether rna silencing of rdna may be relevant for the biological properties of this locus. we show that there are sirnas corresponding to the nts region of the rdna cluster, indicating that this region is a source of endogenous sirna molecules. we also detected both sense and antisense transcripts corresponding to the nts region, suggesting that a dsrna molecule can arise from convergent transcription and could be processed by dicer enzymes, leading to the production of sirnas. in addition, we found that quelling defective mutant strains show a significant decrease in the number of repeats present at the rdna locus, suggesting a possible new biological role for quelling in the maintenance of the integrity of rdna locus.

RESULTS
endogenous sirnas derived from rdna repetitive locus
in order to investigate whether quelling could target endogenous repetitive sequences, we decided to study the rdna cluster, the only endogenous long repetitive locus present in neurospora genome that somehow escaped from rip  <cit> . as a first experiment, since sirna accumulation is considered a hallmark of an ongoing silencing process, we tried to detect the presence of sirna molecules derived from the rdna locus. the rrna is one of the most abundant rna species of the cell, thus we reasoned that, stochastically, some small rnas generated as degradation products of rrna could mask the detection of specific sirnas produced from this region. for this reason, we focused on the nts sequence of rdna locus, which is not normally transcribed for the production of rrnas . however, if the rdna locus is a target of silencing, we would expect the presence of sirnas spanning the entire rdna region, including the nts that normally lies outside of the rrna transcription unit.

in order to detect sirnas from the nts region, we performed a northern blotting analysis on total rna preparations, enriched for small rnas,  extracted from the mycelia of wt and, as negative control, quelling mutant strains. as a probe we used a radioactively labelled rna molecule that spans the two hindiii sites present within the nts region . we were unable to detect any specific signals , suggesting that either no sirnas were present or that the amount of sirnas was below the detection limit of this experimental approach. to increase the sensitivity of our analysis, we extracted rna from an immune-purified preparation of the qde <dig> protein complex. qde <dig> is an argonaute protein  <cit>  that was previously shown to bind sirnas  <cit> , thus it is expected that rna preparations extracted from the immunoprecipitation should be highly enriched for sirnas. in order to purify the qde <dig> protein complex, a neurospora strain expressing a flag-tagged version of qde <dig> was used as previously described  <cit> . by using this experimental procedure, we found that 20–25-nt rnas corresponding to the nts of rdna locus were present in the immune-purified fraction of the flag-qde2-expressing strain . in contrast, these sirnas were not detected in the equivalent fraction of the qde- <dig> mutant strain . it should be noted that the detection of sirnas extracted from qde- <dig> protein complex indicates that these small rnas are correctly processed and loaded onto the risc, suggesting that they may have functional role in the silencing pathway.

bidirectional transcription from nts rdna region
the presence of sirnas corresponding to the nts sequence of the rdna locus suggests that the nts must be transcribed at some point, as suggested by several observations. indeed, rt-pcr analysis on both transgenic tandem repeats and some rip-mutated sequences that are targets of quelling has revealed that these sequences were transcribed although at very low level  <cit> . following these previous findings, we decided to use rt-pcr to detect both forward and reverse transcripts from the nts sequence by using specific oligonucleotides . we found that the nts is transcribed in both directions, although at very low level . a similar bidirectional transcription has been shown to occur at the centromeric repeats of s. pombe. sense and antisense transcripts were proposed to pair, leading to a dsrna molecule that is processed by dicer enzymes into sirnas that can mediate heterochromatin silencing of centromeric repeats  <cit> .

h3k <dig> methylation at the rdna locus is not mainly dependent on quelling machinery
the bidirectional transcription and the presence of sirnas corresponding to the nts sequence might suggest that in neurospora quelling may play a role at the rdna locus similarly to what has been observed in s. pombe, where an initial rna silencing events leads to chromatin methylation at the centromeric repeats  <cit> . indeed, recently, sirnas derived from the nts of the s. pombe rdna locus have been cloned and, in addition, rnai components were found to be necessary for the methylation of lysine  <dig> of histone h <dig>  occurring at the nts region  <cit> . we therefore analyzed the h3k <dig> methylation of neurospora rdna locus by chromatin immunoprecipitation  analysis, using an antibody against trimethylated h3k <dig> . we found an enrichment of 3meh3k <dig> at the rdna locus, indicating that some units of rdna repeats can be transcriptionally silent, as in other organisms. however, wt and quelling mutants show no statistical difference in h3k <dig> methylation of rdna repeats , suggesting that h3k <dig> methylation is not mainly dependent upon quelling machinery .

ptgs pathways influence the stability of the rdna repetitive locus
recent discoveries has shown that in s. pombe and drosophila rna silencing is involved in the stability of rdna locus suggest that in evolutionary distant organisms rna silencing has a role in controlling recombination between rdna repeats  <cit> . based on this evidence and on the fact that the neurospora quelling machinery appears to target the rdna locus, we inquired on the possibility that, similarly to fission yeast, also in neurospora, rna silencing may be involved in controlling the number of rdna repeats. in neurospora, it is known that the copy number of rdna genes can change during meiosis  <cit> , but it has been found that this number is constant during the vegetative phase in which quelling is active  <cit> .

cellular components of the silencing machinery in neurospora include three quelling defective genes qde- <dig>  qde- <dig>  and qde- <dig>  <cit> . we, therefore, decided to measure by quantitative pcr  the number of tandem rdna repeats in quelling mutant strains compared to wild-type. for this aim we used isogenic populations of independent quelling mutants obtained either by uv mutagenesis or by insertional mutagenesis using the same recipient strain 6xw  <cit> . it is particularly important to confront the rdna copy number between strains within an isogenic population, because it is known that the rdna copy number can greatly vary as a result of the meiotic process. the variation of rdna copy number during meiosis, limited our possibility to extend the analysis of rdna copy number to the double dicer mutants that were generated by crossing  <cit> . the results of our analysis have shown that the number of rdna repeats in qde- <dig>  qde- <dig> and qde- <dig> mutants is significantly  reduced compared to both wild-type and 6xw strains, from which qde mutants have been generated .

discussion
in neurospora, quelling is activated in response to the presence of transgenic tandem repeats. in this study, we addressed the question of whether a large endogenous repetitive locus, the rdna repeats, depends on intact rnai machinery for normal stability. firstly, we tried to detect small rna corresponding to the rdna sequences. northern analysis, using a probe that spans part of the nts region of the rdna cluster, revealed a strong signal only when the small rnas were extracted from preparations enriched for qde- <dig> protein, indicating that the sirnas derived from the rdna locus may potentially act as guides in directing the risc complex and therefore have a functional role in neurospora cells. however, due to the limitation of the technique we used, we do not know if, within the nts region, sirnas are either uniformly distributed or there are sirna clusters corresponding to specific nts subregions. moreover, it has been described that few copies of the rdna repeat are outside the nucleolus organizer region   <cit> . thus, we cannot rule out that some of the sirnas we detected may come from these displaced rdna repeats. these issues could be potentially addressed by a deep sequencing approach aimed to identify the entire population of the endogenous sirnas in neurospora. consistent with the presence of sirnas corresponding to the nts, we found that the same rdna region is bi-directionally transcribed, leading to the accumulation of both sense and antisense transcripts. thus, dsrna molecules that could be generated as the result of pairing between sense and antisense rnas, may be processed into sirnas by dicer enzymes. convergent transcription of both coding and non-coding regions, leading to the production of endogenous sirnas, has been observed in animals  <cit>  and in several cases it has been demonstrated these endogenous sirnas have a role in the regulation of gene expression. moreover, genome wide analysis have recently shown that many regions of eukaryotic genomes are transcribed in both sense and antisense orientation, suggesting that endogenous sirnas may play an extensive role in regulating numerous genomic loci  <cit> .

epigenetic regulation of the rdna locus by the rnai machinery is well documented in fission yeast, plants and animals. in s. pombe, the ablation of rnai components has been found to lead to the loss of meh3k <dig>  which in turns leads to an associated increase of mitotic recombination at the rdna repeats  <cit> , indicating a role of rnai in heterochromatic silencing and maintenance of the rdna integrity. similarly, in drosophila the structural integrity of the rdna cluster and nucleolus depends on a functional rnai pathway  <cit> . taken together, these studies suggest an evolutionarily conserved role of epigenetic modifications, mediated by the rnai machinery, in suppressing deleterious recombination between repetitive elements and in maintaining genome integrity.

we observed that in neurospora the levels of h3k9me are increased at rdna repeats, indicating that, as in other organisms, the rdna locus may be a target of heterochromatic silencing. however, quelling defective mutants did not show a significant reduction in the levels of h3k9me, indicating that the quelling pathway does not have a major role in directing and/or maintaining such epigenetic modifications. this finding is in agreement with our previous observations in which sirnas produced either from transgenic loci or from riped sequences, are not required for h3k <dig> methylation  <cit> . however, we observed that quelling defective strains show a reduction of rdna copy number, suggesting that, independently of the levels of h3k9me, quelling has a role in maintaining the stability of the rdna repeats. in s. cerevisae, non-coding transcripts , derived from the cryptic pol ii promoter  in the nts region of rdna, affect the rate of recombination between rdna units  <cit> . transcriptional silencing of epro, and consequently the reduction of ncrna levels, has been shown to increase the stability of the rdna repeats. indeed, it is well known that, especially during dna replication, transcription is correlated with recombination in a phenomenon referred to as transcription-associated recombination   <cit>  we speculate that, as in fission yeast, sense and antisense transcripts that we found in the nts region of neurospora rdna locus, could increase the level of somatic recombination between the rdna repeats, leading to the contraction of the rdna locus. however, the low level of transcripts derived from nts region limit us to perform a quantitative analysis of these molecules in the quelling mutants and wt strains, thereby preventing us from validating a correlation between the levels of ncrna and rdna stability in neurospora crassa.

CONCLUSIONS
while several questions remains unanswered and further experiments could better elucidate the mechanisms by which the endogenous neurospora nts sirnas regulate the integrity of the rdna locus, one possibility could be that quelling may prevent recombination of the rdna locus by inducing the degradation of transcripts derived from nts, thus contributing to the maintenance of the rdna integrity.

