BACKGROUND
a key step in the regulation of gene expression is the sequence-specific binding of tfs to their dna recognition sites. since transcription factor binding sites  are usually short ) and a typical sequence-specific tf binds to sites that are similar to each other, a number of computational approaches have been developed to attempt to identify these sequences in silico  <cit> . we shall refer to a given sequence that a tf binds to as a 'word', and a collection of words that a given tf binds as a 'motif'. various computational motif finders have been developed to search among an input set of sequences in order to identify over-represented dna motifs and have been based upon a range of algorithmic approaches, such as gibbs sampling  <cit> , expectation maximization  <cit> , and word enumeration  <cit> .

at its core, motif finding is essentially a signal-to-noise problem. it has been estimated that in humans about 3% of intergenic regions are regulatory elements, whereas about 15% of intergenic regions are regulatory elements in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . motif finding in metazoans has also been significantly more challenging than in prokaryotes or yeast because tfbss in metazoan genomes can be found far away from the promoter regions  <cit> , and because the noncoding regions are typically extremely lengthy.

additional filters have been applied to mammalian input sequences in attempts to further increase the over-representation of particular motifs within a given input set of sequences. examination of physically enriched genomic regions, such as from microarray-based readout of chromatin immunoprecipitation  allows the identification of regions of a genome that are bound in vivo by a particular tf, and thus also allows the identification of tfbs motifs  <cit> , although these experiments have several limitations  <cit> . of note, phylogenetic footprinting has been successful in enriching for tfbs motif matches in mammalian noncoding regions known to contain tfbss, surrounding similarly expressed genes  <cit> .

in addition to searching for motif matches within conserved sequence, one can perform a de novo motif search within conserved sequence  <cit>  or for conserved motifs  <cit> . for example, xie et al. examined promoter regions and 3' utrs in the human, mouse, rat, and dog genomes for over-represented, conserved motifs  <cit> . for known regulatory motifs, they filtered transfac  <cit>  motifs to identify those with a high motif conservation score, over the four mammalian genomes examined, relative to comparable random motifs. in order to identify novel motifs, they exhaustively enumerated all motifs 6– <dig> bp in length, and filtered for those with high motif conservation scores. a key issue in considering this approach is that the use of the motif conservation score relies upon the assumption that the position of a motif occurrence has been highly conserved in mammalian genomes. however, tfbss may shuffle through evolution, such that their positions in aligned sequence are not conserved, despite the motif occurrence remaining functional  <cit> . indeed, it is unclear how one should score for motif conservation to account for this phenomenon.

here, we hypothesized that many orthologous genes expressed in a similarly tissue-specific manner in human and mouse, are likely to be co-regulated by orthologous tfs through similar cis regulatory regions. therefore, we chose to perform de novo motif searches within human promoter regions that are conserved with the mouse genome and that are upstream of genes whose mouse orthologs exhibit tissue-specific gene expression that is highly correlated to that of their human counterparts.

in order to automate the motif searches, we developed a software package, termed multifinder , that performs automated motif searching using four different profile-based motif finders, including alignace  <cit> , mdscan  <cit> , bioprospector  <cit>  and meme  <cit> . we anticipated that using all four of these motif finders might allow the user to combine the strengths of their different algorithms. this approach has been suggested in the context of methods for aligning noncoding sequences  <cit> , as well as in the context of gene-finding programs  <cit> . since the scoring functions from these motif finders are not directly comparable, multifinder allows the user to select any combination of the four motif finders and any combination of five scoring functions. another motif analysis suite, toucan  <cit> , utilizes motifsampler, a gibbs sampling strategy, to search for motifs within conserved noncoding sequence  <cit> , whereas multifinder uses a combination of motif finding programs. another recently developed integrated system, termed rgs-miner  <cit> , selects motifs by the over-representation of motif pairs  <cit> , whereas multifinder scores individual discovered motifs by a user-specified scoring function.

as input for multifinder, we used conserved regions from the alignment of the human and mouse genomes as available from the ucsc bioinformatics website  <cit> . after motif searching, the results from each motif finder are merged and the motifs are ranked according to the user-specified scoring function. in an attempt to further enrich for mammalian regulatory motifs, we also applied a filter aimed at eliminating motifs that might score well by the various common motif-scoring metrics, but whose information content distribution does not resemble that of typical tfbs motifs.

we have applied multifinder successfully to yeast chip-chip data  <cit>  and to a set of mammalian genes expressed in skeletal muscle  <cit> . multifinder has also been applied to conserved sequence from the alignment of drosophila melanogaster and drosophila pseudoobscura . applying multifinder to conserved noncoding regions surrounding co-expressed tissue-specific human and mouse genes  <cit>  allowed us to discover both previously known and many novel candidate regulatory dna motifs in all  <dig> tissue-specific expression clusters that we examined.

RESULTS
motif finding within saccharomyces cerevisiae sequences
we used yeast chip-chip data  <cit>  as our validation data sets for evaluating multifinder. specifically, we selected  <dig> data sets that span a range of enrichment scores in the chip-chip data  <cit>  and that cover  <dig> gapped and  <dig> ungapped tfbs motifs. in order to determine the statistical significance of the motifs found by multifinder,  <dig> size-matched randomly selected sequence sets  were generated for each of the  <dig> tfs and submitted to multifinder . in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases  multifinder identified the correct binding site motif, with all four motif finders identifying the correct motif as the motif with the best group specificity score  <cit>  . despite the different motif finders' different approaches for internal representation of gaps , there was essentially no difference between the motifs found by the four motif finders, although alignace tended to generate motifs with much better group specificity scores than did the other motif finders. both of the tfs for which the correct motif was not identified  were from sets with low enrichment scores  <cit> . in addition, the gal <dig> motif is a particularly challenging motif for motif finders because of the  <dig> bp gap separating its  <dig> relatively short blocks of contiguous nucleotide preference. we note that it is unlikely that other types of sequence data sets, such as those from gene expression clusters, will be as highly enriched for any given tfbs motif. determining the performance differences between the four motif finders would require a data set of intermediate difficulty; however, we chose not to focus on performing a thorough comparison of these and other possible motif finders  <cit> , but rather on integrating the four commonly used and readily available motif finders, along with additional enrichment filters , for use in identifying candidate mammalian regulatory motifs.

compensating for background word frequency variation within various classes of human noncoding regions
cpg islands, which are associated with increased expression of the downstream gene, are found in the promoters of approximately 50% of mammalian genes  <cit> . as an illustration of the significance of this effect, we quantified the over- or under-representation of specific hexamers in each of  <dig> different classes of genomic regions: 0– <dig> bp, 0– <dig> bp and 0– <dig> bp sequence windows in the immediately upstream, downstream, and intronic regions of genes . although the rankings of the word frequencies are similar among these windows , the relative over-representation ratios are different; this becomes more apparent when non-overlapping sequence windows are considered .  in order to account for the variable gc content of different region locations relative to transcription start, multifinder uses a background model generated specifically from the same genomic sequence window that was used for the motif search.

mammalian skeletal muscle cis regulatory modules 
as a validation sequence set for multifinder analysis of mammalian sequence, we examined the skeletal muscle regulatory tfs myf, mef <dig>  srf, tef <dig>  and sp <dig>  and a set of experimentally verified crms previously collected from the literature by wasserman et al.  <cit> . previous phylogenetic footprinting studies demonstrated that these tfs are enriched in the evolutionarily conserved regions upstream of orthologous human and mouse skeletal muscle genes  <cit> . for these five tfs, there were more position weight matrix  matches for these five tfs  <cit>  within the crm sequence that is conserved between the human and mouse genomes, than there are experimentally verified binding sites .

in order to determine the statistical significance of the motifs found by multifinder, we compared them against motifs found in five sets of matched randoms. the rankings and group specificity scores of the motifs identified by the four different motif finders  are shown in table  <dig>  meme was the only motif finder that identified all five of the known motifs within the skeletal muscle crms. although bioprospector and mdscan identified relatively few of the known motifs, they ranked the identified known motifs highest among all discovered motifs. notably, mdscan found  <dig> motifs that were merged  into four motif clusters and bioprospector found  <dig> motifs that were all matches to the sp <dig> motif, whereas alignace found  <dig> motifs that were merged into  <dig> distinct motifs and meme found  <dig> motifs that were merged into  <dig> distinct motifs. thus, bioprospector and mdscan might be further aided by incorporation of a similarity metric that would eliminate very similar motifs, so that additional nonredundant motifs might be identified within the  <dig> and  <dig> motif limits imposed by mdscan and bioprospector, respectively. we suggest that when considering which motif finder to use, it is important to consider how many different motifs are expected to be present in the data set.

filtering motifs by blocks of information content
certain motif finders usually will find not only motifs that resemble tfbs motifs, but also numerous sequence motifs that contain individual positions of high information content interspersed with positions of low information content . however, because dna binding proteins generally interact with a number of adjacent bases of a dna binding site  <cit> , tfbs motifs are expected to contain blocks consecutive nucleotide positions with very strong base preference. this observation has been noted previously, and has been utilized in developing a new motif finding method that has been successfully applied towards identifying dna motifs in escherichia coli and s. cerevisiae promoters  <cit> . therefore, we applied a simple filtering scheme, termed "block filtering", which removes motifs resulting from multifinder that failed our criteria for having blocks of information content .

in order to evaluate the utility of this filtering strategy, we applied block filtering to the motifs discovered within the mammalian skeletal muscle crm validation data set. all five of the positive control motifs, mef <dig>  myf, sp <dig>  srf and tef, when initially discovered, were retained after block filtering . importantly, the rankings of many of these five motifs that were discovered by alignace and meme improved after block filtering, and none were eliminated by the filter. in considering all of the discovered motifs , block filtering tended to eliminate motifs identified by alignace and meme, suggesting that either these programs or the input parameters that we used for them tended to identify motifs that do not resemble most known vertebrate tfbs motifs.

in general, block filtering tended to eliminate the more group specific motifs generated from the matched randoms, and to retain the more group specific motifs found in the skeletal muscle crms, including known myogenic tfbs motifs . however, we were somewhat surprised that once we considered five separate sets of matched randoms, the number of highly group specific motifs resulting from the matched randoms far exceeded the number of comparably scoring motifs resulting from the skeletal muscle crms . this is in stark contrast to previous observations from similarly designed motif finding analyses in s. cerevisiae, where, for motifs exceeding a given map score threshold, significantly fewer motifs resulting from random sets of genes were as highly group specific as those resulting from functional categories of genes  <cit> . upon inspecting the motifs from the matched randoms, we noticed that some of the highly group specific motifs appeared to be partially repetitive or long motifs of rather low information content sequences, suggesting that our block filtering criteria perhaps should be more stringent. we also noticed that some of the highly group specific motifs from the matched randoms had similarity to transfac motifs such as ets and fox, suggesting that non-protein-coding sequence conserved between the human and mouse genomes contains sequences that resemble core motifs for some tf families and that are frequent enough in promoter regions that the motif finders will discover them along with enough over-represented flanking sequences by chance to generate highly group specific, overfitted motifs. overall, this analysis indicates that our comparison of group specificity scores for motifs resulting from an input tissue-specific query set versus motifs resulting from five separate sets of matched randoms is likely a conservative threshold for assigning statistical significance.

effect of input mammalian sequence length on motif discovery
in order to explore the effect of increasing sequence length on motif discovery ), for each of the skeletal muscle genes for which we had examined crms , we used as input to multifinder the repeatmasked sequence conserved between the human and mouse genomes within  <dig> kb,  <dig> kb, or  <dig> kb upstream of their transcriptional start sites. with only a few exceptions, increasing the amount of input sequence resulted in a less significant group specificity score and thus decreased the rank of the discovered motif ; as expected, the relative enrichment of motif matches in these regions  was strongly correlated  with motif rank. some motifs had stronger base preference, even if not necessarily ranking higher, given a greater amount of upstream input sequence. these results also indicate that even within  <dig> kb upstream regions, biologically significant tfbs motifs can be found, but that these motifs will not necessarily rank particularly highly when ranked according to group specificity score. there are a number of possible reasons for this result: there may be numerous as yet uncharacterized regulatory motifs that rank more highly, group specificity may not be a suitable metric for motif discovery in mammalian genomes, indicating that transcriptional regulation requires the combinatorial action of multiple tfs, or the motif finders may still require significant algorithmic improvement to discover tfbs motifs. since we were interested in discovering tfbs motifs from mammalian tissue-specific gene expression data, we decided to limit ourselves to the  <dig> kb upstream regions in subsequent motif discovery, since those regions in general resulted in tfbs motifs being ranked most highly.

identification of dna motifs within mammalian tissue-specific expression clusters
the gnf symatlas generated by the genomics institute of the novartis research foundation catalogs gene expression profiles from  <dig> human and  <dig> mouse tissues  <cit> . we clustered these data to identify groups of human genes with correlated tissue expression profiles and whose mouse orthologs also displayed similar expression patterns . for motif finding, we limited ourselves to those gene expression clusters that were of biological interest to us, and for which up-regulation appeared to be quite specific for either one or a relatively small set of related tissues. the average expression profiles for each of the  <dig> selected human tissue-specific gene expression clusters that we examined with multifinder are shown in figure  <dig>  heat maps for a subset of the  <dig> selected gene expression clusters that we refer to below are shown in figure 6; all  <dig> selected gene expression clusters are shown in additional figure  <dig> 

for each of the genes in a given cluster, we searched for motifs in the conserved noncoding sequence within  <dig> kb upstream of transcriptional start. since we were interested in identifying tissue-specific motifs, we assessed the statistical significance of the motifs found by multifinder analysis of the gene expression clusters by comparing a given motif's group specificity score  <cit>  versus the geometric mean of the scores of all the motifs passing the block filter that resulted from analysis of five sets of matched randoms. a sample output file from a multifinder search of the skeletal muscle expression cluster is shown in figure  <dig> 

in examining the multifinder output, we first identified all those discovered motifs that were matches to known tfbs motifs listed in the transfac  <cit>  professional database . next, we explored whether any discovered motifs that are matches to transfac motifs correspond to tfs that are expressed in the given expression cluster. here we called a tf "expressed" if its transcript's average difference  value in the specified tissue was at least  <dig>  <cit>  in any one of the tissues that defined the tissue specificity of the given expression cluster. for example, in examining the heart-specific expression cluster, we determined whether each transfac motif's tf was expressed in the heart mrna samples; similarly, even if a given tf was expressed only in the cerebellum, we nevertheless called it "expressed" in the "neuronal" expression cluster. note that it is not necessary for a tf's transcript to be present in the same rna sample as the genes whose expression that tf regulates. for example, the tf may be expressed at very low transcript levels, or the protein may have a significantly longer half-life than does its mrna transcript. furthermore, it is not necessary that if a tf's transcript is present, that the active tf is actually present, with any necessary post-translational modifications, and nuclear, at the same time as its rna is expressed. nevertheless, we were curious to see how frequently we would actually observe that a tf is expressed in the same rna samples as the genes that it may be regulating through the identified tfbs motif match within  <dig> kb of those genes' upstream sequence. in this study we focused on activators and thus gene expression clusters that exhibited tissue-specific up-regulation. a similar study could be performed focusing on repressors and clusters of down-regulated genes.

the threshold that we imposed for considering a discovered motif for potential biological significance was a group specificity score below the geometric mean of the block-filtered motifs from the matched randoms. the results of our multifinder analysis of the skeletal muscle crm set, a skeletal muscle expression cluster not filtered according to expression of the mouse orthologs, and each of the  <dig> expression clusters are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  on average, a given motif cluster mapped to  <dig> transfac motifs. there are at least three reasons for such a higher number of multiple mappings. first, even though we made attempts to extract only nonredundant transfac motifs based upon transfac's motif naming scheme, transfac nevertheless contains numerous very similar motifs, in some cases for the same tf, and elimination of all such redundancies would have required manual curation of their entire motif database. second, transfac contains a number of motifs for highly homologous tfs, which are expected to have highly similar dna binding site motifs. third, our similarity threshold for clustering together similar motifs may be too loose and thus may be clustering together motifs that in reality should remain separate, distinct motifs.

why does the discovery of motifs matching known transfac motifs appear to have been most successful for the skeletal muscle expression cluster, when considering the statistical significance of the group specificity scores? this result does not appear to be an effect of the size of the expression cluster, since a number of other clusters contained either many fewer or many more genes . similarly, this result does not appear to be an effect of the tissue specificity of the cluster's expression pattern, since other similarly sized clusters were of similar or even more highly tissue-specific expression . furthermore, the average pairwise correlation coefficient of the genes making up the skeletal muscle expression cluster was not higher than that for other clusters which did not exhibit highly group specific motifs . we offer two of many potential explanations for this seemingly baffling finding:  the skeletal muscle tissue may have corresponded to a more homogeneous tissue type than the other tissues that were profiled;  the transfac motifs that we considered may be biased with more of the tissue-specific motifs being important in skeletal muscle expression.

in general, if a tf was expressed in the specified tissue of interest, then in most cases  we identified a motif that matched its transfac motif, and many  of those motifs discovered by multifinder within the given expression cluster, passed our blocks filter. it is important to remember that the presence or absence of a tf's transcript, as determined by signal intensity on the expression arrays, does not imply that the given tf was regulating its target genes in the profiled tissue samples. for example, an individual tf may be expressed but regulate its target genes only in the context of co-regulatory factors  <cit> . also, even though a tf is expressed, it may be neither nuclear nor have a particular post-translational modification required for its transcriptional activity.

conversely, of all those discovered motifs that matched transfac motifs, most  of the corresponding tf transcripts were expressed in the tissue corresponding to the expression cluster for which the motif was found. there are a number of possible reasons why more of the corresponding transcripts were not identified as expressed. first, many tfs are known to be expressed at relatively low transcript levels and may not have ad values > <dig>  second, a tf may not be regulated at the transcriptional level, but rather may have a long half-life and in addition may be regulated post-translationally. third, an important caveat in interpreting these results is that there may be more than one tf that is capable of binding the discovered sequence motif. indeed, a number of the transfac motifs are not tfbs motifs for one specific tf, but rather for a class of tfs, such as ets or fox; for example, the fox matrix, is composed of binding sites for  <dig> different fox family members. moreover, the differences between a motif discovered by multifinder and the transfac motif for the same tf may be significant enough to prevent identification. here, we used a reduced set of motifs generated from transfac professional version  <dig>  . interestingly, of the discovered motifs that matched transfac motifs and whose corresponding tfs were expressed, many  had a group specificity score more significant  than that for the size-matched randoms, with some motifs scoring multiple standard deviations better. this suggests that many of the motifs discovered by multifinder are not only statistically significant, but may also be biologically important. finally, for about one-third  of those tfs that were expressed, we did not discover their binding site motifs within that given expression cluster. these might correspond to false negatives of multifinder. alternatively, these motifs might be found beyond the  <dig> kb upstream regions that we examined in this study, or these tfs might not contribute towards the tissue-specific gene expression patterns of these clusters, despite their being expressed in those clusters. we note that almost all of those motifs for which the corresponding tf was expressed, passed our block filter .

this analysis of motifs matching known transfac motifs resulted in a number of interesting findings, which suggest that our overall strategy for discovering sequence motifs in mammalian gene expression data is promising. for example, the homeodomain tf nkx <dig>  is expressed in the ventral central nervous system and is known to regulate the differentiation of oligodendrocytes in spinal cord  <cit> . within the pancreas, nkx <dig>  is required for the differentiation of pancreatic beta cells, and thus has been implicated in diabetes  <cit> . only in the neuronal gene expression cluster was nkx <dig>  expressed, and was a motif discovered that matched the nkx <dig>  transfac motif. a motif matching the nkx <dig>  motif was also discovered in pancreas, although in pancreas the nkx <dig>  transcript was present at an ad value below  <dig> 

it is important to note that motif matches do not necessarily indicate direct regulation by the indicated tf, but rather simply indicate sequence matches beyond the similarity threshold. for example, the nkx <dig>  motif was also discovered in the skeletal muscle, adipocyte, and immune gene expression clusters, although in these tissues nkx <dig>  was present at an ad value below  <dig>  given that muscle and adipose tissue have previously been shown to be involved in glucose homeostasis  <cit> , we were curious whether nkx <dig>  might have an as yet undescribed role in these tissues in regulating genes involved in glucose homeostasis. however, these expression clusters did not have an over-representation of gene ontology  <cit>  annotation terms pertaining to glucose homeostasis. therefore, some other tf that binds a motif similar to the nkx <dig>  motif might actually regulate genes in these expression clusters. indeed, a pfam search indicates that there are  <dig> homeobox proteins in the human genome . it is quite possible that tfs of the same structural class and with a high degree of sequence similarity in their dna binding domains might potentially have similar dna binding site specificities.

the tf peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma  provides another interesting example. ppargamma is a nuclear hormone receptor that heterodimerizes with retinoid x receptor  alpha. ppargamma is expressed predominantly in adipose tissue, and also in the lower intestine and in cells involved in immunity. it is of particular biomedical interest because it is thought to help maintain proper levels of key glucoregulatory and lipogenic molecules, and has been implicated both in diabetes and obesity  <cit> . indeed, adipose-specific deletion of ppargamma in mice causes insulin resistance in fat and liver  <cit> . ppargamma has also been shown to directly activate genes in the pancreas and liver that are important for glucose-sensing  <cit> . interestingly, expression of ppargamma in skeletal muscle has been shown to be important for maintenance of insulin action in skeletal muscle in mice  <cit> . dominant-negative mutations in human ppargamma are associated with severe insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension  <cit> . interestingly in all tissues where ppargamma is expressed, the rxralpha gene is also expressed .

the transfac motif for ppargamma is actually the motif for the ppargamma/rxralpha heterodimer, which is a highly information-rich motif containing  <dig> positions of very strong nucleotide preference, and so it is very likely that a discovered motif matching this transfac motif is a true motif match. using multifinder, we discovered the ppargamma/rxralpha binding site motif, with a group specificity score surpassing that of the size-matched randoms, in the skeletal muscle, heart & related, kidney & liver, liver, tongue, and immune gene expression clusters, consistent with the known biological roles of ppargamma. we found it surprising that we did not discover the ppargamma motif in the adipocyte cluster, given the importance of ppargamma in adipose tissue  <cit> . it is possible that the genes in the adipocyte cluster were not actually highly enriched for genes that are regulated directly by ppargamma. alternatively, in this cluster of genes ppargamma may bind a motif that is not a close match to the transfac ppargamma/rxralpha motif. we also discovered the ppargamma/rxralpha motif in the heart, testis, pancreas, and placenta expression clusters, although the group specificity scores were not significant for these clusters. of note, the dna binding site for the ppargamma/rxralpha heterodimer is a direct repeat, referred to as "direct repeat  <dig> "  <cit> . nuclear receptors generally bind to dna as either heterodimers or homodimers; the dr <dig> half-site is capable of binding many other nuclear receptors, including the thyroid hormone receptor and the vitamin d receptor  <cit> . thus, lack of significant group specificity scores in these tissues may be due to the occurrence of tfbss for other similar nuclear receptors, resulting in partial matches to the dr <dig> motifs. of the tissue-specific gene expression clusters in which we found the ppargamma/rxralpha motif, ppargamma was expressed in skeletal muscle and pancreas, suggesting that ppargamma exerts a more significant regulatory role in skeletal muscle and pancreas for maintaining glucose homeostasis than has been described thus far. in addition, the discovery of the ppargamma/rxralpha motif in the testis expression cluster may provide insight into the involvement of ppargamma in testicular cancer  <cit> .

in addition to identifying previously known tfbs motifs, we also discovered a large number of novel, candidate tfbs motifs. in total, over the  <dig> expression clusters that we examined, we discovered  <dig> previously known tfbs motifs and  <dig> novel, nonredundant motifs with group specificity scores better than the geometric mean of their corresponding matched randoms. examples of some newly discovered, candidate regulatory motifs are shown in figure 10; complete multifinder results for all the known and novel motifs are available online at our website  and in additional data file  <dig>  interestingly, a number of the novel motifs contained within them either a tandem repeat or palindromic sequence, or in some cases, both of these. we may be able to evaluate the functions of some of these motifs in future analyses, such as by assessing their co-occurrence with known regulatory motifs  <cit> . high-throughput genomic technologies such as one-hybrid assays  <cit>  may help to establish what tf bind to these candidate regulatory motifs.

although xie et al. discovered tissue-specific motifs, their search strategy was to perform a search for over-represented k-mers over all ~ <dig> kb promoters, and then to map those k-mers back to tissue-specific expression data. they discovered  <dig> previously known tfbs motifs, and  <dig> novel motifs. in contrast, our goal was to use tissue-specific expression data to discover motifs, and thus also to demonstrate that an expression dataset focused on one or a small number of related tissues could be used to identify candidate regulatory motifs for those tissues. nevertheless, on average 26% of the tissue-specific motifs that we discovered within a given expression cluster were also found by xie et al., although this fraction drops to  <dig> % if we also require that the xie et al. motifs were found by those authors to be enriched within at least one of the same tissue that defined the tissue-specificity of our expression clusters. similarly, of the motifs found by xie et al. to be enriched within tissue defining one of our  <dig> expression clusters, on average 42% were found by multifinder and had a group specificity score better than the geometric mean of the matched randoms. none of the  <dig> novel motifs discovered by xie et al. were found among our novel, block-filtered motifs that scored beyond the geometric mean of the matched randoms. since our study was focused on identifying tissue-specific motifs within  <dig> expression clusters, it is quite possible that in effect we were searching for less common motifs, that would have been unlikely to have been found in xie et al.'s genome-wide search for over-represented k-mers.

in order to assess the improvement in motif discovery afforded by our ortholog co-expression filter, we separately clustered all of the human gnf expression data, rather than just those genes whose mouse orthologs displayed similar expression patterns. from these data, we chose to examine an expression cluster that exhibited skeletal muscle-specific up-regulation . motif finding was then performed on those genes'  <dig> kb upstream, repeatmasked sequences conserved between the human and mouse genomes, just as for all the other expression clusters. results from this comparison indicate that imposing the co-expression restriction tends to result in motifs with more group specific scores than when considering human expression data alone , although some motifs may be missed because a smaller input gene set is used then.

integrating results from a combination of motif prediction tools
the four motif finders that we used in this present study exhibited tendencies for identifying different types of motifs, in part because they impose a different penalties on opening gaps within blocks of sequence preference. in our study, alignace and meme tended to find longer motifs, while mdscan and bioprospector tended to find more compact motifs. block filtering tended to eliminate more alignace and bioprospector motifs. bioprospector and mdscan also tended to find fewer distinct motifs in a given data set. as shown in table  <dig>  within the skeletal muscle crms alignace and meme identified more known motifs than did bioprospector and mdscan, suggesting that alignace and meme may be advantageous when multiple motifs are present in an input sequence set, while bioprospector and mdscan may be better for making reliable predictions of the most frequently occurring motif. bioprospector and mdscan were also faster than alignace or meme.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we searched within sequence conserved in alignment of the human and mouse genomes. as more mammalian genome sequences become available, we will be able to further enrich for likely regulatory regions by limiting our motif searches to those regions that are conserved across all the mammalian genomes. as long as species- or lineage-specific biological processes are not being explored, we can expect this strategy in general to be helpful. in addition, as more gene expression profiling experiments are performed and deposited in public databases, a greater range of tissue types can be examined for shared expression patterns across multiple species. moreover, it would be very useful to develop an algorithm for considering conservation of a motif occurrence, while allowing the occurrence to be rearranged in the aligned genomic sequences.

recently tompa and colleagues organized a motif finding competition, in which the performance of  <dig> different motif finders was compared using a variety of real and synthetic sequence sets covering a range of genomes  <cit> . a caveat for interpreting the results of this competition is that each motif finder was allowed to select only one 'best' predicted motif for each input sequence set. nevertheless, a major conclusion from this comparison was that no single motif finder consistently outperformed the others. moreover, the results indicate that a pairwise combination of motif finders can result in improvement over the use of a single motif finder, although the choice of motif finders is important  <cit> . in that study, the combination of alignace and meme resulted in only marginal improvement; unfortunately mdscan and bioprospector were not included in this comparison. our results also indicate that the integration of the results from these four motif finding tools identifies and ranks highly more known and novels than does the use of just one these tools. although it is possible that only a subset of these four motif finders may be sufficient to gain this improvement, or that some other combination of multiple motif finders may be optimal, it was not our goal to identify such an ideal combination. in addition, we found that the incorporation of our 'block filter' tended to eliminate motifs that in some cases scored well in terms of group specificity, but whose information content distribution does not resemble that of most known tfbs motifs.

it would also be of interest to examine motifs in more than just the  <dig> kb of upstream sequences for particular gene expression clusters. despite our various strategies for enriching for likely similar regulatory regions, our comparison of motif finding in  <dig> kb versus  <dig> kb versus  <dig> kb of upstream sequence for the a set of skeletal muscle genes indicates that there is still much improvement that remains to be made in identifying even the known tfbs motifs with high confidence. since tfbss are often spatially clustered into cis regulatory modules that regulate gene expression in a temporal and tissue-specific manner  <cit> , analysis of both the known and novel discovered motifs using a tool such modulefinder  <cit>  may allow not only the identification of candidate cis regulatory modules but also the assignment of even higher confidence to those novel motifs that are found to significantly co-occur with known tfbs motifs  <cit> . in addition to performing de novo motif searches on conserved noncoding sequence, one can also further restrict motif searches to known or suspected regulatory regions. for example, searching for motifs within a set of known or predicted crms  <cit>  may be a particularly powerful way to increase the likelihood of discovering motifs that are important for specifying the particular gene expression pattern of interest.

