BACKGROUND
sarcoids are benign tumours of fibroblastic origin affecting the skin of horses, mules and donkeys and are considered to be the most common equine cutaneous neoplasm worldwide  <cit> . they are histologically characterized by disorganized dermal proliferation of spindle-shaped fibroblasts that form whorls and by epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, and rete peg formation  <cit> . the tumours most frequently arise from the skin of the head, ventral abdomen, legs and the paragenital region  <cit> . sarcoids are locally invasive and often occur at sites of previous injury or scarring; additionally, they very rarely regress, more often persist and can be locally aggressive. sarcoids may exist as single or multiple lesions and six clinical types are recognized: occult, verrucous, nodular, fibroblastic, mixed and malignant  <cit> . currently there is no effective therapy available for sarcoids  <cit> .

bpv- <dig> and less commonly bpv- <dig> infection is now recognized as one of the etiological factors of sarcoids. however, the pathology of this common equine dermatological neoplasm is not completely understood. recent studies have highlighted the role of the bpv oncogenes e <dig> and e <dig> in the carcinogenesis  <cit> , but little is known about the molecular interplay between viral infection and neoplastic transformation.

different papillomaviruses , such as human papillomavirus type  <dig>  and bpv- <dig>  seems to share common processes of infection  <cit> . several studies associate the development of cancer to the loss of function of a number of tumour suppressor genes. fhit is a well characterized tumour suppressor gene involved in the neoplastic transformation associated to the pvs infection  <cit> .

the fhit gene encodes a protein of  <dig> aa, a diadenosine triphosphate hydrolase that cleaves the diadenosine substrate into adenosine diphosphate  and adenosine monophosphate   <cit> , its physical location overlaps with the fra3b locus, the most active human common fragile site  <cit> . fhit protein is ubiquitously expressed in human tissues. interestingly this protein is directly involved in tumour suppression independently of its hydrolytic activity. it may function as intracellular and extracellular signalling molecules by interacting with specific proteins involved in the regulation of proliferative and apoptotic cellular processes  <cit> . in a variable percentage of cases, depending on the tumour type, fhit loss of function is determined by the hypermethylation status of the associated cpg island with the consequent repression of gene transcription  <cit> . while alterations in the fhit gene have been reported in several human cancers, the putative role of this tumour suppressor gene and its epigenetic alteration in animal tumours are not well known  <cit> . in order to obtain new insights into bpv-mediated carcinogenesis, we investigated the status of fhit protein expression in equine sarcoid cell lines and sarcoid tumours. subsequentely, the dna methylation status of equine fhit cpg island spanning the putative promoter was investigated.

RESULTS
fhit protein expression in sarcoids and cell lines
to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms of fibroblast transformation in equine sarcoid, we analyzed tumour samples and sarcoid derived cell lines for the expression of the fhit protein. the anti-fhit polyclonal antibody was used to stain histological sections of  <dig> bpv positive tumour samples and  <dig> normal skin sample. no staining for fhit protein was observed in  <dig> out of  <dig> tumour cases  . only  <dig> out of the  <dig>  sarcoid samples, showed weak intracytoplasmic immunosignal for fhit. fibroblasts of normal skin sample displayed nuclear and cytoplasmic staining. normal blood vessels and sweat glands also stained .

we also analyzed three equine fibroblast cell lines for the expression of fhit protein, one normal and two derived from sarcoids. by indirect immunofluorescence, distinct cytoplasmic staining was detected in the normal equine fibroblast cell line . the immunosignal was detected only within the cytosol and the pattern was diffuse. the sarcoid cell lines eqso1a and eqso4b showed very weak cytoplasmic immunofluorescence signal for fhit protein as compared with e-derm . however, eqso4b cells showed a weaker immunofluorescence staining than eqso1a. to further confirm the lack of fhit protein expression in tumours, three sarcoid samples, one skin sample from a healthy horse and the cell lines were analysed by immunoblotting. the anti-fhit antibody recognized a band of the expected molecular weight in the neoplastic tissues, normal skin and all fibroblast cell lines. an increase in the amount of fhit protein level in non-neoplastic skin versus tumour samples was observed ; moreover fhit expression levels were lower in sarcoid cell lines compared to e-derm .

the immunohistochemical and biochemical data indicate that the expression of the fhit protein is down-regulated in tumour samples and in fully transformed sarcoid fibroblast lines.

equine fhit locus and transcript characterization
genbank search for equine fhit gene sequences gave the predicted coding sequence from the atg to the stop codon . to obtain the putative regulatory region sequence of the equine fhit locus, the human fhit cpg island sequence  was used to query genomic databases. this sequence encompasses the region of the non coding exon  <dig> and the partial intron  <dig> and represents the region analysed in human cancers for differential methylation profile. the u <dig> human sequence was compared, through the blat algorithm of the ucsc genome browser, with the horse sep.  <dig>  assembly.

the region  showed 87% similarity with the human sequence. the correct localization of the cpg island and the co-linearity of the utr sequence with the fhit coding sequence were confirmed through direct sequencing of pcr fragments obtained using respectively genomic dna and cdna as templates. these analyses were performed in e-derm cell line. the analyses of the pcr fragments amplified using cdna as template, showed the presence of two different transcripts. the analysis of these sequences through the blat algorithm revealed the presence of  <dig> exons in isoform  <dig> and  <dig> exons in isoform  <dig>  the additional exon of isoform  <dig>  is  <dig> bp long. figure 4a shows the 5' fhit transcript organisation in the horse genome. the equine fhit 5'utr region organization is comparable with the data deriving from other species such as bos  <cit> . the dna sequences of both transcripts have been deposited in genbank .

equine fhit cpg island methylation analysis in sarcoid tissues and cell lines
sarcoid samples were investigated for the dna methylation profile of the cpg island associated to the putative regulative region.

the cpg island sequence includes  <dig> cpg dinucleotides, and the region analysed corresponds to the cpg island predicted with the cpgplot analysis. it is slightly larger then the region analysed in human and bovine tumours  <cit> . figure 4b shows the equine cpg island and the position of the amplification primers obtained through the methprimer algorithm. the bisulfite dna conversion and the subsequent cloning and sequencing analysis were performed also for a bpv negative normal skin sample. for all samples at least  <dig> clones were sequenced. the extensive analysis of all cpg dinucleotides present in the region, showed only some random differentially methylated position in comparison with the normal control . similar results were also obtained extending the dna methylation analysis to the sarcoid cell lines, eqso1a and eqso4b compared to the e-derm fibroblast cell lines.

discussion
sarcoids account for an high percentage of all equine neoplasms and are the most common tumour diagnosed in horses  <cit> . few studies have been carried out so far concerning the molecular mechanisms underlying equine sarcoids carcinogenesis. it is well known that bpv is involved in the pathogenesis of the sarcoid, and the role of its oncoproteins in the carcinogenic process has been recently clarified  <cit> , however little is known about the molecular relationship between viral infection and neoplastic transformation. recently, yuan et al.  <cit> , have described the upregulation of mmp- <dig> and ap <dig> in sarcoid, underlying the invasivity potential of such tumour. to identify the key molecules in these phenomena and on the basis of the data deriving from other species, we analysed the role of the tumour suppressor fhit gene. fhit is a tumour suppressor gene and many lines of evidence support the association between hpv infection and fhit expression alteration in different cancer types  <cit> . however, fhit downregulation has been recorded also in bpv induced bovine urinary bladder tumours which are composed of both epithelial and vascular  tumours .

in this study we have characterized the expression of fhit protein by examining it in a normal fibroblast cell line  and fully transformed sarcoid fibroblast lines explanted from equine sarcoid tumours , as well as in normal skin and sarcoid tissues. the data we obtained document, for the first time, a reduction of fhit protein expression in in vitro model of sarcoid-derived cell lines as well as in naturally occurring tumours. the consistency of data between in vivo and in vitro systems strenghten the validity of such cell culture system for gene expression analysis.

our data indicate that fhit protein is expressed in normal fibroblasts, whereas it is much reduced in both in vivo and in vitro tumours. it is worthwhile noting that eqso4b has lower level of the protein compared to the eqso1a. the eqso4b cell line contains higher levels of viral genome and viral oncoprotein transcripts than eqso1a  <cit> . we may speculate that altered expression of fhit protein may correlate with viral load and/or viral oncogenes expression. however, further studies are needed to clarify this point. sarcoids may exist as six different clinical types  <cit> ; although we have examined a limited number of samples, we suggest a lack of correlation between down-regulation of fhit expression and clinical appearance, indicating a common mechanism underlying the reduction of protein expression acting early during the development of equine sarcoids.

our results are in agreement with several previous studies indicating that the loss of fhit expression is frequent in a variety of tumors  <cit>  above all in pvs induced cervical lesions  <cit> . lowered levels of the fhit protein were also documented in pagetoid variant of bpv induced urothelial tumour  <cit> .

promoter methylation is the primary epigenetic alteration associated with transcriptional silencing of tumour suppressor genes during tumorigenesis  <cit> . to determine the reasons for diminished fhit expression in sarcoid tumour we performed the analysis of the methylation status of the fhit 5'-cpg island. our data indicated that fhit gene promoter hypermethylation did not occur either in sarcoid tissues or in sarcoid derived cell lines, suggesting that this epigenetic mechanism may be not involved in fhit aberrant expression in sarcoids. this is in accordance with a previous paper documenting no aberrant methylation causing fhit promoter silencing in bpv induced vesical tumors of cattle  <cit> . it is reasonable to assume that bpv does not alter the methylation status of fhit promoter. it is worth noting that similar data have been obtained both in vitro and in vivo, thus again validating the sarcoid derived cell lines as a good model for the study of sarcoids  <cit> . our data show the presence of an alternative splicing of equine fhit transcript in 5'utr region; this is consistent with the data obtained in other species such as human and bovine  <cit> , in which several different 5'utr regions were described. a well-known regulatory role has been described for the 5' and 3' utr region in mammalian genome  <cit> . the complex structure of the 5'utr region of fhit locus may suggest that this region might be target of post-transcriptional regulative mechanism.

in human species the mutational analysis of fhit indicates the potential role of other mechanisms such as point mutation and deletions, with loss of heterozigosity . the human fhit gene encompasses the fra3b fragile site, a common target of genetic alterations  <cit> . this locus is a hot spot for early inactivation in carcinogen-exposed tissue  <cit> . fra3b fragile site is also reported to be the site for hpv- <dig> integration and demonstrated to undergo frequent loh in cervical carcinoma  <cit> . different pvs, such as hpv- <dig> and bpv- <dig>  seems to share common processes of infection  <cit> . we speculate that the involvement of bpv infection in equine tumorigenesis may be related with fhit loh, but this issue needs further investigation.

our findings suggest an association between bpv infection and fhit protein expression alteration raising the possibility of a mechanistic role for the fhit gene as a cofactor with bpv in triggering the development of equine sarcoid tumour.

CONCLUSIONS
biochemical and immunohistochemical analyses suggest that fhit protein is often reduced in sarcoid tissues and cell lines. the epigenetic analysis suggest that altered dna methylation is not associated with the altered expression of the fhit protein. while further studies are needed to clarify the molecular mechanisms for fhit protein downregulation, we suggest that this tumour suppressor gene is an important player in sarcoid transformation.

