BACKGROUND
dna sequencing technologies have enabled us to decipher molecular sequences of individual organisms. conventional dna sequencing methods relying on fluorescent dideoxy terminators and capillary separation revolutionized sequencing and allowed the first constructions of complete genomes of a number of species from simple prokaryotes to higher vertebrates  <cit> . however the costs involved in eukaryotic genome-sequencing projects using these methods has been very high and thus such projects generally require the collaboration of several well-funded institutes. furthermore the time required for sequencing and assembling such genomes can span several years. the advent of next generation dna sequencing has reduced the time and expense of complete genome sequencing by orders of magnitude  <cit> . for example using next generation sequencing methods the complete genome of a human individual was completed in eight weeks by spending only a fraction of cost incurred using conventional bac and shotgun-based cloning and sequencing methods  <cit> .

the major limitation of a next generation sequencing approach is that the length of the sequence reads produced was until recently only 25- <dig> bases, as opposed to over a kilobase generated by conventional capillary-based sequencing methods. although short sequence reads do not limit the amount of sequence data collected, this can hamper the assembly of the short sequence reads into large contigs. therefore the availability of a genome of a closely related organism is generally required  for the successful assembly of a new genome using the next generation sequencing method. for example, the assembly of the genomes of neanderthal and woolly mammoth was possible only because of the availability, respectively, of complete human and african elephant genomes  <cit> .

recently new algorithms have been developed to assemble genomes de novo without using a closely related scaffold genome  <cit> . however for precise genome assembly using this software, substantial sequence coverage is required. for example, using next generation sequencing and de novo assembly the complete genome of a chinese panda was obtained at 50×  coverage  <cit> . although the sequence required  was generated in only one month, the cost amounted to several million us dollars. therefore without the availability of a closely related organism, assembling complete genomes de novo would still be financially restrictive for most research laboratories. an alternative would be to use low-coverage next generation sequencing to sequence and assemble only the transcribed regions of a genome .

large-scale comparative genomic studies of avian genomes started soon after the chicken genome became available  <cit> . these studies revealed mutational rate differences among chromosomes by comparative analyses of chicken and turkey genomes  <cit> . with the availability of the complete genome of the zebra finch  <cit>  a number of studies have examined genome-wide patterns of molecular evolution and gene expression in avian genomes  <cit> . however all these studies were performed using only the neognathae birds.

in the current study we have sequenced and assembled a number of conserved protein-coding regions of an early stage transcriptome of a paleognathae bird, the north island brown kiwi . kiwi are flightless birds endemic to new zealand, and are of high conservation importance. the purpose of this study was to isolate conserved transcribed sequences of kiwi in order to understand firstly the patterns of mutation and selection amongst protein coding sequences and secondly to use these nuclear gene sequences to reanalyze the divergence time between paleo- and neognathae birds.

RESULTS
preliminary kiwi transcriptome analysis
initial cdna made from kiwi embryo k11- <dig> was tested for coverage by amplification of the temporally and spatially restricted developmental genes tbx <dig>  cry <dig>  pax <dig>  bmp <dig>  ptx <dig>  hoxb <dig>  hoxb <dig>  and hoxd <dig>  all genes were successfully amplified from the kiwi cdna suggesting a comprehensive early stage kiwi transcriptome. as expected, comparison of the amplified kiwi gene sequences with those in genbank consistently gave the chicken homologue as the closest match.

assembly of the conserved regions of kiwi protein-coding genes
to assemble over  <dig>  flx sequence reads we used the well-annotated chicken proteome. kiwi sequences were used as a query to search over  <dig>  chicken proteins using blastx. significant hits were garnered and redundant kiwi reads were excluded. garnered kiwi sequences were assembled into large contiguous segments. we used blast2seq to align chicken proteins with translated assembled reads of kiwi. finally we retained only the regions of the assembled reads where at least 90% of the amino acids aligned with their respective chicken orthologs. although this resulted in a significant reduction in the number of kiwi genes retained, such an approach was required to minimize lineage specific duplicates. furthermore we are confident that this approach will exclude most of the transcribed pseudogenes, which generally have a high rate of substitution. this stringent approach identified  <dig>  kiwi genes. the locations of the chicken-orthologs of kiwi genes on the chicken chromosomes are shown in figure  <dig>  the average length of coding regions was  <dig> bp . our approach to assemble the transcriptome is somewhat similar to a previous method, scarf  <cit> . however scarf is suitable only if the reference scaffold genome is closely related to the target genome with a synonymous divergence of < <dig> .

embryonic expression levels of kiwi genes
since the sequences generated in this study were from the mrnas of a kiwi embryo, the copy numbers of the genes reflect their expression levels. we found two genes with very high  expression levels. while we identified  the product of one of these genes as a neuropeptide the function of the other could not be determined. we grouped kiwi genes into three categories based on their levels of expression. roughly 14% of the genes were highly expressed  while 50% of the genes appeared to be present as single copies in kiwi embryo . conversely the small fraction of highly expressed genes constituted approximately 59% of the expressed mrnas in the embryo, whereas only 13% of the mrnas were from genes with low expression levels . for this analysis we did not include the two genes with very high expression levels  to avoid bias due to these outliers. gene annotations show that most of the highly expressed genes were those involved in protein synthesis such as ribosomal proteins, elongation factors, trna synthetases, as well as structural proteins such as collagen.

evolutionary divergence at neutral and constrained sites
an important parameter used extensively in genome analyses is the rate of molecular evolution. to examine the rate of neutral evolution we compared the concatenated kiwi transcripts with those of chicken. a likelihood-based distance analysis showed that divergence at neutral synonymous sites was  <dig>  substitutions per site. conversely, divergence at nonsynonymous positions was only  <dig>  substitutions per site; over an order of magnitude less than that of neutral divergence and suggests that high levels of purifying selection are acting on amino acid replacement sites. this is perhaps not surprising as the genes analyzed in this study are expressed early in embryonic development and therefore most are expected to be highly conserved. the average ratio of nonsynonymous- to synonymous divergences  was  <dig>  , which is comparable to that estimated using chicken-zebra finch sequences for the genes expressed in zebra finch embryo  <cit> . a previous study using zebra finch and emu  estimated the divergences at synonymous and nonsynonymous positions to be  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively  <cit> . however we found a much higher divergence between zebra finch and kiwi at synonymous  and nonsynonymous  positions, which suggests that the rate of evolution in kiwi might be faster than that of emu.

the distribution of the dn/ds ratio estimated for individual genes shows that over 60% of the genes were highly constrained  . on the other hand only 5% of the genes had a high  dn/ds ratio. among these we found  <dig> genes that appear to be evolving under positive selection . however the difference between the dn and ds estimates was not statistically different  for any gene. this is primarily due to the high variance in the estimates, caused by the short sequence length of the partial genes used in this analysis and this adversely affects ds estimates over dn estimates, as synonymous sites are fewer than replacement sites. a previous study observed a higher rate of evolution in the zebra finch lineage compared to chicken using anole lizard as an outgroup  <cit> . we examined this using kiwi as an outgroup and found an approximately 50% higher rate of evolution in the zebra finch lineage compared to chicken at synonymous  as well as at nonsynonymous  positions.

to compare sequence divergence between the birds and mammals we obtained the orthologous human and mouse genes and used the alignment that contained only the aligned regions from kiwi, chicken, human and mouse. therefore we could examine the rates and patterns of evolution in the same genes and regions from mammals and birds. this analysis using  <dig> genes showed that the divergence at synonymous sites between chicken and kiwi was almost identical to that between human and mouse . therefore the mutation rates of mammals and birds could be similar if the divergence times between human-mouse and chicken-kiwi splits are comparable. molecular data based studies estimates suggest a ~ <dig> my split for primates-rodents divergence  <cit>  and a ~ <dig> my split for paleo-neognathae birds  <cit> . furthermore fossil-based estimates also suggest a similar divergence time for the primates-rodents split  and for palaeognathae-neognathae split  <cit> . however the nonsynonymous divergence for the chicken-kiwi pair was significantly higher than that estimated for the human-mouse comparison . this suggests that despite the similarity in neutral substitution rates between mammals and birds, the magnitude of purifying selection appears to be much higher in the former than the latter. although the low coverage of our sequence data might include some sequencing errors  it will not significantly affect our results as the comparative analyses presented here involve only distantly related species.

previous studies showed a low nonsynonymous divergence in highly expressed genes, owing to a higher selection constraint on these genes  <cit> . we examined this for the kiwi-chicken species pair and found that this also holds true for these avian species. we found that the highly expressed genes are generally highly constrained and conversely the rate of evolution at nonsynonymous sites of the genes with low expression levels showed a large variation . therefore a simple correlation analysis does not capture the actual relationship between expression level and the rate of nonsynonymous site evolution. hence, we estimated the divergences at synonymous and nonsynonymous sites of genes with high, medium and low expression levels by concatenating the genes in each group. the nonsynonymous divergence of genes with low expression levels was found to be 50% higher than that of the genes with a high expression level  and this difference was statistically significant  using a z-test . however the divergence at synonymous sites of lowly expressed genes was not significantly different to that of the highly expressed genes  .

the expression levels determined for kiwi genes might be influenced by the level of coverage of individual genes. therefore we obtained the expression levels for the orthologous chicken genes using an embryonic chicken library   <cit> . only those genes that had a high expression level  in kiwi as well as in chicken embryos were designated as highly expressed genes. similarly we determined the genes with medium and low expression levels. although this reduced the number of genes in our analysis, this stringent approach also produced similar relationships between expression levels and the divergences . this analysis showed an almost two fold higher nonsynonymous divergence for lowly expressed genes than that of the genes with high expression level . the difference in the synonymous divergences between the genes with low and high expression levels was only 14% but was statistically significant . this result suggests very weak selection in synonymous sites of conserved genes of birds.

functional categories of proteins expressed in the kiwi embryo
to determine the functions associated with the kiwi proteins we obtained the functional annotations of their orthologous chicken counterparts from the biomart resource ensembl http://www.ensembl.org. our search using the gene ontology classification of chicken genes resulted in the identification of gene function for ~ <dig> genes. we found that the majority of the kiwi genes  code for dna/rna- or protein-binding proteins . this is not surprising as these proteins are largely involved in the control of transcription; an important regulatory activity expected in developing embryos. furthermore proteins that regulate translation were found to constitute roughly 8%. other major fractions of proteins detected were those that perform housekeeping functions such as catalysis   and transport .

we also determined the types metabolic pathways with which the kiwi genes are involved. this was done using information from the kegg pathway database http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html for the chicken genes, which were then assigned to the corresponding orthologous kiwi genes. figure 6b shows that roughly a quarter of kiwi genes were involved in genetic information processing pathways, which includes dna replication and transcription. approximately 27% and 21% of the genes were found to be associated with cellular and metabolic processes respectively. the remaining 14% of genes were shown to be involved in immunity and the endocrine system and 11% of the genes were associated with environmental processing including transport and signal transduction.

divergence times between paleo- and neognathae
we attempted to determine the divergence time between paleo- and neognathae birds as well as that between galloanseriformes and the remaining neognathae birds. for this purpose we compared the genomes of neognathae birds , a reptile  and used a mammal  as an outgroup. the orthologous sequences of these genomes were obtained using reciprocal blast. this resulted in an orthologous dataset of  <dig> genes and included only those protein-coding sequences that align with the kiwi transcripts. the nucleotide sequences of all genes were concatenated and the branch lengths were estimated using baseml under a general time reversible model of sequence evolution using the tree topology shown in figure  <dig>  first we conducted a simple direct estimation of the divergence times using pair-wise ml distances and a calibration time of  <dig> my  between reptiles and birds. the latter was obtained from fossil studies  <cit> . this yielded a time of  <dig> my for the paleo- and neognathae split  and  <dig> my for galloanseriformes and other neognathae birds . similar divergence times were obtained using a fossil calibration time of  <dig> my for the bird-mammal divergence  <cit> . we also performed a more rigorous bayesian approach using the program mutidivetime  <cit> . the divergence time estimates were  <dig> my  for the paleo- and neognathae birds and  <dig> my  for chicken-zebra finch pair, which are similar to those obtained using the direct method . furthermore, we estimated the divergence times using beast without forcing any phylogenetic relationship among the species. using the three birds and the anole lizard sequences we obtained the divergence times estimate by calibrating the molecular clock using the avian-reptile fossil based divergence time of  <dig> my. this analysis produced an estimate of  <dig> my , which is slightly higher than that obtained using the previous method. however, the confidence or hpd  intervals obtained from beast were within those obtained using multidivtime. the divergence time computed by beast for the chicken-zebra finch split was  <dig> my , which is similar to that obtained using multidivtime. furthermore, we estimated the divergence times directly using the neutral synonymous evolutionary rates estimated by a previous study. a previous study using over  <dig>  protein coding genes from chicken, zebra finch and anole lizard estimated the rate of neutral synonymous site evolution to be  <dig>  × 10- <dig> to  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  <cit> . using an average rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and a synonymous divergence of  <dig>  we estimated the divergence time between kiwi  and chicken  to be  <dig> my. similarly using this rate and the neutral distance of  <dig> , the divergence time for chicken-zebra finch pair was computed to be  <dig> my. clearly the divergence times estimated in this study using the three different methods are largely similar. furthermore these time estimates are comparable to those obtained using complete avian mitochondrial genomes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
using next generation sequencing technology our study provides some important insights into the conserved kiwi transcriptome. the neutral divergence at conserved protein coding genes of kiwi and chicken was found to be comparable to the synonymous divergence between human and mouse. however the divergence at amino acid replacement positions of these birds is much higher than the mammals suggesting a greater selective pressure in the latter. similar to the observations from the studies on mammals, a negative relationship between gene expression levels and rate of protein evolution was found in birds. this study provides divergence time estimates between paleognathae and neognathae birds based on > <dig> nuclear genes.

the conserved kiwi transcriptome data reported here are useful for further specific studies on kiwi genetics and will assist future complete kiwi genome sequencing efforts, specifically in aiding genome assembly and determining gene structure. importantly, our study provides a cost effective way to perform preliminary genome-based analyses and allows examination of some fundamental developmental and evolutionary processes of a species in the absence of a closely related genome.

