BACKGROUND
malaria is the most deadly tropical parasitic disease faced by mankind, responsible for around  <dig>  million deaths each year  <cit> . the malaria parasite plasmodium must complete a complex developmental cycle in the mosquito in order to be transmitted from person to person. when a female mosquito feeds on an infected human, it takes up parasite-laden blood. plasmodium gametocytes rapidly differentiate to male and female gametes, and fertilize inside the mosquito midgut to produce zygotes. the zygotes develop into motile ookinetes that invade and traverse the midgut epithelial cells  <cit> . in the space between the midgut epithelium and the basal lamina, the ookinetes transform into oocysts. after maturation, each oocyst ruptures and sends out thousands of sporozoites into the hemolymph. these sporozoites later migrate to the mosquito’s salivary glands and are released into the saliva during a subsequent blood meal, infecting another person and completing the parasite cycle in the mosquito  <cit> .

mosquitoes have developed various mechanisms to confront plasmodium infection. to accomplish transmission from person to person, the malaria parasite plasmodium must undergo complex developmental transitions and survive numerous attacks from the mosquito’s innate immunity system  <cit> . a variety of mosquito factors have been shown to affect the development of plasmodium parasites in the mosquito {reviewed in  <cit> }. a better understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie vector-parasite interaction may provide critical targets and facilitate the development of new effective malaria control strategies.

the midgut represents one of the most challenging environments for the survival and development of plasmodium. microarray analyses have unravelled many transcriptional changes in the mosquito midgut in response to plasmodium infection  <cit> . these informative studies detail the relative abundance of steady-state mrna, providing the vector-borne disease community with valuable information regarding the transcriptional response to infection. however, these assays could not address whether or when the cognate proteins are actually synthesized, and whether translational regulation of mosquito mrna takes place in response to plasmodium challenge.

polysome profiling has been previously used in other organisms to identify translational regulation in nutritional homeostasis  <cit> , cellular stress response  <cit> , embryogenesis  <cit> , spermatogenesis  <cit> , cancer progression and cancer chemotherapy  <cit> . this approach is based on the principle that messenger rnas that are being actively translated usually have multiple ribosomes associated with them, forming large structures known as polysomes. in contrast, translationally inactive mrnas generally are associated with messenger ribonucleoprotein particles or a single ribosome . sucrose density gradient centrifugation is used to separate polysomes from nonpolysomes. the mrna levels of individual genes in polysome fractions and nonpolysome fractions are determined by using a variety of different methods, and the ratios reflect mrna translational status  <cit> . here we report our systematic study of the translational status of individual mrna species in anopheles gambiae midguts after a blood meal containing plasmodium falciparum gametocytes. rna polysomal profiling indicates that transcripts of a large group of mosquito genes are enriched in polysome fractions in p. falciparum-infected mosquitoes, as compared with the uninfected control. the result suggests that translational regulation of gene expression in mosquito midguts has a profound impact on the anti-malaria reactions. this approach provides more molecular details in the interaction between mosquitoes and malaria parasites, and may reveal additional targets that can be exploited to reduce mosquito vector competence via genetic manipulation.

RESULTS
changes in mrna association with polysomes after p. falciparum infection
our hypothesis is that midgut invasion by p. falciparum ookinetes alters mosquito gene expression at both the transcriptional and translational levels. to test this hypothesis, we analyzed genome-wide mrna translational status by measuring the proportion of individual mrna species in polysome complexes.

midguts from female anopheles gambiae mosquitoes were dissected at approximately a day  after ingestion of p. falciparum-infected blood. mosquitoes fed on uninfected blood were used as control. a portion of the midguts were used for isolation of total cellular rna. extracts of the remaining midguts were fractionated over sucrose density gradients, and fifteen fractions were collected from the top of each gradient . non-polysomal fractions, as well as polysomal fractions were combined, respectively, to obtain two rna pools per gradient for three independent experiments. the first, last and the sample between non-polysomal and polysomal, were all discarded to ensure pure pools from each set. a fourth experiment was conducted where the polysomal and non-polysomal samples were not pooled, to be used later for qrt-pcr. the mrna levels of individual mosquito genes in polysome  fractions, nonpolysome  fractions and unfractionated steady-state  rna were determined using high throughput rna deep sequencing. each rna pool generated  <dig> - <dig>  million raw reads .

sequence reads are listed for three independent experiments . the six samples were multiplexed and sequenced together. each set had roughly  <dig> million raw reads. erroneous reads and reads where linkers were incomplete or missing were excluded from total number of reads. reads mapped to transcriptome are the number  of reads which matched back to the an. gambiae cdna p <dig>  database.

signal intensities of transcripts from each ps pool were compared to those of transcripts from a matching np pool. to quantify the translational status of individual mrna species, we define the relative ps loading  as the extent of mrna association with polysomes:

  pl=expressionlevelinpsexpressionlevelinnp+expressionlevelinps 

pl values were compared between the mosquitoes fed on p. falciparum-infected or -uninfected blood. after exposure to plasmodium parasites,  <dig> transcripts became increasingly associated with polysomes  in mosquito midguts . in contrast, only  <dig> transcripts shifted more towards nonpolysomal fractions .

to validate the alteration of polysome-mrna association, we carried out quantitative real-time rt-pcr  analysis with ps and np rnas collected in the above-mentioned experiments. pl values were compared for  <dig> selected genes between the plasmodium-challenged and control mosquitoes. these genes were selected to represent various expression levels and functional categories. a decent correlation coefficient  was observed between the pl values determined by rna deep sequencing and qrt-pcr, indicating that rna-seq analysis provides reliable pl data .

identification of mosquito genes that are primarily regulated at the translational level in response to p. falciparum infection
it is conceivable that some of changes in pl values simply reflect up- or down-regulation at the transcriptional level. the central concept of translational regulation is that cellular gene expression is governed by the efficiency of translation of a given mrna in the absence of a corresponding change in steady-state mrna levels  <cit> . in order to uncover mosquito genes that are regulated by translational mechanisms after exposure to plasmodium parasites, we plotted the difference in mrna association with polysomes  between the plasmodium-challenged and control mosquitoes against the difference in cellular transcript levels  for every detectable mrna. as shown in figure  <dig>  the dots in rectangle i represent transcripts that show no significant difference in total cellular abundance between the two mosquito groups, but vary considerably in polysomal association, indicating that expression of those genes is up-regulated at the translational level. the transcript levels of some other mrna species  decrease in the plasmodium-challenged mosquitoes, while the mrna polysomal recruitment even increases in these mosquitoes, again demonstrating the translational enhancement in the infected mosquitoes.

among the  <dig> transcripts showing significantly increased association with polysomes, the steady-state mrna levels of  <dig> transcripts also increased after plasmodium infection . the majority of the transcripts  remained at relatively constant level while the amount of mrna for  <dig> genes went down in the plasmodium-challenged mosquitoes. for the  <dig> transcripts exhibiting decreased association with polysomes, their steady-state mrna levels either showed no significant change in total cellular abundance or moved in opposite direction. together, we have identified  <dig> transcripts in the midgut of an. gambiae that are primarily regulated at translational level after ingestion of p. falciparum-infected blood. proteins encoded by these transcripts are predicted to have diverse molecular functions . compared with the transcriptome in the midgut, overrepresented or underrepresented gene ontologies were not found in the translationally regulated genes.

the list includes transcripts showing enhanced polysomal association  or decreased association  in response to plasmodium infection. unchanged steady state mrna levels are defined as within the cut-off .

translational regulation of immune-related genes in mosquito defense reactions against invading p. falciparum
in an. gambiae, twenty-five immune-related genes displayed a significantly higher polysomal association and therefore more active translation during infection . these genes are implicated in different pathways of mosquito innate immunity  <cit> . five genes  are involved in autophagy. seven genes  encode clip-domain serine proteases and serine protease inhibitors that are presumably involved in activation cascades. two genes  encode enzymes that catalyze generation and detoxification of reactive oxygen species, respectively. three genes  are components of toll and imd immune signalling pathways. five genes  encode key proteins in the small rna regulatory pathway.

among  <dig> transcripts that are translationally regulated after ingestion of p. falciparum-infected blood,  <dig> transcripts have putative or established immune-related function . in several cases, alternate splice variants of the same gene were detected. most of the transcripts in this list displayed significant translational change when insignificant change was observed in mrna levels . some transcripts  showed significant downregulation in transcription and upregulation in translation.

we selected four genes from the list to perform detailed polysomal profiling analysis . the clipb <dig> transcript was barely associated with ribosomes in the uninfected mosquitoes, and mrna polysome association was evident in the p. falciparum-infected mosquitoes. for caspar, dcr <dig> and dcr <dig>  their transcripts were loaded on polysomes even in the uninfected mosquitoes. it appeared that each mrna molecule was associated with markedly more ribosomes in the infected mosquitoes as the transcripts were shifting more toward the bottom of the sucrose gradient, suggesting that more proteins were synthesized from each mrna template. in contrast, the housekeeping gene rps <dig> did not alter its mrna distribution within the polysome profiles in the same experiment. the result demonstrated that the identified genes were regulated at the translational level in response to plasmodium infection.

discussion
in this study, we discovered that a plethora of mosquito genes showed no significant difference in total cellular abundance between the plasmodium-infected and uninfected mosquitoes, but varied considerably in polysomal association. translational regulation allows cells to respond swiftly to all types of environmental stimuli and to fine-tune protein levels in both time and space. for most of the genes, it is unknown whether the enhanced translation is directly related to defense responses against invading p. falciparum.

some of the genes, however, have been shown previously to play pivotal roles in anti-plasmodium immunity. when the midgut of an. gambiae was invaded by the rodent malaria parasite plasmodium berghei, srpn <dig> was transcriptionally activated and overexpressed srpn <dig> proteins were detected in the parasite-invaded midgut epithelial cells  <cit> . however, the mrna levels were not significantly changed when an. gambiae was infected by the human malaria parasite p. falciparum <cit> . our experiment suggests that more srpn <dig> proteins are still synthesized in the midgut of the infected mosquitoes as a result of enhanced translation.

rel <dig> and rel <dig>  two nf-κb-like transcription factors, are key regulators of the mosquito immune response. rel <dig> plays a critical role in controlling resistance of an. gambiae to the rodent malaria parasite p. berghei, while rel <dig> seems to provide more protection against the human malaria parasite p. falciparum <cit> . rel <dig> and rel <dig> are controlled by the negative regulators cactus and caspar, respectively. our analysis suggested that rel <dig>  cactus and caspar were all translationally upregulated in the p. falciparum-infected mosquitoes. in future studies it will be interesting to find out whether over-expression of these proteins is restricted in the parasite-invaded midgut epithelial cells or occurs in all the epithelial cells. this may help to explain why expression of rel <dig> and its inhibitor are both enhanced in response to plasmodium infection.

we found significant up-regulation at the translational level in multiple proteins  that are required for biogenesis of mirna and sirna. the sirna pathway is essential to the survival of mosquitoes infected with sindbis virus and west nile virus  <cit> . the mirna pathway has previously been implicated in an. gambiae when infected with plasmodium <cit>  and in culicine mosquitoes infected with viral invaders  <cit> . winter et al. found that p. berghei infection was significantly enhanced by knockdown of key components of the mirna pathway , suggesting a role for these proteins in the response to infection  <cit> . this is the first time, to our knowledge, that mosquito mirna processing proteins have been found to be regulated at the translational level in response to p. falciparum infection in an. gambiae.

additional proteins showing significant translational change include spindle e , which is involved in rna interference  <cit> . the predominantly upregulated translation that we have observed in this experiment and the presumably enhanced rna interference activity seem to crease a paradox. in a preliminary study, we have observed significant increase of several mosquito mirnas in the p. berghei-infected mosquitoes as compared with the uninfected control. studies are ongoing to determine functions of those mirnas and to identify their mrna targets in the mosquito midgut.

translation of mrna transcripts that we identified in this study is modulated without affecting the translational status of the cellular transcriptome as a whole. several regulatory mechanisms could lead to the enhanced polysome association of mrna: subcellular translocation may render some mrna more accessible to ribosomes; particular rna sequence motifs that are present in the 5′ and/or 3′ untranslated regions  of the target mrna are recognized by sequence-specific rna-binding proteins. are all the identified transcripts regulated by the same mechanism? a follow-up question is, what signal initiates the translational regulation? the ctrp knockout mutant strain of p. falciparum has impaired locomotion and is unable to invade the midgut epithelium  <cit> . comparing mrna translational states between mosquitoes that are infected by ookinetes of the wild-type plasmodium or ctrp knockout plasmodium mutant will reveal whether the translational regulation is triggered by ookinete invasion of the mosquito midgut.

this study takes a snapshot at 22– <dig> h after blood feeding, and demonstrates that both transcriptional and translational regulation of mosquito genes takes place when plasmodium parasites invade the mosquito midgut. in order to provide a comprehensive view of the mode of gene regulation, more experiments need to be conducted with midguts and some other tissues  at various time points after an infected blood meal. furthermore, it is imperative to examine translational regulation in natural vector-parasite combinations since co-evolution and natural selection has made the mosquito-plasmodium interactions vary among different vector-parasite combinations, or even between different geographical strains of the same species. comparing gene expression in the plasmodium-refractory and susceptible mosquitoes taken recently from an epidemic region in africa may lead to identification of mosquito factors that determine the ability of mosquitoes to transmit the parasites.

CONCLUSIONS
we report a previously neglected aspect of gene expression regulation in the midgut of an. gambiae mosquitoes after ingestion of a plasmodium-infected blood meal. compared with the mosquitoes fed on uninfected blood, a large group of genes in the infected mosquitoes exhibit a redistribution of their mrna transcripts between monosomes  and translationally active polysomes, without a concomitant change in the steady-state mrna levels. this finding supports our hypothesis that the anti-malarial response of anopheles gambiae occurs at both the transcriptional and translational level. elucidating the profound impact on translation of mosquito mrna will extend knowledge of the molecular interaction between malaria parasites and their mosquito hosts. genes for which mrna translation is affected by plasmodium infection may have been previously deemed “irrelevant” simply because their transcription is not altered by exposure to the parasites. functions of genes identified in this project will be further explored in future studies to reveal new targets that can be employed to reduce mosquito vector competence.

