BACKGROUND
the ability to raise antibodies with high affinity and specificity to almost any biomolecular target has made antibodies essential components in many biomedical fields, both in diagnostics and in the active targeting of drugs and contrast agents for molecular imaging  <cit> . for many of these applications there has been a drive to move towards smaller antibody formats, both to allow efficient recombinant production in e. coli and to potentially avoid unwanted immunogenic problems  <cit> . the ability to express these smaller antibody fragments in e. coli has also allowed the application of phage display approaches to allow in vitro screening of large libraries of antibody fragments. nowadays, a wide range of smaller antibody formats are available including monovalent antibody fragments , single-chain antibody fragments , and single-domain antibodies   <cit> . the latter, which are sometimes also referred to as nanobodies, are derived from heavy-chain-only antibodies that have been found in camels, dromedaries, llamas and sharks  <cit> . single-domain antibodies are the smallest antibody fragments available to date and have unique features including high solubility and thermal stability  <cit> .

current methods for bioconjugation of antibody fragments are non-specific and usually rely on amine and cysteine functionalities present on the protein surface  <cit> . this lack of control over the conjugation reaction gives rise to heterogeneous protein-nanoparticles. moreover, the smaller size of single-domain antibodies compared to full size antibodies significantly increases the risk of affecting key residues near the antigen binding site when using non-specific conjugation strategies. in recent years several bioorthogonal ligation reactions that were originally developed in peptide chemistry have been applied for chemoselective protein functionalization of nanoparticles and chip surfaces  <cit> . two examples of antibody conjugation using oxime chemistry were recently reported that take advantage of novel methods to selectively oxidize the n-terminus of antibodies or introduce genetically-encoded aldehyde tags at any position in the antibody sequence  <cit> . while promising, the applicability of oxime chemistry is still hampered by the incomplete introduction of ketone functionalities and the inability to use n-terminal acetylated proteins  <cit> . we and others have therefore explored the use of native chemical ligation  as an alternative chemoselective conjugation reaction, demonstrating its potential for the ligation of proteins to chip surfaces, dendrimers, supported lipid bilayers, micelles and liposomes  <cit> . native chemical ligation is a chemoselective reaction under aqueous conditions between a c-terminal thioester and an n-terminal cysteine yielding a native peptide bond  <cit> . site-specific coupling via ncl was made possible by the development of expression systems with self-cleavable intein domains to generate recombinant proteins with c-terminal thioesters  <cit> .

intein fusion proteins are normally expressed in the cytoplasm of e. coli, a reducing environment that prevents the proper formation of disulfide bonds that are essential for antibody stability. in vitro refolding of scfv-intein fusion proteins followed by on-column ncl has been reported  <cit> , but the requirement to perform ncl on the column limits the applicability of this method. we recently reported a refolding procedure based on the redox couple sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate /sodium  <dig> -dithio-bis  to generate disulfide-containing proteins with a c-terminal mesna thioester  <cit> . however, also for this method the requirement to do in-vitro refolding presents an important practical limitation. here, we present an efficient strategy to obtain well-folded single-domain antibodies with a reactive c-terminal thioester by targeting the intein fusion protein to the periplasm of e. coli. targeting antibody fragments to the oxidizing environment of the bacterial periplasm is known to increase the amount of active antibody fragments by allowing proper disulfide bond formation. following this new procedure single-domain antibodies with c-terminal thioesters are obtained that can be directly coupled to cysteine-functionalized micelles to generate immunomicelles via native chemical ligation.

RESULTS
production of single-domain antibodies with a c-terminal thioester
our approach, schematically depicted in figure  <dig>  was tested using a llama single-domain antibody obtained from screening a phage display library against glutathione-s from schistosoma japonicum. the dna sequence encoding for this antibody domain  was provided in the phenix vector which contains an n-terminal sequence encoding a periplasmic leader sequence  and c-terminally a vesicular stomatitis virus  tag for detection purposes   <cit> . the pelb leader sequence was used to target the protein to the oxidizing environment of the periplasm, because the sdab-agst protein contains a conserved disulfide bond that is known to be important for the stability of these single domain antibodies  <cit> . since transport of the fusion protein to the periplasm could be dependent on the nature of the intein, we tested two commercially available intein expression vectors, ptxb <dig> and ptyb <dig> , that differ in the nature of the intein domain. the target gene was cloned at the n-terminus of the inteins while a chitin-binding domain  was present at the c-terminus of the intein for purification purposes. both expression vectors were transformed into e. coli bl <dig>  and expression was assayed under a variety of conditions. sds-page analysis showed that expression using the ptxb <dig> vector allowed efficient transport of the intein fusion protein to the periplasm of e. coli, as evidenced by a band of  <dig> kda in the periplasmic fraction . in contrast, expression of the single-domain antibody using the ptyb <dig> vector resulted in accumulation of the fusion protein as an insoluble aggregate in the cytoplasm of e. coli .

the sdab-agst protein contains a single disulfide bond that has previously been shown to play an essential role in the stability of these single-domain antibodies. to establish whether the reducing conditions used during mesna cleavage affected the sdab-agst-mesna produced in this manner, its interaction with gst was studied using surface plasmon resonance . initial attempts to immobilize the sdab-agst-mesna to the cm <dig> biacore chip using a standard amine coupling procedure resulted in a complete loss of gst binding capacity, suggesting that this classical amine coupling affects residues critical for antigen binding. the sdab-agst-mesna protein contains  <dig> lysine residues, two of which are indeed located near the antigen binding site. to exclude antibody deactivation the assay was reversed and gst was immobilized on the cm <dig> chip. figure 3a shows a clear binding response of the sdab-agst-mesna to gst with an apparent dissociation constant of  <dig> nm. this number is in good agreement with results from an elisa assay, which showed a dissociation constant of  <dig> nm . the observed dissociation constants for the sdab-agst are similar to those reported for other single-domain antibodies  <cit> . in addition, spr analysis of sdab-agst-mesna after ncl with cysteine  showed binding behavior that was similar to that of untreated sdab-agst . so while we cannot exclude at this time that the disulfide bond becomes transiently reduced during mesna treatment or ncl, these procedures did not irreversibly affect the functionality of sdab-gst.

preparation of immunomicelles with single-domain antibodies using ncl
to test the performance of sdab-agst-mesna in ncl reactions, we first assessed its reactivity towards cysteine-functionalized biotin. ligation of this small molecule can be conveniently monitored using lc-ms. in addition, single-domain antibodies with c-terminal biotin groups are attractive for use in combination with the many streptavidin-modified compounds that are now commercially available. figure  <dig> shows the lc-ms analysis of the product obtained after reaction of sdab-agst-mesna with an excess of cysteine-functionalized biotin overnight at room temperature. again two peaks appear in the chromatogram corresponding to sdab-agst with various fragments of the pelb leader sequence still attached. all peaks correspond to biotinylated forms of sdab-agst, with the exception of a minor peak at  <dig> da corresponding to a small amount of unreacted sdab-agst-mesna.

having established the essentially complete biotinylation of sdab-agst-mesna, we next used the sdab-agst-mesna to prepare immunomicelles  <cit> . pegylated phospholipids such as peg2000-dspe are known to form relatively stable micelles with a critical micelle concentration  of ~ <dig> μm, forming micelles with a diameter of  <dig> nm and approximately  <dig> lipids per micelle  <cit> . by attaching cysteine-functionalities at the end of the peg-chain  we recently showed that these micelles can be readily functionalized with up to  <dig> copies of the collagen binding protein cna <dig> equipped with a c-terminal thioester. here we used the same procedure to prepare micelles functionalized with sdab-agst. micelles were prepared by mixing cysteine-functionalized phospholipids  and rhodamine phospholipids in a 40: <dig> ratio, followed by addition of sdab-agst-mesna in a 1: <dig> protein-lipid ratio. sds-page analysis showed essentially complete conversion to the lipidated form after overnight incubation with  <dig> mm 4- thiophenol  . based on the aggregation number of  <dig> lipids per micelle and the full conversion of the sdab-agst to the lipidated form, one can calculate that the micelles contained on average eight sdab-agst proteins and two rhodamines. a solid-phase binding assay shows specific binding of the sdab-agst functionalized micelles to gst with half maximal binding at  <dig> μm peg2000-dspe. since no binding was observed for non-functionalized micelles, and because the rhodamine-lipid is associated with the micelle via non-covalent interactions, this assay provides direct evidence for the specific binding of intact immunomicelles. it is important to note that the apparent dissociation constant of ~ <dig> μm is based on the lipid concentration and reflects the stability of the micelles and not the intrinsic affinity of the sdab domains attached to the micelles. a similar phenomenon was observed previously for the binding of cna35-functionalized micelles to collagen, which also showed half maximal binding at a lipid concentration of ~ <dig> μm, despite the fact that cna <dig> by itself binds collagen with  <dig>  μm affinity  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
an efficient strategy was developed that generates active, folded single-domain antibodies with a reactive c-terminal thioester for direct application in nanoparticle functionalization via native chemical ligation. two applications were reported here to illustrate their potential as generic building blocks for the generation of targeted nanoparticles, the generation of biotinylated single-domain antibodies and the efficient preparation of immunomicelles. finally, the approach of targeting intein fusion proteins to the bacterial periplasm may provide a generic, attractive alternative to existing methods to obtain disulfide-containing proteins with a c-terminal thioester.

