BACKGROUND
mutations are the basis of genetic variation and mutant populations are indispensable genetic resources in all organisms. this variation can be either naturally occurring or, in plants, animals and lower organisms, induced by chemical or physical treatments. mutation induction, for example, has played an important role in the genetic improvement of crop species that are of economic significance.

in breeding of aquacultural fish species, it is a final goal to discover and generate the fish with various useful phenotypes for supplying to consumers. currently genetic breeding is carried out with the search for natural variation in traits such as growth, productivity and disease resistance, and then improved strains are produced by genetic selection or marker-assisted breeding approaches  <cit> . thus the success of fish breeding solely depends on the mutations pre-existing in the focal population. the rate of natural spontaneous mutations in fish species is generally lower than  <dig> ×10- <dig> at specific loci. on the other hand, mutation frequency caused by radiation and chemical mutagenesis range from  <dig> ×10- <dig> to  <dig> ×10- <dig> at specific loci when in vivo spermatogonial treatments were carried out in zebrafish and medaka  <cit> . given the high frequency of the mutation ratio, it is reasonable to consider that the chemical mutagenesis will be an efficient way to produce new mutants for future genetic improvement in aquacultural species.

tilling  is a reverse genetics strategy that identifies induced mutations in specific genes of interest in chemically mutagenized populations with high-throughput discovery technologies. tilling, first described in  <dig> for mutation detection in arabidopsis <cit> , is now used in a wide range of plants including soybean  <cit> , rice  <cit> , barley  <cit>  and maize  <cit>  as well as for animal model systems, including drosophila <cit> , caenorhabditis elegans <cit> , rat  <cit> , medaka  <cit> , zebrafish  <cit>  and for the discovery of naturally occurring polymorphisms in humans  <cit> .

the first step in tilling is chemical mutagenesis. in plants, mutations have been induced by using ethylmethane sulfonate  and methylnitrosourea   <cit> . in animals, ems is used in many invertebrate species for mutagenesis, whereas n-ethyl-n-nitrosourea  is used for males of vertebrates, and is the most widely employed method  <cit> . enu acts as an alkylating agent and transfers its ethyl group to nucleophilic nitrogen or oxygen sites on deoxyribonucleotides, leading to base mismatch during dna replication. single-base substitutions that resemble natural spontaneous mutations  <cit> , are mainly induced by enu treatment and all genes are mutated at random  <cit> . because this protocol induces mutations in germ-line stem cells, mutations are transmitted at the rate for at least several months after the treatment. also, the mutations are induced with premeiotic enu treatment, so that the initial mutation, usually an ethylation of a base on one dna strand, is fixed by dna replication prior to production of differentiated sperm, leading to non-mosaic offspring in the next generation  <cit> . on the other hand, it has been recently reported that some point mutations were induced by postmeiotic mutagenesis in ctenopharyngodon idellus  with enu for mature sperm  <cit> . in zebrafish, the postmeiotic enu mutagenesis resulted in mosaic progeny, but produced a  <dig> fold increase in the frequency of induced mutations  <cit> . this protocol in zebrafish has been also shown to induce mutations such as deletions and translocations triggered by chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> . these results indicate that postmeitotic enu treatment of male germ cells can induce a variety of mutations from point mutations to deletions and translocations.

in zebrafish and medaka, which are model fish, mutations are introduced in spermatogonia by soaking founder fish in enu solution  <cit> . however, this protocol is difficult to apply to many aquaculture species including fugu, as the body size of these fish is markedly larger than that of medaka and zebrafish. thus alternative protocols are required for fish with a large body size.

after the enu treatment, a large f <dig> population is generated to choose the mutations for purpose from many random heterozygous mutations in their genomes. as the next step in tilling, the genomic dna from these animals containing induced mutations is screened with discovery technologies. sequencing is considered the standard for dna-based mutation detection because it reveals the exact location and the type of mutations. taniguchi et al. employed a direct sequencing approach even for the prescreening step  <cit> . cel i nuclease-mediated screening of heteroduplexes are widely carried out to detect mutations in tilling  <cit> . both methods are effective, but the costs are substantial and it takes a relatively long time for the screening. recently, high resolution melting  analysis has succeeded to detect point mutations in plant populations  <cit> , medaka tilling library  <cit>  and human disease  <cit> . hrm analysis makes use of characteristics in dna as follows; the thermal stability of a dna fragment is determined by its base sequence. when the dna fragment contains an altered sequence, the duplex stability is changed, leading to different melting behavior. thus changes in the sequence within the dna fragment such as point mutation can be detected by the melting analysis.

to apply tilling technology for breeding practices, it is critical to select a proper target gene in which mutations are likely to cause useful phenotypes such as rapid growth and disease resistance. one of the growth-related factors, myostatin  is a member of the transforming growth factor-β  superfamily, and functions as a negative regulator of skeletal muscle mass  <cit> . naturally occurring mutations in the mstn gene have been identified in double-muscling cattle breeds  <cit> , mice  <cit> , dogs  <cit>  and even humans  <cit> . recently, we have demonstrated that the antagonistic role of mstn against muscle growth is conserved from mammals to fish species  <cit> . indeed mstn-deficient medaka , which were generated by the tilling method, show a significant increase in body weight in comparison with wild-type medaka, due to over-growth of muscles. therefore, mstn is a promising target gene for mutation breeding in fishes.

here, in order to initiate targeted mutation breeding in fish improvement, we searched for efficient methods for tilling combining enu mutagenesis with hrm analysis in takifugu rubripes, tiger pufferfish . fugu males were treated with enu via intraperitoneal injection each week for three weeks, and the sperm collected from the founder fish was used for in vitro fertilization to obtain the progeny. we then isolated genomic dna from the progeny, and carried out hrm analysis targeting the exon  <dig> of fugu mstn gene. our screening successfully identified ten mutations including one nonsense mutation in fugu mstn gene. the mutation frequency in fugu mstn gene was similar to that identified in the medaka tilling library, demonstrating that we were able to establish an effective protocol of the tilling method in fugu. this protocol is likely to be applicable to various species of aquacultured fish.

RESULTS
development of the enu mutagenesis protocol for fugu tilling
in order to develop a protocol for enu mutagenesis in fugu, we performed intraperitoneal injections of enu, referring to the method used for mouse mutagenesis  <cit> . previous study has shown that inheritable point mutations are induced by enu treatment at the spermatogonia stage in mouse  <cit> . based on the report, fugu males were injected with enu at a dose of 70 mg/kg body weight,  <dig> times at weekly intervals at the stage before spermiation when early stages of spermatogenesis were progressing . the injected fish began to die at  <dig> to 6 weeks after the last enu treatment . the surviving fish were treated with the hormone, gonadotropin, to trigger sperm production and spermiation. their sperm was collected for fertilization and cryopreservation during  <dig> to 7 weeks after the enu treatment. no fish survived more than 9 weeks after the last enu treatment. we then performed in vitro fertilization using the collected sperm to obtain mutagenized f <dig> fry. the average fertilization ratio was 89%, which is comparable to the ratio of non-mutagenized sperm. although the hatching ratio was low , most of the hatched fry had a normal appearance without teratogenesis. therefore, we determined the method for the enu mutagenesis in fugu as follows: the founder fish are treated with the 70 mg/kg of enu concentration  <dig> times at weekly intervals during the early mature stage to the late maturation stage in spermatogenesis of the fish.

enu treatment in tilling method has been shown to effectively produce a lot of mutations. in mouse, enu induces mutations at a relatively high rate with a dose dependency  <cit> . next, we examined whether various enu concentrations were effective on viability of the founder fish and their progeny . the fish were injected intraperitoneally with enu at a dose of  <dig>   <dig> or 120 mg/kg body weight, and with the buffer prepared for dissolving enu as the control  to remove the effect of injection on the fish. we examined the number of surviving founder fish after treatment with each enu concentration. although almost all fish with enu in a dose of  <dig>  70 mg/kg  survived at 4 weeks after the last enu treatment, the fish with enu in a dose of 120 mg/kg  began to die at that time. the fish, which were collected sperm at 8 weeks after the last enu treatment, survived till 5 months after the enu experiments. final survival rates of each enu concentration were as follows: 7 mg/kg, 100%; 70 mg/kg, 50%; 120 mg/kg, 33%. after gonadotropin treatment in each family, the collected sperm was used for in vitro fertilization. the fertilization ratio  and the hatching ratio  in each cross were similar to those of control . more than ten thousand hatched fry of fugu were obtained in each family. they revealed that the fertilization and hatching ratios were unaffected by the dosage of enu when the concentration of enu was varied from 7 mg/kg to 120 mg/kg.

in vitro fertilization was carried out by using eggs from wild-type fugu and the sperm treated with enu concentrations as described above.  <dig> of fertilized eggs in each family were counted at the  <dig> cell stage for fertilization ratio, while at the melanophore appearing stage for the hatching ratio. these ratios were calculated according to methods. founder fish treated with buffer was used as the control .

in the course of the above experiment, we noted that the enu-treated founder fish did not spermiate without the gonadotropin treatment injection. then, we investigated the timing of the gonadotropin treatment to maximize the amount of sperm to collect . gonadotropin treatment was performed with the fish at  <dig> or 3 weeks after the last enu treatment, which was the stage before the fish began to die as described above. to determine the time period for sperm collection after the gonadotropin treatment, we counted the number of spermiated fish at  <dig>   <dig> and 6 weeks after the last enu treatment, and measured the volume of sperm . in the gonadotropin treatment at  <dig> and 3 weeks after the last enu treatment, sperm was collected at both  <dig> and 6 weeks, while fish did not spermiate at 3 weeks after the last enu treatment. the frequency of spermiated fish was higher in the gonadotropin treatment at 3 weeks than at 2 weeks after the last enu treatment. there was no noticeable difference between the volume of sperm in each week after the gonadotropin treatment. in the control without the gonadotropin treatment, the fish did not spermiate until 5 weeks after the last enu treatment, and produce a very small amount of sperm at 6 weeks. the volumes of all sperm collected under these conditions were sufficient for cryopreservation, except for the fish without hormonal treatment. from the results, we fixed the method as follows: the gonadotropin treatment for the founder was carried out at 3 weeks after the last enu treatment, and then the sperm from the fish was collected at 3 weeks after the gonadotropin treatment.

* reveals ratio of fish which were able to collect the enu-mutagenized sperm to the examined fish.

target gene for generation of a fugu mutant with tilling
our long-term goal is to generate a fugu line that exhibits a useful phenotype for the aquaculture industry by tilling and to apply this technology to a variety of aquacultured species. recently, we have reported that myostatin -deficient medaka exhibited a double-muscling phenotype with hyperplasia and hypertrophy  <cit> . there is a high possibility that mstn-deficient fugu exhibits such the phenotype, if a mutation is found in the same position or the significant region of mstn gene in medaka. therefore, we amplified presumable full-length cdna of fugu mstn using cdna from the muscle as a template. sequencing of these products indicated that fugu mstn comprises  <dig> exons, and encodes a protein consisting of  <dig> amino acids . the fugu mstn amino acid sequence has  <dig> % identity to medaka and highly  <dig> % identity in the c-terminal active peptide of mstn . search in the fugu genome assembly suggested that fugu has a single copy of this gene.

detection of enu-induced mutations in fugu with hrm analysis and dna sequencing
since tilling can identify mutations in the heterozygous condition, it is possible to screen using the f <dig> offspring of enu mutagenesis. we performed the hrm analysis to screen for enu-induced mutations in the c-terminal region of fugu mstn gene, since the region is highly conserved among vertebrates , and is responsible for the function of mstn  <cit> . to screen correctly and quickly a large amount of genomic dna, efficient protocols for hrm analysis were explored with a dna automatic dispensing machine and a detection device for  <dig> samples. genomic dna was extracted from  <dig>  fry obtained from in vitro fertilization with the enu-treated sperm. these dna were subjected to the nested pcr with some primers of the fugu mstn  and two amplicons figure 2a  were used for hrm analysis. examples of the melting curves and the differentiation plots in fugu mstn gene are shown in figure  <dig>  the mutation candidates were clearly indicated in each family . the amplicons selected as positive samples were subjected to direct sequencing in order to confirm whether they contain mutations. overlapping peaks in the dna sequence traces revealed that an f <dig> individual carries a heterozygous point mutation , while this mutation was not observed in the rest of the siblings as well as in both parents. the results demonstrate that the mutations were induced by enu treatment in fugu.

as shown in table  <dig>  ten types of mutations were detected by hrm analysis and then confirmed by direct sequencing . also, it was found that all the enu-induced mutations in fugu were point mutations. the number of the induced mutations was an average of  <dig> to  <dig> in each family treated with various enu concentrations . when the effect of injection into fugu on the mutations was examined in the control , no mutations were recognized. this indicates that the number of induced mutations does not depend on the concentration of enu within the range of  <dig> to 120 mg/kg. consistent with this, the dose-dependent effects were not observed on the fertilization and the hatching ratios .

: a is the nucleotide of wild-type and b is the nucleotide of the mutant. x indicates a stop codon. there were ten types of mutation in the investigated region with hrm analysis . the nonsense mutation is underlined.

identification of mstn-deficient mutation in fugu
the nonsense mutation we discovered changes a cytosine to an adenine in exon  <dig> of fugu mstn converting a tyrosine codon to a stop codon in a fry from the family  <dig> . while the fry was heterozygous at this site, its parents and control fish were homozygous , suggesting that the mutation was induced by the enu treatment. dna sequencing of the amplicon cloned into a plasmid vector confirmed the presence of this mutation . the nonsense mutation was also examined with cel i assay . the cleavage product was detected in the cel i reactions of the mutant dna , but they were not in the reactions of wild-type dna . the mutation likely results in the loss-of-function of mstn in fugu, as a critical part of the amino acid chain, the c-terminal peptide, are no longer created due to the stop codon.

enu-induced mutation ratio in fugu
the mutation ratio in the mutagenesis is a key point to produce the mutants effectively. therefore, the ratio was calculated using data detected in fugu mstn gene by hrm analysis. we screened about  <dig>  mb in total and identified  <dig> independent mutations . therefore, the enu-induced mutation ratio for fugu mstn gene was one substitution per 297 kb.

discussion
establishment of fugu tilling
schematic model for fugu tilling method is summarized in figure  <dig> as follows: fugu males are treated with enu  <dig> times at weekly intervals at the stage before spermiation and then treated with gonadotropin at 3 weeks after the last enu treatment to facilitate the sperm production and spermiation. the sperm from the founder fish was collected at 3 weeks after the gonadotropin treatment and used for in vitro fertilization to obtain hatched fry. the genomic dna extracted from the fry was subjected to pcr and the amplicons were used to screen enu-induced mutations with hrm in a fugu gene of interest. our study firstly demonstrated that tilling technology is applicable to aquacultured fish. interestingly, the tilling approach in fugu could be used in a similar way as in plants  <cit> . we can treat them like plant seeds derived from mutagenized ancestor, because sufficient eggs and sperm to obtain a large amount of f <dig> progeny are prepared for a single pair of fugu female and male. furthermore, mutations induced by tilling in fugu can be readily distinguished from endogenous snp, since a single female and male pair is used for the cross. on the contrary, it has been pointed out that non-predictable frequency of endogenous snp in a mutagenized bank derived from multiple founders is an obstacle for the screening in zebrafish and medaka  <cit> . tilling can be considered as an appropriate method for many aquacultured fish producing a large number of eggs.

recently, in vitro enu mutagenesis of postmeiotic sperm was performed in grass carp  <cit> . in their study, the induced mutations were investigated using growth-related genes  and the estimated mutation ratio was around  <dig> %. however, the mutations are apparently mosaic in f <dig> individuals. mosaicism of the induced mutation was also reported in zebrafish when postmeiotic sperm was mutagenized  <cit> . this situation makes recovery of the mutant line inefficient in contrast to the case of non-mosaic mutation induced by enu-treatment of spermatogonia  <cit> . the mosaicism in f <dig> individuals and resulting non-mendelian transmission from f <dig> to f <dig> generations hinder some screening protocols. in addition, large-scale rearrangements of the genomic structure such as translocation of genomic segments have been reported following the mutagenesis of postmeiotic sperm  <cit> . therefore, the suitability of the in vitro enu mutagenesis of postmeiotic sperm for mutation breeding in fish improvement remains to be verified. although the in vitro enu treatment is more convenient than the in vivo methods used in fugu and other model animals, it will be required to examine whether the induced mutations will be inherited by the progeny in the mutants.

in tilling, high efficiency for enu-induced mutations is required to obtain various phenotypes in gene of interest. a previous report indicated that the induced mutation frequency increased with enu dose dependently in mouse  <cit> . in this study, there was no difference in the number of surviving fish, fertilization and hatching ratios in enu treatment with  <dig>  70 mg/kg . enu treatment with 120 mg/kg affected slightly on the number of surviving treated fugu. however, the number of the induced mutations did not tend to increase in each enu concentration between 7 mg/kg and 120 mg/kg . these results suggested that each enu concentration in the method may become saturation in premeiotic sperm  of fugu.

identification of fugu mstn mutant
it has been reported that loss of the mstn function in medaka and mice causes double-muscling phenotype with both hyperplasia and hypertrophy  <cit> . in the present study, enu-induced mutations in fugu mstn were confirmed and in particular, the nonsense mutation  was identified at c-terminal region of the peptide. the mstn mutant medaka  made by using the tilling method  <cit>  corresponded to a naturally occurring mutation  in double-muscled piedmontese cattle  <cit>  . the cysteine residue at the 315-position exists in c-terminal region of the mstn peptide  and is known to be one of the important amino acid residues involved in forming the cysteine knot structure in members of the tgf-β superfamily  <cit> . the structure functions as a homodimer to elicit a biological function  <cit> . therefore, we speculate that the structural formation composed of six essential cysteines in fugu mstn will be non functional by the truncated form of the peptide resulting from a point mutation at  <dig> of tyr. eventually, the mutation will be conceivable to cause loss of the mstn function in fugu mstn mutant. the double-muscling phenotype in medaka and bovine could be similarly expected for an mstn-deficient mutant fugu.

development of hrm analysis
for screening, there are a variety of mutation discovery technologies such as direct dna sequencing, cel i assay and hrm analysis  <cit> . we introduced the hrm analysis for screening system in fugu because there is no albino mutant in fugu for specific locus test  and the analysis has recently succeeded to detect point mutations as a screening step for the tilling approach  <cit> . but, there was room for improvement with respect to the cost and variability of output data. in this study, we have developed a system of hrm analysis as follows: cost-cutting with fluorescent intercalator; syto  <dig>  introduction of the nested pcr for precision enhancement and avoidance of variability, speed-up with  <dig> samples treatment in a single experiment, and high uniformity of dispensed volume and removal of human error by using the automatic dispense device. as a result of the improvement, some mutations could be detected efficiently in the analysis . it is difficult for hrm analysis to investigate mutations with a long amplicon in comparison with the other methods, but the acquisition of melting profiles in hrm is not dependent on the location and number of mutations present in the analyzed fragment. it has been compared about the mutations detected by the screening approaches. the results indicate that hrm analysis is useful as resequencing in medaka  <cit>  and more efficient than cel i assay in mammals  <cit> . taken together, these demonstrate that hrm analysis is a reliable high-throughput approach for screening enu-mutagenized individuals in potentially various species.

mutation ratios in fugu tilling
the mutation ratio in enu mutagenesis has been calculated in a slt using the albino mutant in zebrafish and medaka  <cit> . the characteristics of the albino mutant in fish reveal mainly red eyes and one of the responsible genes is tyrosinase. in some aquacultured fish with albino mutants, it may be easy for these enu-treated fish to examine the mutation ratio with slt. however, albino mutants are not found in nature in all animal species.

instead of slt, the mutation ratio was calculated using base-pairs screened and the number of mutations detected in fugu mstn gene by hrm analysis . the frequency in fugu  is similar to the mutation frequency in medaka  and in zebrafish , which were calculated by resequencing data  <cit> . this suggests that enu mutagenesis in fugu was efficiently performed in our way and the protocol detailed here will potentially be useful for constructing a tilling library.

cg to at  changes are often detected in hrm analysis, but the endogenous snps are also detected as the same changes and give the most significant difference in this analysis. in our study, there were no endogenous snps in the c-terminal region of the mstn gene in both the investigated family of fugu and their parents . although g > c, c > g, t > a, a > t mutations were not observed in the  <dig> mutations detected in the mstn gene , it was reasonable results since the appearance frequency of their mutations are also rare in human genome  <cit> .

generation of an mstn-deficient mutant in fugu
our next step will be to generate the mstn mutant for the purpose of serving the aquaculture industry. one of the key components for a successful tilling project is a near-perfect ability to recover valuable mutations once they have been found. for the recovery, tilling libraries can either be ‘living’ or cryopreserved as suggested by moens et al.  <cit> . a living library is one in which mutagenized f <dig> fish are held in pools in tanks while their fin-tip genomic dna is screened. a cryopreserved library is one in which each genomic dna sample corresponds to vials of frozen sperm that can be used in an in vitro fertilization to generate f <dig> heterozygotes. as a large amount of sperm can be stored from a single adult male of aquacultured fish, in general, the cryopreserved library is more desirable than ‘living’ library. however, generation time of many aquacultured fish including fugu is more than one year, making the construction of the cryopreserved library time-consuming. we are currently generating an mstn-deficient fugu with ‘living’ library as the next step.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, the fugu tilling method was established from the results in both enu mutagenesis and a mutation search technology, hrm analysis. this is a first report that tilling is an applicable method for aquacultured fish. the approach for the fish species might play an important role in producing a fish, which exhibits a valuable phenotype  for the aquaculture industry. we hope that the tilling technique will be an alternative to the classic selection approach for improving traits in aquacultured fish species.

