BACKGROUND
several imaging techniques have been developed to assess embryonic development among small animals, including special light microscopy , ultrasound, micro-ct, micro-mri, etc. . ideally, in vivo embryonic research should avoid embryonic sacrifice, which allows monitoring of a serial, longitudinal developmental process of a single embryo. mri has great advantages over other techniques in the research of in vivo embryonic brain development given its high spatial and tissue-contrast resolution, no skull interference, flexible imaging plane orientation, and absence of radiation and obvious teratogenical influences. diffusion tensor imaging  tends to reflect aspects of tissue structure by detecting water molecule diffusion through those tissues. fractional anisotropy  is a dti-derived measurement of tissue structural anisotropy ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . dti could be used to reflect brain maturation by measuring diffusion characteristics based on neuronal differentiation and neural bundle formations . for instance, mesenchymal cells or neuroblasts are round in shape, allowing water to diffuse isotropically . conversely, mature neural bundles have a fiber-like texture, and water molecules mainly diffuse along the bundle’s direction .

in vivo mri studies assessing normal mouse, baboon, and marmoset brain development have been conducted . however, there are few in vivo mri studies assessing serial brain development of the chick embryo. the chick embryo is an accessible and economical model, with an extensive history of use in developmental biology, genetic experiments, transplantation research, teratogenicity evaluation, and cancer research  <cit> . the brain developmental time frame for chicks is also similar to humans, with both chick and human newborns showing well developed brains at hatching and birth, respectively  <cit> . bain et al.  <cit>  estimated the brain volume of developing chick embryos using a  <dig>  t mri system, but images were only obtained at late developmental stages . thus, some problems are encountered and need to be resolved when assessing in vivo mris of embryonic chick brains.  embryo-associated motion artifacts seriously reduce imaging quality after 6 days of incubation. several methods have been proposed to effectively suppress motion artifacts, including the use of a fast imaging sequence, intravenous injection of a small-dose sedative or anesthetic  <cit> , and cooling before imaging  <cit> .  in order to balance long scan times, the spatial resolution and signal-to-noise ratio  for in vivo imaging should be set relatively lower than for ex vivo imaging. however, the spatial resolution and snr need to be increased sufficiently to account for small embryos during the early developmental stages. micro-mris with ultra-high magnetic fields  and a dedicated small coil that is able to fit a small embryo are commonly adopted.  because embryonic position is variable, it is almost impossible to obtain axial, sagittal, and coronal brain slices directly after scanning. images with a 3d mri sequence have high isotropic spatial resolution and could be used to reconstruct standard axial, sagittal, and coronal slices corresponding to an established atlas during post-processing. however, this is sometimes a less attractive option for in vivo research because of long scan durations  <cit> . additionally, some forms of functional and structural imaging  do not have a 3d sequence. thus, a 2d sequence is adopted. when obtaining 2d images with high resolution, adjusting the positioning lines and using a fast positioning sequence with a large field of view  and thick slice are usually needed to obtain axial, sagittal, and coronal slices .

the present study aimed to serially monitor chick embryo brain development in vivo using  <dig>  t mri from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation. a method of adjusting the positioning lines was proposed using 2d imaging to obtain standard sagittal and coronal slices corresponding to an established atlas  <cit> . whole brain and subdivision  volume changes were measured from anatomical images on a day-to-day basis. the dti fa value was preliminarily used to reflect structural evolution in telencephalon.

RESULTS
all seven scanned eggs were normally developing from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation , and hatched successfully after 23 days of incubation. all images of the seven scanned eggs had no obvious motion artifacts and were adopted for analysis. table  <dig> shows the whole brain volume, subdivision volume , volume ratio of telencephalon to lateral ventricle , and the dti fa value from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation. the cerebellum could not be clearly discriminated until 9 days of incubation; thus, we measured the cerebellum from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation. fig.  <dig> plots corresponding growth change over time. the whole brain, telencephalon, cerebellum, and brainstem grew non-linearly during incubation. the whole brain volume reported by bain et al. is also shown in fig. 1a for comparison. lv volume did not decrease linearly over time, and flex points appeared at  <dig>   <dig>  and 17 days of incubation. the tel/lv ratio did not increase linearly over time, and flex points appeared at  <dig> and 17 days of incubation. the fa value of the telencephalon increased non-linearly from 5 days  to 20 days .table  <dig> the data of whole brain volume, subdivision volume , volume ratio of the telencephalon to the lateral ventricle , and the dti fa value from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation. the structure of cerebellum could not be discriminated until 9 days of incubation in our images

fig.  <dig> the growth plots of chick embryonic brain from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation . a the mri volume estimates of the whole brain and the data reported by bain et al.; b the mri volume estimates of telencephalon, cerebellum and brainstem; c the mri volume estimates of lv; d the change of tel/lv ratio; e the change of dti fa value in telencephalon



figure  <dig> shows serial brain developmental processes for one chick embryo in the mid-sagittal and coronal planes with a maximum ventricle area. as shown in fig. 2a, the telencephalic vesicles were formed at an early developmental stage. the telencephalon, cerebellum, and brainstem could be discriminated at 9 days and grew gradually over the following incubation days. as shown in fig. 2b, the parenchyma was very thin, and the ventricle was relatively large at early developmental stages. the cortex became thicker, and the ventricle was reduced over the course of incubation.fig.  <dig> the brain developing process serially of one chick embryo from  <dig> to 20 days of incubation. a in the mid-sagittal plane of the brain; b in the coronal plane with the maximum ventricle area



discussion
we serially monitored chick-embryo brain development in vivo using  <dig>  t mri. compared with previous work, we first conducted serial scans across an early to late developmental stage  at a constant interval . bain et al.  <cit>  only scanned during the late stage  at a non-constant interval. to our knowledge, in vivo mr imaging of chick embryonic brain development prior to 5 days post-incubation has not been reported. hogers et al.  <cit>  noninvasively monitored chick embryo cardiovascular development at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 11 days of incubation using  <dig>  t mri. however, the structure of cephalic vesicles could not be clearly discriminated at 3 days in their study given the snr. embryonic sagittal and coronal slices corresponding to an established atlas were obtained in the present study and the imaging planes were nearly identical in orientation over time; this was not implemented in bain et al.’s study. thus, different anatomical structures could easily be distinguished based on an established atlas. changes within the same structure at different developmental stages could be monitored among corresponding slices. furthermore, changes in subdivision  volume over time and dti structural evolution in the telencephalon were measured in the present study. these methods were yet to be utilized and could not be implemented using histological methods. we used a clinical  <dig>  t mr system, which is more widely available and includes a lower specific absorption rate and shorter scan duration compared with a  <dig>  t or higher system. our t2-weighted image in-plane resolution  and image quality were not overly inferior to those obtained with a  <dig>  t or higher system , which implies that a  <dig>  t system is feasible for anatomical analysis of embryonic chick brain development in vivo.

our whole brain volume data at  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  days of incubation is nearly consistent with bain et al.’s data; however, we noted larger brain volume at 12 days of incubation  as shown in fig. 1a. at the early and middle developmental stages, the cerebral cortex and white matter are immature, and the brain contains a large amount of cerebrospinal fluid. in our segmentation, the whole brain included part cerebrospinal fluid and part cerebral parenchyma, which might explain why our whole brain volumes were larger than in bain et al.’s study at 12 days of incubation. in our study, the whole brain, telencephalon, cerebellum, and brainstem volumes of chick embryos increased non-linearly over time. this non-linear growth pattern is also supported by goedbloed et al.’s and habas et al.’s finding in rat, mouse and human fetus  <cit> . lv volume and the tel/lv ratio increased or decreased at flex points. in our opinion, the lv volume change during development depends on two factors: increasing brain volume and increased cortical thickness. although both of these factors increased over time, one of these factors may have been more dominant at a certain stage. based on the lv volume change curve and tel/lv ratio shown in fig. 1c and d, increasing cortical thickness mainly occurred at early  and late  developmental stages. this led to lv volume decreases and tel/lv ratio increases. during the middle developmental stage , the increasing brain volume level exceeded that of cortical thickness, which led to an lv volume increase and tel/lv ratio decrease.

in addition to the anatomical information obtained from traditional t1- and t2-weighted images, functional and structural information could also be reflected in mr images. cahill et al.  <cit>  showed blood redistribution among fetal mice during hypoxia using bold mri. bold signal intensity decreased by 12 ± 7 % in the fetal brain and by 44 ± 8 % in the liver as the maternal inspired gas mixture varied from hyperxia to hypoxia. this shows that blood flow is redistributed to preserve brain oxygenation at the expense of other organs. peebles et al.  <cit>  used mrs and dwi to reflect metabolic and diffusion conditions before, during, and after hypoxia among chick embryos in vivo. in our previous work  <cit> , we used dti to monitor chick embryonic skeletal and smooth muscle development. the dti fa value had a positive correlation with the quantitative histological analysis, which shows that the fa value could be used to measure fiber-like tissue maturation. in the present study, we extended to neural bundles and used the fa value to measure structural evolution. as shown in fig. 1e, the average dti fa value in the telencephalon non-linearly increased from  <dig>  ±  <dig>   to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the fa value also showed a greater increase after 17 days of incubation than from  <dig> to 16 days. skeletal and smooth muscle fibers could be tracked using dti in our previous studies; however, we could not track the neural bundles. liu et al.  <cit>  used dti to reflect fetal baboon brain maturation using  <dig>  t mri. only mean diffusivity was measured in the white and grey matter, and no fibers were tracked. the low spatial resolution of  <dig>  t diffusion imaging may be too limiting for fiber tracking.

all seven scanned eggs hatched successfully. however, the influence of mri’s biological safety regarding chick embryonic development was not investigated in the present study. other previous studies revealed that high external magnetic fields, gradient fields, and radio-frequency pulses had no apparent adverse effect on chick or quail embryonic development  <cit> . cooling eggs before scanning to avoid embryonic-associated motion artifacts had no apparent adverse effect as well, which is noninvasive and often adopted for in vivo mr imaging of chick embryo. we should also note some limitations to the present study. for instance, we manually defined the borders between different brain subdivisions according to an established atlas. these borders are usually three-dimensional surfaces moving in and out of the imaging planes, which may induce subdivision volume measurement errors. higher spatial resolution and thinner imaging slices may be helpful for more accurate measurement. however, image snrs would reduce as a result. nevertheless, the present study reveals the possible feasibility of using the dti fa value to reflect neural bundle structural evolution. as this was a preliminary in vivo imaging study, no histological validation was conducted. thus, a correlation analysis between the imaging parameters and histological quantification will be pursued in the future.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study succeeded in serially monitoring chick embryonic brain development in vivo. the current methods included segmenting sagittal and coronal planes  using our proposed positioning method. a  <dig>  t mri system is feasible for anatomical analysis of in vivo chick embryonic brain development; however, one caveat is that very early developmental stages could not be properly assessed. the present volume results were the first phase of quantitative analyses regarding brain subdivision development, which could not be implemented using an invasive histological method. chick embryonic brain and subdivision growth patterns were non-linear. additionally, the dti fa value was first used as a measure of neural bundle maturation, which revealed structural evolution in the absence of resolution at the cellular level. overall, this form of mri has great potential for research on brain development.

