BACKGROUND
a. pleuropneumoniae causes contagious pleuropneumonia in pigs. the disease can occur in acute, sub-acute, or chronic form  <cit> . the acute form is characterized by fibrinohemorrhagic pneumonia and the sub-acute and chronic forms by pleuritis with localized necrotizing lesions. the severity and the spread of the disease depend upon the serovar and dose of the strain, and in large measure, upon the immune status of the herd  <cit> .

a. pleuropneumoniae is well adapted to survive and replicate in the host respiratory tract. its survival and replication requires the expression of genes encoding proteins that protect the bacterium from the host immune response and help it to acquire nutrients. although rtx  toxins, lipopolysaccharide, capsule, and various amino acid and iron transport systems of the bacterium are essential to cause acute disease  <cit> , it is not known how the organism survives in the face of non-cellular innate immune components that form the first line of defence in the lungs  <cit> . to identify a. pleuropneumoniae genes that are expressed in a medium that mimics, at least in part, the alveolar surface environment of the lungs, we incubated the bacterium in concentrated porcine bronchoalveolar lavage fluid . in addition to innate immune components, such as collectins, defensins, lysozyme, lactoferrin, and cathelicidin  <cit> , balf contains surfactant, surfactant-associated proteins, dissolved minerals, and other substances functioning in antioxidation, lipid metabolism, and tissue repair and proliferation in the lungs  <cit> . thus, genes expressed by a. pleuropneumoniae in porcine balf may be important for survival and pathogenesis of the organism.

in rt-pcr dd experiments, a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> exposed to balf for  <dig> min differentially expressed a number of genes, including seemingly a lamb homolog. consistent with this finding, an earlier study had also reported that a. pleuropneumoniae expresses a maltose-inducible, lamb-like outer membrane protein in the host <cit> . in e. coli and other gram-negative bacteria, lamb encodes an outer membrane transport protein involved in the transport and metabolism of maltose and maltodextrins. the e. coli maltose regulon is comprised of at least ten genes whose transcription is positively regulated by malt in the presence of maltotriose derived from either imported maltodextrins or endogenous glycogen  <cit> .

in addition to maltose and maltodextrin transport and metabolism, the genes of the maltose regulon have been associated, in ways less well understood, with virulence in bacteria. for example, malf, an inner membrane maltose and maltodextrin transport protein, and malq, a dextrinyl transferase, have been associated with the expression of cholera toxin and toxin-co-regulated pilus in vibrio cholerae  <cit> , as has been lamb with cytopathic effect in enteropathogenic e. coli  <cit> , and adhesion in enteroinvasive e. coli  <cit>  and aeromonas veronii  <cit> . mutants of the male and malt  genes in group a streptococcus are attenuated in their ability to grow in human saliva and to metabolize α glucans and are significantly impaired in their ability to colonize the mouse oropharynx  <cit> .

to elucidate the role of the predicted maltose regulon in a. pleuropneumoniae, malt and lamb knockout mutants were constructed and characterized phenotypically. since malt is a regulatory protein, the effect of its knockout on the bacterial gene expression level was also determined using dna microarrays.

RESULTS
expression of maltose-regulon genes by the wild-type a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> in balf
several differentially expressed genes in a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> exposed to balf for  <dig> min at 37°c were first presumptively identified by rt-pcr dd studies. these included genes encoding protein synthesis and hypothetical proteins , in addition to a cell surface protein, lamb . homologs  of the  <dig> hypothetical proteins are present in all the serotypes of a. pleuropneumoniae sequenced so far, suggesting that they might have a role in persistence or pathogenesis, but their levels of expression were not confirmed by real-time pcr or other more direct methods. the level of expression of the lamb gene was estimated by real-time pcr analysis to be  <dig> -fold higher in balf- than in bhi-exposed cells . genes of the maltose regulon that were also up-regulated  in balf-exposed cells included malf and malg , malp , malq  and malk . for further study, we constructed lamb and malt mutants to evaluate the possible role of these genes in the survival of a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> 

* fold change is the fold increase or decrease in the level of expression of a gene in the wild type exposed to balf  relative to the level of expression of the gene in the wild type exposed to bhi , as measured by real-time pcr.

values in the parentheses represent the range in the fold change.

growth curves of the malt and lamb mutants
the malt mutant grew slower than the wild-type organism in bhi. the growth pattern of the lamb mutant was, however, similar to that of the wild-type organism .

effect of acarbose on the growth of the isogenic malt and lamb mutants of a. pleuropneumoniae cm5
to assess the effect of the malt knockout mutationon the functioning of the maltose regulon, the parent strain and the malt mutant were grown in acarbose-containing bhi in the presence or absence of maltose. acarbose is a competitive inhibitor of maltose transport  <cit> . because of the fastidious nutritional requirements of a. pleuropneumoniae, this experiment was performed in bhi instead of a chemically defined medium. after  <dig> h of incubation in acarbose-containing bhi that was supplemented with maltose, the wild-type organism reached a significantly lower od <dig>  than did the malt mutant . in acarbose-containing bhi that was not supplemented with maltose, there was again, a significant difference in the growth of the two strains. the number of wild type and malt mutant cells was lower in acarbose-containing bhi than in the bhi containing both maltose and acarbose; however, this difference was not significant . the lamb mutant showed a trend similar to that of the malt mutant grown in the acarbose-containing medium, but the number of lamb mutant cells was lower than that of the malt mutant; however, this difference was not significant.

survival of the malt and lamb mutants
because lamb is a cell surface protein that is positively regulated by malt, we examined the effects of serum and high concentrations of sodium chloride to better understand the role of these genes in the survival of a. pleuropneumoniae. the percent survival of the malt mutant after incubation at 37°c for  <dig> h in  <dig> and 50% porcine serum was significantly  lower than the percent survival of the wild- type strain . there was no significant difference in the survival between the wild-type organism and the lamb mutant in either concentration of the serum. the number of cells of all the three strains  surviving in 90% serum was higher than the number of cells surviving in 50% serum. e. coli dh5α did not survive in either concentration of serum.

in the maltose-supplemented bhi containing different concentrations of sodium chloride, the wild type parent, and the malt and lamb mutants showed a significant  decrease in cell numbers after  <dig> h of incubation . the decrease in the cell number was least in the wild-type organism and greatest in the malt mutant. in  <dig> m sodium chloride, the malt mutant decreased in number from an initial count  of  <dig> cfu/ml to a final count  of  <dig> cfu/ml. even at a  <dig> m salt concentration, the wild-type organism decreased in number to only  <dig> log cfu/ml from approximately the same initial count as that of the malt mutant. at salt concentrations of  <dig> m and above, the lamb mutant showed a decline in cell numbers midway between those of the numbers shown by the parent strain and the malt mutant. the wild-type organism, and the malt and lamb mutants were all susceptible to killing by high concentrations of sodium chloride, but this killing was greatest in the malt mutant .

differential gene expression by the malt mutant in balf
to understand the basis of the observed phenotypic differences between the malt mutant and the wild-type organism, gene expression profiles of the mutant and parent strains were compared using dna microarrays. following the incubation of the exponentially grown cultures of the mutant and wild-type organism in fresh bhi at 37°c for  <dig> min, no significant differences were observed in the gene expression profiles of the two strains even at low delta values. incubation in balf, however, resulted in a total of  <dig> genes being differentially expressed in the malt mutant at a false discovery rate  of 1%. the differentially expressed genes included  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes and  <dig> of these encoded hypothetical proteins . in general, the genes encoding proteins involved in energy metabolism and protein biosynthesis were down-regulated , while as those involved in amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis, dna transformation, and biofilm formation were up-regulated . the rela gene encoding a stringent response regulatory protein was also up-regulated in the malt mutant. though known as an in vivo-expressed rtx toxin, the apxiva gene was up-regulated by the wild-type strain in balf  <cit>  and its expression was further increased in balf in the malt mutant.

* differential expression of a gene in the malt mutant is relative to the level of expression of the gene in the wild-type organism, as measured in microarray experiments.

* differential expression of a gene in the malt mutant is relative to the level of expression of the gene in the wild-type organism  as measured in microarray experiments. for complete gene names and the fold changes in gene expression see additional file 1: analyzed microarray data.

* differential expression of a gene in the malt mutant is relative to the level of expression of the gene in the wild-type organism . for complete gene names and the fold changes in gene expression see additional file 1: analyzed microarray data.

expression of selected genes representing biological functional categories of interest was also measured by real-time pcr analysis . a good corroboration in the context of the up- and down-regulation of the genes was found between the microarray and real-time pcr data.

1fold change is the fold increase or decrease in the level of expression of a gene in the malt mutant  relative to the level of expression of the gene in the wild type  in balf except for the lamb gene <dig> whose expression was compared in bhi to examine the effect of the malt knockout mutation on the expression of the lamb gene.  <dig> not applicable.

values in the parentheses represent the range in the fold change.

discussion
expression of maltose-regulon genes by balf-exposed a. pleuropneumoniae cm5
after exposure of a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> to balf for  <dig> minutes, a gene that appeared to be lamb homologue was shown to be up-regulated by the organism in rt-pcr dd experiments . we selected  <dig> min for incubation of the organism in balf, as the medium conditions should remain fairly constant during this time as might be seen in the animal during early infection when there is constant replenishment of alveolar fluid. as shown in real-time pcr studies, the genes encoding intrinsic membrane transport system proteins , maltodextrin phosphorylase , amylomaltase , atp-binding cassette of the maltodextrin transporter  of the maltose regulon were also up-regulated in balf, although some at very low levels . comparison of gene expression in balf- and bhi-incubated cells by dna microarrays  <cit>  showed that malf and malg were up-regulated in balf. however, no differential expression was seen in malt, malk, malp or malq genes. this disparate finding could be because only small quantities of these proteins are required for function, and small changes in gene expression are difficult to detect. for further study, we focused on the lamb and malt genes of the maltose regulon as lamb is a cell surface protein that lies at the host-pathogen interface and malt is a transcriptional regulator that might control the expression of genes other than those involved in the maltose and maltodextrin transport and metabolism.

malt and lamb are the components of a functional maltose regulon in a. pleuropneumoniae cm5
all of the strains of a. pleuropneumoniae sequenced so far possess homologs of the maltose regulon genes malefg, malk-lamb-malm, malt and malpq. as demonstrated by microarray-based comparative genomic profiling, these genes are present in the reference strains of all  <dig> serovars of a. pleuropneumoniae  <cit> . it might be noted that maltose regulon genes are also present in two other upper respiratory tract pathogens, mannheimia haemolytica and haemophilus parasuis. the arrangement of some of these genes in a. pleuropneumoniae, however, differs from that found in e. coli. as in e. coli, malt appears to be a positive transcriptional regulator of lamb in a. pleuropneumoniae as demonstrated by a two-fold decrease in the expression of lamb in the isogenic malt mutant of a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> in bhi supplemented with maltose . this finding is consistent with an earlier phenotypic study  <cit>  which reported that a. pleuropneumoniae expresses a lamb-like outer membrane protein when maltose is added to bhi agar. moreover, the a. pleuropneumoniae malt and lamb has a high degree of amino acid similarity with malt and lamb homologs of a number of other gram-negative organisms. also, malt has a conserved dna-binding  motif such as found in the e. coli malt protein.

to further examine the effect of the malt mutation on the regulation of the maltose regulon, both the wild-type organism and the malt mutant were grown in the presence of acarbose. acarbose is a pseudo-oligosaccharide similar in structure to maltotetraose and it is a competitive inhibitor of maltose transport in e. coli. it can inhibit maltose uptake only if maltose-transport system is first activated by maltose. acarbose also inhibits α-amylases and α-glucosidases and is not degraded by e. coli  <cit> . in bhi supplemented with maltose, acarbose reduced the growth of the wild-type organism as well as that of the malt mutant . the reduction in the growth might have been caused either by accumulation of toxic levels of acarbose by the bacterial cells or by the inhibition of bacterial glucosidases by the accumulating acarbose, or both. the reduction was, however, significantly  greater in the wild-type organism than in the mutant. this is perhaps due to the increased uptake of acarbose by the wild-type organism, owing to its higher activation of the maltose regulon by the intact malt. on the other hand, the reduction in the growth of the malt mutant could have been due to the non-specific entry of acarbose into the bacterial cells.

as a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> is not amenable to complementation it should be noted that we can not rigorously exclude the possibility that the phenotype exhibited by the malt negative strain was affected by some alteration of another gene that occurred during strain construction, but this is very unlikely. that said, taken together, the above findings suggest that a. pleuropneumoniae has a functional maltose regulon similar to that of e. coli.

malt is required for optimum survival of a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> in serum and high concentrations of sodium chloride
in comparison with the wild-type a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> and lamb mutant, the malt mutant had a significantly decreased ability to survive following incubation in fresh porcine serum for  <dig> h; the wild-type organism, however, grew in serum to a significantly higher number . as resistance of a. pleuropneumoniae to killing by serum is predominantly due to its capsule and lps  <cit> , the decreased survival of the malt mutant in serum could have been due to a change in its cell surface polysaccharides or to an alteration in its general metabolism as indicated by its slower growth in bhi. similarly, in the presence of sodium chloride concentrations of more than  <dig>  m, the malt mutant had a significantly  diminished ability to survive in the bhi supplemented with maltose. this result suggests that malt-regulated genes are required for protection against the high concentrations of sodium chloride in a. pleuropneumoniae . an association has been shown to exist between the components of the maltose regulon, stress response, and hypersomolarity in e. coli  <cit> , but it is not known how the maltose regulon behaves in the presence of an exogenous activator and high concentrations of the sodium chloride.

differential gene expression of the malt mutant in balf resembles the stringent type gene-expression profile
there was no significant difference between the gene expression profile of the parent strain and the malt mutant after incubation of the log-phase cultures in fresh bhi for  <dig> min. in balf, however,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed by the malt mutant . the gene expression profile of the mutant resembled a metabolic downshift; genes encoding protein synthesis, energy metabolism, transport of nutrients and dna replication were all down-regulated, while those involved in amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis, biofilm formation , dna transformation, and the stress response were up-regulated . this type of gene-expression response mimics the gene-expression profile of the stringent response seen in e. coli and other organisms during nutrient deprivation  <cit> .

carbon starvation in e. coli invokes a global gene expression response, resulting in the down-regulation of the genes encoding proteins for the growth and replication of the organism and the up-regulation of the genes encoding proteins for the biosynthesis of amino acids, alternate sigma factors, biofilm components  <cit> , as well as proteins of unknown function  <cit> . during amino acid starvation, the ratio of uncharged to charged trna increases, resulting in ribosome stalling at the a-site of the 50s ribosomal subunit. the stalling of the ribosome results in the activation of ribosome-bound rela. rela, a synthase and spot, a hydrolase with a weak synthase activity, synthesize pppgpp  and ppgpp  which in turn invoke a global gene expression response including down-regulation of rrna synthesis, such as seen in the stringent response to nutrient starvation  <cit> .

the increased expression of rela and the changes in the overall gene expression profile of the malt mutant in balf closely resembled the stringent-response gene- expression profile in other bacteria, including e. coli. consistent with the notion of a stringent response having a role in a. pleuropneumoniae, all the major stringent response regulatory genes including rela, spot and dksa  are present in the genome of this pathogen. a malt knockout mutation in a. pleuropneumoniae could result in a stringent response because maltis linked, directly or indirectly, to the regulation of the stringent response genes, or because it regulates the uptake of nutrient in addition to maltose and maltodextrins. the latter assumption could explain the up-regulation of the lamb gene in balf as a secondary response to the activation or the up-regulation of malt for the acquisition of nutrients. the slower growth of the malt mutant and its increased sensitivity to the biological stressors could also be explained by changes in cell surface molecules that result from the inability of the mutant to acquire unknown essential nutrient. by balancing nutrient availability with ribosome synthesis through the stringent response, bacteria can control replication, enter into a persistence mode of life, or express virulence factors, depending upon the type of bacteria  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our data suggest that a. pleuropneumoniae cm <dig> has a functional maltose regulon similar to that found in e. coli. although it is likely that these genes have a role in acquisition of nutrients in saliva and in the oropharynx where maltodextrins would be predicted to be found, these studies suggest that the maltose regulon could also play a significant role once the organism enters the lungs. further, the slower growth rate and increased salt and serum sensitivity of the malt mutant versus lamb mutant suggests that malt has a role beyond that of maltose and maltodextrin metabolism in a. pleuropneumoniae. this is perhaps due to the involvement of the malt in the transport or processing of some essential nutrient. this assumption is further supported by the expression of the stringent type transcript profile in the malt mutant in balf. malt could also be directly or indirectly linked to the stringent response without being involved in the transport of the essential nutrient; however, this remains to be proven. the presence of the maltose-regulon genes in all serovars of a. pleuropneumoniae and in related pathogens such as mannheimia haemolytica and haemophilus parasuis provides further circumstantial evidence that carbohydrate metabolism mediated by the maltose regulon might play a role in the persistence, if not the pathogenesis of some respiratory tract pathogens.

