BACKGROUND
the group i intron from tetrahymena thermophila catalyzes its own excision and ligation of the 5' and 3' exons, meaning that it performs self-splicing without the aid of proteins in vitro  <cit> . self-splicing of unusual sequence alignments has been shown to occur in vitro and in vivo in other species, including mammalian species, but group i introns have not been reported in mammals  <cit> . in addition to self-splicing to ligate two exons that are juxtaposed to a group i intron, several variations on self-splicing have been identified, including trans-splicing, which is used to correct gene sequences with mutations, a promising technique with potential therapeutic application  <cit> . thus, elucidation of the actions of group i introns in vivo would be beneficial  <cit> .

the proper structure and the efficient catalysis of group i and group ii introns seem to depend on rna chaperone proteins in vivo  <cit> . without the aid of chaperone proteins, misfolding is often triggered from alternative base pairings or in the thermodynamically favored direction. to investigate the splicing activity of the group i intron in cultured mammalian cells, we constructed expression vectors containing a short hairpin rna  interrupted by an intron. the expressed shrna is converted to a small interfering rna  by the rnase iii enzyme dicer, and then it triggers rna interference  in the cells  <cit> . after splicing with the help of chaperone proteins, the resulting ligated transcript is predicted to fold back on itself to form a stem-loop structure that produces shrna, leading to silencing of the targeted reporter gene. the low production level of protein products due to self-splicing limits the utility of group i introns and self-splicing, but in this context, the self-splicing mechanism can be used to produce rna as the final product  <cit> . therefore, this method might provide insight into the mechanism of self-splicing and into the relationship between the self-splicing mechanism and rna chaperone proteins in vivo.

two sets of coaxially stacked helices, p4-p <dig> and p3-p <dig>  are the conserved core of group i introns, and the peripheral domains play important roles in stabilizing the functional structures. it has been suggested that p5abc stabilizes the folded structure of group i introns, and the interaction between the tetraloop  in p5abc and the tetraloop receptor in the p <dig> stem functions as a clamp to stabilize the conformation  <cit> . a chaperone protein can substantially rescue the catalytic activity of tetrahymena introns in which p5abc has been deleted. this chaperone appears to bind the p4-p <dig> domain and to form a scaffold for the assembly of the p3-p <dig> domain  <cit> . group i ribozymes were successfully activated using an appended aptamer in which the p <dig> region of the intron from the thymidylate synthase gene in bacteriophage t <dig> was substituted with an anti-theophylline aptamer  <cit> . here, we also attempted substitution of the p <dig> region of the tetrahymena intron with an anti-theophylline aptamer so that the specific binding of theophylline to the the group i intron might lead to a conformational change, thus modulating catalysis in a way that is similar to the binding of a chaperone protein. the application of functional rnas to gene regulation has intriguing possibilities for conditional gene expression and knockdown systems, but the development of these applications is still in progress  <cit> .

in the present study, we used silencing of the firefly luciferase gene by shrnas to evaluate the splicing efficiency of the tetrahymena thermophila group i intron, which was inserted into the loop region, in a mammalian cultured cell line. in addition, to infer how self-splicing was affected by a trans-effector in mammalian cells, we assessed the effects of an appended aptamer under splicing-competent physiologic conditions.

RESULTS
construction of shrnas containing a microrna-derived loop and validation of target silencing
the production of shrna via splicing catalyzed by a tetrahymena group i intron estimates the splicing efficiency in conjunction with chaperone proteins in mammalian cells . to this end, shrnas targeting the firefly luciferase transcript were placed under a cytomegalovirus  promoter, and a group i intron was inserted into the loop region . then target silencing by the shrna was quantitatively analyzed as a reflection of the inserted ribozyme activity. of note, the transcribed rna was longer than the shrna and was expected to be fully expressed under these conditions. specifically, rna polymerase ii-driven promoters have a variety of expression patterns and are more suitable for achieving a spatio-temporal expression pattern than rna polymerase iii-driven promoters  <cit> . the sequences of the 5' and 3' exons of the tetrahymena intron were designed to pair with the intron for efficient and precise splicing, namely the formation of the p <dig> helix  and the formation of the p <dig> helix . to accommodate these characteristics, we searched for a loop portion that was similar to the pairing sequences using a microrna  database, and the hsa-mir- <dig> sequence with a one-base modification was selected  <cit> . the one base change of the loop region did not significantly decrease the efficacy of silencing by the shrna . in addition,  <dig> bases of the intron sequence were modified in conjunction with the loop .

we first constructed two vectors in which the shrna with the mirna-derived loop was inserted downstream of the cmv promoter. the first shrna  contained  <dig> bases of an antisense strand targeting bases 851- <dig> of the firefly luciferase transcript. the second shrna  contained  <dig> bases of the antisense strand targeting bases 155- <dig> of the firefly luciferase transcript, and it was followed by a poly  termination signal based on a report that the poly  termination signal could substitute for the polyadenylation signal in the expression of shrna under the cmv promoter  <cit> . the efficiency of target silencing was then analyzed by transiently transfecting the shrna vector in cos cells with two vectors expressing firefly luciferase and renilla luciferase, and luciferase activity was analyzed  <dig> h and  <dig> h after transfection . in both cases, the reduction of firefly luciferase activity relative to the control vector indicated the efficiency of the shrnas. in the case of shrna <dig>  the addition of the poly  termination signal appeared to be effective for target silencing because the construct without the poly  termination signal  produced less efficient target silencing .

interruption of shrna-mediated target suppression by an intron with cell-type specificity
the loop derived from hsa-mir- <dig> was sufficient for shrna-expressing vectors to induce rnai; therefore, a group i intron was inserted into the middle site of the loop sequence . when the constructed vectors were transiently cotransfected in cos cells, we observed decreased firefly luciferase activity compared to control vectors . no significant changes in the shape or viability of the transfected cells were observed . furthermore, it is not likely that the group i intron induced the silencing effect via a mechanism such as trans-splicing, that is, direct association before splicing. the sequence corresponding to the 5' exon has been used as antisense, and relatively long sequences have been used as the antisense strand for efficient splicing in trans-splicing systems  <cit> . in the present study, the antisense strand corresponds to the 3' stem of both shrna <dig> and shrna <dig>  moreover, if it were transcribed, the antisense strand would be followed by an unrelated sequence, specifically the poly  tail in the case of the shrna1-intron and the poly  termination signal in the shrna2-intron. we also repeated this experiment using another routinely used cell line, 293t cells. in stark contrast to the cos cells, we found no significant repression of luciferase activity, but a similar or even greater silencing effect was observed when the shrnas without the groupi intron were expressed . in addition, we observed no significant effect on cell viability . these findings suggest that the suppressive potency of the shrna-intron is not due to direct activity by the rnase iii enzyme dicer and that the splicing efficiency appears to affect the extent of luciferase gene silencing .

to elaborate on the difference between cell-types, we assessed the expression level of the sirnas from the shrna and shrna-intron vectors. to this end, we designed a stem-loop primer to detect the predicted sirna and determined that the sirna was processed from the shrna precisely as predicted . we did not observe a significant difference in sirna expression between cos cells and 293t cells when the same amount of the shrna-expressing vector was transfected . however, the amount of sirnas produced from the shrna-intron vectors was significantly reduced in 293t cells compared with cos cells, although the expression level of the intron was not significantly different between the cell types . when we compared the sirna to intron ratio, as assessed by rt-qpcr, in 293t cells and cos cells, we confirmed a significant reduction in the level of sirna . taken together, these results suggest that the splicing event and the resulting rnai appear to occur in a cell-type specific manner, independent of the dicer activity of the cell.

characterization of sequence-dependent target silencing induced by the shrna-intron
to more precisely evaluate whether the observed suppressive effects were specific for the target sequences, we used the psicheck- <dig> vector, which is typically used to check the knockdown efficiency of a target sequence by sirna or mirna  <cit> . although the psicheck- <dig> vector expresses firefly luciferase in addition to renilla luciferase, the firefly luciferase gene in this vector has a different sequence from the "155-173" and "851-875" target sequences of the pgl3-control vector . even under this circumstance, it is plausible that these corresponding sites of psicheck- <dig> vector are also repressed by mirna interference because unlike sirna, mirna does not require perfect complementarity of sequences. based on the premise that mirna commonly targets the 3' untranslated region of mrna and that the silencing effect of sirna is usually stronger than that of mirna, the experimental readout would largely reflect the silencing induced by the sirna  <cit> . therefore, we constructed vectors in which the target sequence for each of shrna <dig> and shrna <dig> was inserted into the 3' utr of the renilla luciferase gene of the psicheck- <dig> vector. the constructed vectors, "gl <dig> " which would be targeted by shrna <dig>  and "gl155", which would be targeted by shrna <dig>  were transfected, and we assessed the effect of each shrna-intron on luciferase activity in the transfected cells. as expected, we observed a specific knockdown that corresponded to the inserted target sequences . based on these findings, it is plausible that the sirna was produced from the shrna-intron and silenced the target in a sequence specific manner.

the modulation of splicing efficiency by an aptamer-ligand interaction
we assumed that the expression of shrna from the shrna-intron is modulated by a cell specific factor at the step at which the inserted intron in the loop region of the shrna is spliced. considering that the regional binding of a chaperone protein could promote self-splicing in vivo, we set out to elucidate the effect of a potential trans-effector that binds the regional site in the group i intron in cultured mammalian cells. intriguingly, the splicing of an aptamer-appended t <dig> phage group i intron was shown to be modulated in e. coli  <cit> . to accomplish aptamer-mediated targeting, the p <dig> region of the tetrahymena group i intron was replaced with a theophylline-binding aptamer . the activity of the shrna-intron-aptamer vector was validated in cos cells. the substitution of the theophylline-binding aptamer for the p <dig> region of the shrna1-intron led to less efficient silencing, prompting us to investigate the activity of the shrna1-intron-aptamer when the ligand for the aptamer was present in the culture medium . consistent with previous reports of the use of an anti-theophylline aptamer in mammalian cells, the shrna1-intron-aptamer showed a prominent effect with 8- <dig> mm theophylline  <cit> . this concentration of theophylline, however, was highly toxic to the cultured cells. therefore, we decreased the exposure period and observed a repressive effect similar to that of the shrna1-intron. the presence of theophylline in the culture medium had no effect on the silencing activity induced by the shrna <dig> intron vector . adding caffeine , which is structurally similar to theophylline but does not bind to the aptamer, did not affect the silencing efficiency   <cit> . hence, the aptamer-appended group i intron became functional by adding theophylline in a manner analogous to that of the t <dig> phage group i intron in e. coli  <cit> . the similar effect, although slightly less robust relative to that of the t <dig> phage group i intron in e. coli, might be due to the differences in the physiologic conditions between mammalian cells and e. coli and in their structure. nevertheless, we obtained evidence that the intracellular milieu affects the splicing efficiency of different cell lines .

discussion
the efficient splicing of group i introns in vivo has been attributed mainly to chaperone proteins, contrasting with splicing in vitro, which occurs in the absence of any proteins  <cit> . in fact, compared to cos cells, very little target silencing by shrna-intron vectors was observed in 293t cells, despite the fact that the corresponding shrna expression vectors had the same or even better effects on target silencing. given these results, target silencing by shrna-intron vectors might be dependent on the endogenous distribution or the amount of chaperone proteins in different cell types. alternatively, some substrate-specific chaperone proteins or some inhibitory factors might be involved in the splicing reaction  <cit> . from a therapeutic point of view, it is intriguing that a particular chaperone protein is overexpressed in cancer cells and that could be considered a target for cancer therapy  <cit> . there is evidence that considerable splicing occurs in  <dig> cells when group i introns are inserted into a luciferase gene  <cit> . therefore, there might be a preferential length, sequence, and structure for in vivo splicing  <cit> . thus, several features and obstacles of intron self-splicing are evident when producing shrna via splicing to analyze rna chaperone activity in mammalian cells, similar to an "rna folding trap"  <cit> .

the neurospora crassa mitochondrial tyrosyl-trna synthetase  binds the p4-p <dig> domain of the tetrahymena group i intron to promote splicing  <cit> . however this effect has been confirmed only for the synthetases of neurospora crassa and the closely related fungus podospora anserina, despite the fact that these proteins share the same basic structure with all bacterial tyrosyl-trna synthetases and the saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial tyrosyl-trna synthetase. theophylline, a small organic molecule, modulates group i intron activity in e. coli and in mammalian cells, and there is a possibility that such a protein could bind and trigger a change in the enzymatic activity of the intron in these species. however, replacement of the p <dig> region with a theophylline-binding aptamer was not sufficient to completely inactivate self-splicing in cos cells. therefore, further replacement or modification could be rationally engineered for finely tuned control. alternatively, antibiotics, which specifically bind to group i introns in vitro, might also modulate self-splicing; however, many of these compounds remain to be validated in vivo, and others are not as efficient as initially expected  <cit> . altogether, further understanding of the splicing efficiency of group i introns in physiological conditions might pave the way for applications using modified group i introns and functional rnas in vivo  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results revealed that a mirna-derived loop could be used to efficiently express shrnas under a cmv promoter and that the expression of the shrnas could be mediated by a group i intron inserted into the loop region. the shrnas expressed via self-splicing of a group i intron affected target silencing in a cell-type specific manner under physiological conditions. in addition, the effect of theophylline when a theophylline-binding aptamer was embedded in a group i intron supported the feasibility of regulation by a trans-effector as well as the physiological importance of the connection between splicing efficiency and cellular factors.

