BACKGROUND
measles virus  has a genome with negative polarity, consisting of non-segmented single-stranded rna of approximately  <dig>  kb. mv belongs to the paramyxoviridae family in the order of mononegavirales and only a single serotype is known. it is among the most infectious viruses known for humans, and no other host species has been identified. only human populations of a considerable size are able to sustain circulation  <cit> . global vaccination programs have resulted in a dramatic decline in measles cases and the documented discontinuation of indigenous circulation in a number of countries  <cit>  has encouraged authorities to accomplish global control of measles. however, measles still cause a large number of deaths every year, mainly in developing countries, where endemic circulation of mv is still ongoing  <cit>  as a result of poor vaccination coverage.

intergenomic recombination has been documented in a vast number of virus species within most families of rna and dna viruses. recombination can allow variants of a population to escape from the current fitness peak  and re-appear with a new phenotypic make-up and/or even re-establish in a new host-relationship  <cit> . however, recombination has never convincingly been documented in species of the mononegavirales, and it is speculated whether this reflects an inability of these viruses to recombine. yet, the order of mononegavirales comprises groups of viruses with an apparently large evolutionary potential with frequent shifts of host species. over the past decades, a considerable number of mononegavirales members causing diseases in host species in which they had not previously been recognized have been identified. examples are phocid distemper virus  <cit> , hendra virus  <cit> , menangele virus  <cit> , nipah virus  <cit>  – not to forget the re-emerging divergent members of the filoviridae  . the origins of these emerging viruses have not been identified and the mechanism of their ability to explore new niches remains enigmatic.

co-infection of host cells with phylogenetically distinct virus strains is required for recombination events to be detectable in sequence surveys. as a result of the global vaccination against measles a situation of endemic co-circulation of multiple strains  <cit>  shifted to a situation with a limited number of strains being re-introduced to susceptible subpopulations in major geographical regions  <cit> . by sequencing part of the hemagglutinin gene  <cit> , we recently characterized  <dig> mv strains collected during the pre-/early-vaccination era in denmark. in the present study, the partial sequence of the hemagglutinin coding region of those older strains is subjected to further analysis and compared with strains sampled after vaccination  using various approaches to test for the presence of intergenomic recombination.

RESULTS
the term pre-/early-vaccination era isolates used for isolates collected in denmark during the period of 1965– <dig> is meant to reflect that these isolates are from a period when vaccination against measles was not practiced in denmark but was gradually becoming common practice in many other countries in the world. thus, it cannot be excluded that vaccination in other countries influenced measles virus strains circulating in denmark at the time, but it is anticipated that these isolates still bear valuable information on the nature of strains circulating before an influence of vaccination was imposed.

analysis of recombination
one way to distinguish whether incompatibilities are caused by parallel mutations  or by recombination is to correlate linkage disequilibrium  between sets of informative sites to distance. recombination causes a decrease in linkage disequilibrium and more recombination is expected between sites that are further apart from each other. the block structure of close sites is visualised in a different way in figure  <dig>  which shows all the significant cases of linkage disequilibrium. visual inspection of the figure suggests that physically close sites appear to be more likely to be in strong ld than sites far apart. this observation is tested more formally by correlating ld with distance . table  <dig> shows the correlation of two commonly used measures of ld for both data sets. a significant negative correlation is observed by both measures of linkage disequilibrium in the pre-/early-vaccination data set, whereas the post-vaccination data set does not show any significant decay of linkage disequilibrium with distance. the decrease in linkage disequilibrium with distance for the pre-/early-vaccination sequences is shown graphically in figure  <dig> 

an analysis of expected number of homoplasies caused by parallel mutations and the number of apparent homoplasies in the most parsimonious tree was performed on the pre-/early-vaccination data set . the basic idea is to investigate whether the number of apparent homoplasies in the most parsimonious tree is likely to be due to parallel  mutations. if this is not the case, it is a strong indication of recombination since recombination easily creates "incompatible pairs of sites", i.e. pairs of sites that do not fit into the same phylogenetic tree, and thus will appear as homoplasies if assuming no recombination and a single phylogenetic tree. there are  <dig> sites. of these,  <dig> are third position sites, and among these we observe  <dig> transition mutations. if we assume equal mutation rates at all third position sites, then the number of transition mutations we expect have happened while observing  <dig> different ones is  <dig> +/- <dig>  . in the most parsimonious tree found using paup*, there are  <dig> transition mutations. in other words, given the observed number of mutation events of the transition type, we expect  <dig> +/- <dig>  parallel mutations/homoplasies under the assumption of no recombination . we observe, however,  <dig> parallel mutations in the tree. this suggests that some of the apparent homoplasies resulted from recombination rather than from recurrent mutations. we also calculated the effective sites number  <cit>  from the observed codon usage bias. however, since the codon usage bias is low, the effect is minor, and only  <dig> +/- <dig>  homoplasies are expected under this model, again significantly smaller than the six apparent homoplasies. a large amount of mutation rate heterogeneity at the synonymous sites offers an alternative explanation of the excess homoplasies. while this explanation cannot be ruled out, analysis of the post-vaccination data set does not support large rate heterogeneity at silent sites in the evolution of present-day measles virus, since the number of homoplasies in this data set can be explained by recurrent mutations .

given these different lines of evidence for recombination, it is of interest to try to estimate the rate of recombination needed to explain the data. the most appropriate method is the finite site, composite likelihood approach implemented in ldhat  <cit> . the result  is that a significantly positive recombination rate is found in the pre-/early-vaccination sequences, much reflecting the results of the similar r <dig> test. an estimated rate of ρ =  <dig>  corresponds to that an expected  <dig> recombination events have happened in the ancestral history of the  <dig> pre-/early-vaccination sequences. the estimated recombination rate appears smaller than rates reported for hiv and other viruses  <cit> . the estimated recombination rate in the post-vaccination era data sets also shows a positive rate of ρ, but it not significantly different from zero by the permutation test . the lack of evidence of recombination in present day sequences of mv strains is consistent with what was also observed by  <cit> .

in conclusion, the analysis of pre-/early-vaccination era mv sequences shows evidence of recombination at rates important to the evolution of mv. the five different tests of recombination should not be considered independent tests and some of the results might be explained by alternative mechanisms such as convergent evolution of functionally important sites and rate heterogeneity of synonymous variation. however, all tests agree and provide evidence of recombination both through an excess of apparent homoplasies compared to the expected frequency of parallel mutations, and through a decrease in ld with distance, which is difficult to explain by any other hypothesis than recombination. furthermore, it is difficult to imagine a mechanism other than recombination by which apparent homoplasies could occur pairwise or in triplets in distant parts of the sequence considering also that such patterns are not seen in the post-vaccination data set.

the evidence of recombination among pre-/early-vaccination era mv strains and the lack of detection of recombination among post-vaccination era mv strains are consistent with the shift in epidemiology from a situation of co-circulation of strains in populations to a bottleneck situation with incidental introduction of a single strain to a susceptible sub-population of a geographical region. given that intergenomic recombination and co-infection of individuals are common phenomena of mv it might be assumed that the lineages surviving till today did emerge from a pool of recombining pre-vaccination era strains. a lower level or absence of recombination due to changed epidemiology since then has erased our ability to detect recombination in a global sample of present day mv despite its high level of variability. it is possible that the danish pre-/early-vaccination era strains are representatives of the very pool in which recombination took place while present-day mv strains are representatives of temporally and/or geographically separated lineages. analysing informative sites in other parts of the mv genome of present-day lineages render it unlikely that these lineages could have derived from a clonal population structure of a global pool of mv strains .

the template for replication in members of the paramyxovirinae is a nucleocapsid complex in which each nucleocapsid monomer  is predicted to be associated by hydrophobic bonds with  <dig> nucleotides in such a way as to resist non-ionic detergent and high salt and to protect the rna from rnase digestion  <cit> . this tight association of rna and protein has been dubbed "the rule of six" and excludes the intracellular presence of naked viral rna molecules. it raises the question of the mechanism of rna polymerase template recognition and has provided an explanation of the hypothesis that recombination possibly cannot occur in this group of viruses. our data suggests that a mechanism of partial unwinding of the nucleocapsid structure exists to allow homologous intergenomic recombination or rna polymerase template shift during replication.

CONCLUSIONS
measles virus appear to possess the ability to recombine but the present-day epidemiology of the virus where different sequence types rarely or never meet make the impact of recombination on the distribution of sequence diversity negligible. however, in the prevaccination area, endemic mv allowed more divergent strains to meet and recombine. the present-day strains are thus descendants of recombined sequences but the signal of the early recombination is lost in present-day sequences.

