BACKGROUND
the ecological outcomes of interactions between two species, such as mutualism and parasitism, often vary spatially among the different abiotic and biotic contexts in which those interactions occur; the result of this spatial variation in ecological dynamics is that the pattern of natural selection that species exert on each others' traits will vary among populations, that is, there will be a geographic 'selection mosaic'  <cit> . in addition, selection by species on each other may be strongly reciprocal in some populations, generating coevolutionary hotspots, and not in others, producing coevolutionary coldspots  <cit> . finally, the processes of migration and gene flow among populations and genetic drift within populations may vary over space and time, influencing the distributions of species traits in each population  <cit> . together, these processes result in a geographic mosaic of coevolution, which acts to generate and maintain much of the genetic and ecological diversity within and among populations of species  <cit> .

selection mosaics in species interactions result from geographic differences in how the fitness of one species depends on the distribution of genotypes in another species. such geographic variation in selection can be driven by variation in both abiotic environmental factors, such as the nutrient content or physical composition of soils, and biotic factors, such as the species composition of the surrounding ecological community. thus, a selection mosaic can be defined as a genotype-by-genotype-by-environment interaction  on fitness, in which variation in the 'environment'  can be abiotic or biotic  <cit> . selection mosaics have now been suggested or characterized in a variety of different species interactions, including pines and birds  <cit> , ants and wild cotton  <cit> , camellias and weevils  <cit> , and wild parsnips and parsnip webworms  <cit> . most studies, however, have not been able to control for genotypes of the interacting species across environments to assess the strength of the g × g × e interaction.

interactions between plants and mycorrhizal fungi have high potential to exhibit selection mosaics. mycorrhizal fungi form a relationship with plants by colonizing the plant root system and extending their hyphae into the surrounding soil. classically, this interaction has been considered a mutualism whereby fungal colonization greatly increases plant access to mineral nutrients in the soil, and the fungus receives organic nutrients synthesized by the plant  <cit> . in recent years, however, it has become evident that the ecological outcomes of plant-mycorrhizal fungus interactions are highly variable, ranging from mutualism to parasitism depending on a variety of biotic and abiotic environmental factors, especially ambient soil nutrient availability  <cit> . if environmental factors interact with plant and/or fungal genetics to change the outcome of plant-mycorrhizal interactions among populations, then selection mosaics could emerge as a consequence, driving the evolution of diversification in these interactions. although the effects of individual biotic and abiotic factors on plant-mycorrhizal interactions have been fairly well characterized  <cit> , it is currently not known whether these interactions, which are so pervasive in terrestrial ecosystems, exhibit evidence of selection mosaics. that question, however, is becoming important for our understanding of rapid evolution in terrestrial ecosystems as environmental conditions in many ecosystems are changing quickly and plants and their mycorrhizal fungi are being transported between continents  <cit> .

in the work reported here, our goal was to explore the potential for selection mosaics in the interactions between bishop pine seedlings  and an ectomycorrhizal fungus  by experimentally varying lineages of the plant and fungus, as well as one biotic environmental factor  and one abiotic environmental factor , and measuring the variability in the performance of the plant and fungus. non-mycorrhizal soil microbial communities may have a substantial impact on the colonization of roots by mycorrhizal fungi, and may alter the effects that mycorrhizal fungi have on plant growth  <cit> . for example, recent work has suggested that 'mycorrhizal helper bacteria' are present in soil, and that they are important for the success of the plant-fungus interaction  <cit> . alternatively, rhizosphere bacteria may act to decrease the benefits conveyed by mycorrhizal fungi on plant growth  <cit> . physical soil structure and composition may also have substantial impacts on the plant-mycorrhizal interaction. for example, chen et al.  <cit>  found much faster growth and higher ectomycorrhizal colonization of eucalyptus urophylla seedlings grown in a laboratory potting soil mix compared with various field soils.

RESULTS
mycorrhizal colonization
on average, the mycorrhizal fungus r. occidentalis colonized  <dig>  , n = 128) root tips per plant and  <dig>   root tips per centimeter of root length. total colonized root tips and root tips colonized per unit root length were both significantly affected by an interaction between plant maternal seed family and soil type . specifically, total root tip colonization was approximately equal between the two seed families in the lab soil, but different between the two seed families in the field soil, with an overall trend towards lower colonization in the field soil . when root tip colonization was standardized per unit root length, a similar result was observed, although the two plant families did not differ significantly from each other in either soil . mycorrhizal colonization per unit root length also differed between the two fungal sporocarps . neither the absolute levels of colonization by r. occidentalis nor the colonization by r. occidentalis per unit root length were related to the number of root tips colonized by contaminant fungi . colonization by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi averaged  <dig>   root tips per plant and mostly did not differ among treatments, although contamination was significantly higher in the field soil than in the lab soil . contamination on plants that were not inoculated with r. occidentalis averaged  <dig>  .

root length
plant root length averaged  <dig>  cm  overall, and was influenced separately by both the type of soil used and the fungal sporocarp with which the plant was inoculated. specifically, plants had a greater root length when planted in field soil than they did when planted in lab soil . plants inoculated with spores from fungal sporocarp  <dig> had a greater root length than those inoculated with spores from fungal sporocarp  <dig> . root length was also positively associated with colonization by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi .

response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation
overall, the response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation was negative  = - <dig>  ±  <dig>  se, n = 128), and was influenced by a three-way interaction among plant family, soil type, and the presence/absence of microbial filtrate . in both soil types, with microbial filtrate added, plant family m <dig> had a more negative response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation than m <dig>  without microbial filtrate added, soil type affected the mycorrhizal response of the two plant families very differently: m <dig> exhibited a negative response regardless of the soil type, while m <dig> exhibited a negative response in lab soil and a positive response in field soil. the latter treatment combination  was the only one to exhibit a positive response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation . the response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation also depended on which fungal sporocarp was used for inoculation . plants inoculated with spores from fungal sporocarp  <dig> had a more negative root length response to inoculation than those inoculated with spores from fungal sporocarp  <dig> . finally, the response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation was positively associated with colonization by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi .

relative growth rate
plant relative growth rate  averaged  <dig>  g/g/day  and was significantly influenced by an interaction between plant family and soil type . specifically, plant family m <dig> had a lower rgr than family m <dig> in lab soil, but approximately the same rgr as m <dig> in field soil . rgr was also significantly influenced by an interaction between microbial filtrate and soil type . specifically, in field soil the addition of the microbial filtrate increased rgr, while the opposite response to the microbial filtrate was observed in lab soil . rgr was not associated with the number of root tips colonized by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi .

response of relative growth rate to mycorrhizal inoculation
on average, rgr responded negatively to mycorrhizal inoculation , and the response was significantly more negative when plants were inoculated with microbial filtrate than when they were not . the two maternal seed families also differed in their response of rgr to mycorrhizal inoculation . finally, the response of rgr to mycorrhizal inoculation was dependent on the type of soil used . a significantly negative response to mycorrhizal inoculation occurred for plants growing in lab soil . in contrast, in field soil plants exhibited no significant response of rgr to mycorrhizal inoculation . response of rgr to inoculation by r. occidentalis was not associated with the number of root tips colonized by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi .

root:shoot ratio
plant root:shoot ratio  was affected by an interaction between plant maternal seed family and the soil type used . in lab soil, plant family m <dig> had a greater root:shoot ratio than m18; in field soil, however, the root:shoot ratio of family m <dig> was not significantly different from that of family m <dig> . the root:shoot ratio of the plants was also affected by an interaction between the fungal sporocarp used and the soil type . specifically, in lab soil the two sporocarps produced equal root:shoot ratios, whereas in field soil sporocarp  <dig> induced a significantly lower root:shoot ratio than sporocarps  <dig> . root:shoot ratio was positively associated with colonization by contaminant mycorrhizal fungi .

additional file  <dig> contains summary statistics for all  <dig> response variables in the  <dig> different experimental treatment combinations. additional file  <dig> contains the full statistical results  of the separate univariate analyses of each of the eight response variables.

discussion
our results demonstrate wide variability in a plant-mycorrhizal interaction in response to variation in both biotic and abiotic environmental factors, under conditions in which the same plant and fungal genotypes interact in every environment. despite the inclusion of only four different combinations of plant and fungal lineages, the responses of plants and fungi to each other varied widely, and changed in response to different experimental soil environments. these results emphasize the contextual nature of ecological outcomes in such interactions, showing the potential for them to exhibit selection mosaics across landscapes, and highlighting the importance of exploring multiple conditions when evaluating the ecological outcomes and potential for evolution of interactions between plants and mycorrhizal fungi.

interactive effects of genotype and environment, and the potential for selection mosaics
the two experimental soil factors consistently interacted with plant or fungal lineages to influence plant and fungal performance in our experiments . fungal performance measures, in particular, demonstrate the potential for genotype-by-genotype-by-environment interactions  and thus selection mosaics. root tip colonization by r. occidentalis  was significantly influenced by an interaction between plant lineage and soil type , showing the potential for fungal fitness  to depend on both plant genotype and abiotic soil conditions. the experimental soil conditions we manipulated were not designed to match natural environmental variation among populations, and we specifically used plant and fungal lineages from only one population. hence, our goal was not to demonstrate actual selection mosaics among natural populations of bishop pine and r. occidentalis. rather, our goal was to evaluate the potential for selection mosaics, and to ask whether such mosaics, rather than initial genetic difference among populations, could potentially serve as the starting point for divergent selection on coevolving interactions.

effects of plant and fungal genetic variation, and potential coevolutionary selection
the existence of differences in symbiotic compatibility among the four combinations of plant and fungal lineages suggests the potential for ongoing coevolutionary dynamics between bishop pine and its mycorrhizal fungi at pt. reyes. for example, the two plant maternal seed families exhibited a more than four-fold difference in their response of rgr to mycorrhizal inoculation, with one exhibiting a significantly negative response. not only does this result suggest significant genetic variation between plants for compatibility with mycorrhizal fungi, but it also may indicate that the relationship between the pine and fungus is not strictly a mutualism. parasitic interactions are predicted to drive negative frequency-dependent selection between species, promoting genetic diversity  <cit> . thus, our observation of parasitic effects of fungi on plants, as well as genetic variability among plants for response to fungi, shows the potential for negative frequency-dependent coevolutionary selection at a local scale. alternatively, within-population genetic variability in a symbiosis could also be driven by gene flow from another population in which the pattern and intensity of coevolutionary selection differs from that at the study site. neutral genetic diversity within and between populations of both p. muricata  <cit>  and r. occidentalis  <cit>  has been shown to be substantial, suggesting that processes such as genetic drift are not likely to limit the genetic variability available for coevolutionary selection.

the two fungal lineages differed in their impacts on plant growth, in a way that suggests that variation in compatibility between plants and fungi may sometimes be driven by feedbacks between plant and fungal growth responses. the colonization difference between the two fungal lineages provides an informative example of the interactive nature of plant and fungal genetic effects on symbiotic compatibility. regardless of the plant family, fungal spore family  <dig> was found to have colonized more root tips per centimeter of root length than spore family  <dig>  this result was driven by the fact that both fungal families actually colonized relatively similar absolute numbers of root tips, but plants growing with fungal spore family  <dig> produced greater root length  than plants colonized by fungal spore family  <dig>  this result indicates that the variation between fungal lineages in intensity of mycorrhizal colonization may be due less to variation in fungal growth rates and more to variation in effects on plant growth, which feed back to influence mycorrhizal colonization intensity. of course, this kind of feedback between plants and specific lineages of fungi would only be possible when individual plants are colonized by one or very few species or lineages of mycorrhizal fungi, as occurs in early succession after wildfires in p. muricata habitats  <cit> . the fact that the two fungal lineages colonized similar absolute numbers of root tips suggests that differences between the two sporocarps in average spore maturity or inoculum potential do not explain the variability observed.

implications for experimental tests and applications of plant-mycorrhizal interactions
often, pt. reyes field soil elicited more variation in the outcome of the interactions between plant and fungus, compared with the lab soil . for example, both total colonization by r. occidentalis and root:shoot ratio differed significantly between the two maternal seed families when grown in field soil, but did not differ when grown in lab soil. a potential reason for the observed increase in phenotypic responses in field soil may lie in the difference in texture of the two soil types. during the course of the experiment, we observed that the field soil did not retain water as well as the lab soil, most likely due to its lower organic matter content. plants in field soil produced more root length than those in lab soil, perhaps to compensate for this lower water availability . despite greater average root length in field soil, there were fewer total root tips colonized by r. occidentalis in the field soil compared with the lab soil , a result consistent with recent experimental results for multiple ectomycorrhizal fungal species on bishop pine roots  <cit> . in contrast, contaminant mycorrhizal fungi, although rare overall, were more abundant in field soil than lab soil. as the contaminants we observed were always common greenhouse contaminants that disperse via airborne spores , and observed contaminants were never fungi such as rhizopogon species that do not produce airborne spores, it is likely that contamination occurred via aerial spore deposition and all of our experimental treatments received approximately equal input of spores of contaminant fungi. thus, the higher level of contaminant colonization in field soil compared with potting mix likely reflects a response by the contaminant fungi to the differing conditions in those treatments.

furthermore, the difference between soil types in colonization by r. occidentalis was much more pronounced for one plant lineage than the other . this combination of results suggests that the reduced water availability in field soil may have resulted in a more stressful environment in which genetic variability in the plant-fungus interaction was more likely to be expressed. in general, stronger differences were observed between plant and fungal families in their responses to the field soil compared with the lab soil, despite the probability that there was more heterogeneity in soil conditions among field soil pots within each plant-fungus treatment combination compared with lab soil. the field soil was screened to remove large debris and was mixed to homogenize it, but still contained significant heterogeneity compared with the lab soil.

fungal performance did not appear to directly depend on the presence or absence of a non-mycorrhizal microbial community added as a filtrate. at first glance, this result appears to be in contrast to several studies suggesting that the soil microbial community is an important third member in the mycorrhizal-plant relationship  <cit> . our results, however, may simply represent one of a range of results that can occur in these interactions. we used a single species of fungus, and the soil microbial filtrate was composed of organisms of unknown identity and number. bowen and theodorou  <cit>  found fungal species-specific reactions to different bacteria isolated from soil. the specificity they found was between species, whereas our study focused on within-species variation. the apparent lack of response of r. occidentalis in our study to the non-mycorrhizal microbial community could be due to the presence of a wide array of genotypes in that community, having a diversity of effects on the different fungal genotypes in our experiment. regardless, laboratory measurements of colonization by r. occidentalis may not be very dependent on the presence of non-mycorrhizal microbes.

in contrast, plant performance and the response to mycorrhizal inoculation were influenced by augmentation of the non-mycorrhizal microbial community. with the addition of the microbial filtrate, root length was consistently greater in non-mycorrhizal controls than in mycorrhizal treatments, especially for plant family m <dig> . this observation may indicate that when the microbial filtrate was added, plants generally experienced reduced access to soil nutrients in the absence of mycorrhizal fungi and responded by increased root allocation. in contrast, without the microbial filtrate, one plant family × soil combination exhibited a positive response of root length to mycorrhizal inoculation .

the response of plant rgr to mycorrhizal inoculation was significantly negative in the presence of the microbial filtrate, and was neutral in its absence. the reason for this result is not readily apparent, and is in contrast to findings by heinonsalo et al.  <cit> , which showed that shoot volume of mycorrhizal inoculated douglas fir seedlings was higher than in control treatments regardless of bacterial inoculation. furthermore, we found that addition of the microbial filtrate had opposite effects on plant rgr depending on whether plants were growing in lab versus field soil , suggesting that the impact of non-mycorrhizal microbes on plants may be strongly contingent on the abiotic environmental context.

numerous previous studies have also demonstrated significant genetic variability within plant and/or fungal species for symbiotic compatibility in mycorrhizal interactions. for example, in an inoculation study utilizing  <dig> pisolithus isolates, burgess et al.  <cit>  found that eucalyptus grandis varied greatly in its growth response to the different fungal genotypes. similarly, studies of within-population compatibility in plant-rhizobium interactions have also found significant variability in performance. estaún et al.  <cit>  found substantial differences among pea genotypes in their responses to different species of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, ranging from positive to neutral. as discussed by trappe  <cit>  three decades ago, such genetically based variation in compatibility between the partners in a putative mutualism points to the need to consider plant and fungal genotypes as factors in inoculations for forestry and nursery production. when using a limited number of plant or fungal genotypes, practitioners may be reducing the chances of seedling success. our results highlight the need not only to consider plant and fungal genetic variation, but also their interactions with biotic and abiotic environmental factors.

the variation found in these experiments is likely to be modified within natural populations, where each interaction between a plant species and a fungal species is often part of a larger network of interactions, and in which plant roots and mycorrhizal fungi are not restricted within the artificial conditions of a pot. ectomycorrhizal fungus communities are typically diverse, with multiple species colonizing the roots of individual trees simultaneously  <cit> , and two or more plant root systems can be interconnected by a common mycorrhizal network  <cit>  with the potential to transfer nutrients among the plants . in addition to the variation we observed in compatibility among different genetic combinations of plants and fungi, there may also be variation among plants or fungi in their response to mycorrhizal networks or ectomycorrhizal fungus community composition. for example, a particular plant-fungus combination may exhibit low performance when compared with other combinations in the laboratory, but may exhibit superior performance in the context of a diverse community and the potential to connect with mycorrhizal networks.

CONCLUSIONS
we found significant genetic variation for symbiotic compatibility within the pt. reyes population of bishop pine and the ectomycorrhizal fungus rhizopogon occidentalis, as well as substantial dependence of the plant-fungal interaction on variation in biotic and abiotic experimental soil characteristics. this variation in plant and fungal responses to experimental conditions illustrates the broad plasticity of the interaction, and the potential for mycorrhizal interactions to exhibit geographic selection mosaics across landscapes, as abiotic and biotic factors vary and induce corresponding changes in the impacts that species have on each other.

