BACKGROUND
mathematical modelling approaches are increasingly being employed to inform disease control strategies. interest in these techniques in this context has been greatly augmented by recent disease outbreaks within the british cattle population. the accuracy of such models relies upon accurate estimates of population structure as temporal trends in the births, deaths and movements of cattle may impact substantially on pathogen transmission dynamics. for instance, birth rate may affect rapidity of spread due to supply of susceptible individuals into the population. understanding the dynamics of the cattle population may also inform timing of resources and therefore the efficacy of surveillance schemes.

in addition to factors associated with pathogen transmissibility and host susceptibility, population characteristics can drive the temporal and spatial patterns of disease occurrence. for example, the widespread movement of livestock  that occurred prior to the detection of foot and mouth disease  in  <dig> resulted in transmission of disease to several spatially distinct foci, one of the main differences between the outbreak of  <dig> compared with that of  <dig>  <cit> . an association between movements of infected cattle and the observed geographical pattern of disease has also recently been shown for bovine tuberculosis by gilbert et al.  <cit> . although reports of temporal characteristics in cattle movements in britain already exist in the literature  <cit> , quantification and additional exploratory analysis of the extensive data is required.

the individual identification and tracing of the cattle population is a requirement of all member states of the european union . within britain a centralised tracing system capable of identifying individual cattle for the purposes of public health was established in the form of the british cattle movement service . mitchell et al.  provided a short historical overview of the changes to the reporting of cattle movements in britain. since  <dig> it has been mandatory for all keepers of cattle in britain to register births, deaths and movements to bcms via telephone, post or internet. this data is then collated by the department for environment, food and rural affairs  as part of the rapid analysis and detection of animal risk  information management system  <cit> .

this extensive database resource provides the reported event  histories of all cattle in britain. the database of cattle births, deaths and movements reported to bcms contains records from as early as  <dig>  however, initially, data reporting by animal keepers was not mandatory. also, as a result of the foot and mouth disease outbreak of  <dig>  many animals were slaughtered and movement restrictions were imposed on the industry, and data collected during this period are atypical. in this paper we consider only movements of cattle for the period 1st jan  <dig> to 28th feb  <dig> 

time series analysis, of which data smoothing forms a necessary first step, can be applied to temporal data to identify two basic components: trend and seasonality  <cit> . trend represents a general systematic linear or nonlinear component that changes over time and does not repeat. seasonality represents trend that repeats itself in systematic intervals over time. identifying these two components in time series data can help to understand underlying processes and also to predict future trends. in this paper we aim to identify long term trends, as well as seasonality in cattle population dynamics and cattle movements within britain by analysing data on cattle movements collected by the bcms and supplied through defra's radar information system.

RESULTS
time series traces
for each type of event  the raw data, 3-point moving average, residuals  and 53-point weighted moving average are illustrated.

there was no clear trend in live cattle imports evident from the raw import data . however, on close inspection of the trace, seasonal fluctuations are discernable which upon smoothing  become more evident. however, peaks in imports appear at different times during successive years. in  <dig> a strong spring peak in the number of imported animals occurred whereas two smaller peaks in spring and autumn occurred in  <dig>  plotting of the residuals reveals relatively constant noise over time, but a small systematic reduction in residual variance over time may be evident . smoothing of the data to reduce the effect of seasonality in the data  demonstrates a generally decreasing trend in the number of cattle imports since  <dig> .

the data for the reported on-movements of cattle onto all types of premises are plotted in figure  <dig>  although we have not presented the results for off-movements of cattle from premises, the data are very similar and the traces appear to replicate those seen for the on-movements. therefore all of the results described below for trends in on-movements also apply to those of off-movements, as is expected due to the dual-reporting of cattle transferred between two premises; if an animal arrives on one premise  it must have left another . in figure 6a, the reporting of on-movements of cattle exhibit strong temporal cycles associated with spring and autumn peaks, of which, the autumn peak is the larger . additional traces of similar trend but of smaller magnitude were observed with both on- and off-movements, reflecting the reduced number of movements occurring on saturday and, particularly on sundays . plotting the residuals does not highlight any further temporal trends. the 53-point weighted moving average indicates that on-movements have been steadily, but consistently increasing over the study period .

as well as examining the number of cattle moving according to day of the year, movements were also grouped by animal holding premises and the number of premises reporting births, deaths or movements on any given day was analysed. the temporal trends for the number of farms reporting animal births, imports, deaths and on and off movements for each day appeared to be very similar to the traces for the number of animals of each event respectively, therefore suggesting that the average size of batch movements of animals at different times of the year do not vary greatly. the majority of farms reported singular occurrences of births and deaths.

modelling of calendar effects
generalised linear models were used to examine and compare the different effects of the day of the week, the day of the month, month and year on the number of reported events. when fitted in the same model with day of the week and day of the month, the associations between the variables year and month on reporting of events  were in agreement with the trends reported above and shall therefore not be presented for a second time. the model parameter values and standard errors are plotted for births, imports and "on-farm" deaths in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. for all cattle events, as well as significant effects of month and year , the day of week and the day of month were also significantly associated with the numbers of reported events .

after accounting for months with fewer than  <dig> days, further exploration of the data on reported calf birth dates indicated a notable tendency to report the 1st, 10th and 20th of the month. there were deficits in the reports for odd numbers adjacent to multiples of  <dig>  such as the 9th, 11th, 19th and 31st of each month . there also a clear deficit in births reported to be on the 13th of any month with over 20% fewer births reported on this day compared with the number expected. a similar pattern was also reported for "on-farm" deaths but was not evident for other events, ).

the generalised linear model output for live cattle imports  revealed a significantly increased association between the 16th of any month and the number of cattle imported on that day when compared to the 1st. there was a trend for increased number of import movements occurring later in the week and friday was significantly  associated with more import movements compared to mondays and sundays.

the first four days and the 24th–27th and 30th and 31st days of any given month were associated with significantly  fewer cattle slaughtered on these days. mid- periods of any given month were associated with an increased number of cattle reportedly slaughtered. not surprisingly, tuesdays, wednesdays and thursdays were associated with significantly more slaughterhouse deaths when compared to mondays and fridays , which were also significantly associated with increased numbers of deaths compared to weekend days .

discussion
in this paper we have identified seasonal and other temporal trends in the reported births, deaths and movement of cattle within britain. the findings reported in this paper are supported by mitchell et al.  <cit> . however, our analysis has taken a more rigorous approach to the temporal structure of the data: extracting temporal trends in the residuals unexplained by the seasonality in the data and extracting long term trends whilst allowing for seasonality in the data. the time period examined in this paper is also more recent and does not include the movements occurring during the uk fmd outbreak of  <dig>  which was a period of unusual cattle movement patterns due to the implementation of disease control measures.

cattle are managed on animal holdings, with management often determined by season. hence it was not surprising that we found considerable variation, with distinct seasonality in the number of reported births , deaths and movement of cattle. trends in the dynamics of the cattle population,  indicate strong seasonal fluctuations accompanied by relatively small changes year on year. there is evidence that the cattle population is steadily increasing year on year, which concurs with the birth rate in recent years exceeding the overall death rate. however, the effect of gradual restocking of farms following the fmd outbreak in  <dig> and improvements in data capture and data quality over recent years are likely to have contributed to the observed increase in the number of cattle in the population.

an important feature of this analysis is the examination of residuals in the temporal data after allowing for seasonal fluctuations. the residuals for live imports of cattle reveal no obvious trend and can be regarded as noise . however for most other events, examination of the residuals reveals further temporal features in the data. for births, slaughterhouse and "on-farm" deaths a spring spike in  <dig> is evident that is not explained by seasonal extremes in trends. this observation can not be explained by changes in data management or quality by bcms at that time . although not necessarily related, the spring spike in residuals in  <dig> does coincide with a change in the legislation governing cattle movements when the stand-still rule in england and wales reduced from  <dig> to  <dig> days. other biases may account for the observation, and further exploration may be warranted.

by examining the appearance of spikes on the residual plots in this way, outbreaks of disease leading to higher mortality may be highlighted. however, outbreaks of disease are often localised and therefore analysing regional, as opposed to national data, may be more informative. furthermore, highlighting periods in real-time when the number of "on-farm" deaths are above or below the normal seasonal fluctuations, may lead to a more reactive and flexible surveillance. this approach to identifying localised disease "hot spots" has been discussed on a small spatial scale for cases of gastrointestinal disease in humans  <cit> . the reporting of movements to bcms is, however, not available in real time and therefore, in terms of real time surveillance, it is not conceivable that this approach could be taken at present.

in this paper we characterised the data regarding cattle deaths into "on-farm" deaths, reported by agricultural holdings, landless keepers, knackers yard, hunt kennels, markets and on common land  and those occurring at slaughterhouse premises . although this distinction has proved useful the assumption that cattle arriving at slaughterhouses enter the food or feed chain may not be the case for a small proportion of cattle that arrive at the slaughterhouse. equally, our assumption that cattle deaths on agricultural holdings, at hunt kennels, or knackers yards etc., are due to disease is also likely to be an overestimation of the amount of disease as many cattle on farms will be culled due to age related factors and may not be diseased. therefore the data for "on-farm" deaths may be more useful in disease surveillance if additional information collected.

importation of live cattle also affects the cattle population dynamics within britain. in contrast to the trend for births and deaths, imports have been decreasing year on year since  <dig>  possibly reflecting the increased demand for cattle immediately following the  <dig> fmd outbreak. this reduction in the numbers of cattle imported from other countries may have important implications for risk assessments associated with the importation of cattle disease into the national herd. in addition other temporal trends highlighted such as periods of the year, dates of the month and days of the week when increased numbers of cattle are imported could help to direct resources as part of an informed surveillance program.

we have presented evidence that records of cattle births and "on-farm" deaths taken from the radar information management system are subject to a reporting bias, namely digit preference, with preferential reporting of dates ending in a multiple of 10's, even numbers or the first of the month. it is unlikely that there would be any biological explanation for this effect. digit preference, the preferential reporting of dates or numbers by subjects, typically those ending in zero or five, is a well documented reporting bias that has been investigated in several health-related contexts, including blood-pressure measurements  <cit> , self-reported height and weight  <cit>  and date of onset of last menstrual cycle  <cit> . the evidence that this form of bias appears only in the reporting of births and "on-farm" deaths may be due to several factors at the animal holding level. firstly, as births and deaths only occur on one animal holding, it is their sole responsibility to report. there is no method of cross-checking the date as is the case for movements of cattle off and onto premises which involves both parties reporting the movement. secondly, different rules exist for the reporting of different events. calf births in britain must be reported to bcms by animal keepers within  <dig> days, deaths must be reported within  <dig> days, whereas movements of cattle must be reported within  <dig> hours of the movement occurring. hence, there may be differential recall error for different events due to the variation in intervals permitted between event and reporting. it would be of interest to explore, in consultation with animal keepers, the reasons for this bias. for instance, the method  by which births are reported to bcms may affect the degree of bias present.

as well as error occurring in reporting, others sources of error may be introduced during data editing. within the raw data reported by animal keepers obvious and illogical discrepancies exist, e.g. the reporting of a birth date that is after death has been reported to occur. in such cases, data editing by data suppliers  is undertaken to ensure that events in cattle movement histories are logical and sequential. hence, this editing process may also be a source for the preferential selection of particular dates.

the apparent preferential reporting of mondays as the day on which most births and "on-farm" deaths occur on animal holdings may result from biased observation. due to the  lower intensity of observation of cattle during the weekend, some births and "on-farm" deaths that occur over a weekend may only be detected on mondays when closer inspection of the cattle herd resumes. it may also be the case that if cattle fall ill during the weekend, euthanasia by a veterinary surgeon would not occur until after the weekend, when consultation charges may be lower.

it is likely and, indeed, intended that data on cattle movements obtained via the radar information management system will become more widely available to scientific researchers in the future. it is important that biases inherent within the database be considered. in general terms, the digit preference reporting bias that we have identified may only cause small discrepancies between the reported and the actual dates of calf births and deaths. although for many studies this may not be important, some studies may need to consider and adjust for the effect of this bias; for example studies assessing mortality in calf cohorts using data extracted from radar information management system, where small deviations in the age of calves are likely to be important. methods exist for the correction of this bias within datasets  <cit> . however it will often be the case that an awareness of the bias may be all that is required.

whilst digit preference is a natural phenomenon associated with recall, measures to reduce or avoid this source of bias within the data may be worthwhile. consultation with animal keepers may suggest important improvements for the methods of reporting of births and deaths that may lead to a reduction in the bias. identification of animal holdings for whom records suggest substantial digit preference may be used to target incentives to improve the accuracy of reporting births and deaths. it is also of significance to highlight that in different applications, evidence of bias within data, can also aid in the detection of fraudulent claims  <cit> .

a limitation of this study is the assumption that all movements, births and deaths of cattle are subsequently reported to defra. there has been some speculation within the industry as to the extent of unreported or misreported cattle movements and therefore the efficacy of surveillance policy based on incorrect field data. further issues of data quality associated with the data handling may also be introducing sources of error.

CONCLUSIONS
the recording of sequential observations in the form of daily cattle births, deaths and movements within britain provides a large data set, archetypal for use in time series analysis. identifying trends in movement of cattle and the underlying population dynamics may assist the planning of appropriate disease surveillance schemes that can be seasonally adjusted to cope with increasing surveillance at times of the year when movements are at a peak. further time series analysis may also aid in the prediction of future trends in movements and population dynamics. using complex time series analysis the ability to forecast and predict future number of movements that may occur on a particular day may of use again for surveillance purposes. however, restructuring within the cattle industry, in response to rapid changes in government legislation , are also likely to cause continued changes to the cattle population structure in britain. these changes require continued monitoring.

