BACKGROUND
fonsecaea pedrosoi is a soil-borne dimorphic fungus and the major etiological agent of chromoblastomycosis, a chronic disease that can affect immunocompetent hosts. f. pedrosoi is usually limited to skin tissue, most commonly on the lower limbs. infection usually occurs after exposure to the fungus via contaminated soil, splinters or sharp farm equipment, and results in long-term inflammation, suppurative granulomatous dermatitis and fibrosis  <cit> . the affected patients are typically low-income workers that engage in agricultural or manual labour in tropical and subtropical countries. rarely, f. pedrosoi can also cause phaeohyphomycosis, in immunosuppressed patients  <cit> .

the management of diseases caused by f. pedrosoi continues to be challenging. treatment depends on an early diagnosis and the use of systemic antifungal agents and local therapies, including the surgical removal of lesions. the suggested drug interventions are expensive, involving high doses of itraconazole and/or terbinafine  daily for over one year. even with treatment, relapses are common  <cit> .

f. pedrosoi constitutively produces melanin  <cit> , a pigment that is an important virulence factor in several human pathogenic fungi due to its anti-oxidative, thermostable, anti-radioactive, paramagnetic and metal binding properties. melanins are present in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. these ubiquitous dark compounds are formed by the oxidative polymerisation of phenolic or indolic compounds. melanins have been extensively studied and characterised as negatively charged amorphous compounds with quinone groups, hydrophobic and insoluble in organic solvents  <cit> . efforts to elucidate the structure of melanins are not yet conclusive due to limitations of the biochemical and biophysical analytical methods available. electron spin resonance  can characterise pigments, including melanin, and reveals that a typical melanin spectrum falls between  <dig> and  <dig> gauss  <cit> .

franzen et al.  <cit>  reported that f. pedrosoi constitutively synthesises melanin in organelles named melanosomes through the dhn-pathway. in f. pedrosoi, melanin confers structural integrity as a cell wall constituent and immune protection through antigen masking. f. pedrosoi melanin also has anti-phagocytic properties, and is overexpressed during infection  <cit> . inside melanosomes, melanin plays a role in the intracellular storage and regulation of calcium and iron ions  <cit> . the anti-phagocytic properties of f. pedrosoi's melanin were described after interaction with murine macrophages with or without activation with lipopolysaccharide  and interferon-gamma   <cit> . in addition, conidia from f. pedrosoi cultures treated with  <dig> μg/ml of tricyclazole , a dhn-melanin pathway inhibitor, showed a higher susceptibility to activated murine macrophages when compared to untreated fungus  <cit> .

macrophages are found in granulomas of chromoblastomycosis lesions and may participate in the antigen presentation and innate immune response against f. pedrosoi  <cit> . to contain the growth of pathogens, activated macrophages release oxygen and nitrogen reactive intermediates. no released by the activated macrophages are fungicidal against histoplasma capsulatum  <cit> , cryptococcus neoformans and sporothrix schenkii  <cit> . the anti-oxidative properties of fungal melanins  <cit> , their paramagnetism as revealed by esr, and the melanin-iron  association in f. pedrosoi raised the hypothesis; the trapping of free radicals by fungal melanin during interactions between macrophages and fungi is a mechanism of oxidative buffering.

the aims of the present work were the following:  to characterise the melanin of f. pedrosoi by esr;  to investigate the no production of activated macrophages against f. pedrosoi conidia;  to detect i-nos activity during macrophage interactions with fungi;  to evaluate fungal growth after treatment with no and h2o2; and  to compare these approaches in conidia with or without tc treatment.

RESULTS
esr spectrometry and microwave power saturation of melanins
the esr spectra of the control-melanin and tc-melanin present strikingly similar signals with a peak of  <dig> gauss  . progressive microwave power saturation shows that the paramagnetic centres in these melanins do not saturate under the experimental conditions. in addition, these experiments reveal that the control-melanin has a higher spin relaxation rate than the tc-melanin . these observations suggest that the control-melanin is a more compact polymer than tc-melanin.

oxidative burst
the macrophage oxidative burst was analysed by the nbt assay. the activity of oxidative compounds released by activated macrophages was visualised through the precipitation of nbt-formazan  around the fungus in all melanin-deficient systems. this precipitation occurs in response to superoxide molecules near the fungal cell wall . formazan precipitation was observed near s. cerevisiae  and f. pedrosoi grown in melanin-deficient conditions, such as with tc treatment  or low aeration . however, activity of the oxidative compounds was not detected in control f. pedrosoi conidia producing regular melanin  or s. cerevisiae supplemented with f. pedrosoi's control melanin .

i-nos expression revealed by immunofluorescence
immunocytochemistry studies with anti-i-nos enzymes revealed that these enzymes were active in all models tested: macrophages alone ; macrophages with control f. pedrosoi ; or with tc-treated f. pedrosoi . such data indicate that i-nos expression was not inhibited in any tested condition.

nitrite evaluation
after  <dig> h of interaction in cultures with f. pedrosoi and activated murine macrophages, the nitrite levels were reduced by 91% compared to the amount of nitrite observed in macrophage cultures without fungal interaction . a similar reduction was observed when melanin extracted from control f. pedrosoi was added to a macrophage culture without fungal cells. conidia isolated from tc-supplemented cultures yielded a detection of 81% more nitrite compared to non-infected macrophages after  <dig> h of interaction. results obtained after  <dig> hours of interaction suggest a similar concentration endpoint of ~ <dig> μm of nitrite for both macrophages alone or in interaction with tc-treated fungi.

*mean values ± standard deviation recorded after  <dig> independent experiments.

molar concentration of nitrite detected after interaction of f. pedrosoi or melanin from f. pedrosoi with activated murine macrophages for  <dig> and  <dig> h.

fungal growth after direct activity of oxidative species
the growth of tc-treated f. pedrosoi significantly decreased in comparison to the control after incubation with either h2o <dig> or snap . differences were more prominent at concentrations of  <dig>  m of hydrogen peroxide and  <dig>  m of snap.

discussion
fungal melanins are a hot topic among mycologists and have been extensively characterised as virulence factors. melanin pigments can protect pathogenic fungi from the mammalian host innate immune responses providing resistance:  to phagocytosis in c. neoformans, paracoccidioides brasiliensis, s. schenkii and f. pedrosoi;  to killing by the host cell in the previously mentioned species as well as in aspergillus fumigatus and wangiella  dermatitidis; and  against oxidising agents in c. neoformans, aspergillus spp. and s. schenkii  <cit> .

esr characterizations of melanins correspond to a peak signal on the spectra near  <dig> gauss. these data are coherent among several fungi regardless of the specific melanin biosynthetic pathway or even if the fungus is pathogenic, including c. neoformans  <cit> ; blastomyces dermatitidis  <cit> , p. brasiliensis  <cit> , h. capsulatum  <cit> , s. schenckii  <cit>  and w. dermatitidis  <cit> , or not, as in the slime mould fuligo septic  <cit> , indicating that, at the molecular level, the structure of paramagnetic center is similar on these melanins.

the esr characterisation of the samples revealed the presence of paramagnetic centres in both the control-melanin and tc-melanin; however, the control-melanin sample was of a higher intensity indicating that the number of unpaired electrons  was higher. thus, these results indicate that the control-melanin is a polymer with more paramagnetic centres than the tc-melanin.

in the host environment, the expected iron species are diamagnetic fe and paramagnetic fe. in our experiments fe was used as a nutrient since we used ferric ammonium citrate as the medium substrate. fungal melanins are able to reduce fe to fe, and this oxidative change prevents the formation of oxidative radicals when iron reacts with hydrogen peroxide, thus protecting the fungus from oxidative stress  <cit> . cunha et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that untreated f. pedrosoi has more abundant and homogeneous binding to cationised ferritin  complex) on the cell wall surface than fungi treated with tc. at the time, the stronger binding was attributed to more anionic groups on the surface of the control and melanin's affinity to iron.

experiments with melanin from c. neoformans  <cit>  suggests that it acts as a redox buffer, changing its oxidative state according to the chemical stimuli in its environment. thus, it is possible that melanin maximises its antioxidant potential by reducing fe to fe, ensuring the balance of its redox chemical microenvironment and minimising the effect of oxidation of fundamental structures on fungal growth.

the novel findings of this work led us to propose that the melanin of f. pedrosoi reacts with ferric iron to reduce it to ferrous iron, and maintains this iron-melanin complex as a redox buffer to trap oxidative radicals. this explains the higher growth rate of the control f. pedrosoi samples compared to the tc-treated samples following exposure to no and hydrogen peroxide , as well as the higher susceptibility of the tc-treated samples to activated macrophages  <cit> .

the progressive microwave power saturation esr experiments, which varied the power of the microwaves on the magnetised sample, showed approximately a two times higher intensity in the control-melanin samples compared to the tc-melanin samples. according to our hypothesis, this suggests that control-melanin has more self-interaction sites as well as interaction sites for associated structures and therefore is more compact. as indicated by herbst et al.  <cit> , the profile of progressive microwave power saturation curves of amorphous solids is linked to the effectiveness of spin relaxation pathways for the paramagnetic centre that interacts with its surroundings. hence, the measure of the progressive microwave power saturation curves for similar paramagnetic centres may provide an indirect indication of molecular arrangements. in this study, the profiles observed for control-melanin  suggest that it is a more compact polymer than tc-melanin because its spin relaxation rates are faster. such data are in agreement with the thinner cell wall of untreated f. pedrosoi conidia compared to tc-treated f. pedrosoi as revealed by freeze-fracture assays  <cit> .

our data from interaction assays between fungi and activated murine macrophages suggest that melanin is involved in the protection of the fungus against no. precipitation of formazan in the nbt assay  revealed the presence of an oxidative response in the interface between the melanin-free fungi and macrophages. these experiments also showed that the presence of control-melanin  decreased no levels as revealed by its direct correlation to the detected nitrite levels. further, tc-treatment of f. pedrosoi conidia resulted in at least an 80% increase in the amount of nitrite detected after the first  <dig> h of interaction compared to samples with only macrophages. these data indicate that the inhibition of the melanin pathway, and consequently, the absence of melanin exposed on the cell wall of the fungus, could stimulate the production of no by activated macrophages.

fungal glucans, the major component of the fungal cell wall, were previously described to activate macrophages  and promote the synthesis and release of no  <cit> . nimrichter et al.  <cit>  suggested that the removal of melanin from the f. pedrosoi cell wall exposes antigens, such as glucans, that were previously masked by melanin. we conclude that the increase of the macrophages' oxidative response after interaction with tc-treated f. pedrosoi was probably due to the unmasking of antigens/glucans in the fungal cell wall.

the inhibition of i-nos expression by pathogens has been reported in other microorganisms, e.g., toxoplasma gondii  <cit> . bocca el al.  <cit>  suggested that melanin from f. pedrosoi could inhibit no production in macrophages. however, our experiments suggest that the reduction of nitrite levels after the interaction of macrophages and control conidia was not due the inhibition of i-nos expression, since its expression was detected in all tested conditions in immunofluorescence experiments. we propose that f. pedrosoi melanin acts as a scavenger of oxidative radicals, masking the detection of no in some systems.

the conversion of l-arginine by i-nos in the presence of no requires calcium ions and fe. melanin participates in the storage of calcium and iron in f. pedrosoi, and therefore it might reduce the availability of such ions in the interaction microenvironment  <cit> . in addition, no reversibly reacts with both fe and fe, leaving an electron that could remain trapped in the quinone groups of melanin  <cit> .

the assays with the no donor snap and h2o <dig> revealed that untreated f. pedrosoi grew more than tc-treated f. pedrosoi; this suggests a protective function for melanin. in these experiments, our only variables were the f. pedrosoi conidia and the oxidative agent. consequently, in these systems, no other mechanism can occur to inhibit i-nos production.

CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest a protective role for f. pedrosoi melanin by its direct interaction with no; the fungal melanin acts as a trap for the unpaired electron of no, protecting the fungus against oxidative damage. this mechanism impairs the immune system and makes difficult the fungal clearance by macrophages and other phagocytes, which might be related to the recalcitrant nature of chromoblastomycosis lesions and the chronic nature of this disease. further investigation is necessary to define the structure of fungal melanins and describe putative chemical reactions that could occur in the infection environment, the products of such reactions and possible target sites for the development of new drugs.

