BACKGROUND
more than a hundred methods have been developed so far for the automated discovery of unknown short conserved motifs in a set of protein or nucleic acid sequences  <cit> . these methods are routinely used for the identification of functional features, such as, for example, transcription factor binding sites in a set of gene regulatory regions.

however a functional motif needs not to be contiguous in sequence and might arise from the clustering in space of similar side chains coming from different parts of non homologous proteins. finding occurrences of shared structural motifs can be instrumental for mapping the interaction site of different proteins with the same partner  <cit> , for locating of the binding site for a common ligand even of unknown identity or for identifying an epitope shared, for example by an external agent and an endogenous protein involved in autoimmune diseases.

at present, several applications for the comparison of multiple structures are available  <cit>  and are used for clustering protein structures in families or for identifying large structural motifs shared by different folds. all these algorithms are based on fold comparison methods, and therefore the alignments they produce are often sequence-dependent and/or require at least a small core of conserved residues which are contiguous in the primary sequence  <cit> .

these fold comparison methods cannot be used to identify small structural motifs not conserved in sequence and belonging to non homologous proteins. nevertheless identifying such motifs is important to study cases where the same metabolite, for example atp, is bound to proteins with different folds  <cit> , or where the same protein interacts with different partners using the same surface  <cit> .

here we describe funclust  <cit> , a new web server for the identification of common structural motifs in a set of non homologous protein structures without any knowledge about the type or position of the motif, which, additionally, does not need to be present in all the submitted structures.

funclust is based on a local  structural comparison program  <cit> . local structural comparison methods  <cit>  can identify small sets of residues organized in a conserved geometry, irrespectively of the order in which they appear in the primary sequence. they are useful to search for functional and/or structural motifs such as active sites or ligand binding sites in non-homologous protein structures  <cit> .

in this work we show that our method is able to effectively and efficiently identify common functional and/or structural motifs present in different structures. as test cases, we used proteins known to share common motifs and a complete set of atp binding proteins. the server is also being used for finding common interface patches in proteins interacting with the same partner  <cit> .

RESULTS
the funclust web server
the funclust web server  <cit>  enables the quick identification of structural motifs, putatively associated with a common function, present in an ensemble of non-homologous protein structures. users submit a set of protein structures deemed to share a given function, binding capability or a common epitope, without the need to specify where the common structural motif should be located. the output consists of a list of one or more conserved sets of residues.

input
the method accepts as input a set of pdb  <cit>  codes or user-submitted coordinates in pdb file format. in the latter case, it is also possible to provide an arbitrary subset of residues instead of the whole protein. if a pdb code is given without any chain identifier, all the available chains are considered in the computation.

pdb codes and user-submitted coordinates are processed in order to validate their format and detect sequence similarities that can indicate homology relationships. only one representative structure is used for each set of submitted protein chains with sequence identity higher than a user-specified threshold. this restriction reduces or eliminates the risk of finding local similarities arising because of the overall similarity among the input proteins.

the user can set the value of five parameters: the maximum r.m.s.d. among the involved residues, the maximum distance between the side chains of the residues forming the motif, the inclusion/exclusion of solvent accessible residues only, the inclusion/exclusion of hydrophobic residues and the weight of physicochemical similarities among the matched residues.

a set of pre-selected combinations of parameters tailored to the identification of four different kinds of functional sites  is also provided.

output
the output is a list of all the identified structural motifs, sorted by an approximate significance score, as described below. each motif consists of a set of at least three protein chains and at least three residues in each chain. not all the user-submitted structures need to contain the motif, but all the identified structures must contain a motif formed by the same number of residues. each motif is shown in the output page along with its score in tabular and graphical form . in the tabular form, the residues of each structure are listed in a different row, with the corresponding residues in different structures aligned in the same columns.

each motif is associated to its approximate significance score, which depends upon the number of protein chains containing it. more specifically, the score is given by the number of residues in the motif multiplied by the number of aligned pairs of structures. the score of a cluster formed by  <dig> aligned residues in  <dig> proteins chains can range from 3* <dig>  to 3* <dig> .

test cases
we show here some examples where the largest identified structural cluster of residues shared by a set of protein structures corresponds to a known functional motif. the examples are taken using prosite  <cit>  regular expressions, csa  <cit>  catalytic residues, pdbfun residues in binding sites  <cit>  and elm  <cit>  motifs. we selected our cases from the limited number of functional motifs identified on at least three structures with a completely different fold and low sequence identity. for each selected motif, we requested the representing structures to have a different cath  <cit>  architecture and share a sequence identity lower than 25%.

some examples of cases where the first structural cluster identified by the server correctly pairs some or all of the correspondent functional residues in all the submitted structures are the serine endopeptidases enzymes , the ef hand motif , the zinc binding site  and the 4fe-4s ferredoxin pattern .

in table  <dig> we show the results of the funclust server for each different functional motifs. we also report the score and the set of parameters used .

in this table six cases of functional motifs are reported that the server identified as the largest cluster of conserved residues. the score, r.m.s.d. and side chains maximum proximity parameters are reported . a detailed parameter description can be found in the online help.

for each motif the list of submitted pdb structures is present along with their cath code. finally, for each structure the aminoacids that have been included in the common cluster are indicated.

atp binding pockets
as an additional test of our method, we evaluated its ability to identify a common structural motif in a set of protein structures binding the same ligand. we used a complete set of  <dig> atp binding structures  <cit>  sharing less than 35% sequence identity, representative of all the pdb. for the comparison, all residues having at least one atom at less than  <dig> Å from the bound atp were used. using the standard ligand binding site parameters of funclust, a total of four structural motifs  were identified. the three highest scoring clusters  are composed respectively of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> different proteins all sharing a set of three residues: two glycines and a lysine or serine. all residues in the three identified motifs belong to the p-loop binding motif  <cit> . by superposing the motifs, it can be seen that the vast majority of atp molecules appear to have one of their phosphate atoms in the same location. the complete set of results can be viewed on the server web pages, using the “example 3” set of structures.

CONCLUSIONS
here we present a new server for the multiple local alignment of protein structures and show some examples of its application to the discovery of common functional patterns in serine endopeptidases, ef hand containing proteins, ferredoxins, zinc and atp binding proteins. funclust is a useful tool in the automated discovery of local structural motifs shared by a set of non-homologous protein structures. the server is fast and easy to use. to date, this is the only method available on the web for the automated and unsupervised identification of local structural motifs in unrelated protein structures.

