BACKGROUND
mating causes extensive short- and long-term modifications of physiology and behavior in females. in insects, mated females often become refractory to additional mating, their ovaries become activated, they form mature eggs, and they initiate egg-laying and/or foraging behavior  <cit> . however, there have been few studies that examine the molecular mechanisms underlying these post-mating changes, and all of these have been carried out using drosophila melanogaster  <cit> .

the queen honey bee  provides an excellent model to study the genes that regulate these behavioral and physiological transitions. the mating process in honey bees has been very well-characterized, and the behavioral and physiological differences between virgin and mated queens are extensive and have been well studied  <cit> . furthermore, because the mating process can also be quite prolonged, it is possible to analyze intermediate states – in addition to virgin and mated, laying queens, we can monitor behavior, physiology, and gene-expression patterns in mated queens that have not yet initiated egg-laying. with the release of the honey bee genome  <cit> , we now have the tools available to elucidate the genetic changes associated with the observed changes in behavior and physiology.

mating in honey bee queens can be a protracted process . a queen bee reaches sexual maturity when she is 5– <dig> days old, at which point she initiates mating flights. she will take one to three mating flights on subsequent days, and mate with an average of  <dig> drones throughout the course of these flights  <cit> . the majority of the semen collected by the queen is excreted within  <dig> hours after insemination, and a proportion of each male's sperm is stored in her spermatheca. a fully inseminated queen carries approximately 5– <dig> million sperm  <cit> . these averages vary tremendously among individuals, populations, and other bee species within the genus apis  <cit> . once the queen completes the mating process, she will initiate egg-laying behavior within a few days, and then will never mate again during her 1– <dig> year lifespan.

after mating, a queen undergoes considerable physiological and behavioral changes. her ovaries  complete the final stages of maturation as her ovarioles increase in size and the eggs become vitellogenic and reach, maturity  <cit> . the queen's pheromone profile also changes dramatically  <cit> , causing workers to surround the queen in a retinue response, antennating and licking her. major changes occur in the brain as well. fahrbach et al.  <cit>  found that following mating, the kenyon cells of the mushroom bodies decrease by 30% while the neuropil of the mushroom bodies increases by 25–50%. levels of dopamine and n-acetyldopamine also decrease following mating  <cit> . mating also causes profound behavioral changes. virgins are phototactic and take mating flights, while mature, mated queens remain in their colonies and lay eggs  <cit> .

in order to disentangle the molecular pathways regulating these various components of the post-mating response, we correlated changes in gene-expression patterns in the brains and ovaries to behavioral and physiological changes in three distinct types of queens: virgins , mated queens that have not yet initiated egg-laying , and mated queens that have begun laying eggs . virgin queens and laying queens are the two extreme cases encompassing the complete post-mating response, while the second group  represents an intermediate phenotype. these queens are considered to be "incompletely-mated", because they have not yet completed the full suite of behavioral and physiological transitions associated with mating in honey bees. it is also important to note that queens in this group were heterogeneous in terms of flight behavior; some attempted to take additional mating flights, while others were not observed to do so. four queens from each group were used for the microarray study. our results demonstrate that behavioral and physiological post-mating changes can be uncoupled in the mated group, and that these changes can be associated with specific gene expression patterns. furthermore, we compared our results to previous microarray studies in drosophila  <cit>  to determine if genomic changes due to mating were similar in these different insect species, but found that few genes were similarly regulated between these studies. finally, we found no obvious correlation between genes regulated by mating and genes regulated by behavior or physiology in workers.

RESULTS
behavioral data
flight attempts of queens that had been allowed to take only a single mating flight were monitored. when queens were  <dig> days old, colony entrances were opened so they could take mating flights. of the  <dig> queens allowed to fly,  <dig> mated within  <dig> days. four of these initiated egg-laying within five days, while the remainder did not. none of the queens that initiated egg-laying were observed to attempt additional mating flights. of the five remaining queens , three attempted to take additional mating flights . two of these were represented in the mated group in the arrays. the remaining two array samples from this group were queens that did not attempt to take additional mating flights.

ovary development
the ovaries were dissected from the queens and assigned a development score ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . ovary development differed among all three groups . virgin queens  had not yet initiated ovary development . mated queens  had initiated ovary development , however none of these queens had fully developed ovaries. laying queens  all had mature eggs present in their ovaries  .

sperm counts
the number of sperm stored in the spermathecae of the queens was counted after collection. all of the virgin queens were examined as well to verify that they had not mated. sperm numbers varied significantly among groups . means were compared using a nonparametric tukey-kramer hsd test. laying queens and virgins had significantly different numbers of sperm , while sperm numbers in mated queens were at intermediate levels, and not significantly different from virgins or laying queens .

vitellogenin levels
vitellogenin is an egg-yolk protein that is synthesized in the fat bodies and transported into the eggs during maturation. quantitative, real-time pcr revealed that levels of vitellogenin varied significantly among groups . means were compared using a nonparametric tukey-kramer hsd. there was a significant difference between virgins and laying queens in vitellogenin rna levels present in the abdominal fat bodies , but there was no significant difference in vitellogenin rna levels between mated and laying queens or mated and virgin queens . levels of vitellogenin were positively correlated with ovary development .

pheromone profiles
gas chromatography of the queen mandibular glands of the three groups of queens  revealed a significant difference in the overall profile  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , figure 2). two discriminant variables explained 100% of the variation. while the three types of queens clustered into distinct groups, the greatest difference occurred between the virgin/mated queen clusters and the laying queens, suggesting that the pheromone profiles of the mated queens were in the early stages of transition . relative quantities of the mandibular gland compounds are included in additional file  <dig> 

brain gene expression profiles
statistical analysis revealed that out of  <dig>  transcripts included in the analysis,  <dig> were differentially expressed in the brain among our queen groups . hierarchical clustering analysis using all of the significant genes grouped virgin queens with laying queens . principal component analysis was performed to determine if there were any specific underlying expression patterns in the significantly regulated genes across all three groups . the first principal component accounts for 91% of the variation and shows little difference between the three groups, while the second principal component accounts for 6% of the variation, with the virgin and laying groups resembling each other and the mated group as the extreme. the final principal component accounts for 2% of the overall variation, and demonstrates that virgin and laying queens are at two extremes with mated queens intermediate.

the top  <dig> predictive genes were identified using the class prediction function in genespring. leave-one-out cross-validation using these genes correctly identified 11/ <dig> samples – one virgin was unpredicted. clustering analysis grouped virgin and mated queens together, with an "approximate-unbiased" p-value score of  <dig>  and a bootstrap support of  <dig> .

gene ontology analysis  using david  <cit>  reveals that among the significantly regulated genes, there is a significant overrepresentation of genes involved in protein folding , protein catabolism , and stress response . several of these genes were part of three pathways: a purine metabolic pathway, proteasome structure, and pyrimidine metabolism. the  <dig> predictive genes were input into david to identify overrepresented biological functions, but no groups survived the benjamini correction. a table of these genes is provided in the supplementary data .

top  <dig> significant go biological processes that were overrepresented in expression profiling of the brains. one major pathway, involved in purine metabolism, was significantly overrepresented by our data set, as well as genes associated with metabolism and stress response.

ovary gene expression profiles
statistical analysis revealed that out of the  <dig>  transcripts included in the analysis,  <dig> were differentially expressed in the ovaries among all groups . hierarchical clustering analysis using all regulated genes grouped virgin and laying queens together for overall gene expression patterns . principal components analysis of all regulated transcripts in the ovaries demonstrated similar patterns as the brain . the first principal component accounts for 83% of the variation, and shows little differences among groups. the second principal component accounts for 10% of the overall variation and demonstrates that mated queens represent an extreme phenotype. the final principal component explains 7% of the variation, and identifies laying queens as the outgroup.

the top  <dig> predictive genes were identified using the class prediction function in genespring. leave-one-out cross-validation using these genes correctly identified 8/ <dig> samples. all virgins were correct. two laying queens were unpredicted, and two mated queens were unpredicted. hierarchical clustering of the  <dig> predictive genes grouped mated and laying queens together, with an "approximately-unbiased" p-value score of  <dig> and a bootstrap value of  <dig> .

gene-ontogeny analysis  of the  <dig> significantly regulated genes revealed that they were largely involved in cell division , gametogenesis , reproduction , and oogenesis . the  <dig> predictive genes were input into david to identify overrepresented biological functions, but no groups survived the benjamini correction. a table of these genes is provided in the supplementary data .

top  <dig> significant go biological processes overrepresented in ovarian transcriptional profiling. due to the large number of overrepresented terms, duplicate groups and groups with less than  <dig> genes were removed from this table. several groups involved in reproduction, oogenesis, and development appear in this list.

there were  <dig> transcripts that were regulated in both the brains and the ovaries. a list of these genes is included in additional file  <dig> 

comparative analyses
changes in transcript abundance in honey bees and drosophila
we compared our results from the brain transcriptional profiling to the results of a study published by mcgraw et.al.  <cit> . in this study, whole-body expression differences in virgin and mated female drosophila were compared 1– <dig> hours post-mating. of the genes expressed in our brain arrays,  <dig> were also found on the drosophila arrays performed by mcgraw et al.  <cit> . only  <dig> genes from this list of  <dig> were significantly regulated by mating in both bees and drosophila . in the  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed in both data sets, several go biological processes were overrepresented, such as stress response, alternative splicing, protein binding, and tissue development .

we compared our results to the results of a study published by mcgraw et.al.  that identified changes in gene expression in drosophila females 1– <dig> hours after mating. of the genes on our honey bee arrays,  <dig> were also found on the arrays used by mcgraw et.al.   <cit> . only  <dig> genes from this list were significantly regulated by mating in both bees and drosophila. several go biological processes were overrepresented among the  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed in both data sets, such as: stress response, alternative splicing, protein binding, and tissue development.

correlations with worker honey bee development, qmp-response, and reproduction
previous microarray studies identified  <dig> genes that were expressed at significantly different levels in the brains of reproductive and sterile worker bees  <cit> . of these  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes were expressed at high enough levels in our brain samples to be included in our analysis. of these, only two were significantly differentially expressed .

a study published by whitfield et.al  <cit>  identified sets of genes regulated by methoprene  in worker bees. in queens, juvenile hormone levels are lower in mated than newly emerged virgin queens  <cit> , but juvenile hormone levels do not change after mating  <cit>  and do not appear to be directly involved in ovary development . to examine whether levels of juvenile hormone may be involved in producing the changes in gene expression associated with mating, we compared our list of significantly regulated genes in the brain to these methoprene-regulated genes  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes that were both upregulated by methoprene and expressed in the brains of our queens, only  <dig>  were significantly regulated by mating . of the  <dig> genes that were both downregulated by methoprene and present in our study, only  <dig>  were significantly regulated by mating . thus, there does not appear to be any particular biased involvement of methoprene-regulated genes in the post-mating changes.

finally, we examined whether genes regulated by queen mandibular pheromone  in the brains of workers were regulated by the mating process in the brains of queens. qmp regulates many aspects of worker behavior and physiology  <cit> , including inhibiting ovary development  <cit> , and thus qmp-regulated genes may be associated with reproduction in queens. we compared our data to a study published by grozinger et.al.  <cit>  and found no obvious association of mating with qmp-regulated genes in workers. of the  <dig> genes which were both upregulated by qmp and present in our analysis, only  <dig>  were significantly regulated by mating, while only  <dig>  of the  <dig> genes that were both downregulated by qmp and present in our analysis, were significantly regulated .

correlation with genes associated with worker division of labor
one of the major theories in the evolution of eusocial behavior is the concept that genes involved in reproduction may have been co-opted for use in division of labor  <cit> . in honey bees, worker division of labor involves a behavioral maturation process, in which young bees care for brood  while older bees become foragers  <cit> . to determine if genes associated with worker division of labor are also preferentially associated with reproductive state in queens, we examined the brain expression patterns of sets of genes previously identified by whitfield et.al.  <cit>  as expressed at significantly higher levels in the brains of nurses vs. foragers  or expressed at significantly higher levels in the brains of foragers vs. nurses .  <dig> nursing-associated genes were expressed in the brains of our queens, but only  <dig>  were significantly regulated by mating . similarly,  <dig> foraging-associated genes were expressed in our data set, but only  <dig>  were significantly regulated by mating in queens . thus, there is no apparent bias for the mating process in queens to preferentially regulate nursing-associated or foraging-associated genes.

previous studies suggest a link between pollen hoarding, reproductive potential, and insulin signaling genes  <cit> . we did not find any insulin signaling genes in our top  <dig> most predictive genes in the brains or in the ovaries, nor were insulin signaling genes overrepresented in the top  <dig> gene ontology lists. however, metabolic genes were significantly overrepresented in the brain gene ontology analysis.

discussion
mating in honey bees causes dramatic changes in behavior  and physiology . here, we demonstrate that these behavioral and physiological transitions are uncoupled in mated honey bee queens, and that they are associated with distinct gene expression patterns in the brains and ovaries. mated queens behaved like virgins , but in terms of physiological parameters, they were in the early stages of the transition to the mated state for pheromone profiles and vitellogenin synthesis in their fat bodies, and had partially activated their ovaries. this uncoupling of behavioral and physiological parameters was mirrored in the gene expression patterns of the  <dig> predictive genes in the brains and ovaries. hierarchical clustering of the  <dig> predictive genes in the brains demonstrates that a portion of the variation in brain gene expression is strongly associated with behavioral differences , while hierarchical clustering of the  <dig> predictive-genes in the ovaries demonstrated that a portion of the variation in ovary gene expression is associated with physiological differences . overall, these results suggest that gene expression in the brains and the ovaries of queens may be uncoupled, such that the physical process of mating may trigger changes in the ovaries, but that the brain may require additional stimuli or a longer amount of time to complete the transition.

behavioral changes
the behavioral observations indicate that there is a cue which triggers queens to switch from taking mating flights to laying eggs. however, while the behavioral switch appears to be unidirectional and permanent, the process that prompts this 'decision' to stop mating remains unclear. our data suggest that cessation of mating flights is not triggered by the act of mating alone, and is supported by previous studies  <cit> . moreover, it is unlikely that the cue for queens to cease mating attempts and initiate egg-laying is related to the number of mating flights taken, because half of our observed queens initiated egg-laying after a single mating flight while the other half did not. instead, our findings suggest that the likely cue inhibiting further mating in a queen is associated with the amount of seminal fluid she receives during her earlier flights  <cit> .

physiological changes
interestingly, mating elicits several immediate physiological changes in queens, even if the mating process has not been completed. vitellogenin transcript levels began to increase in the fat bodies of mated queens and are intermediate between virgin and laying queens, demonstrating that levels of this transcript begin to increase even in mated queens. similarly, in contrast to virgins, mated queens have initiated  ovary development, and their pheromone profiles are in the early stages of the transition to the fully mated state. previous studies suggest that virgin queens treated with carbon dioxide  or are instrumentally inseminated eventually initiate egg-laying, though the process is delayed compared to naturally mated queens  <cit> . this suggests that the act of mating will rapidly induce physiological changes, but that these changes are slower in incompletely mated queens.

common patterns in the brains and the ovaries
a portion of the brain gene expression pattern correlates with the behaviorally-associated pattern observed. using a leave-one-out cross-validation, we identified the  <dig> most-predictive transcripts associated with behavior. when we cluster behavioral groups using these transcripts, this is the pattern we observe. however, if all of the regulated genes were used in a hierarchical clustering analysis, then virgin and laying queens appeared more similar to each other than to mated queens. based on the principal component analysis, a small proportion of the variation in brain gene expression  matches with the behavioral studies, with virgin and mated queens most similar. 6% of the variation demonstrates that mated queens are the outgroup, showing the same pattern observed with the significant gene-expression patterns. however, the majority of the expression variation  showed no distinct differences among groups. this suggests that the brains of the incompletely mated queens are in a transitional state that is not simply intermediate between the virgin and laying states, and that it is not strongly correlated with either endpoint.

similarly, when only the  <dig> most-predictive genes in the ovaries were used for hierarchical clustering, a physiologically-associated pattern emerges that correlates with vitellogenin levels and the initiation of ovary development. again, clustering analysis of the significant gene-expression patterns in the ovaries grouped virgin and laying queens together, with mated queens placed as the outgroup. as in the brains, principal components analysis reveals that only a small part of the observed variation  shows a pattern associated with behavioral and pheromonal differences, with the virgin and mated queens grouping together. 10% of the variation identifies mated queens as the outgroup, showing the same pattern observed with the significant gene-expression clustering patterns. again, the majority of the expression variation  showed no distinct differences among groups. this suggests that the ovaries of the mated queens are also in a transitional state  that is not simply intermediate between the virgin and laying states, and that it is not strongly correlated with either endpoint.

it is important to note that all mated queens  were allowed only a single mating flight, but that the number of males each queen mated with may have varied during this flight. the laying queens all developed ovaries and initiated egg-laying following this single flight. however, the mated queens did not. the variation observed within mated queens was the greatest for the behavioral observations, pheromone profiles, and ovary development. perhaps this transition state represents a period of greater flux and more individual variability, and thus may explain why this group appears to be the outgroup in the overall expression profiles of the brains and the ovaries.

comparisons to previous studies
previous studies have examined transcriptional changes in females following mating in drosophila  <cit> . we compared our results from brain transcriptional profiling in honey bee queens to the results published by mcgraw et.al.  <cit> , which examined changes in transcript abundance in females shortly after mating. few genes overlapped between our analysis and this study. however, these results are not surprising for both biological and technical reasons. while there are many similarities in the post-mating behavioral and physiological changes between honey bees and drosophila , there are several important differences that would contribute to the lack of overlap in gene expression differences. for example, in drosophila, mating reduces female longevity and also stimulates an immune response  <cit> . chapman et.al. has proposed that this may be due to sexual conflict and reproductive trade-offs, such that the male seminal proteins stimulate the females to produce as many offspring as possible, to the detriment of the female  <cit> . in honey bees, sexual conflict between males and females is thought to be reduced, since multiple matings in females is advantageous to colony health, by increasing the genetic diversity of the workers . other differences in the mating systems of the two species may have resulted in the lack of observed similarities in the functional categories of regulated genes. furthermore, the genes identified by mcgraw et.al. resulted from microarray studies using whole bodies as the tissue source. our analysis focused directly on changes in gene expression in the brains and ovaries. thus, small changes in the brains or ovaries of the drosophila samples may not have been characterized. finally, these studies also examined drosophila 1– <dig> hours after mating, while our samples were collected  <dig> days after mating. previous studies have demonstrated that post-mating transcriptional changes are highly variable at different time points following mating  <cit> , and may possibly explain the lack of overlap in transcriptional differences between these two studies.

comparison of our results to previous honey bee microarray studies enables us to examine whether particular aspects of worker physiology or behavior are associated with the mating process in honey bee queens. we compared our gene set to sets of genes associated with worker reproduction  <cit> . we found little overlap among the genes regulated by mating in queens and these gene sets. there were only two genes that were regulated by reproduction in both workers and queens, suggesting that workers may use a different pathway to initiate egg-laying. furthermore, in the worker reproduction study, individuals were reared in cages and identified as reproductively active by scoring ovary development. because they were in cages, these individuals were not able to initiate any form of egg-laying behavior. the queens in this study were reared in colonies and were thus allowed to perform the egg-laying behavior as well as having fully-developed ovaries. similarly, there was no obvious bias for methoprene  regulated  <cit>  genes to be involved in post-mating changes in queens. this is consistent with previous studies assessing the levels of juvenile hormone and effects of methoprene treatment on queens. while juvenile hormone levels are strongly linked to behavioral maturation in workers  <cit> , juvenile hormone does not appear to be strongly associated with mating behavior . we also examined genes known to be regulated by qmp in workers  <cit> . in workers, qmp elicits a "nurse-like" state, which is associated with high levels of vitellogenin. one might expect genes associated with high vitellogenin levels in workers also to be associated with high vitellogenin levels in queens vs. workers, or in mated queens vs. virgin queens. indeed, grozinger et.al.  <cit>  observed that these qmp-regulated genes were similarly regulated in virgin queens relative to workers. however, in our study we did not observe any strong bias to regulate qmp-regulated genes. it is possible that qmp-regulated genes in workers may play another role in the behavior or physiology of queens throughout the mating process.

one emerging theory in the evolution of eusocial behavior is the idea that genes involved in solitary female reproduction may have been co-opted for other processes in worker division of labor  <cit> . if this hypothesis is true, we might expect that genes associated with mating state in queens would also be associated with nursing and foraging behaviors in workers. to test this concept, we compared our list of significantly-regulated genes to genes previously identified by whitfield et al.  as genes associated with nursing and foraging behavior. our data indicated that some nursing- and foraging-associated genes are regulated by the mating process , but that there is no particular bias to regulate either nursing-associated or foraging-associated genes throughout the mating process in queens.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has examined whole-genome transcriptional regulation in the brains and the ovaries of virgin, mated, and laying honey bee queens. the post-mating changes in honey bee queens are highly complex. queens undergo a multitude of behavioral and physiological changes, some of which are immediate and rely either directly on mating as a cue or some other aspect of the mating process to trigger these changes. other changes are more gradual. we have demonstrated that changes in the behavior and physiology of the groups correlate with the underlying variance observed in transcript abundance in the  <dig> predictive genes in the brain and the ovaries, and that these changes are associated with either a behaviorally-associated pattern or a physiologically-associated pattern. we have also compared our results to previous studies of mating changes in drosophila melanogaster to identify common biological processes affected by mating, as well as transcripts that may be differentially regulated between these two species due to important differences in natural history. finally, we used our data to test important theories in the evolution of social behavior, but found no clear relationship between the genes associated with either nursing or foraging behaviors and regulation by mating in queens.

