BACKGROUND
in the race for the first $ <dig>  human genome, next-generation, high-throughput sequencers such as the illumina hiseq instrument have been developed that can produce tens of gigabases of raw sequence per day. such high outputs are essential for human whole-genome sequencing but excessive for many other applications, where the same amount of data would be sufficient to sequence several samples in applications such as targeted sequencing, microbial genome sequencing, rnaseq, chip-seq and amplicons. on existing short-read sequencing platforms, the main bottleneck in processing large numbers of samples is preparing them for loading: there is an acute need for low-cost, high-throughput, highly-multiplexed library production methods that moreover require only small amounts of input material.

typically, library construction involves random fragmentation of starting dna followed by the ligation of adapter oligos to support the amplification and sequencing of each molecule. recently, epicenter  introduced nextera, a library construction method  <cit>  that combines simultaneous fragmentation of dna and ligation of adapter sequences in a single reaction mediated by a transposase loaded with adapter oligos  <cit> . this technique, referred to as tagmentation, can produce high-quality genomic or cdna libraries from as little as 20 pg dna  <cit> , reducing both preparation time and input material  <cit> . however, the current nextera protocol requires pure dna template, an accurate assessment of input concentration and a column cleanup that together limit its applicability for high-throughput sample preparation.

here we describe a workflow validated to be automation friendly, which relaxes the need for very clean and accurately measured dna and which enables increased library preparation throughput. the starting point of our process is a bead-based normalisation of genomic dna , a step that replaces quantification by using a defined amount of dna-binding beads to enforce a reproducible, input dna quantity while also removing possible contaminants such as salts and proteins. a fixed volume of normalised sample is then used for library construction. to increase our laboratory’s throughput, we validated the use of the nextera kit in reduced volumes compatible with a 384-well pcr plate. we also tested various alternatives to clean up columns. finally, we developed a series of  <dig>  8-base index tags included in two sets of primers that allow the construction of nextera libraries with a possible level of multiplexing of up to  <dig>  samples. with the aid of a liquid handling robot, the method described here allows the production of 2x <dig> samples in a day at a cost comparable to or lower than alternative methods. our protocol reduces the cost per sample 4-fold from standard nextera, 3-fold from illumina truseq and by almost half compared to the nextera xt kit.

RESULTS
gdna sample normalisation
a major limitation of the nextera protocol is the constraints it places on input samples. accurate dna quantification and high dna quality are both important in achieving consistent tagmentation and reproducible library size distributions. informally, we observed that samples with a turbid or otherwise abnormal appearance produced libraries with a shorter size distribution than intended, which were therefore unsuitable for sequencing. with both issues in mind, we evaluated the use of  <dig> kits prior to library preparation to remove inconsistencies between samples. the  <dig> kits were, axyprep mag normalizer kit , dna iq system  and just-a-plate pcr purification and normalisation kit . initial trials proved the axyprep mag kit to be the top performer; further evaluation was carried out on this kit alone. the kit, which is designed to normalise pcr products rather than genomic dna , was used with a modified protocol , on gdna test samples from several organisms at two input concentrations . for human gdna the normalised concentration ranged from  <dig> - <dig>  ng/μl . the apparently modest normalisation performance was in fact comparable to that achieved using a more conventional method, qubit . similar results were attained across a range of genomes with gc contents  indicating that the normalisation protocol was robust.

since none of the normalised samples exactly matched illumina’s recommended  <dig>  ng/μl for the nextera kit, we evaluated the kit’s performance on a range of concentrations spanning from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ng/μl. although the performance of the nextera protocol is reported to depend strongly on input dna concentration  <cit> , little variation in the final size distribution of the library was observed . to test whether the bead normalisation also removes impurities detrimental to nextera library construction we took two samples of clostridium difficile  gdna which had a turbid appearance and prepared two standard nextera libraries for each where one followed the bead-normalisation. where the standard libraries had very small inserts, following gdna normalisation we obtained libraries with the normal size distribution . the most parsimonious explanation is that other factors such as contaminants present in the sample could have a greater effect than the absolute amount of dna used in the reaction. conceivably, the small insert sizes of the standard library suggests that only a small proportion of dna was accessible to the transposase, altering the ideal ratio of dna to enzyme. while the exact mechanism for this effect is unknown, these results support the idea that dna purity is important, and more importantly, provide a practical way of improving the robustness of library construction when sample quality is variable, while completely removing the need for sample quantification.

low-volume nextera library construction over a range of gc contents
performing bead-normalisation before nextera library construction allows improvements in sample handling efficiency. to further increase throughput we sought to scale down the reaction volumes, making library construction possible even in 384-well pcr plates. we conducted a pilot study with gdna from c. difficile; a species we sequence at large scales and for which we had an internal need for an improved workflow. as a follow up experiment, other organisms of clinical relevance were also tested. we evaluated the robustness of the nextera kit in producing high-quality sequencing libraries using reduced volume reactions. initial tests were performed with using full , half , quarter  and one-eighth  scaled tagmentation reactions with proportionately reduced input dna amounts . since the kit comes with transposase pre-loaded with adapters and a proprietary buffer, reducing all reaction components in the same proportions as the input dna also removes the need for custom preparation of buffers. the tagmentation reactions were cleaned up using zymo clean & concentrate™ columns in which the elution volume was related to the initial reaction volume , except for reaction d for which the recommended minimum column elution volume  was used. because elution volumes were also used to scale the subsequent pcr reactions, the effect of pcr volume on yield was checked by comparing the one-eighth-scale tagmentation reaction with a duplicate amplified in a full  volume pcr . following amplification and pcr clean-up, the quantities and size distributions of the libraries were compared. all test volumes produced libraries with a similarly broad peak ranging from 150-900 bp , implying that a one-eighth volume nextera tagmentation reaction containing only  <dig>  ng of dna could produce a library with characteristics similar to a standard 50 ng nextera reaction. the one-eighth volume was evaluated across all genomes  and produced a broad peak similar to the standard reaction .

reduced volume nextera reactions were evaluated. from left to right, the different columns show final volumes for the tagmentation reaction, elution after purification, pcr amplification and elution after pcr purification respectively. dna input amounts were scaled from the illumina recommended amounts proportionately to the final volume of tagmentation: full , half , quarter  and one-eighth . for reaction e only the tagmentation reaction is reduced, followed by a standard pcr to increase yield.

analysis of sequencing data revealed no functionally significant biases introduced by the use of reduced volumes in nextera library preparation. our finding is in agreement with previously published work which has shown that it is possible to produce libraries of acceptable complexity with 1-10 ng of gdna  <cit>  and that libraries can be made with even as little as 10 pg of dna, albeit with decreased complexity  <cit> . such low input requirements benefit studies of difficult to culture organisms  or limiting starting material . moreover, even in cases where dna can be obtained in large amounts, a low input requirement allows other types of analysis to be performed on the same sample such as validation or follow up studies. we found that reduced volume reactions can also be applied to the nextera xt kit allowing for even lower gdna input when the sample is particularly limiting .

although the tagmentation reaction can be reduced 8-fold, we found that the standard pcr amplification of a quarter-scale reaction produced more concentrated libraries , rendering qc steps easier to perform and interpret and avoiding the risks of duplication and at-bias attached to increasing the number of pcr cycles. nevertheless, the difference in volumes used for tagmentation and pcr reactions meant that we had to design a set of custom pcr primers, allowing us to maximise the use of the kit .

gc content has been reported to influence nextera kit efficiency  <cit> . to find out whether this effect was reproduced with our modified protocol  and to identify the range of organisms for which our protocol would be useful we sequenced four organisms with a range of gc contents. dna samples from plasmodium falciparum , clostridium difficile , escherichia coli , and mycobacterium tuberculosis  were normalised to a mean  <dig>  ng/μl final sample concentration . e. coli  produced noticeably higher output concentrations .  <dig>  μl of normalised dna  was used in the one-eighth-scale  tagmentation reaction. for each organism, reduced-volume libraries were produced in triplicate and compared with the standard 50 ng nextera prep. analysis of library size distributions prior to sequencing implied that transposase efficiency was comparable across the range of dna concentrations gc content used in this study . one nextera standard and one low volume library from each genome were pooled and sequenced on a miseq 150b pe run. sequencing metrics revealed library insert sizes of 250-300 bp  for c. difficile, e. coli and m. tuberculosis, irrespective of the original tapestation profile . the data obtained in this experiment showed a shift in the size distribution between the standard and modified workflow of the c. difficile library . in particular, the modified workflow produced a library with an insert size below 200 bp, however, subsequent libraries prepared in the same way for c. difficile showed insert sizes of 250-300 bp  indicating an intrinsic variability in library sizes obtained by tagmentation. the p.falciparum library was extremely biased and produced unusable data.

we used mapping- and de novo assembly-based analysis of sequencing data to compare the low-volume nextera prep and the standard prep for each of the four genomes . for m. tuberculosis, e. coli and c. difficile, no functionally significant differences were evident between the standard and low-volume nextera preps. we observed high and comparable genome coverage in both low-volume and standard preps . no single-nucleotide differences were identified between prep types using our standard mapping-based basecalls filtered as in  <cit> . there was a small gc-bias in coverage  although its magnitude was small considering the wide range of gc content in the study . both the standard nextera and our modified protocol showed a similar under-representation at very high gc  and failed to produce acceptable libraries at very low gc . pcr amplification during illumina library preparation has been previously shown to cause gc bias after sequencing, emphasizing the value of pcr-free library methods for such organisms  <cit> . the transposase is known to have a particular insertion preference which was reported to introduce a low level bias  <cit> . our data showed a pattern at the beginning  of each read which confirms that the transposase has a preference for insert sites within at rich regions  <cit> ; however, we were unable to detect any major consequences of this in any further downstream analysis. our preliminary attempts to improve representation at the ends of the gc spectrum by substituting the nextera pcr master mix with either of two enzymes, q <dig>  or hifi  were unsuccessful despite the fact that both enzymes have been reported to produce more even representation of the genome under standard conditions or with the addition of tmac  <cit> . due to the formulation of the nextera kit it was impossible to test a pcr free approach, however, our results with two alternative pcr enzyme support the hypothesis that at least a component of the gc bias observed in p.falciparum is due to the transposase insertion mechanism.

p. falciparum
c. difficile
e. coli
m. tuberculosis
19
29
50
66
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
genome trial data metrics. samples were pooled and sequenced on a 150 bp pe miseq run. data from the standard and the modified reaction were compared and showed no significant differences between the library preparations.

high-throughput low volume library construction
to fully harness the power of the nextera kit the whole protocol needs to be capable of automation. the standard clean-up method using columns to remove tagmentation reaction constituents hinders the use of robotics, although throughput can be increased with the use of a  <dig> well manifold . we compared alternative clean-up procedures in order to find a comparably-performing replacement for the column step. the three methods  column purification ,  ampure xp, and  qg/ampure xp were performed in duplicate. all clean-up systems produced libraries of a similar quantity and size profile, indicating that a bead-based clean-up method can be a suitable replacement for columns . when the clean-up step is removed entirely and the tagmented dna put straight into the pcr reaction, a library with a good profile is still produced . others have promoted the routine use of ampure xp in library preps  <cit>  and a clean-up before pcr may not even be necessary  <cit> . since the transposase is not able to “disengage” in vitro  <cit>  we hypothesise that heat inactivation of the enzyme occurs during the early steps of pcr. in summary, the replacement of the column clean-up with a bead-based approach provided the final element that allowed full automation of the nextera workflow using our current instruments. interestingly, when testing different methods to clean the tagmentation reaction, we found that even a simple ampure xp bead clean-up or immediate transfer into the pcr mix were successful reinforcing the idea that inactivation of the transposase can occur during pcr.

in house  <dig> tag primers
in our lab we routinely use a set of  <dig> custom indices  for conventional paired end sequencing. we aimed to design a set of indices that would allow single sequencing errors to be corrected, and double errors to be detected. in addition, we required  nucleotide use to be balanced across indices, to avoid low complexity issues when using subsets of indices and prevent increased error rates, and  no nucleotide triplets to occur anywhere, and no duplets to occur at either end, to avoid potential increased error rates within homopolymers. using the quaternary hamming code  we obtained a list of  <dig> indices. we picked  <dig> of these to form our actual index set. every two indices differ in at least  <dig> positions, allowing single errors to be corrected, and double errors to be detected but not necessarily corrected. triple errors can in principle be mistaken for single errors and be mis-corrected in this way; however, only  <dig> %  of possible triple errors would in fact be mis-corrected. by not using reads whose indices include likely erroneous bases, the misclassification rate will be negligible. the readability of the tags has been tested and they are routinely used. by combining the new nextera oligo design with dual indexing and our tags we can expand our current multiplexing capacity to up to 96x <dig> samples in a pool.

CONCLUSIONS
transposome-based preparation of genomic libraries for high-throughput sequencing  provides a convenient and quick alternative to conventional methods that, moreover, needs only relatively little input material. however, in its currently available form, nextera is not robust to variation in sample concentration and quality, is not easily automatable, and is substantially more expensive than conventional preps. in this work, we describe the validation of modifications to the standard nextera protocol which solve these problems and make it possible to adopt fast nextera protocols as the standard for large-scale microbial genome sequencing and similar applications. we made a marked improvement to the protocol by providing a series of strategies that address all the identified bottlenecks.

firstly we applied a bead-based normalisation step to decrease sample concentration variability which leads to an increase in library quality and removes the need for quantification. we validated the normalisation protocol over genomes with different gc content or complexity. secondly, in order to reduce costs and input dna amount, we lowered the volume of the nextera library preparation. sequencing data analysis of the modified protocol revealed no functionally significant biases to the majority of the data and good coverage across the whole genome was achieved. on the other hand, our results illustrated that the nextera kit is not ideal for low gc genomes due to the compulsory pcr step and the transposase preference for at rich sequences.

the normalisation prior to nextera library construction is not an absolute requirement; if the dna is scarce and of good quality it can be used directly with the reduced volume protocol to keep the sample input to a minimum. in addition to these two modifications we also replaced the column clean-up with an automatable bead-based approach which allows increased throughput. finally we designed custom primers and multiplex tags to increase throughput to 96x <dig> samples.

we addressed the bottlenecks of nextera library construction to produce a modified protocol which harnesses the full power of the nextera kit and allows the reproducible construction of libraries on a high-throughput scale reducing the associated cost of the kit.

