BACKGROUND
the transition from the mammalian fetal environment to that enveloping a newborn animal is profound and associated with major physiological changes. skeletal muscle in particular, must rapidly adapt to meet the demands of locomotion and to provide postural support against gravity in the newborn animal. these skeletal muscle adaptations are of even greater importance in newborn ruminants, which stand, walk and run within one to two hours of birth - a physiological trait that is required to avoid predation and allow movement with the mother as she feeds on different pastures and supplies nourishment to the newborn animal.

individual skeletal muscles are adapted to specific functions. muscles undergoing slow but continuous contractions such as various postural muscles, are characterized by predominance of slow twitch oxidative fibres , while muscles requiring rapid contraction generating substantial force such as some locomotory muscles, have a greater proportion of fast twitch glycolytic fibres . fibre types intermediate between these two exist and most muscles contain a mixture of fibre types. the developmental program that produces the differing functional outcomes in specific adult skeletal muscles is unclear but it is known to involve the programming of fetal muscles  <cit> .

skeletal muscle development in sheep is characterized by the sequential formation of primary, secondary and tertiary myofibres beginning approximately  <dig>   <dig> and 62- <dig> days of fetal life, respectively  <cit> . parturition is at  <dig> days from conception. the primary fibres are composed of multinucleated myotubes, which are derived from the fusion of committed myoblasts present in the embryonic dermamyotome. secondary and tertiary myotubes, which surround the primary myotubes, are formed from myoblasts associated with primary myotubes. the formation of secondary myotubes typically occurs after innervation. the primary myotubes have a greater chance of becoming type i fibres while the secondary and tertiary myotubes have a greater propensity of forming type iib fibres in the adult. the wave of tertiary myotube formation is complex and initially consists of different muscle groups that populate the spaces between secondary fibers and along the borders of fascicles using the secondary fibers as scaffolds. the different muscle developmental stages are characterized by progressive changes in the expression of embryonic, neonatal and adult myosin heavy chain genes  <cit> .

the molecular events controlling the preparation of fetal skeletal muscle during its late developmental phase for the demands of the post-partum environment are unknown. longissimus dorsi  skeletal muscle, which has both locomotory and postural roles, is one of the largest muscles of the back spanning the entire thoracic and lumbar regions, and contains a mixture of fibre types in the adult state  <cit> . we have chosen ovine ld skeletal muscle to examine transcriptional changes occurring during development from stages representing the beginning of tertiary myotube formation  through to birth and to a young immature lamb of  <dig> months of age. the objective of this research was to define the hierarchical transcriptional changes associated with skeletal muscle development and to interpret this information in the context of progressive changes in biological functions. we hypothesize that there is a major developmental switch in gene expression occurring during late fetal development which is associated with tertiary myotube formation and changes in the oxidative status of muscle in preparation for the new physiological demands on the muscle in the postnatal environment.

RESULTS
experimental model
gene expression was measured using microarray analysis of samples representing various stages in late fetal and postnatal development of ovine ld skeletal muscle. figure  <dig> shows the experimental model, which included three fetal and two postnatal samples . birth was at approximately  <dig> days of development. the fetal samples corresponded with the period of formation of tertiary myotubes  <cit> .

global gene expression across ld skeletal muscle development
the gene expression data were subjected to statistical analysis to identify genes that were significantly differentially expressed between any two adjacent developmental time points. three data processing methods were employed and each was subjected to independent statistical analysis. genes that were significantly differentially expressed between any two adjacent developmental time points, as measured by the convergence of the three analysis methods, are listed in additional file  <dig>  this conservative approach using multiple methods provided increased robustness in the identification of differentially expressed genes. a total of  <dig>  unique genes were differentially expressed at some stage during the total developmental period. these represented  <dig> %  of the total number of genes that were expressed at any stage during development. this result indicated that skeletal muscle development during the late fetal stages and postnatal period was associated with substantial transcriptional changes.

the differentially expressed genes were clustered into co-expression patterns. table  <dig> summarizes the number of genes in each of the major clusters  using specific terminology to reflect the direction of the expression changes in the four contrasts between adjacent developmental stages i.e. u, up; d, down; f, flat. for example, the 'ffuf' cluster contains genes that were only differentially expressed between  <dig> days of fetal development and the  <dig> d sample taken 1- <dig> days after birth. details of the differentially expressed genes present in the major clusters are listed in additional file  <dig>  as the three microarray analysis methodologies produced unrelated measures of signal intensity, only mas <dig>  signal data were used to define the gene expression clusters. however, the significantly differentially expressed genes were defined from the convergence of the three microarray analysis methodologies.  <dig> clusters were identified using this approach but only  <dig> clusters containing  <dig> or more genes were subject to more detailed analysis. none of the remaining  <dig> smaller clusters was over-represented in any gene ontology terms, pathways or key words.

1d , significantly decreased expression; u , significantly increased expression; f , no significant change. each symbol  represents the direction of change in gene expression between any two adjacent developmental time points. each cluster is represented by these symbols across four developmental intervals. only clusters containing more than  <dig> genes are shown.

2number of significantly differentially expressed genes in each cluster.

as anticipated from the visual representation of global gene expression shown in figure  <dig>  the largest clusters, containing  <dig>  and  <dig> genes , reflected changes between the samples taken at  <dig> days of fetal development and the samples taken 1- <dig> days after birth . these two clusters combined represented  <dig> % of the genes that were differentially expressed at any stage throughout the developmental profile. this result reinforced the visual representation shown in figure  <dig> that there was a major developmental switch in gene expression between late fetal development and birth. four clusters, fuff, fdff, ufff and dfff containing  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively, reflected changes in gene expression that were occurring during fetal development prior to the much larger transcriptional changes occurring between late fetal development  and the samples taken just after birth . two clusters, ffud  and ffdu , represented transient changes in gene expression coincident with, or in preparation for, the birth process. there was also a substantial number of genes associated with postnatal muscle development  and fffd ).

of particular note are the skeletal muscle structural proteins α-actin  and a number of myosin heavy chain genes, myh <dig>  myh <dig>  myh <dig>  myh <dig>  and myh <dig>  fetal and embryonic myosin heavy chain genes  reflected their names in that both were strongly down-regulated during the fetal to new-born transition between  <dig> d and  <dig> d of development, and both were present in the ffdd cluster. in terms of absolute expression, myh <dig> was generally more prevalent than myh <dig>  three 'adult' myosin heavy chain genes, myh <dig>  myh <dig> and myh <dig>  showed a reciprocal pattern to the myh <dig> and myh <dig> pair, in that the former group was strongly up-regulated in the postnatal samples. these three genes characterize type i , type iia  and type iix ) skeletal muscle fibres, respectively. concomitant with these changes is a strong postnatal increase in α-actin expression.

gene ontology  analyses were performed using the david functional analysis tool to identify go terms as well as pathways and keywords that were significantly over-represented  in specific gene expression clusters  <cit> . david was then used to group significantly enriched terms into functional annotation clusters  . this process provided a higher level perspective of the enriched functions associated with each gene expression cluster.

the dominant ffuf and ffdf clusters, representing genes that were differentially expressed between late fetal development and birth, were characterized by highly significant changes in many go terms, however there were marked differences between these two clusters. the ffuf cluster contained  <dig> functional groups. functional groups 1- <dig> were directly associated with mitochondrial structure or function and all were highly significant. for example, functional group  <dig> in the ffuf cluster contained  <dig> terms which were largely associated with mitochondrial structure, while functional group  <dig> was enriched for terms associated with the tca  cycle and function group  <dig> was enriched for terms associated with oxidative metabolism. thus, there were strong indications that the transition between late fetal development and birth corresponded with enhanced mitochondrial function, which could be due to enhanced mitochondrial number, size or activity. the genes tomm70a, tomm <dig> and tomm <dig> were present in this cluster. they encode structural proteins located in the outer mitochondrial membrane and are involved in the translocation of proteins into the mitochondria. these three mitochondrial genes were up-regulated  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold, respectively in the contrast between the fetal  <dig> d and postnatal  <dig> d samples, thereby suggesting an increased size and/or number of mitochondria. the remaining functional groups primarily related to aspects of metabolism and in several cases indirectly reflected mitochondrial function . functional group  <dig> represented terms linked with amino acid metabolism, suggesting an emphasis on protein synthesis. three kegg pathways were over-represented in the ffuf cluster: oxidative metabolism ; citrate cycle   and phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis . the first two pathways related to mitochondrial function and together suggested that energy production and conversion were the major themes of this cluster. although the ffuf and ffdf gene expression clusters were associated with several go terms linked to skeletal muscle structure and function, these were not significant after correction for multiple testing. the under-representation of skeletal muscle genes on the microarray and in some instances its inability to discriminate between gene family members may have contributed to this outcome.

the ffdf cluster by contrast, was characterized by  <dig> functional groups but none was related to mitochondrial function. there was also greater diversity in the functional groups associated with the ffdf cluster. several functional groups involved aspects of development, morphogenesis and differentiation  suggesting that these processes were concluding during the fetal to postpartum transition. functional groups  <dig> and  <dig> contained terms linked to neurogenesis, which may correspond with completion of the muscle innervation process that began with secondary myotube formation  <cit> . the ffdf cluster was also associated with several functional groups suggesting completion of tissue remodeling as these groups contained terms associated with the extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton and transmembrane receptors .  other distinctive functional groups contained terms associated with cell signaling  and transcriptional regulation . indeed, postnatal down-regulation of the expression of a number of promyogenic transcription factors  in similar samples has previously been reported  <cit> . two kegg pathways were associated with the ffdf cluster: cell adhesion molecules and wnt signaling pathway. although the ffuf cluster showed strong evidence for enhanced mitochondrial oxidative activity, the ffdf cluster showed no corresponding enrichment for glycolytic metabolism. thus, the acquisition of enhanced oxidative capacity between the  <dig> d fetal time point and the postpartum sample  required continued maintenance of glycolytic function.

the fffu cluster contained four functional groups, all of which were related to transcriptional regulation, while three of the four also contained terms relating to transcriptional control of metabolic processes. the ffud cluster, representing transient changes around birth, contained two functional groups involving aspects of nucleotide binding and amino acid metabolism as well as one kegg pathway . immune response was a major theme in one of the two functional groups in the fuff cluster. the second functional group in this cluster broadly related to extracellular glycoproteins. the ufff cluster  was the only other cluster containing significant functional groups. three of the four functional groups in this cluster involved aspects of cell adhesion indicating that this theme temporally preceded the tissue remodeling theme present in the ffdf cluster. two kegg pathways were present in the ufff cluster: cell adhesion molecules and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction. the former is also present in the ffdf cluster while the latter overlaps with immune response terms enriched in the closely related fuff cluster.

changes in ld skeletal muscle oxidative activity during development
the go, keyword and pathway analyses for the genes in the ffuf cluster strongly suggested that there was a large change in the oxidative capacity of ld skeletal muscle during the late fetal to postpartum transition. this prediction was experimentally examined using sections of muscle samples stained with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-nitro-blue tetrazolium reductase , a stain for oxidative fibres  <cit> . examples of the staining patterns in the  <dig> d fetal sample and a sample at  <dig> d  are shown in figure  <dig>  the latter sample has larger fibres and a greater proportion of darkly stained oxidative fibres. figure  <dig> shows the mean greyscale frequency distribution  for each of the developmental samples. a larger greyscale value indicates stronger staining intensity and therefore higher oxidative capacity. there was a marked difference between the fetal and postnatal samples, which was consistent with the gene expression analysis. compared with the two postnatal samples, the three fetal samples were characterised by relatively low greyscale values, indicative of less abundant oxidative fibre contents. moreover, the fetal frequency peaks were relatively sharp, which infers that the fetal muscles at these three time points were relatively homogeneous in their oxidative capacities compared with the postnatal samples. the higher intensity edges of the fetal  <dig> d and  <dig> d peaks showed extensions toward higher oxidative capacity compared with the fetal  <dig> d sample. thus, fetal development showed progressive increase in muscle oxidative capacity. the postpartum  and young immature lamb  peaks were very different from the fetal samples in that the frequency profiles of the former two samples were markedly shifted toward higher staining intensities and the peaks were relatively broad and asymmetrical. these results are consistent with a gain in overall oxidative capacity and greater heterogeneity in muscle fibre oxidative status in the postnatal samples. the  <dig> d sample showed a greater shift toward higher greyscale values compared with the  <dig> d postnatal sample and hence there presumably was a greater proportion of oxidative fibres at birth relative to the young lamb  sample.

identification of conserved cis-regulatory motifs in gene expression clusters
each gene expression cluster was examined for enrichment of conserved cis-acting regulatory motifs using the molecular signatures database   <cit> . this database included conserved gene-associated anonymous motifs in the human, mouse, rat and dog genomes  <cit>  and also conserved gene-associated transcription factor binding sites as well as conserved mirna recognition sites. the conserved anonymous motifs and transcription factor binding sites were restricted to a sequence window corresponding to  <dig> kb up-stream and  <dig> kb down-stream of the transcription start site while the conserved mirna recognition sites were restricted to the 3' untranslated region of genes. only the ffuf and ffdf clusters contained significantly over-represented cis-regulatory motifs after bonferroni correction for multiple testing . in the ffuf cluster five motifs were over-represented. two of these conserved motifs matched binding sites for the transcription factors estrogen-related receptor alpha  and estrogen receptor  <dig> . two related motifs corresponded with sp <dig>  recognition sites, while the last motif corresponded with mllt <dig>  sites. no anonymous conserved motifs or mirna motifs were identified in this cluster. the ffdf cluster was enriched for  <dig> motifs, only one of which  was also identified in the ffuf cluster. strikingly,  <dig> of the motifs in this cluster were conserved mirna recognition sites. there were also two sox <dig> motifs, one anonymous motif and an lef <dig>  motif.

1the ffuf gene expression cluster was examined for enrichment of conserved cis-acting regulatory motifs by using the molecular signatures database  and its associated analysis procedures  <cit> . the database contained motifs conserved in the human, mouse rat and dog genomes. the conserved transcription factor binding sites and anonymous conserved motifs were restricted to a sequence window corresponding to ±  <dig> kb of the transcription start site while the conserved mirna recognition sites were restricted to the 3' untranslated region of the genes in this cluster.

2p-values are uncorrected for multiple testing and were calculated as described  <cit> . only motifs with p-values <  <dig>  after bonferonni correction for multiple testing are shown.

1the ffdf gene expression cluster was examined for enrichment of conserved cis-acting regulatory motifs using the molecular signatures database   <cit> . the conserved transcription factor binding sites and anonymous conserved motifs were restricted to a sequence window corresponding to ±  <dig> kb of the transcription start site while the conserved mirna recognition sites were restricted to the 3' untranslated regions of the genes in this cluster.

2p-values are uncorrected for multiple testing and were calculated as described  <cit> . only motifs with p-values <  <dig>  after bonferonni correction for multiple testing are shown.

discussion
ld skeletal muscle development from the late fetal state to postnatal life was associated with a remarkable transition in the gene expression program, which probably underpinned major metabolic and structural changes. this transition is clearly preparing skeletal muscle for the immediate postnatal environment where the muscle contributes to locomotion and the maintenance of posture in response to gravity. the ld muscle is a large epaxial muscle lying along the thoracic and lumbar regions of the back and is involved in both of these functions. strikingly, the range in gene expression levels is highly constrained in the sample taken just prior to birth  possibly indicating that transcriptional activity is minimized at this time in anticipation of the energy demands of birth.

enhanced oxidative metabolism in postnatal ld skeletal muscle was strongly evident in the gene expression program and histological sections of the muscle. this is consistent with increased requirement for skeletal muscle fibre types that are fatigue resistant in the context of postnatal movement and support against gravity. skeletal muscle oxidative fibres  are known to have these attributes and are characterized by high mitochondrial content and a rich capillary supply  <cit> . indeed, adult ruminant ld muscle contains a strong contribution from fast twitch oxidative fibres   <cit> . also consistent with this conclusion was the major transition in myosin heavy chain gene expression during the fetal to neonatal transition with strong postnatal up-regulation of myh <dig>  myh <dig> and myh <dig>  which characterize type i slow twitch oxidative fibres, type iia fast twitch oxidative fibres, and the predominant type iix fast twitch oxidative-glycolytic fibres, respectively, and down-regulation of the fetal and embryonic myosin heavy chain genes . moreover, the postpartum change in the gene expression program in the ffuf cluster was strongly associated with many go terms related to mitochondrial structure and function, including the tca cycle, as well as enrichment of kegg pathways for oxidative phosphorylation and citrate  cycle. the postpartum period involves separation of the newborn from the placental oxygen supply, the onset of lung activity and changes in the oxygen carrying capacity of blood. these major physiological events directly parallel the increased capacity for skeletal muscle oxidative metabolism suggested by the gene expression program during this time interval.

the late fetal to postnatal developmental transition in some species has been associated with major changes in muscle fibre type diameter and also expansion of the skeletal muscle in the axial direction, which was associated with the formation of new sarcomeres  <cit> . these changes are thought to occur in the absence of formation of new fibres. the histological staining for oxidative capacity indicated that there was greater diversity of muscle fibre types in the postnatal samples. hence, the increased oxidative status of ld muscle during this period was most likely the result of enhanced metabolic capability, presumably the consequence of increased mitochondrial activity and/or number within type i, type iia and to a lesser extent type iix muscle fibres. the developmental transition between  <dig> d  and  <dig> d  needs to be further investigated at finer temporal resolution to ascertain whether the observed major gene expression changes occurred prior to birth, at birth or within the 1- <dig> days after birth. it is noteworthy that the large changes in gene expression between late fetal development  and the postnatal samples were often preceded by qualitatively similar, though much smaller changes, in the earlier developmental intervals suggesting that these changes were in preparation for the birth process.

the gene expression clusters revealed many additional system-wide changes within ld skeletal muscle during the fetal to neonatal transition. in the ffdf cluster there was evidence for de-emphasis of restructuring of myofibres as reflected in the enriched kegg pathways: cell adhesion molecules, ecm-receptor interaction, focal adhesion, adherins junction, and tight junction. these could reflect the finalization of muscle hypertrophy responses or fibre type changes  <cit> . the ffdf cluster also contained many go terms relating to development as might be expected from the nature of the developmental time-course being examined. the wnt pathway was over-represented in this cluster suggesting that its role is diminished in postpartum skeletal muscle. this evolutionary conserved pathway is involved intercellular communication underpinning many aspects of embryonic development including body axis specification, morphogenic signaling and axon guidance  <cit> . in skeletal muscle the wnt pathway is also involved in signaling satellite cell proliferation during muscle cell regeneration  <cit> . thus, the down-regulation of genes involved in this pathway within the ffdf cluster suggests the completion of muscle developmental processes dependent on satellite cell formation. there were also multiple go terms relating to neuron development in this cluster. these could reflect the completion of the innervation process during fetal secondary and tertiary myotube formation as the obligatory precursor to muscle use in the postnatal environment.

the actual birth process was anticipated to be associated with transient increased synthesis of stress related genes. however, this was not evident in either the ffud or ffdu gene expression clusters. one possibility is that the samples taken at  <dig> d corresponded to a period of 1- <dig> days post- partum and hence there may have been sufficient time for the muscle to recover from the stress of birth. functional group  <dig> of the ffuf cluster and functional group  <dig> of the related fuff cluster contained stress response terms. in the former instance, there was up-regulation of stress responsive genes during the transition between late fetal development  and 1- <dig> days postpartum but these remained up-regulated even at  <dig> days of development . hence, it is unlikely that the enhanced expression of these genes was in response to the birth process itself. an alternative possibility is that these stress related genes present in the ffuf and fuff clusters were coordinately up-regulated in parallel with the increased muscle oxidative capacity. the stress response genes may encode proteins that protect muscle cells from damage caused by the side effects of high levels of oxidative metabolism. the extremes of both hypoxia and hyperoxia are also known to cause transcriptional changes and therefore it is probable that enhanced oxidative metabolism during development directly regulated the transcription of some of the genes during this period  <cit> .

there were also changes in the gene expression program between the two postnatal samples. these related to increased transcription of genes involved in transcriptional regulation of metabolic processes and therefore may indicate emphasis during this period on the adaption of skeletal muscle to the changing metabolic requirements of the immature lamb. the weaning age for lambs is 2- <dig> months. the metabolic processes changing between the new-born lamb  and the immature lamb  may have corresponded with adaptation to the nutritional transition between diets of milk and forage, and the associated establishment of rumen functions.

one caveat on the gene function analyses is that highly conserved bovine genes, especially those contributing to conserved metabolic functions and cellular structures, are more likely to have been annotated and have attributed gene ontology terms. hence, there may be some bias in these analyses. the histological data provided independent confirmation of the increased emphasis on oxidative metabolism in the postnatal samples thereby providing confidence in the analysis strategy.

the mechanisms underpinning the large changes in gene expression during the fetal to postnatal transition are unclear but were likely triggered by hormonal changes. these mechanisms orchestrate coordinate changes in the expression of a large number of genes within the genome in a progressive hierarchical manner that has exquisite reproducibility, accuracy and robustness. one possibility is that hormonally triggered transcription factor cascades are involved, which ultimately result in coordinated changes in the transcription of a large number of target genes. this process enables cooperativity in the production of specialized functional units within a cell such as muscle fibre structures, mitochondria and metabolic circuits. moreover, the process results in a high level of system control by hierarchical amplification of a small initial input signal. consistent with this concept, analysis of cis-regulatory motifs associated with genes from the ffuf cluster identified over-representation of the estrogen receptor  <dig>  and the estrogen related receptor alpha  motifs. the ovine placenta produces increasing amounts of estrogen during pregnancy with a substantial peak just prior to birth  <cit> . thus, estrogen levels may be a primary means of coordinately altering the expression of a large number of genes during the fetal to newborn transition. to coordinate the gene expression changes it is speculated that a threshold level of estrogen is required to activate the estrogen receptors. notably, the esr <dig> gene was present in the uuff gene expression cluster and thus it was up-regulated early in the developmental period perhaps in preparation for its enhanced functional role in changing the expression of genes later in development just prior to birth in response to estrogen levels. the sp <dig> and mllt <dig>  motifs enriched in this cluster are also interesting as the foxo <dig> protein not only has characteristic dna binding capability that regulates gene expression but it also directly binds sp <dig>  which probably has a co-activator role  <cit> . moreover, motifs for these two transcription factors co-occur with estrogen receptor motifs in the promoters of genes whose transcription is subject to control by estrogen  <cit> . in addition, both foxo <dig> and sp <dig> have been strongly implicated in the regulation of gene transcription initiated by insulin in skeletal muscle  <cit> . thus, it is likely that these three transcription factors act in concert with the estrogen receptors to help orchestrate large estrogen-induced gene expression changes in the ffuf cluster.

the situation in the ffdf cluster is not as clear as it is dominated by mirna motifs thereby suggesting post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. the potential roles of mirna in this cluster require further investigation to ascertain whether they are spatially and temporally expressed with their putative target transcripts and whether the mirna affect the transcription levels of their target genes. the over-representation of the wnt signalling pathway in the ffdf gene expression cluster and the enrichment of the lef <dig> transcription factor binding site motif in these genes is consistent with previous studies indicating that lef <dig> is a down-stream target in the wnt pathway  <cit> . this suggests that decreased wnt signalling led to reduced lef <dig> mediated gene transcription during this developmental period. sox <dig> motifs were also over-represented in this cluster. consistent with this, sox <dig> has been implicated as a negative regulator of expression of sarcoglycan, a skeletal muscle structural protein  <cit> . collectively, there is strong evidence for the involvement of these transcription factors in regulating muscle development.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study has demonstrated that there is a major change in the gene expression program in skeletal muscle during the fetal to postnatal developmental transition. enhanced mitochondrial function during the transition from the late fetal state to the postpartum state is probably regulated by estrogen acting via a number of transcription factors. the enhanced oxidative capacity of the muscle reflects new functional demands on the muscle and the radically different nature of the primary energy and oxygen supplies in the newborn animal.

