BACKGROUND
the phylogenetic position of tardigrades is controversial, as they are typically regarded as either the sister group of arthropods, onychophorans, onychophorans plus arthropods, or one of the cycloneuralian taxa, such as nematodes  <cit> . incongruent topologies based on molecular datasets suggest that tardigrada is a rogue taxon, the phylogenetic position of which is uncertain . the problem with molecular phylogenetic approaches might be due to long-branch attraction artefacts, which have been shown to either directly or indirectly affect the inferred topologies  <cit> . these artefacts might have caused the conflicting hypotheses on the position of tardigrada in different molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit> . hence, to rely entirely on molecular datasets may be insufficient when trying to resolve the phylogenetic position of tardigrades within the ecdysozoa.

an alternative approach to discern the phylogenetic relationships between different animal groups is the comparison of their anatomy, including the organisation of their nervous systems  <cit> . one of the most prominent features of the tardigrade nervous system is the presence of segmentally repeated ganglia in their ventral nervous system  <cit> . the ganglia are accumulations of neuronal cell bodies, which are linked by somata-free connectives along the body  <cit> . among representatives of panarthropoda , segmental ganglia occur only in arthropods and tardigrades, whereas somata-free connectives and segmental ganglia are lacking in onychophorans, which instead show a medullary organisation of their ventral nerve cords  <cit> . thus, the question arises of whether segmental ganglia evolved convergently in tardigrades and arthropods, or whether they are homologous structures . if they are indeed homologous, they might either have been present in the last common ancestor of panarthropoda or even ecdysozoa , or they might represent a synapomorphy uniting the tardigrades and arthropods  <cit> .

to clarify this issue and shed light on the evolution of segmental ganglia, we have chosen two approaches. on the one hand, we searched for specific correspondences between the tardigrade and arthropod ganglia by analysing the staining patterns of a variety of established neuronal markers, including antisera raised against tyrosinated and acetylated α-tubulin , the biogenic amine serotonin and the neuropeptides rfamide, allatostatin and perisulfakinin. on the other hand, we performed retrograde dye tracing of leg nerves in the onychophoran euperipatoides rowelli to localise the cell bodies of motor neurons supplying the legs. this approach was necessary to allow a comparison with tardigrades and arthropods because segmental ganglia are lacking in onychophorans and the leg nerves are the most prominent segmental structures associated with nerve cords in these animals  <cit> .

RESULTS
organisation of the central and peripheral nervous system in the three tardigrade species studied
the three tardigrade species studied, including macrobiotus cf. harmsworthi, paramacrobiotus richtersi and hypsibius dujardini, show basically the same organisation of the central nervous system, with the brain and the four trunk ganglia being the most prominent features . the brain comprises a dorsal, bilaterally symmetric ganglion, which bears a central neuropil and a defined number of serotonin-like , rfamide-like , allatostatin-like  and perisulfakinin-like  immunoreactive somata . the brain is linked to the first trunk ganglion via an inner and an outer pair of connectives, whereas the trunk ganglia are joined with each other by only one pair of connectives along the body . the first three ganglia are similar in size, whereas the fourth ganglion is smaller and contains fewer cells, as revealed by dna labelling .

each trunk ganglion consists of two hemiganglia that are fused along the ventral midline and show a central fibre mass . within this mass, a clear structure of fibre arrangement is not apparent. however, commissure-like bundles of contralateral neurites are present, some of which display serotonin-like, rfamide-like, allatostatin-like and perisulfakinin-like immunoreactivity . in addition to these fibres and bundles of neurites, each trunk ganglion displays a set of serotonin-like and rfamide-like immunoreactive cell bodies that are organised in a bilaterally symmetric pattern and show essentially the same arrangement in different specimens of the same species .

apart from contralateral projections and commissure-like structures within each ganglion, additional extra-ganglionic  commissures occur anterior to the second, third and fourth trunk ganglia . these interpedal commissures are not accompanied by neuronal cell bodies, as they are not associated with ganglia but link the connectives, which are somata-free. each interpedal commissure consists of a bundle of fibres, which in contrast to those in the connectives do not show serotonin-like, rfamide-like, allatostatin-like or perisulfakinin-like immunoreactivity .

each trunk ganglion gives rise to two pairs of leg nerves, one anterior pair and a posterior pair that project postero-laterally into the legs . this peculiar posterior course of the leg nerves is due to an anteriorly shifted position of each trunk ganglion with respect to the corresponding leg pairs . though less evident in the first leg-bearing segment, this shift is clearly present in all trunk segments . each leg nerve gives rise to additional branches and the anterior leg nerve is associated with a peripheral ganglion lying at the basis of each leg . while the branching pattern of the leg nerves is similar in the first three leg pairs, the branches are part of a complex network in the fourth leg-bearing segment . among other tracts, this network contains a pair of nerves embracing the cloaca. these cloacal nerves terminate in two large, serotonin-like and allatostatin-like immunoreactive, platelet-shaped structures devoid of nuclei . moreover, they are associated with two rfamide-like immunoreactive cell bodies .

additional peripheral tracts form an orthogon-like grid encompassing the body and consisting of two pairs of longitudinal and four pairs of transverse tracts linked to each other . the first pair of transverse peripheral nerves is associated with the outer connectives, whereas the second and the third pairs project laterally from the second and third trunk ganglia. the fourth pair is part of the anastomosing network of peripheral tracts in the fourth leg-bearing segment . the lateral pair of longitudinal tracts interconnects the transverse peripheral nerves on each side of the body, whereas the dorsolateral pair of longitudinal tracts runs further dorsally and is linked to the dorsomedian portion of the brain via a convergent pair of nerve tracts .

position of leg nerves and localisation of motor neurons in the onychophoran euperipatoides rowelli
in contrast to the tardigrade nervous system, the nerve cords of the onychophoran euperipatoides rowelli lack segmental ganglia and somata-free connectives . the neuronal cell bodies are instead distributed along the entire nerve cord. hence, there is no clear border delineating a defined neuromere. the only segmentally repeated structures associated with nerve cords are the paired nerves supplying each leg. as found for the three tardigrade species studied, each leg of the onychophoran e. rowelli is also innervated by an anterior and a posterior leg nerve . however, in contrast to the tardigrade nervous system, the bases of the two leg nerves are not shifted anteriorly but take a direct lateral course into each leg .

the cell bodies of motor neurons in euperipatoides rowelli could nonetheless still be shifted anteriorly, as in tardigrades . to clarify this, we performed retrograde fills of the leg nerves using dextran coupled to tetramethylrhodamine. our data show that the cell bodies of locomotory neurons innervating the onychophoran legs are grouped around the roots of the two leg nerves . thus, in contrast to the ventral nervous system of tardigrades, neither the bases of leg nerves nor the cell bodies of motor neurons are shifted anteriorly with respect to each leg pair in onychophorans.

discussion
interpedal commissures and grid-like arrangement of peripheral nerves: remnants of an ancestral orthogonal nervous system?
previous studies have shown that an orthogonal organisation of the nervous system, characterised by a regular grid of longitudinal tracts interconnected by numerous ring commissures, was most likely present in the last common ancestor of panarthropods, as it occurs in various invertebrates, including the onychophorans  <cit> . thus, the ganglionated, “rope ladder-like” nervous system of arthropods might have evolved from such an ancestral orthogonal architecture. this hypothesis receives support from our data, as we observed a regular, grid-like arrangement of longitudinal and transverse peripheral tracts in the tardigrade nervous system. although the transverse tracts do not form complete rings, together with the paired lateral and dorsolateral nerve tracts, they might be remnants of an ancestral orthogonal arrangement, which might have been present in the last common ancestor of panarthropoda  <cit> .

furthermore, our data revealed additional commissures in the ventral nervous system of the three tardigrade species studied, which lie outside the trunk ganglia, in the interpedal regions, where they link the paired longitudinal connectives with each other . although these commissures have long been known from tardigrades  <cit> , marcus  <cit>  questioned their neural identity in his monograph, which might have been the reason why these commissures were neglected by most subsequent authors . nevertheless, our data clearly show that the interpedal commissures belong to the ventral nervous system of tardigrades. these commissures might be remnants of numerous median commissures, which were present in the pedal and interpedal regions in the last common ancestor of panarthropoda and have persisted in extant onychophorans  <cit> , whereas they were reduced completely in arthropods .

evidence for the homology of segmental ganglia in tardigrades and arthropods
a previous immunocytochemical study  <cit>  has suggested that the organisation of the trunk ganglia in the tardigrade macrobiotus hufelandi is principally different from that in arthropods, on the grounds that no contralateral projections or commissures linking the two hemiganglia were detected. based on this finding, the contralateral commissures have been reinterpreted as a derived feature  of onychophora and arthropoda to the exclusion of tardigrada  <cit> . however, our immunocytochemical and electron microscopic data clearly show contralateral fibres and bundles of neurites in all four trunk ganglia in specimens of macrobiotus cf. harmsworthi, paramacrobiotus richtersi and hypsibius dujardini, thus confirming previous findings from other tardigrade species, including macrobiotus hufelandi <cit> . therefore, contrary to this previous assumption  <cit> , the occurrence of contralateral fibres and commissures in the ventral nervous system does not support the proposed sister group relationship of onychophora and arthropoda, as these structures also occur in the tardigrade ganglia and, therefore, were most likely present in the last common ancestor of panarthropoda.

likewise, the segmental sets of serotonergic neurons occurring in the ventral ganglia of chelicerates, myriapods, crustaceans and insects  <cit>  have been regarded as a derived feature  of arthropoda  <cit> . they were unknown in tardigrades, while in onychophorans serotonin-like immunoreactive somata are distributed throughout each nerve cord  <cit> . however, our results show that segmentally repeated sets of serotonin-like immunoreactive  neurons are indeed present in the tardigrade ganglia, suggesting that they are either a synapomorphy of tardigrades and arthropods or an ancestral feature of panarthropoda rather than an autapomorphy of arthropoda  <cit> .

moreover, our data revealed an anteriorly shifted position of trunk ganglia with respect to each leg pair in the three tardigrade species studied, which is also seen in the illustrations of other tardigrade species  <cit> . notably, a corresponding anterior shift in position of ganglia occurs in representatives of all major arthropod groups  <cit> , which might be due to the embryonic origin of ganglia. during embryogenesis, the formation of ganglia coincides with parasegments, the initial functional units of the arthropod embryo, which are shifted anteriorly with respect to the adult segments  <cit> . at the end of embryogenesis, the ganglia retain their anteriorly shifted, parasegmental arrangement, whereas the position of other organs, including the legs, corresponds to the adult segments  <cit> . consequently, the characteristic, anteriorly shifted position of ganglia can be taken as evidence of parasegments in tardigrades.

this assumption receives support from the expression pattern of the engrailed protein in the tardigrade embryo, which is localised in the posterior ectoderm of each segment, thus resembling the situation in arthropods  <cit> . this suggests that the segment polarity gene engrailed has a conserved function in establishing the morphological boundaries between segments in both tardigrades and arthropods. in contrast, engrailed might play a different role in onychophora, as the early expression domain of this gene extends beyond the segmental furrow and no precise cellular boundary is evident between engrailed and wingless domains in the onychophoran embryo  <cit> .

furthermore, the results of our neuronal tracing experiments using retrograde fills revealed no anterior shift in position of neurons supplying the legs in the onychophoran euperipatoides rowelli, which would be expected, if parasegments were present . to our knowledge, there is no indication of a similar anterior shift of neurons in any other group of segmented or “pseudosegmented” protostomes such as the kinorhynchs and annelids, since their ganglia are typically located either midway or even posteriorly within each segment  <cit> . thus, irrespective of whether the segmental ganglia are homologous across these distantly related protostome taxa, their anteriorly shifted  position in each segment is unique to tardigrades and arthropods, suggesting that these structures are unlikely to have evolved independently in these two animal groups .

hence, the ventral chain of ganglia in a parasegmental position is either a synapomorphy of tardigrada and arthropoda , or it might have been lost in the onychophoran lineage . we favour the first alternative, as any other scenario would require additional evolutionary steps and is therefore less parsimonious. in particular, a modification of the ventral chain of ganglia into a pair of widely separated medullary nerve cords, which occur in onychophorans  <cit> , cannot be explained by a simple loss of segmental ganglia. rather, several modifications, including reversals back to ancestral states, would be required. first, the neuronal cell bodies, which had been accumulated to segmental ganglia, would have to be re-dispersed along each nerve cord . second, the nerve cords would have to be separated from each other secondarily to take up a ventrolateral position on each side of the body. third, the median commissures would have to have lost their segmental arrangement and to be multiplied along the body. fourth, the motor neurons supplying each leg would have to be relocated from an anteriorly shifted  to a position in the middle of each segment. based on these arguments, we consider an evolutionary scenario, which first proposes the presence of segmental ganglia in onychophorans and then assumes a reversal back to the ancestral orthogonal, medullary organisation of their nervous system, as very unlikely.

CONCLUSIONS
unfortunately, all too often morphological and embryological data are either dismissed or simply mapped on trees generated by using molecular methods. this is problematic, in particular if one is dealing with a long-branch taxon, such as tardigrada, the position of which is ambiguous, as evidenced by conflicting topologies published each year  <cit> . in this case, a careful evaluation of morphological characters might prove helpful. we have shown here that tardigrades and arthropods share a parasegmental organisation of the nervous system, with anteriorly shifted ganglia relative to each leg pair. the ganglia are linked by paired somata-free connectives along the body and the hemiganglia are joined by contralateral projections crossing the midline. within the ganglia, segmentally repeated sets of serotonin-like  immunoreactive neurons are found.

these neuroanatomical data speak in favour of the sister group relationship of tardigrada and arthropoda  <cit> , i.e., the monophyly of tactopoda  <cit> , but contradict recent analyses of molecular data, which propose a sister group relationship of tardigrades either to onychophora  <cit> , to nematoda  <cit> , or to onychophora plus arthropoda  <cit> . the monophyly of tactopoda receives additional support by the occurrence of stomatogastric ganglia associated with the third body segment in both tardigrades and arthropods, which are lacking in other animal groups  <cit> . moreover, the segmentation of the longitudinal musculature might also support this relationship, as the longitudinal musculature does not show a segmental arrangement in onychophorans  <cit>  and other ecdysozoans, except for kinorhynchs . in our view, therefore, it is premature to regard the position of tardigrada as the sister group of onychophora and arthropoda as “resolved”  <cit> . on the basis of our data, we instead suggest that the segmental ganglia are a synapomorphy uniting tardigrada and arthropoda to the exclusion of onychophora.

