BACKGROUND
type  <dig> diabetes mellitus  is a metabolic disorder in which pancreatic insulin secretion does not meet the demands of insulin sensitivity  <cit> . over a period of time, consistently elevated levels of blood glucose and free fatty acids lead to glucolipotoxicity- mediated pancreatic beta cell dysfunction  <cit> . it is now accepted that elevated glucose levels are required to mediate the lipotoxic effects, including inhibition of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion , impaired insulin gene expression and apoptosis  <cit> .

gsis involves both glucose oxidation-coupled atp production and the anaplerotic/cataplerotic pathway-mediated generation of coupling factors that trigger and amplify insulin secretion, respectively  <cit> . briefly, glucose uptake initiates metabolic pathways in which glucose is first converted to pyruvate mediated by glucokinase, and then to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase. mitochondrial oxaloacetate generates citrate, a cataplerotic signal, which is transported to the cytosol and then broken down into acetyl-coa initiating fatty acid synthesis. acetyl-coa is subsequently converted to malonyl-coa, the concomitant step in fatty acid synthesis. in pancreatic beta cells, malonyl-coa inhibits carnitine-palmitoyl transferase- <dig>  blocking fatty acid oxidation and resulting in the buildup of long-chain acyl-coa esters  in the cytosol  <cit> . long chain-coa is thought to be a potential modulator of insulin secretion stimulating insulin granule docking and exocytosis  <cit> . glucose metabolism also raises the cytosolic atp/adp ratio, which inhibits the atp-sensitive potassium channel  resulting in plasma membrane depolarization. in response to this, voltage-gated calcium channels open, causing an influx of extracellular calcium and exocytosis of insulin granules  <cit> .

another well-known role of glucose is augmenting insulin secretion by promoting phospholipase-c -mediated hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol  <dig>  5-biphosphate  into diacylglycerol  and inositol triphosphate   <cit> . the dag generated, in turn, activates protein kinase c , which is known to maintain insulin exocytosis  <cit> , while ip <dig> mobilizes calcium from endoplasmic reticulum stores. the plc pathway is also known to upregulate camp levels in beta cells, which show glucose-mediated oscillations that correlate with insulin secretion  <cit> .

further, glucose is known to increase insulin content through insulin gene transcription mediated by pdx <dig> and mafa  <cit> . under normal conditions, the synthesized insulin is held in readily releasable pools which are transported to the plasma membrane by the small gtpase, rab27a and the snare complex for acute calcium-mediated release  <cit> .

chronic hyperglycemia  and hyperlipidemia  have been known to impair beta cell function  <cit> , and glucolipotoxicity has been defined as ‘the deleterious effects of elevated glucose and fatty acids on pancreatic beta cell-function and mass’  <cit> . studies by kashyap et al. in human subjects have shown that the ability of the beta cell to increase insulin secretion in response to fatty acids is a component that may predispose to t2dm  <cit> . in accordance with this, animal models for t2dm show a glucolipotoxicity-mediated dysfunction in multiple cellular processes involved in insulin secretion . in vitro studies have been an important source of information to understand the molecular basis of glucolipotoxicity. for example, fatty acid-mediated inhibition of insulin gene transcription, which was identified in vitro, has been recapitulated in vivo. however, a known limitation of the in vitro studies in this area of research has been the varying concentrations of fatty acid used  <cit> .

here, we used specific concentrations of glucose and palmitate to study the effects of in vitro chronic glucolipotoxic conditions on intracellular signaling pathways and cellular processes that mediate glucose responsiveness and insulin secretion. we confirmed metabolic stress in pancreatic islets under these conditions using known stress markers. we found that chronic glucolipotoxicity impaired glucose and fat uptake/metabolism in rat pancreatic cells resulting in lower cellular atp along with mitochondrial number and activity. in agreement with this, ip <dig> levels were also reduced as was the calcium mobilized by the ip <dig> receptor and the l-type voltage gated calcium channels. finally, we found that chronic glucolipotoxicity significantly decreased insulin secretion by reducing both insulin gene expression and granule docking to the plasma membrane in pancreatic islets. thus, our results present the first integrated view of glucolipotoxicity in vitro linking known and novel signaling events to reduced glucose sensitivity and insulin secretion.

RESULTS
to investigate the effects of chronic glucolipotoxicity on glucose responsiveness and insulin secretion, we generated glucolipotoxic conditions in rat pancreatic islets and the nit <dig> beta cell line using  <dig>  mm glucose and  <dig> μm palmitate.

chronic glucolipotoxicity reduces insulin secretion in rat pancreatic islets
to evaluate the effect of high glucose and fatty acid concentrations on insulin secretion, we incubated rat pancreatic islets as mentzioned above for  <dig> h ; untreated islets were used as control. under these conditions, we treated rat pancreatic islets with either low glucose or high glucose for  <dig> h to study glucose-stimulated insulin secretion  . in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , in the presence of high glucose, islet insulin secretion was significantly reduced under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions . we confirmed induction of glucolipotoxicity-mediated er stress, oxidative stress and inflammation in pancreatic islets using known metabolic stress markers  <cit>  .

to understand the mechanism by which chronic glucolipotoxic conditions reduce gsis in vitro, we next assessed glucose uptake/metabolism, calcium release, insulin gene expression and granule docking.

glucose uptake and metabolism is impaired under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions
we examined the effect of chronic glucolipotoxic conditions on glucose metabolism in rat pancreatic islets and nit <dig> cells maintaining the same experimental conditions used in figure  <dig>  untreated rat islets and nit <dig> cells, respectively were used as controls. we found significant reductions in the mrna and protein levels of the glucose transporter, glut2/slc2a <dig> under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions when compared to the untreated control   <cit> . this reduction in glut <dig> seen in both nit- <dig> cells and rat pancreatic islets  suggested impaired glucose metabolism, which was confirmed by a decrease in glucokinase  and pyruvate carboxylase  mrna levels   <cit> . to determine whether glucose uptake was also affected under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, we used a fluorescent glucose analog, 2-nbdg to monitor glucose uptake. under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, we observed a ~40% decrease in glucose uptake  indicating that both glucose uptake and metabolism were impaired. consistent with these data, nadph levels decreased and lactate release increased under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions  confirming a dysfunction in glucose metabolism. the increase in lactate release also suggests that pryuvate, the end product of glycolysis, was converted into a non-oxidative metabolite indicating that glucose oxidation is severely impacted under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions.

we next ascertained the link between malonyl-coa formation and insulin secretion under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions. to this end, we treated rat islets cultured in glucolipotoxic conditions with high glucose and found a decrease in insulin secretion, as expected. interestingly, when atp citrate lyase  was inhibited using radicicol  <cit> , insulin secretion decreased further suggesting that acly and potentially the anaplerotic/cataplerotic pathways are involved in the dysregulation seen in insulin secretion . together, these results suggest that chronic glucolipotoxicity impairs glucose uptake and metabolism and thus, insulin secretion.

chronic glucolipotoxicity impairs fatty acid uptake and metabolism
since chronic glucolipotoxic conditions impaired gsis, we next investigated its effect on fatty acid metabolism  <cit> . we found that mrna and protein levels of the fatty acid transporter, cd <dig> were significantly increased in rat islets . this increase was observed in both nit- <dig> cells and rat pancreatic islets  suggesting increased fatty acid uptake.

to ascertain whether fatty acid uptake is impaired under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, we used a bodipy dye, a non-metabolized fluorescently labelled fatty acid analog. we observed a three-fold increase in fatty acid uptake under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions  indicating that along with cd <dig> mrna and protein levels, fatty acid uptake was also impaired. further, we also found fat metabolism to be impaired under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions as seen from the four-fold increase in triglyceride levels in the pancreatic beta cell line, nit- <dig> . this was validated by a reduction in fatty acid oxidation studied by measuring the mrna levels of ppara . we confirmed that in vitro chronic glucolipotoxicity generated metabolic stress in the cell system using known markers of er stress  <cit>  . taken together, these data showed that chronic glucolipotoxic conditions impaired both glucose and fatty acid uptake and metabolism.

mitochondrial number/activity and cytosolic atp levels are reduced under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions
since a primary outcome of glucose metabolism is atp synthesis from mitochondria  <cit> , we investigated the effect of chronic glucolipotoxic conditions on mitochondrial dna copy number/activity and cellular atp. under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, mtcox <dig> levels were significantly reduced in rat pancreatic islets along with a decrease in glucose-mediated cellular atp  suggesting a reduction in mitochondrial number. to ascertain the impact of decreased mtcox <dig> copy number on mitochondrial function under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, we measured activity of succinate dehydrogenase- a critical enzyme in both the citric acid cycle and the mitochondrial respiratory chain. we found that under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, succinate dehydrogenase activity decreased by ~50% . this reduction in mitochondrial activity was further studied by measuring insulin secretion in the presence of leucine and glutamine, precursors of tca cycle intermediates  <cit> . in this assay, chronic glucolipotoxic conditions reduced insulin secretion indicating an overall suppression of the tca cycle .

these data present the first line of evidence linking a decrease in cellular atp to a reduction in mitochondrial number and activity under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions.

an increase in cytoplasmic calcium is required for insulin secretion under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions
since chronic glucolipotoxicity lowered gsis and glucose metabolism, we investigated its effects on ip <dig> and cytosolic calcium, known signaling mediators of insulin secretion  <cit> . we detected a modest decrease in ip <dig> upon culturing rat pancreatic islets under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions . next, we investigated intracellular calcium dynamics under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions in nit- <dig> cells; cells cultured in 5mm glucose were used as control. subsequently, cells were treated with either low or high glucose and cytosolic calcium was measured. in control cells, high glucose enhanced cytosolic calcium mobilization when compared to the low glucose treatment. interestingly, this effect of high glucose on cytoplasmic calcium was lost under glucolipotoxic conditions .

as further confirmation, we ascertained whether l-type voltage gated calcium channels mobilized calcium under glucolipotoxic conditions by studying insulin secretion in the presence or absence of the l-type channel inhibitor, nitrendipine, ntd  <cit> . as reported earlier, we detected a decrease in high glucose-mediated secretion in the presence of ntd . in a similar assay, upon using the ip <dig> receptor inhibitor, 2-aminoethyldiphenyl borate   <cit> , we found that endoplasmic reticulum calcium mobilization was also required for insulin secretion . in summary, chronic glucolipotoxic conditions impaired ip <dig> levels and cytosolic calcium release.

insulin synthesis and intracellular insulin content are reduced under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions
calcium and camp are known to influence insulin gene expression through pdx <dig>  <cit> . as reported previously  <cit> , pdx <dig> and insulin  mrna levels were reduced under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions . thus, chronic glucolipotoxicity not only mediates its effects on gsis by impairing glucose metabolism but also a down-regulation of insulin gene transcription. lastly, we ascertained whether changes in insulin synthesis and glucose metabolism influenced insulin content . to test this, we treated rat islets  and observed a significant decrease in islet insulin content under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions . thus, chronic glucolipotoxicity significantly affects overall glucose responsiveness through glucose metabolism, calcium release and insulin gene expression.

insulin granule docking is reduced under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions
in animal models of t2dm, the small gtpase, rab27a is known to be downregulated leading to decreased insulin granule docking to the plasma membrane, thereby lowering insulin secretion  <cit> . in addition, insulin release at the fusion pore is also known to be impaired in diabetic animal models resulting in defects in exocytosis and release  <cit> .

here, we found that rab27a mrna significantly decreased under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions in both pancreatic islets and nit <dig> cells  suggesting a decrease in the readily releasable pool of insulin granules docked to the plasma membrane. to confirm this, we treated rat islets with potassium chloride , a membrane-depolarizing agent known to release insulin vesicles docked to the plasma membrane  <cit> . as expected, we found a significant decrease in docked insulin granules under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions when compared to control islets . these data show that chronic glucolipotoxicity reduces insulin secretion through its effects on insulin synthesis and transport in addition to glucose uptake/metabolism and cystosolic calcium mobilization.

taken together, these data provide the first, integrated in vitro view of known dysfunctional cellular mechanisms in chronic glucolipotoxic conditions, while identifying novel events such as the glucolipotoxicity-mediated reduction in mitochondrial number/activity and insulin granule docking/transport.

discussion
despite intensive research, information about the mechanism of action and intracellular signaling pathways activated by glucolipotoxicity remains limited. such an understanding has clinical relevance since the ability of the beta cell to increase insulin secretion in response to fatty acids is thought to be a predisposing factor for t2dm  <cit> . in vitro studies have been important to gain a mechanistic understanding of glucolipotoxicity but have not allowed a complete view of glucolipotoxicity-mediated cellular dysregulation due to variations in the concentrations of fatty acids used  <cit> . this study systematically evaluates specific in vitro glucolipotoxic conditions linking their effect to multiple cellular processes involved in insulin secretion and glucose responsiveness including glucose uptake/metabolism, fatty acid uptake/metabolism, cellular energetics, insulin synthesis, secretion and transport; and calcium dynamics.

we used  <dig>  mm glucose and  <dig> μm palmitate in this study after evaluating multiple concentrations for their effect on metabolic stress and cell death . under these conditions, we confirmed metabolic stress in pancreatic islets and the nit <dig> pancreatic beta cell line as seen by the strong induction of er stress, oxidative stress and inflammation. as previously reported  <cit> , these conditions also led to cell death as seen by the significant increase in caspase- <dig> activity .

under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions in vitro, we found that insulin content and gsis were lowered in rat pancreatic islets. further, glucose and fat metabolism were impaired in islets correlating with the decrease in mitochondrial number/activity and cellular atp levels. chronic glucolipotoxicity reduced cytosolic calcium levels by decreasing calcium mobilization mediated by itpr.

based on our findings, we propose a model for the effect of chronic glucolipotoxicity on the pancreatic beta cell . extended exposure to high glucose and palmitate concentrations leads to a) suppression of glycolysis resulting in reduced cellular atp and a dampening of the tca cycle, b) reduction in mitochondrial dna copy number and activity, c) reduction in plc-ip <dig> signaling leading to reduced calcium mobilization, insulin transcription and granule docking, and d) a decrease in insulin transcription and synthesis.

our in vitro findings recapitulated data from previous glucolipotoxic studies in animal models showing an impact on glucose metabolism, calcium dynamics and insulin secretion/content  <cit> . for example, we detected an increase in cd <dig> expression under glucolipotoxic conditions that correlated with enhanced triglyceride accumulation and reduced gsis. these findings concur with data from cd36-null mouse models and over-expression studies in ins cell lines  <cit>  further validating the in vitro conditions used in our study.

we found it interesting that chronic glucolipotoxic conditions impacted multiple cellular processes including insulin synthesis, content and docking. on the basis of our results, we speculate that chronic glucolipotoxicity impacts insulin content most severely compared to insulin gene transcription, docking and secretion. future studies will be required to get a more complete understanding of the same.

a key finding in our study is the influence of glucolipotoxicity on mitochondrial number/function. this is in line with the notion that enhanced insulin secretion may require an overall increase in mitochondrial activity/number as opposed to an isolated increase in an aspect of mitochondrial metabolism  <cit> . in this study, we also detected a decrease in insulin granule docking/release under glucolipotoxic conditions indicative of a reduction in the readily releasable pool of insulin, which may have a bearing on the first-phase insulin secretion  <cit> . further studies are required to explore the mechanistic link between docking/exocytosis and the dag-pkc pathway in more detail.

increasing insulin secretion is an intensely pursued therapeutic strategy in t2dm. this study yields in vitro assay conditions that can be used to evaluate anti-diabetic agents, specifically insulin secretagogues, currently in development for their impact on glucolipotoxicity-mediated dysregulation. importantly, an understanding of glucolipotoxicity-mediated cellular dysfunction may yield novel points of therapeutic intervention  that hold promise in t2dm treatment. thus, our study has potential to facilitate an improved understanding of pancreatic beta cell pathophysiology in t2dm.

CONCLUSIONS
chronic glucolipotoxic conditions comprising high glucose and fatty acid resulted in various defects in key cellular machineries. glucose sensing machinery involved in uptake and glucose metabolism for insulin secretion was reduced whereas fat uptake and triglyceride storage was increased. defects in mitochondrial number and activity along with reduced atp levels were observed under glucolipotoxic conditions. similarly, beta cells showed increased er stress, inflammation and apoptosis together with impaired calcium homeostasis. these defects occurred in conjunction with decreased insulin synthesis, insulin vesicle transport, docking and glucose-dependent insulin secretion. our data provide a first integrated view of beta cell defects across multiple levels under chronic glucolipotoxic conditions.

