BACKGROUND
wildlife species can often be affected by starvation due to changes in environmental factors . starvation not only affects the nutritional and health status of animals, but also the microbes in their intestines  <cit> . physiological changes during starvation drives the animals and their intestinal microbes to rapidly acclimate to the situation  <cit> .

the composition and interactions of the gut microbiota may affect the amount of energy extracted from the diet and energy harvest  <cit> , and play an important role in the metabolism of dietary substrates and immune system modulation  <cit> . the balance of gut microbial community composition can be altered by many factors, including stress  <cit> , antibiotic exposure  <cit> , nutritional status  <cit> , age  <cit> , degree of hygiene  <cit>  and bacterial infection  <cit> . diets play a dominant role in shaping gut microbiota and altering the metabolism and population sizes of key symbiont species, resulting in biological changes to the host  <cit> . an altered microbiota in the intestine can lead to altered immune functions of hosts, and also increase the risk of disease  <cit> . however, as studies on gut microbiomes have largely been performed on humans and land animals  <cit> , not much is known on gut microbiomes and their changes under changing environmental conditions in organisms living in aquatic habitats.

studies of bacteria community are traditionally carried out on the basis of representative genomes and signature genes such as 16s ribosomal rna . however, analyses of 16s rrna can only appraise the phylogenetic composition of a sample and provide no direct information about its functional capabilities  <cit> . full scale metagenomics can augment the information content of the data generated by not only determining the relative abundance of all genes, but a description of the functional potential of each community as well. compared with the signature gene-based methods, this new technique gives a much broader description than phylogenetic surveys  <cit> . recently, an analysis of 16s rrna was performed to assess the bacteria composition in the grass carp  <cit>  and the zebrafish  <cit> . however, little is known about the gene content of fish microbiota and the effects of starvation on microbial populations in fish.

the asian seabass lates calcarifer is an important farmed foodfish species. the fish has the ability to tolerate all levels of salinity from fresh to seawater allowing them to be cultured in both environments. this species feeds on crustaceans, mollusks, and smaller fish  <cit> . in this study, we sequenced the metagenomic dna isolated from the intestine of the asian seabass using a hiseq  <dig> sequencer. we characterized the intestinal microbiome, and analyzed the influence of starvation on the composition of the gut microbial communities. by using comparative metagenomic studies and analyzing expression of selected host genes with quantitative reverse-transcriptase pcr , we have constructed a primary microbial gene catalogue, and investigated the changes of the microbial composition and the host-microbe interactions in the intestine under starvation. our analysis suggests variable microbiomes and host-microbiota signatures in the fish intestines in response to starvation.

RESULTS
metagenomic analysis suggests variable microbiomes in fed vs. starved seabass intestines
the intestine is one of the major organs in fish that interacts with the environment, and is involved in adaptations and stress responses. the intestinal microbiota are composed of a diverse and vast population of microorganisms  <cit> . to characterize and compare the microbial communities in the asian seabass intestine in response to starvation, we sequenced two metagenomic dna samples isolated from asian seabass intestines at eight days post fasting challenge  and from fed seabass intestines  by using the illumina hiseq  <dig> sequencing system. the sequencing yielded  <dig> , <dig> reads for the experimental sample and  <dig> , <dig> reads for the control sample. the sequences gave an overall average length of 101 bp and represented  <dig>  gb of dna data. after trimming of the low-quality sequences and adaptors,  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> high-quality reads for the experimental sample and the control sample were obtained. the high quality reads were classified from phylum to family using the program metaphlan  <cit>  with the default settings.

in the control sample, we found that  <dig> % of the metagenomes were assigned to bacteria and  <dig> % were assigned to archaea. the metagenome included  <dig> phyla,  <dig> classes,  <dig> orders and  <dig> families . proteobacteria , firmicutes , bacteroidetes  and fusobacteria  were the four most abundant bacteria phyla . the results were generally consistent with those observed in the intestinal samples of other fish species. in grass carp, proteobacteria and firmicutes were dominant in the gut bacteria  <cit> , and in adult zebrafish, proteobacteria  and fusobacteria  phyla were common members of the intestinal microbiota  <cit> . however, there are some differences in the intestinal microbiota among different fish species. for example, in grass carp, actinobacteria  were the most prevalent members of the intestinal bacterial communities, and they were more abundant than bacteriodetes  <cit> . in our study, only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the microbiota members were actinobacteria in the control sample and in the experimental sample, respectively. therefore, actinobacteria were much less abundant than bacteriodetes  in the asian seabass intestine. diet plays a dominant role in shaping gut microbiota and changing key populations  <cit> . the grass carp is an herbivorous species, while asian seabass is a strict carnivore, feeding on crustaceans, mollusks and smaller fish in the wild. therefore, the difference in bacterial communities between grass carp and asian seabass may be caused by evolved differences that have arisen in the context of differing diets. in addition, our data supported prior findings suggesting that gut microbiota differ between fish and mammalian intestines. firmicutes and bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla in mammals  <cit> , whereas proteobacteria were the most abundant bacteria phyla in fish. this difference suggests that gut environments differ in their selectivity/hospitability for bacterial proliferation.

in the experimental sample, we found that  <dig> % of the metagenomes were assigned to bacteria, and  <dig> % were assigned to archaea . proteobacteria , bacteroidetes  and firmicutes  were the three most abundant bacterial species in the experimental sample . both metagenomes showed very small differences in diversity when reviewed in light of the numbers of present taxa . however, dramatic differences in microbial community composition of the fish intestine across samples were observed . we found that a total of three orders and four families showed apparent shifts in relative abundance in response to starvation. more detailed information on these shifts in microbial community composition was presented in additional file  <dig>  these findings are consistent with previous studies in humans, in which the relative abundances of different bacterial species in the gut microbiota were highly sensitive to diet  <cit> .

p
the significant changes in microbial composition  from family to phylum in the fish intestines in response to starvation are presented. p-value indicates significance level as calculated using a bootstrap statistical test.

significantly more reads were assigned to the bacteroidetes phylum in the experimental sample  as compared to the control sample . at the class level, bacteroidia  and sphingobacteria  contributed to higher percentages of the microbiota in the experimental sample than in the control sample. the significant elevation of bacteroidetes in the intestinal community of the starved seabass sample is in agreement with some other studies  <cit>  on dietary shifts. for example, in mice  <cit> , fasting was associated with a significant increase in the proportional representation of the bacteroidetes . bacteroides with a much larger genome size  are normally mutualistic in the animal gastrointestinal flora. a large part of the proteins made by the bacteroides genome are able to break down polysaccharides and metabolize their sugars  <cit> . they play a fundamental role in the processing of complex molecules to simpler ones in the host intestine. their ability to harvest alternative energy sources from food might allow bacteroides to be more competitive than other bacteria in the fish intestine during starvation.

in contrast, firmicutes are more abundant in the control sample  than in the experiment sample . the pattern that the relative abundance of firmicutes in the gut is positively correlated with dietary caloric intake is frequently observed in humans, mice, pythons and in zebrafish  <cit> . in addition, the betaproteobacteria class was more abundant with  <dig> % in the control sample as compared with  <dig> % in the experimental sample. the increased abundance of betaproteobacteria class in response to feed was also observed in zebrafish  <cit> , suggesting that betaproteobacteria play a role in the interactions between microbiota, diet and hosts in fish.

to better understand the temporal changes of microbial community composition during starvation, we further amplified the 16s rrna sequences from metagenomic dna that was isolated directly from the intestine samples at three, six and twelve days post fast by using conserved primers targeting the domain bacteria, and generated six libraries  for sanger sequencing. for each time point of the fasting challenges, around  <dig> high-quality sequences with a minimum length of 500 bp were obtained. the taxonomic classification for the control library d <dig>  is drastically different from the control libraries d <dig> and d <dig> that were composed entirely of cetobacterium. this is unexpected and may suggest that the classification is invalid at lower level  due to a limitation of the blast-based approach. however, the phylogenetic analysis of the 16s rrna gene data suggests a similar shift of bacteria components post the fasting challenge as our next generation sequencing-based metagenomic study . for example, bacteroidales were the most dominant order in the experimental samples, but were negligible in the control samples; proteobacteria phylum  and fusobacteria phylum  were the most dominant components in the control samples, but only low proportions of these bacteria were detected in the experimental samples at the three time points. our data showed that the microbial community composition in the fish intestines can be quickly changed in response to starvation in less than three days. however, in human, a 10-day dietary intervention is not sufficient to alter the enterotype of an individual  <cit> . compared to the changes of microbial composition in humans, the changes of the intestinal microbiota in fish are more rapid and significant. a recent comparison of the microbiota of zebrafish intestines and their housing water under fed and starved conditions suggested that some bacterial taxa observed in the fish intestine are found at similar frequency in the water, while other taxa are enriched specifically in the intestine  <cit> . this suggests that the fish gut looks a lot more like the surrounding environment, and even more so under starvation conditions due to a limited selective environment as compared to mammals.

metagenomic comparisons between fed and starved fishes by functional investigations
functional investigations by blasting the metagenomic data against public databases may reveal the genetic determinants of microbial interactions, and illuminate the mechanisms responsible for directing the changes in microbial diversity in response to fasting challenges. in order to generate a primary catalogue of microbial genes from the fish intestines, and explore the data differences caused from the fasting challenge, we first performed de novo assembly for the high quality reads. the de novo assembly of the high quality reads from two samples produced  <dig>  scaffold sequences with a n <dig> length of  <dig>  bp. eighty-three percent of these reads was mapped back to the assembly. of the scaffolding sequences,  <dig>  sequences had a minimum length of 500 bp and gave a total length of 443 mb with a n <dig> length of  <dig>  bp. sixty-one percent of the reads from the control sample and sixty-nine percent of the reads from the experimental sample were mapped back to the assembled sequences . we then used the software prodigal   <cit>  to predict the whole range of open reading frames  for the metagenomic dna sequences . even though a total of  <dig>  orfs were found, most of the orfs appeared to be incomplete. we classified these predicted genes by aligning them to the clusters of orthologous groups  protein database that was derived from all of the proteins encoded by the genomes of bacteria, archaea and unicellular eukaryotes  <cit> . we found that  <dig>  predicted orfs were assigned to  <dig>  cog orthologous groups, which could be classified into  <dig> cog functional categories . nearly six percent of the reads from the control sample and thirteen percent of the reads from the experimental sample were mapped back to the predicted orf sequences with cog annotation.

there were significant differences in read counts of cog functional categories between the two datasets . we found that three functional categories, including transcription, cell division and chromosome partitioning and replication, recombination and repair were significantly depleted in the experimental samples . six functional categories, e.g., cell envelope biogenesis, outer membrane and defense mechanisms were significantly enriched during starvation .

to further identify genes in the intestinal microbiome, which are associated with starvation, statistical comparisons for the  <dig>  cog orthologous groups were performed. substantial fluctuations in the metagenomic components were found during starvation. we observed that  <dig> orthologous groups were significantly depleted . these included the genes citf , entf  and transketolase . these genes were mainly associated with energy production and conversion, secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport, and catabolism, and carbohydrate transport and metabolism. thirty genes were significantly enriched, including rhsa , nanh  and tesa . of the enriched genes,  <dig>  were associated with functional categories including carbohydrate transport and metabolism, inorganic ion transport and metabolism, and amino acid transport and metabolism.

gut microbiota provide their host with a physical barrier to pathogen infection by competitive exclusion and production of antimicrobial substances  <cit> . antibiotics are produced by bacteria to outcompete intestinal pathogens. to further explore the microbe-microbe interactions, we downloaded  <dig>  prokaryote genes related to antibiotic activity from uniprot protein database . by using local blast alignment,  <dig>  of the metagenomic sequences were mapped to  <dig> antibiotic related genes . we found that seventy-two genes  were significantly depleted in the experimental sample. also seventy-two genes  were significantly overrepresented in the experimental sample . the overall mapping rate was only  <dig> % in the control sample, while in the experimental sample, the rate was higher  . as compared with the overall mapping rate of the reads to cog orthologous groups , a much higher proportion of reads in the experimental sample mapped to antibiotic related genes. our data suggest that the relative proportions of bacteria with genes related to antibiotic activity may be increased in the fish intestine in response to starvation. of the enriched genes, at least six genes were related to beta-lactamase activity, e.g., beta-lactamase type ii, putative beta-lactamase hcpd, putative beta-lactamase hcpe and beta-lactamase blatla- <dig>  an increase in antibiotic-producing strains could benefit the fish by excluding potential pathogens from colonizing the intestines. this observation could be due to the reduction in overall bacterial abundance with the exception of a few larger genome generalists  that harbor antibiotic resistance genes and can, in the conditions of nutrient deprivation, turn to harvesting host-produced products. this is in agreement to the human intestine-adapted bacterial symbiont, which turns to host mucus glycans when polysaccharides are absent from the diet  <cit> . however, it is also possible that these genes may simply be hitching a ride with a microbe that is a generalist which can better survive these conditions.

functional interactions between intestinal microbiota and their hosts during starvation
the importance of the intestinal microbiome in the development of both the intestinal mucosal and systemic immune systems have been shown in mammals  <cit> . in most species of fish, starvation is experienced during certain periods of every year largely due to environmental conditions  <cit> . starvation affects many physiological changes to satisfy its energy requirements in fish  <cit> . recent studies have shown that starvation can induce stress responses in fish. for example, starvation resulted in a significant reduction of the intestine length, the surface area of the intestinal mucosa and the mucosal thickness  <cit>  and increased xenobiotic resistance and paracellular permeability of epithelial cells in the anterior intestine  <cit> . to further explore the host-microbe interactions in fish intestine, ten genes related to immunity, defense and inflammatory response and four genes related to lipid metabolism and transport, and cholesterol metabolism were selected for expression analysis . temporal expression of the  <dig> genes was analyzed by qrt-pcr using rna isolated from the asian seabass intestine sampled at three, six and twelve days post fasting. the expression analysis clustered these genes into two groups . the apolipoprotein and phosphoethanolamine n-methyltransferase  <dig> genes related to lipid metabolism and transport, cholesterol metabolism  <cit> , and the placenta-specific gene  <dig> protein gene showing defense response to bacteria  <cit>  were down-regulated in the starved experimental fish at all time-points of fasting . interestingly, mucin- <dig>  which provides an insoluble mucous barrier that serves to protect the intestinal epithelium  <cit> , was weakly increased at three days post fasting , but quickly down-regulated at six and twelve days post fasting . the intestinal barrier functions as one of the first lines of defense against microbial pathogens  <cit> . dramatic decreases in the gene expression of mucin- <dig> and placenta-specific gene  <dig> protein may lead to disruption of the mucosal barrier in the long term, increasing susceptibility to pathogen infections. moreover, the immune-related genes, such as complement c1q-like protein  <dig> , class i histocompatibility antigen  and cd <dig>  were highly up-regulated from samples at three and six days post fast. however, at 12 days post fasting, immune related genes were only slightly increased, e.g., class i histocompatibility antigen  and cd <dig> , or down-regulated, e.g., complement c1q-like protein  <dig> . these data suggest that long-term malnutrition or starvation will damage the mucosal barrier of the asian seabass by increasing the permeability of the intestinal mucosal barrier. the intestinal microflora, especially the opportunistic pathogens could then cross the intestinal barrier when the intestinal mucosal barrier is damaged or the normal flora has been destroyed by antibiotics or nutrition deficiency. based on prior findings from mammals, short-term stress experienced at the time of immune activation can enhance innate and adaptive immune responses, but long-term stress can suppress immunity by decreasing immune cell numbers and function and/or increasing active immunosuppressive mechanisms  <cit> . however, the underlying mechanisms of the nexus between host immune system and intestinal microbiota in response to nutrient changes need further exploration. future studies targeting the microbial metaproteome and the interactions between the intestinal microbiota and their hosts in response to different nutrition conditions or stressors with a combination of continued sequencing, cultivation and functional genomics are likely to provide further insights into the functions of metagenomes in the fish intestine.

CONCLUSIONS
we determined the primary microbial gene catalogue and investigated the changes of the microbial composition and host gene expression in the intestine of asian seabass in response to starvation. proteobacteria , firmicutes  and bacteroidetes  were the three most abundant bacteria phyla. the components of intestinal microbiota community shifted in response to starvation with significant enrichment of bacteroidetes, but depletion of betaproteobacteria. there were significant differences in cog functional categories and orthologous groups, and genes related to antibiotic activity in response to starvation. genes related to antibiotic activity in the microbiome were significantly enriched in response to starvation, and host genes related to immune system were generally up-regulated. this study provides the first insights into the intestinal microbiome and its changes under starvation in fish. since our next generation sequencing datasets are from two pooled samples, the inter-individual variation can not be evaluated, which strongly influenced the power of our data analysis. further detailed study on interactions between individual intestinal microbiomes and hosts under dynamic conditions will shed new light on how the hosts and microbes respond to the changing environment.

