BACKGROUND
proteomic techniques are important tools for studying the mechanisms of a disease, pinpointing new therapeutic targets or finding potential biomarkers. the field of proteomics is ever expanding and today there are several techniques available for protein separation, both gel based and non-gel based. traditionally two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  has been the technique used for protein separation. in 2d-page proteins first undergo isoelectric focusing  based on their net charge, then an orthogonal second dimension is applied to further separate proteins based on their molecular weight, in the presence of denaturing conditions. in this way it is possible to resolve several thousand proteins in a single sample. 2d-page mainly produces data which enables the investigator to determine whether a particular protein shows an increase or decrease when comparing two different conditions e.g. a diseased state compared to a non-diseased state. the limited dynamic range and poor reproducibility between gels has been of major concern with traditional 2d-page experiments.

the task of detecting changes in protein expression has recently been facilitated by the introduction of difference in gel electrophoresis  <cit> . gels using the 2d-dige method usually contain three samples labeled with three distinct fluorescent dyes, cy <dig>  cy <dig> and cy <dig>  the cy <dig> dye is typically used to label an internal standard which is a mix of all samples in the experiment and the other two dyes are usually used to label two biological samples of interest. the strength of the internal standard is to help the mapping of spots/proteins between gels and thus make the different gels more comparable. the internal standard is also used in some methods for normalization within and between gels. the 2d-dige has been commercialized through the ettan dige system of amersham biosciences .

fluorescent dyes, most commonly cy <dig> and cy <dig>  have been used extensively in gene expression microarray technologies to measure differences in gene expression. using cdna microarrays there is a need for proper normalization in order to remove systematic variation, within and sometimes between arrays, and a need for proper test statistics to exploit the information across genes  <cit> .

since the data generated from 2d-dige experiments exhibits similar characteristics to that obtained from cdna gene expression microarrays, some methods have evolved for normalization of data produced with 2d-dige based on methods in gene expression analysis  <cit> . these methods focus on the intensity bias within and between gels, paying little attention to spatial bias within gels. spatial bias is known to be a source of variation in gene expression microarrays  <cit> .

in a gel set using 2d-dige we examined spatial and intensity bias removal by eight different normalization methods. the commercial software available from ge healthcare  provides two of the methods, two of the methods have been used on 2d-dige data before  <cit> , two methods have not been used on 2d-dige data before, but have been used on gene expression microarray data  <cit>  and the final two are single channel analysis approaches which have not been used on 2d-dige data previously.

most 2d-dige data analysis has focused on finding single proteins with a changed expression between two different conditions and tested for significant differences between the means or medians in the different groups. to our knowledge the most common approaches are those of two-sample t-tests, their extensions within the scope of analysis of variance   <cit>  and generalized linear models   <cit> , and moderated t-statistics  <cit> .

the issue of significance level correction in multiple hypothesis tests has been extensively discussed in the field of gene expression microarrays. in proteomics studies, we and others have used methods correcting the observed significance levels using false discovery rate   <cit> . there are several similarities between data obtained from gene expression and proteins , but there are also aspects of the data that have to be taken into account. to a single protein there may be different chemical moieties attached or removed by various enzymes, also known as post-translational modification . this causes a change in the protein mass and charge. as a result a protein originating from the same gene-product but with different modifications may be found in several different positions in the gels. a treatment effect on a protein may therefore cause a change of level of the unmodified protein and/or a change in level for a certain ptm-protein. it is difficult to know whether these actions are co-regulated or not, but as a consequence the use of fdr may be inappropriate since it assumes independent observations. instead we propose the use of an alternative method which produces cut-off levels on the basis of permutation tests.

although single differentially expressed spots/proteins can be informative, we are primarily interested in the activity profiles of sets of functionally related proteins. therefore, we also perform re-sampling-based tests on predefined sets of proteins. our protein set test is in line with gene set tests suggested by subramanian  <cit>  and tian  <cit> . we adapted their method to suit protein data and have named it differential expression in predefined protein sets .

parkinson's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder which is characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, causing a reduction in striatal dopamine content. dopamine replacement by l-dopa is the most common treatment resulting in an initial positive symptomatic response. unfortunately, long-term l-dopa therapy is associated with the development of motor complications such as dyskinesia. after 4– <dig> years of l-dopa treatment approximately 40% of patients have developed dyskinesia  <cit> . once exposed to l-dopa therapy, some patients are 'primed' and some will eventually develop dyskinesia even if switched to a drug that in itself does not induce dyskinesia when administered de novo  <cit> . dyskinesia contributes to the disability experienced by patients and it is therefore of great importance to understand the mechanisms of l-dopa induced dyskinesia.

in this report we analyze the protein content in the striatum from the gold-standard animal  model of parkinson's disease with and without de novo or long-term l-dopa treatment. the group with long-term l-dopa treatment displayed dyskinetic symptoms. we examine the ability of eight normalization methods to remove the intensity and spatial bias found in our data produced with 2d-dige. four of the methods have previously been used for data generated from 2d-dige and four of them are novel. we also discuss existing methods for producing cut-off levels for finding differentially expressed spots/proteins and propose an alternative method based on permutation tests. finally we use the method proposed in this study, depps, to provide insights on the priming effects of l-dopa in the striatum in parkinsonian animals.

RESULTS
we have used 2d-dige to study the difference in protein expression in the striatum of  <dig> animals which received four different administration regimens. six of the animals were used as controls , five were administered mptp only , six animals were administered mptp and then a single dose of l-dopa  and ten animals were first administered mptp then long-term treatment with l-dopa until displaying dyskinesia . one of the control samples were used twice, resulting in a total of  <dig> samples which were compared on  <dig> 2d-dige gels.

all gel images were analyzed using the decyder software v <dig>  . on average  <dig> ±  <dig>  spots were identified on the gels. as gel number four displayed the most spots , it was designated as the master gel for matching purposes. for evaluating the different normalization methods, we included spots from each gel that were also found in the master gel. when comparing the four experimental groups we only included spots for which we had enough observations to estimate all possible comparisons between treatment groups, and for which the degrees of freedom in the linear model were at least eleven. the quality of all these spots was examined manually and subsequently  <dig> spots were used in the parameter estimation.

evaluation of bias removal by different normalization methods
we have studied eight different normalization methods. two of the methods are provided with the decyder software , two have been published earlier in the literature   <cit> , two are known from two-channel cdna expression array data but have now been adapted to suit 2d-dige data  and the final two are a separate channel analysis approach that have not been used on 2d-dige data before . for comparison, we have also included un-normalized data .

when the raw data was analyzed using only cy <dig> and cy <dig> intensities, significant dye bias was found in several of the gels . this dye bias was intensity dependant in some of the gels . each of the  <dig> gels exhibited spatial bias, irrespective of the treatment group identity of the samples. for instance, in the top right corner of gel four there were generally higher cy <dig> intensities compared to cy <dig>  the same applied for the higher mass regions  of gel twelve .

the 'decyder no pool' successfully removed dye-specific differences . the same applied to the 'loess+scale' method . the 'kreil' method introduced bias in the lower intensity range in some of the gels . however, none of three methods removed the spatial bias seen in the raw data .

two of the pool-based normalization methods  removed the dye-specific differences, but spatial bias remained . because the cy5/cy <dig> logratios are calculated via the pool channel  the spatial pattern is different compared to the methods not using the pool.

comparing the two normalization methods included in the decyder software  where the fold changes are calculated with or without the pool channel , the variability is larger when the pool channel is included . this is a natural consequence when two signals  are compared via a third signal  rather than directly. the two methods using the pool channel, 'decyder pool' and 'fodor', produced the largest variability in fold changes compared to all other methods, including the raw data as can be seen in figure 2c&2d.

when using the proposed '2d loess+scale' method the spatial and intensity dependant dye bias were successfully removed . from this observation we suggest that the intensity dependant bias often found in 2d-dige data may be completely or partly dependant on spatial bias. to adjust the scales of the logratio distributions the 2d loess adjustment was followed by between gel scale normalization .

in the single channel analysis, each of the three channels on the  <dig> gels had different mean intensity but the variance of the data was quite similar, as can be seen by the width of the boxes in figure  <dig>  quantile normalization  forces each of the channels to have the same mean intensity and range, but the spatial bias is similar to that seen in raw data .

for the method 'sc-2d+quantile' when spatial location normalization is applied to each of the three intensity channels, the spatial bias is removed, but there are still differences between the intensity means, therefore quantile normalization is also applied .

importantly the values of extreme observations are very similar for raw data and data after spatial location normalization . these extreme values may represent true biological differences between samples and should therefore only be slightly affected by the normalization .

effects of different normalizations
all normalization methods gave different results for the estimated spot expression differences between treatment groups.

after normalization the spots were ranked and plotted in a volcano plot. a volcano plot displays the measure of statistical significance of the change, lodsratio  versus the fold changes. a high lodsratio indicates a higher chance of true differential expression compared to a low lodsratio . this method is widely used on data generated from gene expression arrays  <cit>  and occasionally on 2d-dige data  <cit> . we calculated the lodsratios using the ebayes function in the limma  <cit>  r  <cit>  package.

the standard errors of the spot expression estimates are generally larger using the 'decyder pool' normalization compared to the 'sc-2d+quantile' method. this is indicated by the width of the 'decyder pool' volcano plot compared to that of 'sc-2d+quantile' .

although we can not prove which method provides the most accurate results for each particular spot, reduced standard errors of the spot expression estimates generally gives better results.

the treatment effects and rankings could have been estimated only using the cy <dig> and cy <dig> intensities  and the pool channel would have been excluded. in this study, where the effects of all four treatments were compared with each other and the original design was fairly skewed, the analysis gained by including the pool channel , especially for those treatments with few or no direct comparisons. see also discussion; the pool channel and parameter estimation.

protein classification
before any comparisons were made between the different treatments,  <dig> spots were picked for identification. of these,  <dig> proteins were successfully identified. based on the criterions described above  the level of  <dig> proteins had been compared between the four experimental groups. for the set tests  ten proteins were excluded from the analysis due to limited information available on biological function. the remaining  <dig> proteins were successfully classified into groups  based on molecular function, their membership in protein families, involvement in biological processes and cellular localization. a total of  <dig> sets were identified.

results of parameter estimation and single differentially expressed spots
using the 'sc-2d+quantile' normalization and least squares estimates we calculated lodsratios for six contrasts of interest . figure  <dig> illustrates volcano plots of the comparisons between mptp and ctl , ldopa and mptp , dysk and ldopa , dysk and ctl , dysk and mptp  as well as that between ldopa and ctl .

using a permutation test we estimated three lodsratio cut-offs for each comparison, corresponding to fdr*  <dig> ,  <dig>  and the minimum observed fdr*. using a fdr* value of  <dig>  for all comparisons resulted in  <dig> unique spots above the lodsratios cut-offs whereas  <dig> of these spots have been successfully identified and classified into sets.

results of differential expression in predefined sets of proteins
the purpose in most 2d-dige gel experiments is to find single proteins found to be differentially expressed between e.g. two different treatments. however, we were primarily interested in the expression changes of predefined sets of proteins. it is anticipated that this also reduces the number of false positive results, which is a risk when looking at individual proteins on a large scale.

based on the method presented by subramanian et al  <cit>  and tian et al  <cit>  we calculated significance levels  for sets of proteins that show association with the predefined phenotypes of interest.

the modified method used here, depps, is based on ranking  for all the spots in each set of interest. an advantage with this kind of approach is that it uses the whole ranking list of spots/proteins and not only those above a certain lodsratio cut-off and/or fold change.

a p-value for each protein set was assessed by comparing the result from the true comparison to those from the permutations of gel numbers , .

there were differences in the average level of the p-values for the comparisons examined. therefore it may not be appropriate to use the same cut-off p-value across comparisons. instead an alternative method using a quantile- quantile -plot  with standardized p-values versus the standard deviations of the p-values for each protein set was used . based on visual inspection of the results for all comparison we selected the same relative cut-off level  across the six comparisons.

protein sets
we wanted to explore if the method used herein  can provide insights into the priming effects of l-dopa in the striatum of a parkinsonian animal model.

four of the sets identified in the lvm comparison  were sets of proteins that are involved in energy metabolism or tubulin cytoskeleton. we will briefly discuss the possible involvements of these four sets of proteins in relation to the priming effects of l-dopa. the main biological aspects of this study will be published separately .

example i: energy metabolism
three sets of proteins involved in energy metabolism , tricarboxylic acid cycle  and alcohol metabolism ) were affected in parkinsonian animals compared to single and long-term l-dopa treatments . it should be noted that there is a great overlap for proteins classified into the sets for glycolysis and alcohol metabolism. for proteins involved in alcohol metabolism, this difference is also maintained after long-term l-dopa treatment, compared to untreated animals . there is no common expression pattern for these sets of proteins, which is not surprising since the energy metabolism comprises many complex pathways .

the changed state of proteins associated with energy metabolism is encouraging since crossman and co-workers  <cit>  analyzed 2-deoxyglucose accumulation and reported metabolic changes in the basal ganglia in mptp and l-dopa treated macaques, with the exception of the striatum which was not studied. other studies have reported an increase of lactate in the striatum of parkinsonian models, indicating anaerobic glycolysis  <cit> . metabolic pathways are known to be affected in several neurodegenerative disorders, for a review of recent proteomic findings see  <cit> .

example ii: tubulin cytoskeleton
proteins that form part of the microtubule cytoskeleton in striatal tissue appear in this study to be affected by single and long-term l-dopa administration to parkinsonian animals .

the actual difference in protein expression is low, but the protein expression pattern is similar for most proteins in the set . the alpha tubulins are expressed/present to a lower level in parkinsonian animals  compared to untreated , which appear to be reversed after l-dopa treatment . in contrast to alpha tubulins, beta tubulins do not appear to be affected . the difference in biological response between alpha and beta tubulins suggests different functions.

dysfunctions of the neuronal cytoskeleton, especially the microtubule system, have been associated with several neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis   <cit> . furthermore, mptp and its metabolites destabilize microtubules  <cit> . this is interesting since dopaminergic neurons are particularly sensitive to microtubule destabilizing agents  <cit> . one other possibility is that dopamine regulates changes in the striatal medium spiny neuron  dendritic trees and spines resulting in changes to the cytoskeleton. dopamine depletion results in a reduction of spines and synapses on striatal projection neurons  <cit> . postmortem samples from parkinson's patients also show reductions in msn dendritic spines and dendritic tree size  <cit> . however, we do not know if the microtubule changes seen in the striatum after l-dopa treatment in this study are based in dopaminergic fibers from the substantia nigra or in striatal medium spiny neurons and/or interneurons.

discussion
normalization and spot matching
in the field of cdna microarrays, spatial and intensity effects arising from printing, hybridization, scanning and other technical factors are known to mask the data obtained from gene expression.

the same applies for protein studies using 2d-dige, although the bias arises from different sources. recent studies by fodor  <cit>  and kreil  <cit>  have shown the need for proper normalization and the need for development of better normalization techniques.

comparing the results by kreil  <cit>  to ours, their biological example had more dye-bias, however they also included more spots with low spot volume and there is more dye bias in spots with low spot volume. we had a low number of spots per gel with a low spot volume , on average less than 2%. the differences compared to the study by kreil may be due to different biological samples, the ph interval for the gel strips, the gel concentration, the settings during scanning or a different setting in the decyder software for spot detection.

the fact that we have generally fewer low-volume spots in our data can also be explained by us having manually checked the matching for all spots between the gels in the multi gel interface in the decyder software . in our experience the automatic matching needs to be extensively checked, since it is not uncommon with bad matching between spots in different gels, and low volume spots are often surrounded by other low volume spots, making the bva matching even more unreliable. a large gel set requires a great deal of manual work to minimize the risk of bad matching and it is often that low-volume spots fail to be correctly matched, simply because they can not be found with great confidence between gels.

the methods provided by fodor  <cit>  and kreil  <cit>  both make use of the relationship between the dye-bias and intensity but independently of spot location. we think there is a risk of masking the true signals using 2d-dige due to spatial bias. the '2d loess+scale' and 'sc-2d+quantile' methods proposed in this report are two new methods that remove both the intensity and spatial bias found in 2d-dige data.

in cdna microarrays the probes are often spotted in a random manner across the microarray, so no spatial bias may be expected. however using 2d-dige, spatial bias may to some extent be expected. certain proteins may be identified in the spot maps as tight rows of spots of proteins originating from the same gene-product . they appear in rows in the gels because they have approximately the same mass but different charge.

the spatial bias we found in the raw data and in several normalization methods showed that large areas of spots had higher intensities with either cy <dig> or cy <dig>  irrespective of the treatment group identity of the samples. however, in a case where two very different protein samples are compared on the same gel, then the assumptions made for normalization may not be valid. it can therefore be very helpful to study the spatial plots of un-normalized data, especially if both technical and biological replication is available. see also  <cit>  for further discussions about spatial trends in gel based data.

there are several sources that may cause the spatial bias, such as variations in the quality of the gels, the labeling efficiency of the dyes, incomplete number of proteins transferred from the first to the second dimension and the scanning procedure. it is also known that background subtraction may introduce bias  <cit> . the procedure for background subtraction using the decyder software is to subtract the lowest tenth percentile of the pixel values on the spot border. we have not been able to evaluate the impact of this on the data, since it is not possible to disengage background subtraction using the decyder software. see also  <cit>  for a review on sources of variation in gel-based proteomics.

it is unclear from the present study which normalization method gives the most accurate results for each particular protein. however, in most cases the data used to find differentially expressed proteins should not be intensity or spatially biased. the '2d loess+scale' and 'sc-2d+quantile' methods proposed in this study are the only methods that sufficiently satisfy these two criteria.

loess smoothing and possible software improvements
when using loess smoothing  <cit> , the smoothing factor has to be set by the user. this factor  indicates the percentage of spots to be used in the estimation of each point of the loess curve.

for the master gel  a smoothing factor between  <dig>  and  <dig>  satisfyingly removed both the intensity and spatial bias. using the same smoothing factor on a gel with only half as many spots, the estimation of each point would be performed on relatively fewer spots and there may be a risk of over fitting. to minimize the risk of over fitting a smoothing factor proportional to the number of spots is appropriate. in this case a factor of e.g. 100/, gives a higher span for gels with less spots. this may seem as a relative low smoothing factor, but the spatial bias found in our gels are relative local. a smoothing factor that is too high would result in a more global intensity biased normalization rather than local bias normalization.

for ideal 2d-dige spatial  normalization all spots identified in each gel should be used for normalization, instead of only using spots also found in the master image. this would probably improve the local bias normalization slightly and therefore give a better final result. using version  <dig>  of the decyder software this is not possible because the merging of two spots in the multi-gel comparison interface, bva, results in no update of the original spot map. consequently the normalized value can not be extracted. if no spots in any of the gels have been merged it is possible to use all spots, but in our experience this is seldom the case.

the pool channel and parameter estimation
the decyder software manual, as well as fodor et al  <cit> , recommends the pool channel  to be used in the statistical analysis for all types of gel experiments.

after normalization , the pool channel intensity will generally not cancel out when the logratios are combined, but there will be an error term connected to each of log2cy5/cy <dig> and log2cy3/cy <dig>  karp et al  <cit>  even suggests that the cy <dig> channel gives more noise than each of cy <dig> and cy <dig>  in which case the noise added in each step of log2cy5/cy <dig> and log2cy3/cy <dig> would be higher than the single noise term in the direct measurement log2cy5/cy <dig> 

the linear model is then based on the logratios log2cy5/cy <dig> and log2cy3/cy <dig> rather than directly on the logratios between the red and the green intensities  only or on the log intensities log2cy <dig>  log2cy <dig> and log2cy <dig>  according to the decyder software manual, as well as fodor et al  <cit> , these logratios may be considered as independent measurements.

we want to stress that if a log difference between only two samples on the same gel is to be measured, the standard error of the measurement will be larger if the difference is estimated via a third  sample than if it is estimated directly between the samples of interest. additionally the logratios log2cy5/cy <dig> and log2cy3/cy <dig> can not be considered as independent measurements, since they originally come from the same gel.

as a consequence, in a case where only two treatments are compared with replicate gels, we advocate the use of the pool channel  for mapping between gels and the use of normalized m-values  in the linear model.

in a case where more than two treatments or states will be compared the situation may be different, then the analysis may improve on including the pool channel in the linear model. we recommend the data first be normalized using 'sc-2d+quantile' and then the three log <dig> intensity estimates for each spot on a gel should be treated as correlated observations. as a consequence the three dyes should be treated as fixed effects and the gels should be treated as blocks by a random effect in the linear model.

experiments should be carefully designed so that the comparisons of particular interest are made within gels rather than between gels. the labeling using different dyes  of the experimental groups should also be balanced. since our experiment was originally designed following only the manual of the decyder software , little attention were given to the possibility of systematic bias within the experiment and the balance of the dyes for each experimental group in the design.

see also microarray statistics theory on direct versus indirect experimental designs in e.g.  <cit> 

protein identification and predefined sets of proteins
traditionally, studies of gene expression have drawn biological conclusions from lists of differentially expressed genes. the development and use of a more pathway-oriented approach in gene studies, such as gsea <cit> , have recently become more popular.

most 2d-dige studies have focused on identifying individual spots  that are differentially expressed between two states. using this approach it is hard to make conclusive remarks about effects in biological processes and pathways.

we have used a pathway orientated approach  in this 2d-dige study. the ideal situation would have been to have all spots in the gels identified, but this is quite difficult, especially for the low volume spots. there are several reasons for our relative low number of identified spots with low spot volume. the main reason is that the spots were manually picked from preparative coomassie stained gels . the coomassie staining is less sensitive compared to the cydye staining. the lesser sensitivity can not be completely compensated for by loading more proteins on preparative gels. consequently spots with low spot-volumes in the 2d-dige gels could not be found in the preparative gels, at least not with a great certainty that they were the same spots.

another reason is that the spots were manually extracted from the preparative gels in a random and unbiased way before any statistical analyses were made. spots that had been picked for identification were afterwards matched to the 2d-dige gels. it may have been possible to first find the spots in the 2d-dige gels, then try to match these low spot-volume proteins  and then pool spots from several preparative gels to get enough of protein for protein identification. this was not done due to the extensive workload needed.

although some interesting low-volume spots may have been missed for protein identification, we think that looking at differences between groups in sets of proteins has revealed confirmatory and new intriguing results in an animal model of parkinson's disease. this is in spite of the quantitatively small differences between the treatments. these results would probably not have been found when looking only at single differentially expressed proteins.

the false discovery rate  and significance levels
the issues of significance levels and multiple testing are often revisited in the literature of gene expression, with varying conclusions drawn. in 2d-dige gels, where location and content of spots are unknown before the experiment is carried out, the complexity is further increased compared to gene arrays. a spot/protein originating from the same gene-product may be represented in several positions in the gels due to ptms and artifact spots may also be present. therefore the spots, and hence the tests, may not be considered independent. as a consequence we give little confidence in the determined significance levels or false discovery rates.

to address this problem we derived potential lodsratios cut-off for each comparison through a permutation test. this test can be used as guidance for deriving cut-off levels, especially for studies where only a limited number of spots will be identified. however, we still prefer to see the observed single spot lodsratios solely as rankings of the evidence for changes in protein activity. to detect changes in biological processes for known and well characterized proteins we recommend using methods such as depps which makes use of the whole ranking list.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that there may be substantial intensity and spatial bias in 2d-dige data. the '2d loess+scale' and 'sc-2d+quantile' are the only normalization methods evaluated in this study that sufficiently remove both the intensity and spatial bias.

for direct comparison between two treatments or states we recommend the use of normalized m-values and that the commonly used pool channel  should be used for mapping between gels only.

when more than two treatments or states will be compared the pool channel  may be included in the linear model but this depends on the original study design and comparisons of interest. the three log <dig> intensities of the dyes should then be treated as correlated single channel fixed effects and the replicate gels should be treated as a random factor in the linear model.

different methods correcting the observed significance levels are used for 2d-dige data. we like to stress that the gel spots, and hence the tests, can not be considered as independent measurements. as a consequence we recommend the p-values in significance tests in 2d-dige data to be used as rankings only and that looking at sets of proteins instead of individual proteins generates more accurate and biologically informative results.

using the depps method which is based on sets of proteins; we found that proteins in the striatum that are involved in energy metabolism and tubulin cytoskeleton appear to be affected by the administration of l-dopa in the golden-standard animal model of parkinson's disease.

