BACKGROUND
it is a truism that most if not all species on the planet serve as habitat for one or more microbial symbiont  <cit> . these associations can have ecological outcomes that are beneficial  or deleterious , and as such are among the most important biological interactions on the planet given that they affect everything from general ecosystem health to human disease. however, our understanding of many major facets of the evolutionary and ecological interactions that occur among partners is limited. new molecular tools and a growing genomic perspective are offering the ability to discern nuanced aspects of host:symbiont interactions while identifying genes and pathways involved in regulating host:symbiont relationships  <cit> . here, we employed transcriptomic approaches to elucidate the molecular genetic machinery in operation during re-establishment of an intracellular symbiosis.

the structure and function of coral reefs depends upon trophic interactions that occur between a dinoflagellate symbiont belonging to the diverse lineage referred to as symbiodinium  and a variety of invertebrate and protistan hosts . the algal partners, known colloquially as zooxanthellae, have long been known to be of vital trophic importance to the host . we understand less about the benefits the symbionts receive from the association, though most hypotheses argue that symbiodinium benefit from intracellular residency by gaining access to nutrients that are limiting outside the host . the partnership is arguably the most important ecological interaction that occurs in shallow tropical habitats worldwide because symbiodinium spp. energetically subsidize the entire ecosystem and power calcification processes  <cit>  that generate the topographic complexity of these systems.

many symbiodinium-based symbioses are remarkably sensitive to environmental stressors, notably elevated seawater temperatures . symbionts can be lost from the host through a process known as bleaching, which can have significant deleterious effects on the host  <cit> . there is growing concern among scientists about what the potential disruption of this important symbiosis means for the future of coral reefs . in the face of these concerns, it has become apparent that significant gaps exist in our basic comprehension of the natural dynamics of the symbiodinium:host interaction, and in the degree of cellular and genetic integration among partners. hosts can recover from mild and even massive losses of their symbiont populations, though mortality rates of the hosts increase under both scenarios, especially the latter  <cit> . symbiodinium spp. are also capable of  existence outside of the host, and symbiodinium spp. have planktonic, free-living stages that occur even during non-bleaching events . currently, coral reef biologists have a limited capacity to satisfactorily explain the facultative nature of the symbiotic interaction between symbiodinium and heterotrophic hosts  <cit> . we do not know how facile/labile the symbiotic association between symbiodinium spp. and their host partners is, nor what selective landscapes are in place that favor the observed patterns of partner association. understanding fundamental aspects of symbiont uptake, establishment of intracellular residency, and dynamics behind cellular expulsion will be essential as we attempt to manage the significant environmental changes underway on coral reefs.

as we face warming sea surface temperatures due to human-induced climate change, it has become more pressing to understand the interactions that occur among the partners at the finest molecular genetic levels so that we may better prepare for the ecological realities coral reefs will face. in the broadest terms, we lack a clear understanding of how symbiodinium navigates a potential host’s cellular and molecular genetic machinery so that digestion, detection and expulsion are avoided; we also lack a clear understanding of what role the host might play in permitting intracellular residency. recent advances in molecular and genomic approaches have enhanced our understanding of some of the regulatory operations executed between cnidarian hosts and zooxanthella symbionts . molecular genetic data has failed to identify “symbiosis-specific” genes that regulate the interaction between partners, but instead has found subtle differences in expression patterns that depend on holobiont context. for example, symbiont cladal identity has been shown to play an important role in transcriptomic profiles  <cit> . emphasis has now shifted toward finding the cellular pathways that are modulated such that symbiodinium maintain their position within the host cell or a particular type of tissue .

given that cnidarians are not the only habitable hosts for symbiodinium on coral reefs , we stand to gain insights into nuanced aspects of the entire zooxanthella niche through analysis of non-cnidarian systems . sponges are ecological important members of many marine ecosystems , and their simple body plans affords interesting experimental opportunities  <cit> . they belong to an ancient metazoan lineage that represents one of the earliest branches of the animal lineage  <cit> . sponges use flagellated choanocytes in the choanoderm to propel large volumes of water through an aquiferous system that efficiently remove bacterioplankton and dissolved organic matter while the pinacoderm mediates interaction with the environment  <cit> .

in the work presented here, we took advantage of a suite of molecular tools to explore aspects of the intracellular symbiosis that exists between the caribbean bioeroding sponge cliona varians and its clade g symbiodinium symbionts. sponge: zooxanthella symbioses are especially important given that symbiodinium are predominantly associated with the bioeroding sponges that dissolve calcareous structures , which is a growing concern given co2-driven changes in the ph of seawater  <cit> . non-cnidarian systems also offer some empirical and comparative advantages over cnidarian hosts , and the ability to produce aposymbiotic cell aggregates  that can then be exposed to symbiodinium under precisely controlled conditions). in this context, we present c. varians as a useful tool to better understand the symbiodinium niche sensu lato as well as to achieve a high level of resolution of genetic regulation in sponge:symbiodinium and all intracellular associations.

RESULTS
creation of “aposymbiotic” and “reinfected” tissue
cliona varians forma varians associates with dense populations of clade g symbiodinium <cit> . these sponges can be divorced from their resident symbionts by removing the pinacodermal region of the sponge, which is the site of highest symbiodinium density . the “aposymbiotic” explants can then be reared in light-tight containers supplied with continuously flowing seawater. we were able to maintain “aposymbiotic” tissue of c. varians forma varians for months under these conditions. we discovered we were able to restore the symbiotic condition by exposing “aposymbiotic” explants to recently extracted homologous symbiodinium . explants from “aposymbiotic” tissue were able to take up symbionts, and after 5 days showed signs of reinfection. thus, we were able to identify three types of sponge tissue that had different symbiont states .figure  <dig> 
reinfection process involving
cliona varians
forma
varians
.
symbiodinium were released from recently collected sponges . the dark brown ring that can be seen in the cross-section of the sponge represents the pinacodermal region where symbiodinium reside at high densities. the brown color comes from the symbiont populations. aposymbiotic sponges grown in a light-tight aquarium were inoculated with symbiodinium . these sponges were monitored for several days until signs of reinfection were noticeable at which point a sample was taken for subsequent molecular work .



transcriptome characterization: de novo assembly, blast, and functional annotation
we sequenced transcriptomes from “normal”, “reinfected”, and “aposymbiotic” sponges. each pool of rna used for subsequent sequencing of the three tissue types was derived from at least three different sponge samples, but these were pooled into a single batch for each symbiont state prior to next generation sequencing. thus, the sequences we present below come from non-replicated sequence runs . this caveat becomes important when interpreting the putative differences we observed. we recognize a preferable approach would be to sequence several distinct and independent samples from each symbiont state. however, this was a pilot study to determine the feasibility of using c. varians to study symbiodinium symbioses, and used several approaches ) to assess molecular genetic regulation. at the time we sequenced the transcriptomes, costs associated with sequencing multiple replicates were prohibitive. furthermore, best practices associated with rnaseq experiments were just being developed . nonetheless, the success we achieved in obtaining high quality sequences indicated that the database we present below will be a useful resource for the community as future studies attempt to discern significant differences observed at various stages of the establishment and maintenance of symbiodinium symbioses.

the number of reads obtained from the sequencing platform hiseq for “normal,” “aposymbiotic,” and “reinfected” treatments are shown in table  <dig>  the quality of the reads was highly similar across treatments: most reads with average phred score of  <dig>  gc content from  <dig> to 44%, and the levels of sequence duplication varying only from 81% in “normal” to 89% “reinfected” treatment . before the de novo assembly, between  <dig> million and  <dig> million reads were trimmed in the separate datasets . the number of bases assembled in contiguous sequences  was always over 21 mb. the number of contigs ranged from  <dig>  in “reinfected” to  <dig>  in “normal” treatments with average contig sizes > 400 bp in all cases . the major differences between numbers of contigs in “reinfected” vs “normal” states were due to small contigs . the n <dig> for each treatment was always close to 500 bp . the number of assembled reads and size in megabases of the dataset, as well as the number and size of contigs in all datasets, was similar to recent transcriptomic datasets published from two demosponges  obtained with similar methodologies . transcriptomic sequences were deposited in the ncbi sequence read archive .table  <dig> 
de novo
assembly data from the rna-seq experiments involving the three symbiont treatments “normal,” “reinfected,” and “aposymbiotic”



normal

aposymbiotic

reinfected

reference 
the reference category represents pooled datasets from each of the other three. abbreviations: n, number; bt, before trimming; avg, average; l, length; at, after trimming; max, maximum. for the sequence duplication percentages, the first number refers to the forward reads  and the second to the reverse reads .



for non-model organisms sequenced de novo, it is typical that fewer than 50% of the contigs return hits against the genbank metazoa database when the blast algorithm is employed . for the “reference” dataset ,  <dig>  sequences returned blast hits against metazoa - 12% of those were specifically poriferan; another 15% were to other metazoa . bacteria  and protozoa  were also recovered . symbiodinium sequences recovered included the genes cytochrome oxidase subunit i and cytochrome b , which were assigned to the following taxa: symbiodinium goreaui , s. microadriaticum , protodinium simplex , pelagodinium beii , polarella glacialis , symbiodinium sp. cultured from aiptasia sp. , symbiodinium sp. from acrozoanthus australiae , symbiodinium sp. from palythoa mutuki , and symbiodinium sp. from zoanthus vietnamensis .figure  <dig> 
general characteristics of
cliona varians
transcriptomes. a. percentages of blast hits of the reference transcriptome against porifera, other metazoa, bacteria, and protozoa , using a combined database of metazoa, bacteria, and protozoa. b. hit count obtained from the independent blast searches for contigs of the transcriptomes of each treatment when blast searches were performed against only one database or two .



for each tissue treatment, most contig sequences with hits returned a blast hit against the metazoan database, followed by the bacterial database, and then the protozoan database, with very few contigs obtaining hits against more than one database . the “normal” treatment obtained more blast hits than the other two treatments, whereas the “reinfected” treatment returned the fewest blast hits . this difference in patterns of blast hits could be due to differences in sequence read numbers obtained for the different treatments , which could represent experimental error . alternatively, this pattern could point to an actual molecular genetic response to the onset of symbiosis in the form of global- or chromatin-level gene regulation . for example, symbiont-induced, host-gene suppression may be a feature of the initiation of host:symbiont interactions  <cit> . further data are necessary to test this hypothesis.

given the limited number of genomic and transcriptomic resources available for non-model organisms, gene ontology  term assignment analyses return few annotated sequences, which rarely surpass 10% of the total dataset . of particular interest to this study are the go term assignments showing more sequences derived from the “reinfected” treatment, which might indicate categories of genes involved in acquisition and establishment of symbiodinium populations. several of these categories were identified in our study, and included go terms like metabolic and cellular processes, biological regulation, binding, and intracellular components . a pairwise enrichment analysis of the go terms obtained for each treatment using the metazoa database recovered several significantly enriched terms . among the enriched go terms in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” treatments are organelle , biological regulation, macromolecule catabolic process, cytoplasm, regulation of cellular process, lipid metabolic process , response to chemical stimulus, transport, and protein binding. these categories are targets for future exploration of processes and mechanisms important in host: symbiont interactions. we found that the “reinfected” treatment often contained more bacterial and metazoan go term assignments than the other two treatments . protozoan go term assignments, on the other hand, were usually reduced in “reinfected” tissue . several categories in the metazoan go term assignments showed more sequences derived from the “normal” treatment . go assignments using the bacterial and the protozoan databases showed different trends , but it is not clear how these relate to the presence or absence of symbiodinium populations in c. varians. attempting to discern how these interacting systems influence one another would provide an intriguing line of research, but goes beyond the capacity of the current study.figure  <dig> 
overview of go term assignments in
cliona varians
transcriptomes. a. selected go term assignments in each transcriptomic dataset  when searched against the database metazoa. b. enriched go terms shown in pairwise comparisons between “normal” and “aposymbiotic” treatments, and “normal” and “reinfected” treatments using the correction fdr on the fisher’s exact test  for only metazoan hits. c-d. selected go term assignments in each transcriptomic dataset  when searched against the databases bacteria, and protozoa . in the x-axis of a, c-d, the go terms belonging to the “biological process” category are shown in blue, those belonging to “molecular function” in red, and those to “cellular component” in green.



differential expression analysis
in the differential expression analysis using deseq package  <cit>  for the comparison between “normal” and “aposymbiotic” treatments,  <dig> genes showed significantly different expression values . forty-nine genes showed significantly higher expression in “aposymbiotic” tissue compared to “normal” tissue , while  <dig> genes were at significantly higher levels in “normal” tissue . we found  <dig> genes that showed significantly different levels of expression when “aposymbiotic” and “reinfected” tissues were compared . eighty-six of the genes were at significantly higher levels in “reinfected” tissues  while  <dig> were significantly higher in “aposymbiotic” tissue . while many genes were expressed at different levels in “reinfected” vs. “normal” tissue, deseq analysis revealed no statistically significant differences in expression values.figure  <dig> 
heatmaps and dendrograms comparing the differentially expressed genes between “normal” and “aposymbiotic” treatments  and “aposymbiotic” and “reinfected” treatments . the affiliation of the different contigs showing differential expression to either metazoa, bacteria, protozoa, fungi, and virus is shown in a color-coded bar next to each heatmap.



gene ontology treemaps that display hierarchical data using nested rectangles  reveal that some of the genes expressed at higher levels in the “aposymbiotic” treatment  were particularly interesting in the context of symbiosis . within the broad “cell cycle” category, processes such as cell communication and signaling as well as trans-membrane transport may highlight a response by the host to the presence or absence of a putative symbiont. another notable go category had to do with “protein translation,” broadly defined, and included dbh-like monooxygenase  <dig>  which is involved in the catecholamine metabolic process, and sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase, mitochondrial-like , which encodes an enzyme that oxidizes sulfide to thiosulfate. sqr is a potentially important enzyme because sulfide is produced endogenously in several tissues of marine invertebrates  <cit> , and may be related to sulfide-oxidizing bacteria  <cit> . one explanation could be that the removal of symbiodinium populations in the “aposymbiotic” treatment may have modified other components of the microbial consortia residing in sponges resulting in differential regulation of the host gene expression profile.figure  <dig> 
gene ontology treemaps for the differentially expressed genes  in the “aposymbiotic” treatment in the comparison “normal” vs. “aposymbiotic.” go terms for genes expressed in “aposymbiotic” tissue are shown. the box size correlates to the –log <dig> p-value of the go-term enrichment. boxes with the same color can be grouped together and correspond to the same upper-hierarchy go-term which is found in the middle of each box.



interesting gene ontologies are also revealed when comparing genes expressed at higher levels in “normal” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue  including members of the tnf family , which are important in immune responses . other interesting genes included deleted in malignant brain tumor and niemann pick c <dig> . these genes are discussed further below. it was intriguing that some of the genes that appear at higher frequency in “normal” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue  are involved in “cell adhesion”  chain, basement membrane-specific heparan sulfate proteoglycan core protein-like, and focal adhesion like fibronectin, which is an ecm component that acts as the integrin ligand  <cit> ). this may relate to the movement and re-organization of symbiodinium-bearing cells in mature symbiont populations.

most of the genes that had significantly higher expression levels in “reinfected” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue were involved in the “regulation of cell growth” . for example, astacin  is a metalloprotease involved in cell adhesion and pattern formation by processing extracellular proteins  <cit> . two different transcripts with homology to sarcoplasmic calcium binding protein , which plays a role in calcium sequestration within endomembrane spaces, are interesting given our hypothesis that symbiodinium spp. select hosts based on their ability to provide the dinoflagellate access to calcium stores . we also found that two genes containing the fibrinogen domain were increased in expression in “reinfected” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue ; in invertebrates, the fibrinogen domain has been found to be associated with innate immunology and pathogen intolerance  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
gene ontology treemaps for the differentially expressed genes  in the “reinfected” tissues for “aposymbiotic” vs. “reinfected” treatment comparisons. the box size correlates to the –log <dig> p-value of the go-term enrichment. boxes with the same color can be grouped together and correspond to the same upper-hierarchy go-term which is found in the middle of each box.



the treemaps provided unique insights into some of the patterns observed in our comparison of expression profiles in the different tissue types. the two panels that describe increased levels of expression in “aposymbiotic” tissue  showed very similar patterns in go assignments. the top three categories for each of these comparisons were “cell cycle,” “trna aminoacylation for protein translation,” and “response to bacterium” . some of the remaining categories were also identical . the situation was different for the other two comparisons that involved higher levels of gene expression in the presence of symbiodinium . the differences in go assignments here point to the possibility that different cellular processes are operating in a mature symbioses  compared to an association that is at an earlier stage of re-establishing symbiodinium populations . for example, “regulation of cell growth” was the predominant go signature of genes that showed higher expression in “reinfecting” vs. “aposymbiotic” tissue. this broad category presents a suite of genes that would be worthy of future work to ascertain their importance in the development of a stable symbiodinium symbiosis.

we found interesting patterns in global gene expression patterns among “normal”, “aposymbiotic”, and “reinfected” tissue treatments . while the significant differences observed using the deseq analysis described above are interesting, it is important to recognize that subtle differences in gene expression profiles that do not rise to the level of statistical significance estimated with a methodology like the one implemented in deseq may still play important biological roles in regulating the interaction between partners in this symbiosis. thus, closer inspection of specific go categories provides important perspectives on the interplay that may occur between partners in this sponge: algal association. however, high throughput sequencing generates a large and complicated suite of genes and gene networks to consider, thus it is necessary to reduce the complexity of the dataset and identify testable hypotheses for future experiments. therefore, we examined pathways that might relate to a recent hypothesis that posits that symbiodinium spp. may mimic the phagosome by releasing materials at a rate and of a quality that would be expected from digesting prey thus securing their intracellular position  <cit> . this “arrested phagosome hypothesis ” offers a subtly different perspective on the cellular machinations in operation when symbiodinium take up residency in host cells. if symbiodinium spp. use their photosynthetic capabilities to maintain residence within the intracellular habitat , then we may expect different types of genetic expression profiles than if the host is somehow controlling the association . it is clear, however, that our non-replicated transcriptomes must be interpreted cautiously as trends we observed may not represent statistically significant differences.

the first group we considered included endosome, lysosome, and phagosome processes. for the endosome category we used go: <dig> . for the lysosome category we used go: <dig> . no single phagosome category was available so we used the following terms: phagocytic vesicle , phagosome maturation , phagocytosis, engulfment , phagolysosome , phagosome-lysosome fusion , phagosome acidification , phagocytic vesicle membrane , and early phagosome . this analysis produced  <dig> genes that appeared to be at least two-fold more highly expressed in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue, whereas  <dig> genes appeared to be at least two-fold more highly expressed in “aposymbiotic” tissue compared to “reinfected” tissue. differences between these groups included rab and tnf family genes that were represented two-fold or higher in “reinfected” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue . two groups of genes with several representatives each  appeared to be represented at higher frequencies in “aposymbiotic” but not in “reinfected” tissue . if symbiodinium spp. mimic endosomal structures, as predicted by the aph, the genes identified here are excellent candidates for future work aimed at manipulating expression profiles to pinpoint the cellular components used to gain access to the intracellular habitat. for example, rnai techniques that permit reducing expression levels of particular genes have recently been developed for sponges  and would be applicable to the cliona:symbiodinium association.figure  <dig> 
comparison of “reinfected” versus “aposymbiotic” expression patterns for go categories related to endosome, lysosome, and phagosome function. red bars represent fold differences where genes appeared to be at least two-fold more common in the “reinfected” transcriptome compared to the same genes from the “aposymbiotic” transcriptome. blue bars represent fold differences where genes appeared to be at least two-fold more common in the “aposymbiotic” transcriptome than the same genes found in the “reinfected” transcriptome.



symbiodinium has been shown to energetically subsidize its c. varians host  <cit> . therefore, we examined a proxy for growth to see if any differences between “aposymbiotic” and “reinfected” tissue could be detected. we selected the go category of cell division . twenty-five genes were at least two-fold more highly expressed in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue whereas only  <dig> genes with those values were found in “aposymbiotic” compared to “reinfected” tissues . it is interesting that bcl- <dig> and condensin ii had the highest fold representation in reinfected and aposymbiotic tissue respectively. the bcl- <dig> protein suppresses apoptosis by preventing the activation of caspases. the condensin ii gene orchestrates chromosome condensation and thus helps regulate mitosis. thus, these genes play vital roles in regulating the production of new cells, and the interplay that goes on upon reinfection indicates that the cellular dynamics are complicated. symbiodinium spp. may benefit from the actions of these genes because a greater number of cells  would be available for colonization.figure  <dig> 
comparison of “reinfected” versus “aposymbiotic” expression patterns. a. go categories related to cell division are shown. red bars represent fold differences where genes appeared to be at least two-fold more common in the “reinfected” transcriptome than the same genes in the “aposymbiotic” transcriptome. blue bars represent fold differences where genes appeared to be at least two-fold more common in the “aposymbiotic” transcriptome than in the “reinfected” transcriptome. b. go categories related to generalized stress are shown. colors as in a.



in addition to the positive energetic benefits gained by hosts from their symbionts, symbiodinium partners might also increase physiological stress on their hosts . it is also possible that by inoculating dark-acclimated aposymbiotic c. varians with a large dose of symbionts, and placing them under lighted conditions, we stressed the sponges involved in the reinfection experiments. thus, we assessed generalized stress responses in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue. we identified  <dig> genes involved in response to stress  that were at least two-fold more common in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue . using that same go category, we identified  <dig> genes that were at least two-fold more common in “aposymbiotic” compared to “reinfected” tissue .

suppressive subtractive hybridization
we also employed suppressive subtractive hybridization  technology as an alternative methodology to search for mrna sequences represented in higher abundance in “reinfected” tissue compared with “aposymbiotic” c. varians tissue. we originated ssh before rnaseq technology became feasible for our study so the ssh experiments were not originally designed to complement the rnaseq experiments. however, we subsequently realized that the ssh data provided another avenue to verify some of the patterns we observed in the rnaseq experiments. we sequenced  <dig> clones recovered from our ssh analyses. of these,  <dig> were not used for further analysis because they came from bacterial, protozoan or non-metazoan sources , recovered no significant blast hits , were taxonomically-unaffiliated hypothetical/predicted proteins , or lacked inserts/interpretable sequences . of the remaining  <dig> sequences,  <dig> sequences did not receive strong enough support during blast searches  to assign a gene name with confidence. the remaining  <dig> clone inserts contained some redundancy , but the final  <dig> metazoan orthologs could be confidently identified based on gene orthology . these genes should be expressed at higher levels with “reinfected” tissue, and thus afford an opportunity to independently verify for a subset of genes patterns we observed in the rna-seq experiments.table  <dig> 
results from suppressive subtractive hybridization experiments


blast searches for each isolate  against ncbi database were used to determine gene identity. gene function and go categories were inferred from gene identity.



we tested these genes as a possible validation of expression patterns observed in the transcriptomic datasets. we compared the raw reads obtained from the rna-seq data to each clone identified via ssh , which should come from genes up-regulated in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue. over 80% of the contigs in the transcriptome that aligned with our ssh clones showed a trend of increased expression in “reinfected” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue as expected . none of the ssh genes were expressed at lower levels in “reinfected” tissue compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue. however,  <dig> ssh clones  that corresponded to  <dig> of the ssh genes revealed contig expression patterns that were both higher and lower in “reinfected” compared to “aposymbiotic” tissue. thus, we are unable to confirm that these genes show increased expression upon uptake of symbiodinium . it is important to note, however, that these results are expected given that ssh methods using pcr-select cdna subtraction  have a false positive rate that is caused by the presence of remnant cdnas common to both tester  and driver  samples. we also note that possible false positives in this type of ssh can depend can depend on a variety of factors including rna quality, mrna abundance, and performance of the subtraction. this was, to our knowledge, the first time this technique has been applied to poriferan systems, and we had no other studies to compare our efficiencies. we also validated the differential expression patterns we observed for a subset of the animal-specific clones by rt-pcr followed by gel electrophoresis and/or relative qrt-pcr . of the genes with higher expression values in c. varians upon infection with symbiodinium, we found that several genes that play documented roles in host phagosomes  and host immune responses  were represented . we highlight, however, that any candidate genes identified in this study  should be subjected to rigorous evaluation on a gene-by-gene basis in controlled and natural re-infection experiments with multiple biological replicates, as well as in functional experiments, before their role in symbiodinium-symbioses can be confirmed and delineated.figure  <dig> 
rt-pcr validation of relative  expression differences for representative genes isolated by suppressive subtractive hybridization when comparing mrna from “aposymbiotic” tissue to mrna from “reinfected” tissue . qrt-pcr expression values were normalized to the housekeeping gene ef1a.



field experiments
we were interested in assessing the utility of the c. varians system as a means to examine genetic interactions between host and symbiodinium under field conditions. few studies have correlated gene expression profiles with symbiont population dynamics under ecologically realistic conditions, and we were interested in determining whether we could do this using genes identified above. thus, our natural reinfection experiment may represent a methodological advance in symbiodinium research. cliona varians provides a useful model to study temporal aspects of reinfection dynamics in symbiodinium associations because we demonstrate algal densities and locations can be monitored precisely. we detected very few symbiodinium cells in c. varians tissue during the first 7 days in the field . by the 8th day, we observed a small number of symbiodinium-like cells, and after the 12th day the symbionts repopulated aposymbiotic sponges at a nearly exponential rate . the presence of the algae within the tissue was skewed towards the surface layer after 1 month in the field . after  <dig> d, the symbionts rapidly increased their populations and recovered nearly normal concentrations of symbiodinium by  <dig> d. we typed the symbiodinium populations using 23s rdna sequences  and exclusively found g clade algae . as a test of this experimental system, we correlated gene expression profiles for vacuolar sorting protein and nup <dig>  with symbiodinium population dynamics within the host. we identified interesting temporal patterns in gene expression using qrt-pcr. expression patterns differed for each gene at days  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> . it was particularly intriguing that vacuolar sorting protein had elevated expression near the onset of rapid symbiodinium population growth . this represents the earliest stages of discerning nuanced aspects of host:symbiont integration at the genetic level. additional experiments on other key genes are needed, but our results indicate that the tools are available to precisely describe the nature of the symbiosis at the finest level of genetic resolution.figure  <dig> 
temporal dynamics of
symbiodinium
reinfection of aposymbiotic
cliona varians
tissue in under field conditions. a. cryosections through sponge tissue starting at the pinacodermal  surface of the sponge down through the choanosome. red/orange dots represent symbiodinium cells. scale bar  = 10 μm. b. estimates of symbiodinium density for the time points collected during the reinfection experiment. c. density of symbiodinium as a function of depth within the sponge tissue. d. expression profiles for two genes  as a function of time . y-axis represents the fold change in gene expression relative to time  <dig> with all points normalized to the housekeeping gene ef1α.



CONCLUSIONS
our results add to the growing perspectives on molecular genetic integration between hosts and symbionts in symbiodinium-based associations. this is, however, the first that provides insights into the genetic pathways that appear to be important in poriferan: symbiodinium partnerships. our results indicate that hosts, regardless of taxonomic origin, engage similar cellular and genetic processes in response to intracellular zooxanthella-residency . high-throughput sequencing offers opportunities to generate massive datasets, and we found that comparing the transcriptomic data with results generated through suppressive subtractive hybridization provided an interesting mechanism to validate a portion of our non-replicated rnaseq data. the rna-seq experiments and cross-validation with an independent methodology  provide confidence that we have identified some appropriate candidate genes for future work focused on detailing precise genetic regulation of symbiont and host interactions. however, any differences observed in the present study should be treated cautiously since they come from transcriptomes that were not replicated within treatments. one of our goals was to demonstrate the importance of integrating ecologically-relevant scenarios with insights gained through acquisition of lab-based gene expression data. sponges may be exceptionally useful systems of study in this context. specifically, the temporal variability seen in expression dynamics under natural conditions in the field highlight how nuanced the interaction between the host and symbiont is likely to be, and how much work remains to uncover detailed perspectives on the associations.

through this and related work, it appears possible to identify some common pathways that symbiodinium may co-opt to gain entry and to procure residency in a variety of potential hosts. nonetheless, clear explanatory hypotheses are needed so that we can better understand, and prepare for, changes in the symbiosis that are likely with the rapid shifts in temperature and sea-water chemistry that will accompany global climate change  <cit> . we also require more detailed knowledge of the interaction between symbiotic partners. we argue that sponge: symbiodinium associations add important perspectives on the symbiodinium niche, which will foster greater understanding in other host environments.

