BACKGROUND
aspergillus fumigatus, the most common agent of human and animal aspergillosis, is an opportunistic mould responsible for various infections in receptive hosts, ranging from colonisation of the airways in patients with cystic fibrosis to severe and often fatal disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients  <cit> .

elucidation of the pathogenesis of these infections has been the subject of many scientific investigations over the last few years  <cit> . it has been suggested that numerous fungal components play a role in pathogenesis, including adhesins and hydrophobins, proteases or phospholipases, catalases and superoxide dismutases or non ribosomal peptide synthases involved in the synthesis of hydroxamate-type siderophores . in addition, several virulence factors have been discovered such as gliotoxin, components involved in iron and zinc acquisition or in various signalling pathways, and melanin  <cit> . the latter is synthesized through the dihydroxynaphtalene -melanin pathway  in a. fumigatus. its biosynthesis involves  <dig> genes, organized in a cluster, which are expressed during conidiation. this complex metabolic pathway starts with acetyl-coa and malonyl-coa which are converted by the products of the genes pksp  and ayg <dig> into  <dig> , <dig>  tetrahydroxynaphtalene . then, by successive steps of reduction  and dehydration ,  <dig> , <dig> -thn is in turn converted to  <dig> -dhn, which is finally polymerised by a fungal laccase encoded by the abr <dig> gene. strains with mutations in the pksp/alb <dig> gene were obtained by exposure to uv or by gene disruption and were shown to be less virulent than their parent wild-type strains in murine models of disseminated aspergillosis  <cit> . in vitro experiments showed that melanin protects the conidia from phagocytosis and increases their resistance to reactive oxygen species produced by phagocytic cells  <cit> . however, deletion of the abr <dig> gene in a wild-type strain did not reduce virulence in an intranasal mouse infection model  <cit> .

adherence of microorganisms to the host tissues is considered a crucial step in the initiation of infection. previous studies on a. fumigatus by our group  <cit>  and others  <cit>  suggested that specific interactions involving the recognition of the extra-cellular matrix  component proteins, laminin and fibronectin, could mediate adherence. immunofluorescence studies and scanning or transmission electron microscopy  also suggested that fungal adhesins for the ecm proteins are located on the ornamentations of the cell wall of resting conidia, the agents of infection. therefore, as it had been shown by sem that laboratory strains with mutations in the alb1/pks gene produce smooth-walled conidia, we predicted that melanin also plays an indirect role in pathogenesis, allowing correct assembly of the cell wall layers of resting conidia. in this study, three pigmentless or brownish isolates of clinical or environmental origin, from the bccm/ihem collection , were investigated and compared to two reference strains . after characterisation of the genetic defect of the three mutant isolates and visualisation of the conidial surface by sem, the capacity of their conidia to bind the ecm components laminin and fibronectin was quantified and the physical properties of the conidial surface were investigated. finally, an ultrastructural study of the conidial wall was performed, and the surface of the conidia was analysed by atomic force microscopy .

RESULTS
susceptibility to dihydroxy-naphtalene -melanin inhibitors and characterisation of the genetic defect
to identify which steps of the melanin biosynthesis pathway were affected in mutant isolates, the effect of specific dhn-melanin inhibitors was analysed based on colony colour and radial growth on culture media supplemented with tricyclazole, pyroquilon or fenoxanil. tricyclazole and pyroquilon inhibit hydroxynaphtalene reductase encoded by the arp <dig> gene, while fenoxanil interferes with scytalone dehydratase encoded by the arp <dig> gene . on czapek medium supplemented with  <dig> μg/ml of tricyclazole, pyroquilon or fenoxanil, a. fumigatus cbs  <dig>  and ihem  <dig> developed powdery colonies with pigmentation similar to that of colonies of the brownish isolate ihem  <dig> . the inhibitors had no effect on pigmentless or brownish isolates. the colour of the colonies of these mutant isolates was not affected, nor was their diameter significantly modified in most cases .

experiments were performed in triplicate and results are expressed as mean diameter  of the colonies  after  <dig> hours of incubation at 37°c. *indicates statistically significant difference between control and inhibitor of melanin biosynthesis .

the different genes involved in melanin biosynthesis were then amplified by pcr and sequenced, for each strain or isolate. the data obtained were compared with available sequences in the genbank database . point mutations in alb <dig>  encoding a pentaketide synthase which is involved in the early steps of this metabolic pathway, were identified for pigmentless isolates ihem  <dig> and  <dig> . more precisely, a nonsense mutation was identified for isolate ihem  <dig>  which caused truncation of the enzyme by <dig> amino acid residues at its c-terminus, leading to the loss of the thioesterase/claisen cyclase  domain in particular. a deletion was detected for ihem  <dig>  leading to a shift in the reading frame from the amino acid at position  <dig>  and thus to the loss of an acyl carrier protein  domain and the te/clc domain. the metabolic pathway was blocked at a later step for the brownish isolate ihem  <dig>  sequencing of the different genes showed an insertion in the arp <dig> gene, which encodes a hydroxynaphthalene reductase . this mutation led to a shift in the reading frame after the amino acid at position  <dig>  and consequently to the loss of the dehydrogenase/reductase domain. the missense mutation  found in abr <dig> for ihem  <dig> led to the replacement of a glutamine  by a glutamic acid  at position  <dig>  the effect of this mutation on the protein function is not clear.

                              alb1
                              ayg1
                              arp2
                              arp1
                              abr1
                              abr2
a mutations are described as follow: first letter corresponds to the nucleotide present in the genbank database sequence for the corresponding gene , the number represents the relative position from the start of the reference sequence, and the second letter represents the nucleotide found in the gene sequence for isolates ihem  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig>  the letter x placed after the number indicates a deletion of the corresponding nucleotide, and the same letter placed before the number corresponds to an insertion. the missense mutations found in the different gene sequences are underlined. nonsense mutations, insertions and deletions are in bold type. other mutations correspond to silent mutations. mutations which correspond to polymorphism outside the encoding sequences are not presented here. genbank accession numbers of the corresponding sequences are in brackets.

b mutations shared by the three mutant isolates and the two wild-type strains used as controls. all these mutations were silent, corresponding only to polymorphism, except mutations g1203a  and t5639c  from comparisons to gene sequences available in the genbank database.

evidence for conidiation and visualisation of the conidial surface by scanning electron microscopy
sem observation of cultures of mutant isolates on yeast extract - peptone - dextrose - agar  plates through dialysis membranes showed typical conidial heads, consistent with the powdery texture of their colonies . further examination of the conidia by sem showed, as expected, a typical echinulate surface for reference strains  and smooth-walled conidia for the pigmentless isolates ihem  <dig> and  <dig> . sem also revealed the absence of ornamentations on the conidial surface for the brownish isolate ihem  <dig>  as well as for reference strains cultivated in the presence of pyroquilon .

flow cytometry analysis of laminin and fibronectin binding
the conidial adhesion to laminin and fibronectin was quantified by flow cytometry on conidia from 5-day-old cultures. results showed a slight, but significant, increase in specific binding  of fibronectin at the conidial surface for pigmentless  and brownish  isolates compared to the wild-type strains , associated with a marked decrease in binding of laminin .

results are mean values of the data collected for  <dig>  cells. significance of the difference between two fluorescence frequency distribution histograms was confirmed by statistical analysis using the kolmogorov-smirnoff two sample test.

evaluation of the physical properties of the conidial surface
the conidial cell surface electrostatic charge was assessed by microelectrophoresis with a zetasizer and the cell surface hydrophobicity  was assessed by two-phase partitioning with hexadecane as the hydrocarbon phase or using a two-aqueous phase system. results showed that the electronegative charge of the conidial surface for mutant isolates was much lower than that of the wild-type strains . likewise, two-phase partitioning showed a decrease in csh for conidia of pigmentless or brownish isolates. this decreased hydrophobicity is consistent with the increased wettability observed during the preparation of conidial suspensions.

 <dig> results are expressed as the percentage of conidia that were excluded from the aqueous phase.

 <dig> results are expressed as the ratio between the absorbance of the upper phase  and that of the lower phase 

ultrastructure of the conidial wall visualised by transmission electron microscopy
the conidial wall of reference strains was composed of several superimposed layers, with a thick electron transparent inner layer and two thin electron dense outer layers, the outermost layer being responsible for the ornamentations of the cell wall . however, conidia of mutant isolates, as well as those from reference strains cultivated in the presence of pyroquilon, showed a thinner cell wall devoid of the outermost layer which could sometimes be seen free in the surrounding medium.

visualisation of the hydrophobic rodlet layer by atomic force microscopy
we also investigated the presence of a hydrophobic rodlet layer on the conidial surface, to provide support for our hypothesis. this protein film is usually composed of about 10-nm thick rodlets of varying length organized into bundles or fascicles, in which individual rodlets lie parallel within a single fascicle. conidia from 5-day-old cultures of ihem  <dig>  ihem  <dig> and ihem  <dig> isolates were therefore examined by afm. typical rodlets were detected for the reference strain , whereas the rodlet layer seemed to be lacking in conidia of pigmentless  or brownish  isolates .

discussion
many fungal species produce pigments such as melanin, either from l- <dig> -dihydroxyphenylalanine  or from  <dig> -dihydroxynaphthalene   <cit> . the genes and enzymes involved in these metabolic pathways have been known for many years, but the two types of melanin were only recently related to virulence in phytopathogenic or human pathogenic fungi  <cit> . for example, dhn-melanin provides the rigidity of appressoria, which allow the fungus to penetrate plant leaves, in magnaporthe grisea, the agent responsible for rice blast  <cit> , and in colletotrichum lagenarium, responsible for cucurbits disease  <cit> . the role of melanin in virulence is less well defined in human pathogens such as cryptococcus neoformans  <cit> , paracoccidioides brasiliensis  <cit> , exophiala dermatitidis  <cit>  and sporothrix schenckii  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that this pigment protects the fungal cells especially from reactive oxygen species produced by the host immune defences. brakhage  <cit>  and kwon-chung  <cit>  demonstrated the importance of melanin for a. fumigatus. they generated white mutants either by uv mutagenesis, or by targeted mutagenesis. these mutants produced white colonies and had mutations in the pksp  gene, encoding a polyketide synthase required for conidial pigmentation. they were less virulent than their parent wild-type strains in murine models of disseminated aspergillosis, probably due to an increased susceptibility of their conidia to phagocytosis and reactive oxygen species. however, virulence in mice was not affected by the disruption of the abr <dig> gene which is involved in a later step of the melanin pathway  <cit> .

mutation in the pksp  gene also led to morphological changes of the conidia. indeed, sem showed that these pigmentless mutants produced smooth-walled conidia, whereas the conidia of a. fumigatus have typically a rough surface covered with echinulations  <cit> . the study of mutant isolates of clinical or environmental origin, with defective melanin biosynthesis pathways, suggests that the pigment also plays an indirect role in virulence of a. fumigatus.

sequencing of the genes involved in the melanin biosynthesis pathway showed a genetic defect in the early steps of this pathway for our isolates. this was consistent with the changes in colony colour observed for reference strains grown in the presence of specific dhn-melanin inhibitors. two distinct mutations in the alb <dig> gene were detected for ihem  <dig> and  <dig> isolates, leading to the production of white powdery colonies; whereas the genetic defect was localised in the arp <dig> gene for isolate ihem  <dig>  producing brown, powdery colonies. as expected, sem examination of conidial suspensions from our pigmentless isolates showed a smooth surface. however, a lack of ornamentation was also observed on the conidial surface for the brownish isolate, as well as in reference strains cultivated in the presence of pyroquilon, an inhibitor of the hydroxynaphtalene reductase.

results from flow cytometry experiments confirmed previous work which suggested that the laminin receptors were located on the ornamentations of the conidial wall. scanning or transmission electron microscopy, showed that labelling was associated mainly with protrusions of the cell wall  <cit> . the marked decrease in laminin binding receptors to the surface of conidia of mutant isolates compared to reference strains, together with the smooth-walled appearance of these conidia, strengthens our previous conclusions. previous work  <cit>  also suggested the presence of at least two distinct adherence systems on the conidial surface in a. fumigatus: 1) the recognition of fibronectin from its tripeptide sequence arg-gly-asp by two fungal polypeptides of  <dig> and  <dig> kda, and 2) the binding of laminin and fibrinogen by a 72-kda sialic acid-specific lectin located on the ornamentations of the conidial wall  <cit> . our current results also support this hypothesis, showing a slight increase in the fibronectin binding capacity of mutant isolates compared with reference strains, together with a marked decrease in the binding of laminin to the conidial surface.

the physical properties of the surface of the conidia were also investigated, as they may contribute to host tissue adherence by bringing interacting surfaces closer and mediating their dehydration. we showed that blockage of the melanin biosynthesis pathway resulted in a marked decrease in the electronegative charge of the conidia, a charge which may be due to ionization of free amine and carboxylic acid groups of some surface proteins. a marked decrease in csh was also observed for conidia of mutant isolates when compared to reference strains, which was consistent with the increased wettability of the colonies. this result suggests that blockage of the melanin pathway also led to the lack of some hydrophobic components on the conidial surface. the defect in melanin in a. fumigatus mutant isolates could also contribute to the marked loss of adherence properties of their conidia  <cit> , as melanins are hydrophobic molecules and have a negative charge. youngchim et al.  <cit>  localised melanin in the electron dense outer layer of the cell wall which surrounds the conidia by tem examination of a. fumigatus conidia before and after treatment with enzymes and hot acid. nevertheless, the precise physico-chemical nature of melanin is not well defined and relationships between melanin and other components of the conidial wall, particularly polysaccharides, remain to be clarified  <cit> .

among the components of the conidial wall are small proteins called hydrophobins which have been described in a large variety of filamentous fungi including a. fumigatus  <cit> . hydrophobins share some common properties. these moderately hydrophobic proteins are secreted into the environment by the fungus and they remain in a soluble form when the fungus is cultivated in a liquid medium. however, at an air-liquid interface , they assemble in about 10-nm thick rodlets organised in bundles or fascicles on the conidial surface, forming a hydrophobic rodlet layer which may be visualised by afm.afm examination of the conidial surface showed that this rodlet layer was lacking in mutant isolates whereas typical rodlets were seen on conidia of the tested reference strain. immunofluorescence or flow cytometry using specific anti-hydrophobin antibodies should be performed to determine whether or not hydrophobins are totally lacking at the conidial surface or simply not organised into a rodlet layer.

conidia of a. fumigatus may germinate on contact with water. previous studies showed major changes in the ultrastructure of the conidial wall during the first stage  of germination. in addition to a marked increase in cell size and the vacuolisation of the cytoplasm, tem examination of swollen conidia showed changes in the cell wall which became thinner, probably due to the progressive detachment of the outermost cell wall layer  <cit> . conidia of mutant isolates and of reference strains were also examined by sem and afm using laminin-coated glass coverslips applied to the centre of sporulating cultures. these experiments confirmed the smooth surface of the conidia of mutant isolates and showed the lack of rodlets at their surface. however, this study was conducted on clinical or environmental isolates with defective dhn-melanin pathways and no isogenic wild-type isolates were available as controls, so other mutations, besides those identified in the melanin pathway may have been responsible for phenotypic changes other than colony colour. nevertheless, the role of melanin in the organisation of the conidial wall was established, because cultivation of reference strains in a medium containing dhn-inhibitors including pyroquilon led to smooth-walled conidia devoid of the outermost electron-dense layer.

CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrated that, as suggested by franzen et al. for fonsecaea pedrosoi  <cit> , melanin is required for correct assembly of the different layers of the conidial wall in a. fumigatus and, therefore, for the expression of adhesins and other virulence factors at the conidial surface. due to the complete lack of laminin binding at the surface of their conidia, these pigmentless isolates may be valuable tools in the characterisation of fungal receptors. comparative studies of the proteins of these isolates and of reference strains are now being undertaken using 2d-electrophoresis.

