BACKGROUND
molecular cross talk has recently been referred to as a dance of seduction that encompasses various tissues, cells and effector molecules
 <cit> . this dance particularly holds true for the host-pathogen dynamic at the intestinal epithelium interface
 <cit> . one common stratagem that intestinal pathogens utilize is to take advantage of or misdirect normal cell-to-cell cross talk that occurs between the intestinal epithelium and subepithelial dome  macrophages
 <cit> .

few studies focus on epithelium-mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis  interactions and go beyond map translocation through m cells due to the lack of in vitro and animal models that recapitulate pathogenesis
 <cit> . therefore, the majority of host-map studies center on the macrophage in part due to the intracellular lifestyle of pathogenic mycobacteria and the designation of enterocytes as bystander cells 
 <cit> . however, we and others have shown that the epithelium plays an active role during early infection with map and that epithelium processing of map may greatly contribute to the course of infection. epithelium processing and interaction with bovine mammary epithelial cells , a surrogate for the intestinal epithelium, results in enhanced phagocytosis during secondary infection
 <cit> . changes to invasion phenotype due to epithelial processing are also seen with m. smegmatis, a saprophytic mycobacteria that is nonpathogenic
 <cit> . m. smegmatis exposed to a <dig> epithelial cells had a significant increase in intracellular growth during secondary infection in thp- <dig> macrophages
 <cit> . epithelium processing of map may also impact which repertoire of pathogen genes are used during infection to promote its survival in its target cell, the macrophage. for example, map invasion into madin-darby bovine kidney  cells, another surrogate cell type for the intestinal epithelium, upregulated an oxidoreductase  to regulate the cdc <dig> pathway
 <cit> . the cdc <dig> pathway is also regulated by other pathogens to form filopodia and cytoskeleton rearrangement
 <cit> . we have shown that map transcriptional profiles isolated and enriched from the ileum  and mesenteric lymph nodes  from naturally infected cattle are significantly divergent from straight macrophage infection
 <cit> . a number of reasons for this exists which includes 1) epithelial processing of map and 2) cross talk between the epithelium and macrophage. for instance, cross talk between the epithelium and macrophage results in the downregulation of pathogen recognition receptors , which creates an inflammation anergic state in intestinal macrophages and may impact which genes are needed by map to survive
 <cit> . more recently, we have elucidated a mechanism for map orchestrated macrophage transepithelial migration that is reliant on phagosome maturation concomitant with il-1β production at the epithelial interface during early infection
 <cit> . taken together these data suggest that map’s first interaction within the host at the intestinal epithelium interface is a dynamic process that can be harnessed by the pathogen to achieve survival and dissemination within the macrophage. this interaction is unnoticed in in vitro macrophage models alone and it is likely that the map encountered by sed and lamina propria macrophages shows an entirely different transcriptional and proteomic profiles. consequently, reported studies utilizing macrophage infection models are suspected to underestimate both host and map responses.

in order to bridge the knowledge gap between pathogen processing by various cell types and multiple layers of cross talk, a host-pathogen interactome must be established
 <cit> . based on our previous study using the epithelium/macrophage co-culture system during map infection, we expect that elucidation of the early molecular events resultant from multiple layers of cross talk is critical to understanding pathogen establishment and survival within the host. host pathways involved during infection are expected to be influenced by cell-to-cell crosstalk and release of extrinsic factors. map processed by the epithelium prior to macrophage infection may utilize a different set of genes in comparison to macrophage infection a priori. this is the first study to show that pathways involved during early stages of map infection are influenced by pathogen processing by the epithelium and cell-to-cell cross talk. these results show an active role of the epithelium in establishment of map infection, which augments our knowledge of map pathogenesis as well as sheds light on pathways for disruption in novel vaccine designs.

RESULTS
infection under co-culture of different types of cells will reveal both the cell cross-talk and the host and pathogen interaction. in this study, macrophages and mac-t cells were cultured alone or together in a transwell system and subjected to map infection at  <dig> min. post-infection, which allowed for epithelium processing of map as well as multiple layers of cross-talk . rna-seq was conducted on mac-t, macrophages alone, or co-culture, with or without map infection. a total of  <dig> , <dig> pair 76-base sequence reads were generated from  <dig> host samples and passed the quality check. more than 80% of reads were mapped on bovine reference genome.  <dig> , <dig> pair 76-base sequence reads were generated from  <dig> infected and bacterial-enriched samples and approximately 15% of these reads were mapped on map reference genome.

extrinsic factors released by macrophages inhibit cellular growth to prevent cell death in mac-t cells under co-culture conditions
contrary to the long-held assumption of the epithelium acting as a bystander in microbial infection, we have shown that pathogen invasion at the epithelium interface is a dynamic process that results in macrophage recruitment to the infection site in an epithelium/macrophage co-culture system, which may aid in pathogen establishment and survival
 <cit> . macrophage recruitment is most likely influenced by the type of host cell map first encounters and extrinsic factors secreted during cell to cell cross-talk . rna-seq and ingenuity pathway analysis  analyses identified  <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed genes, respectively, that were either mapped to functional networks or to canonical pathways, in mac-t cells grown under co-culture conditions in comparison to mac-t cells cultured alone . the  <dig> genes were categorized into cellular and molecular functions, which identified macrophage influence on functions related to cell growth and proliferation, cell development, protein synthesis, cellular movement and cell death . nine genes from the host  were selected for qt-rt-pcr validation . qt-rt-pcr fold changes were compared against those obtained from rna-seq and the correlation coefficient  was calculated . the r <dig> was  <dig> , indicating a strong correlation between rna-seq and qt-rt-pcr data . the majority of ipa mapped genes were downregulated in comparison to mac-t cells cultured alone and were placed into networks involving 1) protein synthesis and cell cycle, 2) assembly and organization, cellular function and maintenance, nucleic acid metabolism, 3) cancer, dermatological diseases and conditions and lymphoid tissue structure and development and 4) cell cycle, cell morphology, and cellular assembly and organization . top canonical pathways  were downregulated and encompassed neuregulin, insulin- <dig> growth factor , hepatocyte growth factor , and interleukin- <dig>  signaling pathways . downregulation of the listed canonical pathways are involved in the cessation of cell growth and inflammation. for example, activation of the neuregulin signaling pathway produces molecules that function as mitogens, differentiation agents and transforming agents in epithelial cells 
 <cit> . also, the igf- <dig> signaling pathway induces cell growth and survival via atypical protein kinase c  
 <cit> . again, cell growth is also a major function of the hgf pathway 
 <cit> . the il- <dig> signaling pathway, which promotes inflammation, is likely downregulated as tolerance has been achieved within mac-t cells 
 <cit> .

co-cultured macrophages are characterized by an immune tolerant phenotype reminiscent of subepithelium dome  macrophages
six-hundred two genes were differentially expressed between co-culture vs. macrophage alone by rna-seq, and  <dig> of them were mapped by ipa . genes were categorized by biological and molecular functions, which included cellular function and maintenance, cellular movement, cell morphology, cell-to-cell communication, and antigen presentation . like co-cultured mac-t cells, the majority of genes identified in macrophages under co-cultured conditions were downregulated compared to macrophages cultured alone. downregulation of genes associated with antigen presentation suggest establishment of tolerance in macrophages
 <cit> . this is further strengthened by decreased expression in 1) inflammatory disease, 2) molecular transport, and 3) infectious disease . in addition, inflammatory pathways, such as interferon signaling, were downregulated . these data suggest that mac-t cell extrinsic factors promote a tolerant phenotype that is characteristic of sed and lamina propria macrophages. similar to macrophages co-cultured with mac-t cells, laminia propria macrophages do not produce inflammatory cytokines such as il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α. tolerance is also achieved within mac-t cells due to extrinisic factors released during co-culture with macrophages, which is reflective of the intestinal epithelium. these data suggest that the mac-t cell/macrophage co-culture system may serve as an in vitro model for the intestinal epithelium to study map-host interactions. future studies should include further characterizations of co-cultured macrophages including the presence of macrosialin  and response to tlr angonists.


with
 extrinsic factors from macrophages 


with
 extrinsic factors from mac-t cells 

and
 extrinsic factors from macrophages 

and
 extrinsic factors from mac-t cells 



 and map infection 

mac-t cells infected with map downregulate complement receptor and have enhanced interferon activity
five hundred and forty-seven genes  were differentially expressed in mac-t cells infected with map in contrast to  <dig> genes  found in infected mac-t cells under co-cultured conditions . separate biological functions used by infected co-cultured mac-t cells included protein folding and post-translational modification in contrast to infected mac-t cells alone which contained cell death function . the majority of upregulated genes under co-cultured conditions were involved in cellular growth and proliferation  and dna replication, recombination and repair in individual cell type culture . canonical pathway analysis revealed genes involved in prr and interferon signaling under co-culture . prr signaling was limited to the complement receptor, which was downregulated in response to map infection . several reports indicate that complement receptor is used by pathogenic mycobacteria to gain entry into host cells; however, these studies focused on mycobacteria-macrophage interaction only
 <cit> . it is possible that map uses an alternative entry route as genes associated with complement were also not upregulated in infected mac-t cells cultured alone when compared to the uninfected control. map may downregulate the complement receptor in mac-t cells co-cultured with macrophages in order to avoid immune recognition and potential clearance, which may occur due to the increased gene activity in co-cultured mac-t cells compared to single cell type culture . as opposed to a pathogen driven mechanism, the host may downregulate the complement receptor in order to prevent map invasion. in order to determine which scenario is correct a study utilizing multiple complement blocking strategies will be necessary. a common host mechanism employed under co-culture and single cell type culture conditions during map infection is the upregulation of genes found in the interferon signaling pathway . infected co-cultured mac-t cells upregulated 2′-5′-oligoadenylate , myxovirus resistance- <dig>  and interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats  <dig>  . map infected mac-t cells alone also upregulated oas- <dig>  mx <dig> and ifit3; however, the host cell had increased expression of signal transducers and activators of transcription  and interferon regulatory factor  <dig>  genes . 2′5′- oligoadenylate synthestase  <dig> , a double stranded rna  binding protein, is commonly associated with an antiviral response, which is characterized by downstream interferon  signaling. like dsrna viruses, map may capitalize on oas- <dig> manipulation in order to evade the host innate immune response. for example, nuclear oligomerization domain  <dig> , a cytoplasmic pathogen recognition receptor that detects muramyl dipeptide , binds to oas- <dig> to enhance rnase-l, an antiviral endoribonuclease, activity and subsequent ifn production
 <cit> . ifn production has been linked with control of mycobacterial dissemination
 <cit> . interestingly, nod <dig> has recently been recognized as a prr for rna viruses and rnase-l has been reported to be involved in clearance of intracellular bacteria
 <cit> . dampening of the nod2-oas- <dig> pathway may represent a universal mechanism in intracellular pathogen survival by innate immune evasion. stat- <dig> is also linked to ifn production and its impairment leads to disseminated disease
 <cit> . together these data suggest that initial infection is marked by a check and balance system in which map downregulates the complement receptor to prevent immune recognition and the host upregulates the interferon pathway to clear map.

co-cultured macrophages infected with map upregulate the complement receptor to promote map entrance
four hundred and eighty-eight genes  were identified in map infected macrophages cultured alone versus  <dig> differentially expressed genes in map infected co-cultured macrophages  . the majority of assigned biological functions were common to both culture conditions . however, antigen presentation and cell morphology functions were restricted to co-cultured conditions while cellular movement was associated with single cell type culture . the cell death network was mostly downregulated in co-cultured macrophages in response to map infection in contrast to upregulation of cell-to-cell signaling and interaction . unlike map infected co-cultured mac-t cells, co-cultured macrophages upregulated the complement receptor, c1q, in response to map infection . this suggests that once map orchestrates its exit from mac-t cells, it preferentially utilizes the complement receptor for its own uptake into macrophages.

liver x receptor/ retinoid x receptor  activation pathway was identified in map infected macrophages cultured alone . the lxr/rxr activation was shown to contribute to host protection against m. tuberculosis infection as determined by bacterial burden
 <cit> . lxr/rxr protection may be due to its downstream proteins including nitric oxide synthetase- <dig> , interleukin 1-beta  and matrix metallopeptidase  <dig> , which are all upregulated in infected macrophages .

map residing in mac-t cells rebuilds its cell wall
comparisons of map transcripts during mac-t cell infection to those in macrophage infection identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes . network analysis confirmed the presence of suga and sugc, genes from an operon predicted to be involved in carbohydrate utilization from the host, and uspc, a lipid anchor associated with the uspabc operon that also plays a role in carbohydrate transport 
 <cit> . the sugabc operon, an abc transporter, is best characterized in m. tuberculosis and is composed of a periplasmic sugar binding protein that forms a lipid anchor , a transmembrane protein  and a terminal atp-binding cytoplasmic protein . it was previously thought that sugabc served to transport maltose or matodextrins; however, edson had shown that both m. tuberculosis and m. smegmatis were incapable of growth when supplied with maltose as the sole carbon source
 <cit> . the literature also indicates that host carbohydrate utilization by pathogenic mycobacteria is unlikely as the phagosome is carbohydrate poor and that host lipids provide the critical carbon and energy sources for growth
 <cit> . it is likely that the stage of infection may determine carbohydrate availability within the phagosome. for example, schnappinger et al. state that “there is no one phagosome” and transcriptomic profiles change concomitantly with time. in the study performed by schnappinger et al., rna was collected from intraphagosomal mycobacteria at  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> h post infection as opposed to an earlier time point, such as this study, representing initial infection, which may impact carbohydrate availability
 <cit> . going beyond host carbohydrate metabolism, mycobacterial sugar transport systems have been implicated in virulence since transposon mutants of sugar transporters have a growth defect in macrophage and mice models
 <cit> . recently, kalscheuer et al. has shown a novel role for lpqy-suga-sugb-sugc in cell wall maintenance via disaccharide trehalose retrograde recycling
 <cit> . kalscheuer et al. demonstrated specific binding of lpqy to trehalose and subsequent uptake into the sugabc transporter. in the newly devised sugar transporter model, trehalose-containing molecules  are released during cell wall biosynthesis and are processed by mycolyl transferases from the antigen  <dig> complex, which result in the incorporation of the tmm mycolyl moiety to arabinogalacton  for cell wall building. this process also yields the formation of trehalose dimycolate  and trehalose; trehalose is capable of binding onto lpqy, which initiates trehalose transport into the cell’s cytoplasm via sugabc
 <cit> . once inside the cytoplasm trehalose may interact with mycolic acids by an unknown mechanism to produce tmm that is exported into the extracellular milieu to re-start the cycle
 <cit> . the authors suggest that trehalose recycling may be necessary to maintain sugars for mycolic acid biosynthesis and as an alternative carbon source
 <cit> . we hypothesize that the map sugar transport system also serves a similar function as described for the m. tuberculosis lpqy-suga-sugb-sugc pathway. both map and m. tuberculosis operons are identically organized; however, our network lacks lpq and sugb . although present in our map gene data sets, sugb was not considered for analysis as its p-value at  <dig>  was not statistically significant . as mentioned above, the map sugar transport network includes uspc, which serves the same function as lpqy in the uspabc operon. protein blast comparisons show that uspc and lpqy are 67% identical, share bacterial extracellular solute-binding protein motifs, and have a predicted function as periplasmic solute binding lipoproteins. we suggest that uspc may also be used in the sugabc pathway as a tm binding protein . further investigations into the map sugabc operon will elucidate the importance of trehalose-recycling in virulence and determine if uspc may functionally replace lpqy. furthermore, sugabc may provide a novel therapeutic target for pathogenic mycobacteria as trehalose and trehalose uptake systems are not present in mammals, which may reduce drug side-effects that are commonly associated with current chemotherapeutics.

infected co-cultured mac-t cells 

 vs. uninfected mac-t cells 


infected co-cultured macrophages 

 vs. uninfected macrophages 

 <cit> .

beta-oxidation is a universal map pathway in mac-t cells and macrophages under co-culture and single cell type conditions
network comparisons against known map pathways found in kegg mapped several map genes to the beta-oxidation pathway regardless of cell type and co-culture status . the beta-oxidation pathway is utilized by mycobacteria to oxidize fatty acids as a sole carbon source in order produce acetyl-coa, which enters into the tricarboxylic acid cycle , to replicate
 <cit> . fadd , fade  and echa genes  were found to be upregulated by map in mac-t cells under single cell type culture conditions . the map profile in infected macrophages  identified one fadd  gene and one fade gene , indicating that beta-oxidation has just initiated within macrophages . comparisons of infected co-cultured mac-t cells against infected mac-t cells, identified additional fade gene , enoyl hydratases , and a transcriptional regulator  .

map undergoes translesion synthesis and double stranded break repair to insure its survival within nitrosative mac-t cells
two hundred and fifty-one differentially regulated map genes were uncovered in mac-t co-cultured vs. macrophage co-cultured comparisons . further analysis identified a major network pertaining to map replication . the first characterized network gene, map3179c, was determined to function as a universal stress response gene that when bound to chromosomal dna, initiates the sos response . further examination of the network indicated that map3179c became activated due to nitric oxide sensing within the bacterial cell. 
 <cit> . the presence of no is suspected to result in dna damage. map2835c has an upstream sos binding box and like map3179c is activated due to nitric oxide buildup; therefore, dna replication is likely inhibited by a yet to be identified mechanism until dna repair can be accomplished
 <cit> . map likely overcomes the stall in dna replication by employing a) double strand break repair and b) translesion synthesis . mapping of network genes onto the double strand break repair pathway for map within kegg showed map <dig> and map <dig> involvement. map <dig> is responsible for dissolving the holliday junction after 5′ to ′ <dig> resection and map <dig> forms a primosome to resume dna replication . it is possible that prolonged cell exposure to no may cause some dna bases to become irreparable
 <cit> . based on our network analysis this appears to be the case; therefore, map conceivably employs translesion synthesis  . tls is a damage tolerance pathway that allows a cell to replicate past dna lesions and distortions by using an error-prone or lesion bypass polymerases
 <cit> . this process is expected to follow the tool belt hypothesis, which has been shown in e. coli and m. tuberculosis <cit> . map3487c  contains a β-clamp motif that enables recruitment and rapid interchange of replication machinery proteins pertaining to dna repair and lesion bypass polymerases  at the replication fork
 <cit>  . along with resuming dna replication, mutations will be inserted into the nascent strand. the implications of this are unclear. nitric oxide may also interact with map2833c, which contains a nitrobindin binding domain that reversibly binds to nitric oxide, and cause further deleterious buildup within the cell
 <cit> . the network implicates the involvement of map <dig>  a predicted glutathione reductase based on the presence of a pyridine nucleotide-disulphide oxidoreductase domain, as a source to defuse nitric oxide . enzymes containing the pyridine nucleotide-disulphide oxidoreductase domain have been shown to protect cells from oxidative damage
 <cit> . map3296c, also referred to as whib <dig>  is present within the network. whib <dig> from m. tuberculosis is involved in the transcription of antibiotic resistance programs including those for tetracycline, macrolide, lincosamide and aminoglycoside resistance
 <cit> . in our model, whib <dig> is activated in the presence of a reducing environment caused by map <dig>  whib <dig> interacts with map <dig>  a potential antibiotic resistance protein, and map2674c, an antibiotic biosynthesis monooxygenase . also, we show that map2835c, which contains a lysm  and closely resembles the cell wall hydrolase, rv2719c, of m. tuberculosis, is upregulated. map2835c is hypothesized to have a role in maintenance of cell wall division despite the presence of dna damaging agents
 <cit> . these data suggest that map encounters a dynamic host environment that contains nitric oxide. map overcomes dna damage and stops in replication by employing double strand break repair and tls. this hostile environment also creates an opportunity for map to activate antibiotic resistance genes. this network has illustrated a number of potential targets for therapeutic design, including imub and whib <dig> . further research involving mutation and deletion of the above genes will be required to validate the tls pathway.
 <cit> . however, mce genes are structurally similar to abc transporters and are also thought to play a role in lipid or other molecule import into the cell
 <cit> . the mce network is composed of map <dig> , an abc transporter and permease, and map2113c and map <dig>  mce related genes that belong to the mce <dig> and mce <dig> <cit> . the network suggests that although identified genes do not belong to the same operon that they may function together as a potential abc import system. we hypothesize that map2113c and map <dig> function as lipid binding domains and are either 1) tethered to the cell membrane via a lipid anchor or 2) inserts into map <dig> . once a lipid, possibly host derived, binds onto either map2113c or map <dig> and is transferred to map <dig> and is subsequently imported into the cell where it can be utilized for energy conversion .

nickel/dipeptide utilization is also accomplished through an abc transporter system. in this model, dppa binds nickel/dipeptide in the extracellular milieu and transfers it to the permease, dppc . dppd_ <dig> and dppd_ <dig> represent terminal molecules in the system and drives nickel/dipeptide into the cell . pathogenic mycobacteria have developed numerous systems for the importation and sensing of nickel as it is involved in cell growth and homeostasis
 <cit> .

defining the dance of seduction: the host-map interactome
in order to link host biological processes to pathogen responses, we examined all differentially expressed genes from host and pathogen  and conducted a k-clustering analysis to determine correlations in expression. the k-clustering analysis identified  <dig> host genes that shared a similar pattern profile with  <dig> map genes . host expression profiles were dependent upon co-culture status . host genes were categorized into gene ontology  biological processes using david software . the majority of go processes upregulated in mac-t cells were related to cell maintenance  while downregulated processes included the immune response and signal transduction regulation  . in contrast to differentially expressed go biological process in mac-t cells, macrophages showed upregulation of pathways involved in pathogen elimination and host preservation  and downregulation of immune responses primarily associated with 2′5′ oligoadenylate synthetase and major histocompatibility class  <dig>  related proteins . map genes identified by k-cluster analysis were organized into cluster of orthologous groups  . as expected, the majority of differentially regulated genes were categorized as an unknown function  due to the large number of hypothetical genes within the map k- <dig> genome
 <cit> . other functional groups of interest included defense mechanism, replication, recombination and repair, secondary metabolites biosynthesis, energy production and conversion, and lipid transport and metabolism . cog identification indicates that initial infection is characterized by a pathogen program specific for map establishment within the host as defined by bacterial replication in face of strenuous host immune and defense responses.

the  <dig> map genes constitute two significant networks . network  <dig> is composed of  <dig> upregulated genes, map <dig>  map1913c, and map <dig>  in mac-t cells and macrophages . predicted functions involve sensory transduction regulation  and endonuclease activity for homing activity . map1913c does not contain any known structural motifs and is declared as a gene of unknown function. map <dig> resembles ybjn, a sensory transduction regulator and orphan gene found in escherichia coli <cit> . ybjn has been show to play a role in cell motility, aggregation, exopolysaccharide production, and biofilm production
 <cit> . these functions are dependent upon ybjn expression as overexpression of ybjn reduced the above processes
 <cit> . however, upregulation of ybjn activated the sos response pathway
 <cit> . homing endonucleases, like map <dig>  are highly-specific dna cleaving enzymes that initiate double-stranded break repair
 <cit> . increased expression of map <dig> and map <dig> indicates a hostile host environment characterized by oxidative and nitrosative stresses, which is further supported by double-stranded break repair via map <dig> and map <dig> as well as translesion repair synthesis described in the mac-t cell comparison to macrophages under co-culture conditions . this mechanism is most likely used as a survival strategy for pathogen genome stability in face of a strenuous host response
 <cit> .

network  <dig> was composed of an operon  and a neighboring gene  that were transcribed in opposite directions and suspected in iron regulation . iron is utilized by intracellular bacteria in redox reactions, electron transport, replication and other essential functions
 <cit> . due to iron limitation within the host , pathogenic mycobacteria have developed several strategies for iron sequestration and storage
 <cit> . a critical iron acquisition mechanism is the synthesis and transport of siderophores , which include mycobactin  and carboxymycobactin 
 <cit> . all genes in network  <dig> were found to be upregulated in both cell types . however, co-cultured macrophages showed a decrease in transcription compared to macrophages cultured alone. reduced map transcriptional activity within co-cultured macrophages may be due to dampening host responses caused by mac-t cell extrinsic factors. map3734c-3736c and map <dig> are designated as hypothetical genes; however, domain and motif searches determined that map3734c- 3736c form an abc-type multidrug transport system and map <dig> has a proline-proline -glutamate  domain. map3734c-3736c belong to the large sequence polymorphism  <dig>  and contain nucleotide binding walker a , walker b , and abc transporter signature motifs  at the c-terminal end
 <cit> . also, map3735c has an n-terminal siderophore binding domain  that resembles substrate binding domains of siderophore uptake systems, such as the ferric enterobactin transport atp-binding protein, fepc
 <cit> . furthermore, map3735c and map3736c are predicted to form a heterodimer that is composed of  <dig> transmembrane segments in contrast to map3734c that forms  <dig> transmembrane segments. blast comparisons and reference to the tuberculist database server  listed rv <dig>  and rv <dig>  as orthologs to map3734c-map3736c. rv <dig> and rv <dig> were first reported to be repressed in the presence of iron by the direct regulation of the iron dependent regulator  and later identified as an abc transport system involved in iron acquisition
 <cit> . rodriguez and smith showed that mutants of rv <dig> and rv <dig>  a and b, respectively) failed to replicate efficiently in vitro under iron-deficient conditions, in thp- <dig> cells, and inside the lungs of c57/b <dig> mice
 <cit> . rodriguez and smith reasoned that irta and b may be involved in mycobactin synthesis; however, the irta mutant and irtab double mutant strains produced equivalent amounts of mycobactin compared to the wild-type strain
 <cit> . although irtab was determined not to be involved in mycobactin synthesis, the growth defect was linked to the inability of the irtab mutant to utilize iron bound carboxymycobactin 
 <cit> . irta and irtb involvement in fe-cmyco utilization is further supported by a study conducted by farhana et al., which elucidated the irtab iron trafficking mechanism utilizing recombinant irta and irtb packaged into liposomes and irta and irtb knock out mutants in m. smegmatis <cit> . according to the model proposed by farhana et al., irtab functions as a novel carboxymycobactin cytoplasmic exporter-importer system, in which newly synthesized, non-ferrated carboxymycobactin binds specifically onto the irta sbd and is exported into the extracellular milieu to sequester fe3+ <cit> . farhana et al. show that fe-cmyco binds to an ider independent siderophore interacting protein, rv2895c, found on the cytoplasmic membrane that forms a two-component importer with irtb
 <cit> . in addition to fe-cmyco utilization, the irtab carboxymycobactin importer-exporter system may prevent toxic siderophore buildup inside the bacterial cell. based on the farhana model, map3734c-map3736c functions as a carboxymycobactin importer-exporter system that is activated due to iron limitation within the host . map3734c forms a heterodimer with map3735c and exports non-ferrated carboxymycobactin into the extracellular milleu, where the siderophore may sequester iron. fe-cmyco is transported back into the cell by map3736c and is subsequently used for processes requiring iron . it is important to note that we did not find map2960c, the equivalent of rv2895c, within network  <dig> nor in the listed map interactome genes. recently the farhana model has been brought into question due to the exclusion of confirmatory experiments such as, testing recombinant irtb proteoliposomes for siderophore export and recombinant irta proteoliposomes for siderophore import, characterization of protein topology within liposomes, and creation of irta and irtb knock out mutants in m. tuberculosis <cit> . rather than functioning as a carboxymycobactin importer-exporter system, ryndak and others propose that irtab forms one abc transporter necessary for fe-carboxymycobactin and iron assimilation via ferric iron reduction
 <cit> . in the study performed by ryndak et al., the amino terminus domain was shown to contain a fad-binding domain and when mutated abrogated irtab function and iron utilization
 <cit> . the authors suggest that the farhana model may be reflective of m. smegmatis only and has limited translation to m. tuberculosis <cit> . furthermore, ryndak et al. state that the positive chrome azure s  assay from farhana et al. is most likely due to exochelin, which composes the majority of secreted siderophores by m. smegmatis, and not fe-carboxymycobactin
 <cit> . under the ryndak model, map3734c-map3736c forms a single abc transporter and the irta fad binding domain functions after fe-carboxymycobactin translocation . the fad binding domain of irta  binds flavin, which is reduced by nadh and dissociates and serves as a ferric reductase and is sustained by a “ping-pong” mechanism h and then reducing complexed fe3+) . due to study design concerns from the farhana et al. model and failure to identify map2960c, we propose that the correct iron assimilation pathway for map is likely the ryndak et al. model. in addition to map3734c-map3736c, we have identified map <dig>  a ppe related gene, within the iron network . research performed by rodriguez et al. showed that genes from the pe/ppe family are upregulated during iron limitation and repressed by ider in m. tuberculosis <cit> . structural studies by strong et al. suggest the ppe proteins may serve as signal transduction molecules as they resemble the cytoplasmic domain of the serine chemotaxis domain 
 <cit> . the tsr cytoplasmic domain functions as a multidomain protein capable of sensing extracellular signals, which are transmitted into the cell via a phosphorylation cascade
 <cit> . furthermore, we have identified upregulation of nitric oxide synthtase  <dig>  by host cells, which created a nitrosative environment that has been shown to enhance iron-scavenging programs in m. tuberculosis <cit> . upregulation of nos- <dig> may promote map3734c-3736c expression due to map <dig> sensing, which would activate the iron uptake system . the map3734c-3736c iron assimilation models  argue that mycobactin is not required for iron uptake from fe-cmyco. this is further strengthened by the growth of m. tuberculosis mbtb mutant controls, which do not synthesize mycobactin or carboxymycobactin but have an intact irtab system, when provided with exogenous fe-cmyco
 <cit> . this may also explain successful map replication inside macrophages and mycobactin independence in some map laboratory strains cultured in vitro  despite a truncation in the ente domain of, the first gene in the mycobactin biosynthesis gene cluster
 <cit> . it is also important to note that in vitro cultivation of isolated map from feces and tissue samples require medium supplementation by mycobactin; therefore, the possibility remains that map3734c-3736c activity may depend upon cues provided by the host cell, such as nitric oxide, or multiple in vitro passages within the laboratory
 <cit> . similarly, map3734c-3736c may also be employed during a specific stage in infection as iron from fe-cmyco transfer to mycobactins in the cell surface has been reported, albeit in an in vitro setting only
 <cit> . this model contradicts the hypothesized loss of function of mbta  described by li et al.. however, it is important to note that the consequences of the ente truncation in mbta have not been validated by functional studies, including those replacing the mbta gene with a completed version. interestingly, barclay et al. have described mycobactin independence  and subsequent mycobactin synthesis in map and m. avium after multiple rounds of in vitro subculture
 <cit> . barclay et al. showed that the synthesized mycobactin was structurally different than supplemented mycobactin using high-pressure liquid chromatography
 <cit> . the potential remains that the mbta truncation results in reduced function rather than an entire loss of function. we propose that map3734c-3736c and map <dig> may play an important role during initial infection as a previous study conducted by our group reported the downregulation of this operon in intestinal tissues collected from subclinical jd positive cows
 <cit> . the discrepancy between the two studies is likely reflective of infection stage as the map transcriptome from tissues were found largely to be downregulated, which is characteristic of a “hunkered-down” phase associated with subclinical/latent infection as opposed to initial infection where multiple genes are employed for pathogen establishment
 <cit> . creation of map3734c-map3736c deletions will be necessary to assign a definitive role to this operon and which model best represents this operon as well as determine if infection stage may impact its activity. to our knowledge, this is the first study to show irtab  employment by map as well as in a co-culture model of infection. these data provide further support that irtab is a functional iron assimilation system used by slow-growing mycobacteria during infection.
 <cit> . b)map3734c-3736c forms a homodimer and transport fe-cmyco inside the map cell. once fe-cmyco is inside, the fad-binding domain of irta  becomes activated and binds to flavin, which accepts electrons from nadh. this allows flavin reductase to function as an iron reductase. reduction of fe3+ to fe2+ dissociates iron from carboxymycobatin so it can be utilized by map.

CONCLUSIONS
we established a primary macrophage cell culture reminiscent of macrophages found within the lamina propria. we profiled both host and map transcriptomes simultaneously using massively parallel ultradeep sequencing technology. contrary to the reported literature, map infection inside the epithelium is a dynamic process that involves immune dysregulation  as well as mycolic acid building and dna repair by map. we propose that the epithelium serves as a pathogen “boot camp” that trains map for efficient long-term survival within the macrophage phagosome. this epithelium “boot camp” for map has for the first time been shown as an interactome of initial map infection. we have uncovered an iron assimilation system linked to nos- <dig> activity by the host, which is unrecognized in map research. creation of the interactome has created previously unknown map pathways and identified multiple targets for potential therapeutics as well as data that can be subsequently used for hypothesis-driven research.

