BACKGROUND
the homeostatic architecture of the skin is maintained by a tightly regulated balance between proliferation and differentiation, which occurs continuously as the skin self-renews. in adult skin, growth potential is focused into a minor subpopulation of stem and progenitor cells, some located in hair follicles and others in sebaceous glands  <cit> . these have been shown to be particularly important to wound healing  <cit>  and also to the regenerative cycle of the hair follicle  <cit> . the growth potential of interfollicular keratinocytes resides in the progenitor population within the basal layer  <cit> . these cells are distributed into developmental fields, which divide laterally to become rapidly expanding transit amplifying cells, and differentiate after detachment from the basal lamina, migrating up into the stratified suprabasal layers of the skin  <cit> .

recently, some of the soluble factors that control progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation have been identified. ectopic activation of the wnt signaling pathway, in particular, has been shown to promote progenitor dysfunction in skin, as it does for other lineages  <cit> . thus, transgenic mice engineered to have gain of function of wnt signaling in basal keratinocytes, showed de novo hair follicle morphogenesis, follicular hyperplasia and tumors  <cit> . the canonical wnt signaling pathway  is indeed highly oncogenic for a number of mammalian lineages, and there is gathering evidence that the underlying mechanism is the misregulation of stem cell compartments. while the role of wnt signaling in follicular keratinocytes has been well established, its function in interfollicular keratinocyte regulation is unknown.

wnt ligand expression  has been observed in interfollicular skin  <cit>  , together with a number of the other components of the wnt signaling pathway, implying that this pathway may be involved in normal morphogenesis. here, we tested the effect of mis-expression of the canonical wnt ligand, wnt <dig>  on development of an organotypic culture model of interfollicular skin.

our interfollicular organotypic culture model is based on a cell line that arose spontaneously from human foreskin keratinocytes . these cells replicate all aspects of differentiation in vivo, and are used therapeutically for grafting to human patients. they differentiate normally in culture as well, and resemble the pattern typical of primary keratinocyte cultures. niks are non-tumorigenic and have a stable, near-diploid karyotype  <cit> . they grow in monolayer culture as undifferentiated, highly proliferative cells, but when transferred to organotypic culture on collagen gels containing human fibroblasts, they stratify, closely resembling their epidermal counterpart in vivo. every molecular marker so far tested shows normal expression.

our results were surprising. unlike the proliferative response of follicular stem cells to ectopic wnt signaling in vivo, interfollicular progenitor cells were induced to exit from the proliferative compartment and undergo terminal differentiation, suggesting that the response to wnt signaling is highly dependent upon the keratinocyte cell context.

RESULTS
cultured human keratinocytes transduced with wnt <dig> show reduced proliferation and an increase in cell size
monolayer cultures of niks keratinocytes were transduced with either a wnt1-ires-lacz retrovirus or a control virus, ires-lacz. approximately 85% of niks cells were infected . both wnt1-ires-lacz and ires-lacz transduced niks cell lines were expanded for eight passages. prior to each experiment, the percentage of lacz-expressing cells was re-assessed and found to be approximately constant. we measured the effect of wnt <dig> expression on the proliferative capacity of keratinocyte monolayers, and found that it was reduced by 50% . in monolayer culture, keratinocytes undergo an attenuated differentiation program, generating a heterogeneous culture population that contains small, actively dividing cells, together with a proportion of large, terminally differentiated cells. in cultures of keratinocytes transduced with wnt1-ires-lacz, there were many more large cells . we quantified the area of transduced cells, and observed that there was a  <dig> fold increase in very large cells .

specific induction of tcf-βcatenin-dependent transactivation in response to ectopic wnt signaling was measured using the canonical top-flash reporter. . to evaluate the induction of top-flash expression in niks cells, cultures were treated with soluble wnt3a . these cultures showed a 2× increase in wnt reporter expression. this was reduced by co-expression of the canonical wnt pathway inhibitor, dkk <dig> . transactivation of top-flash was increased in cell strains constitutively expressing wnt- <dig> from the viral expression vector  compared to control virus  .

thus wnt <dig> expression results in decreased cell proliferation and increased cell size, and suggests that wnt signaling affects the balance between proliferation and differentiation. to test this proposal more rigorously, we transferred the cells to organotypic culture.

interfollicular epidermis generated from wnt1-ires-lacz keratinocyte populations shows precocious thickening of the stratum corneum and depletion of nucleated cells from the basal layer
wnt1-ires-lacz and control ires-lacz niks cells were seeded at equal cell density onto dermal equivalents. niks cultures proliferate to form a continuous sheet of cells, and at confluence, cells begin to stratify as they undergo differentiation. after  <dig> days, control cultures had organized into a stratified epidermis, and cornification proceeded for several weeks thereafter). epidermal tissue generated from wnt 1-ires-lacz keratinocyte populations exhibited a thickened stratum corneum  relative to control ires-lacz keratinocytes at all time points . to test whether the hyperkeratotic layers were expressing differentiated molecular markers, we confirmed that the suprabasal layers of differentiating cultures of wnt1-lacz-niks cells were filaggrin-positive .

the basal layer of the wnt 1-ires-lacz epidermis became progressively more orthokeratotic or enucleated over the course of  <dig> days. cells in wnt- <dig> expressing organotypic culture showed an elongated, flat morphology compared to normal cells .

we determined the proportion of dividing basal cells in wnt1-expressing cultures by immunostaining for the m phase cell cycle marker ki <dig>  over the course of  <dig> days, control cultures show a decrease in ki67-positive nuclei . in wnt1-expressing cultures, the mitotic index was reduced by 50% on day  <dig>  and this was reduced to almost zero after  <dig> days . thus, after  <dig> month in culture, there was very little growth activity in cultures expressing wnt <dig> 

wnt <dig> expressing-cells are progressively excluded from the dividing basal layer
we assessed the distribution of lacz-expressing cells in organotypic cultures from control ires-lacz and wnt1-ires-lacz cultures. whereas the control cultures maintained a constant majority of lacz-positive cells during the culture period , the wnt1-expressing cultures showed a 75% reduction of lacz-positive cells in the basal layer over the course of  <dig> days . this loss of lacz expression spread upwards into the suprabasal layers as the culture matured, suggesting that wnt1-expressing basal cells were eliminated from the tissue over time.

wnt-induced growth inhibition and stratification is reversed by dkk <dig>  a canonical wnt signaling inhibitor
the canonical, β-catenin-tcf wnt transactivation pathway is specifically inhibited by the extracellular, soluble inhibitor, dkk <dig>  <cit> . we added dkk <dig> to keratinocyte cultures in order to test whether the canonical wnt pathway was responsible for the observed growth inhibition and precocious differentiation. morphologically, the hyperkeratosis was rescued in large part by the addition of soluble, recombinant dkk <dig> to the cultures , and this was confirmed by counting the proportion of ki67-positive basal nuclei . thus, we implicate the canonical activity of wnt <dig> as an important regulator of the choice of basal cells to proliferate or differentiate.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
canonical wnt ligands are expressed in normal human interfollicular skin  <cit>  , suggesting that this pathway may be used normally to regulate the maturation of the keratinocyte lineage during growth and differentiation. it is known that gain- or loss-of function of this pathway has profound effects on growth and differentiation for stem and progenitor cells in hair follicles and sebaceous glands in transgenic mice. thus, in  transgenic mice  there was an increase in folliculogenesis, and ectopic proliferation of cells in stem cell compartments, leading eventually to tumor development  <cit> . expression of Δn-lef <dig> induced cysts and sebaceous tumors  <cit> . subtle manipulations in vivo have revealed that wnt signaling reduces the threshold for activation of follicular stem cell division  <cit> . these authors propose that the stem cell niche has a powerful inhibitory function, maintaining stem cell quiescence, and wnt signaling overcomes this signal to initiate tissue growth.

epidermal stem cells  are able to differentiate along any of the epidermal lineages , given the correct microenvironment  <cit> . misregulation of one stem cell compartment tends to generate complex phenotypes in the other lineages. since there is no unambiguous way to dissociate the activity of the follicular and interfollicular compartments in transgenic mice  <cit> , we have used an organotypic culture model of interfollicular skin to isolate the effects of wnt signaling upon the interfollicular keratinocytes.

we have shown that the ectopic expression of the canonical wnt signaling pathway shifts the balance of division and differentiation for interfollicular progenitor cells away from cell division towards precocious differentiation. if our culture model were accurate, we would predict that inhibition of wnt signaling in basal cells of transgenic mice should increase growth and reduce differentiation. indeed, hyperproliferation of interfollicular skin was observed in mice expressing the dominant negative transactivation inhibitor, Δn-lef <dig>  <cit> . similarly, transgenic mice expressing tcf <dig>  showed decreased expression of filaggrin and loricrin within the interfollicular epidermis  <cit> . we propose therefore that this culture model can be used to accurately model of interfollicular development.

the outcomes of wnt signaling are known to be highly context-dependent. here we show that although wnt signaling has previously been shown to promote proliferation of follicular stem cells, it induces the differentiation of interfollicular progenitors. wnt signaling is a classic morphogenic pathway known to regulate cell fate choices and differentiation during developmental processes  <cit> , for example those associated with imaginal disc formation. thus, in ommatidial development, wnt signaling is used early during specification, and later to promote differentiation and apoptosis of peripheral retinal cells  <cit> . within mammalian lineages, wnt signaling has been shown to be key to opposite cellular growth/differentiation choices  <cit> . wnt signaling promotes hematopoietic stem cell proliferation, and is used again later in the lineage to promote t cell differentiation  <cit> . similarly, wnt signaling promotes intestinal crypt stem cell division and accumulation, and later in the lineage induces maturation of paneth cells  <cit> . gain of function of wnt signaling in neural crest cells generates sensory neurons at the expense of all other lineages, re-specifying cell fate and promoting differentiation  <cit> .

organotypic keratinocyte culture establishes a balance between basal cell renewal and differentiation resulting in the continued accumulation of fully differentiated squames in the stratum corneum over time. upon transplantation of fully stratified organotypic cultures to athymic mice, the balance between basal cell renewal and differentiation becomes further normalized, supporting long term renewal of the interfollicular epidermis  <cit> . these early studies coupled with our findings suggest that basal progenitor compartment is maintained in organotypic keratinocyte cultures. applying the paradigm derived from other differentiating lineages, we suggest that ectopic wnt signaling accelerates the exit of cells from the basal progenitor compartment, rapidly reducing stem cell activity. we conclude that this organotypic culture model could be used to screen for molecular candidates that regulate the interfollicular stem/progenitors cell niche, a niche that maintains the renewal potential of skin.

