BACKGROUND
in recent years, different groups have shown the existence of rna editing in different species , and more recently the possibility of the presence of the so-called rna chimeras  <cit> . these are transcripts that contain fragments from independent rna molecules. rna chimeras may arise from chromosome translocations, as found in eukaryotes, where they often play a role as transforming oncogenes . furthermore, mrna chimeras can also arise as product of transcriptional or post-transcriptional events. examples in the archaeal domain are trnas that are composed of pieces transcribed from different regions of the genome . also in eukaryotes, several reports have suggested the presence of rna chimeras that are not the result of chromosome rearrangement in eukaryotes  <cit> . this implies the existence of mechanisms for end joining of independent rna transcripts and, if true, could point out to new hidden complexity. spliceosome-mediated trans-splicing has been suggested to be one possible mechanism for rna chimera formation in eukaryotes  <cit> . another proposed mechanism for the formation of fusion transcripts is intergenic splicing. this occurs when transcription fails to terminate at a transcription termination site and therefore the nascent transcript is extended until the termination site of the next gene. the resulting bicistronic transcript is processed to obtain a mature rna formed by exons from two adjacent genes, and these chimeras are often regarded as readthrough chimeras or transcription-induced chimeras  <cit> . some recent studies have shown that these chimeras that do not result from chromosomal translocations are translated and may encode for novel functions inside the cell  <cit> .

several computational approaches have been developed for the detection of chimeric transcripts in rna-seq data . although all of these computational methods show good sensitivity, true identification of chimeric transcripts could be hampered by experimental artifacts. indeed, there are reports that indicate that artifactual chimeras could be generated in the rna sample preparation for deep-sequencing  <cit> . multiple factors, including pairwise sequence identity between rrna genes, number of pcr cycles, and relative abundance of gene-specific pcr templates have been shown to influence chimera formation  <cit> . furthermore, the rapid changes in these cutting-edge technologies demand fast adaptation, limiting the time for proper optimization of library preparation protocols, as well as of the software tools used to analyze the results. thus, it is important to carefully select the mapping software according to the structure of the rna-seq data under analysis. some algorithms, as fusionmap  <cit> , chimerascan  <cit>  and tophat fusion  <cit>  apply different filters in order to validate real chimeric rnas. for instance, tophat fusion  <cit>  considers the total number of reads that cover a given fusion transcript and the read distribution around the chimeric junction, as well as the number of unique reads spanning each junction. it also applies different filters for rna polymerase read-through  and minimum anchor length at each side of the junction. chimerascan  <cit>  introduces other filters such as the pe mates distance regarding the junction site, and the isoform fraction of the chimera respect to the genes that are forming it. fusionmap  <cit>  also considers read quality in order to discard artifactual chimeras arising from read mismapping.

here, we want to determine if prokaryotic rna chimeras exist and to what extent they may be the result of artifact generation both in the library preparation protocols and the analysis methods. to do so we chose two bacteria belonging to gram negative  and gram positive  classes. both genomes are fully sequenced  <cit>  and in the case of m. pneumoniae, aside from being very small  a genome-wide transcriptome analysis is available  <cit> . to control for potential artifacts in sample preparation we mixed p. aeruginosa and m. pneumoniae at different stages of the rna extraction and preparation, and performed rna-seq of the isolated and mixed samples. we analyzed two widely used protocols for library preparation  and truseq stranded rnaseq , see methods) to study the impact of these protocols on chimera formation. both protocols are widely used in the analysis of eukaryotic and prokaryotic transcriptomes. whilst the first one is mainly used for small rnas in eukaryotes, such as sirnas or micrornas, the second is mostly used for mrna sequencing . regarding bacteria, both methods have been used for total rna library preparation  <cit> . to analyze the data, we used fusionmap  <cit> , chimerascan  <cit>  and tophat-fusion  <cit>   as well as a customized pipeline designed to filter out artifacts.

our analysis detected large numbers of putative chimeric rnas that were revealed to be artifacts generated during library preparation protocols, using widely accepted sequencing methodologies. also, we found that the methodology used for sequence analysis could result in different non-real chimeras identified. therefore, care should be taken with the selection of a sequencing protocol and software for the analysis when annotating fusion transcripts in different organisms.

RESULTS
sequence mapping
to analyze the origin of chimeric rnas and to discern if they are artifacts derived of library preparation or natural chimeric rnas, we prepared different samples by mixing rna of m. pneumoniae and p. aeruginosa at different ratios , as well as non-mixed samples. mixing was done immediately after rna extraction. another sample was obtained by mixing the cells of both bacteria prior to rna extraction . libraries were prepared using the directional rna-seq library protocol . we used two alternative short read mappers: gem-mapper and bowtie  <cit> . with gem-mapper the sequences were mapped individually as single-end  reads without considering the associated mates, while bowtie was used to map paired-end  mates and calculate the insert lengths in between both mates . in both cases it was requested that the reads mapped uniquely to a single position in the genome. it has been previously reported that in pe sequencing a small percentage of second mate reads are not correctly assigned to their corresponding first mate read. this will lead to the obtaining of artifactual chimeras  <cit> . in contrast to the previous methods, we used se reads in the first step of the analysis to identify the junction of putative chimeric rnas. then, we applied pe mapping to validate the candidates for the study of putative chimeric rnas in all the samples previously described, by supporting the reads that spanned the chimeric rna junction. both se and pe reads were used to validate the chimeric candidates, and several filtering steps were applied in order to discard potential artifacts arising from the different steps of library preparation protocols.figure  <dig> 
pipeline of the rnaseq data analysis. two complementary approaches have been integrated to analyze the putative chimeric rnas: i) mapping pair end mates as single end by using gem-mapper and ii) mapping pair ends individually as single ends using bowtie. after the two complementary mapping strategies there is a validation procedure that integrates three steps: i) determination of confidential scores that consider the levels of expression of the genes that originate the chimeric rna; ii) filter by unique reads that considers the number of different reads that represent the chimeric junction and iii) filter by staircase profile that select for those chimeric variants that show a homogenous distribution of counts for the different reads that cover the junction.



deep sequencing analysis of m. pneumoniae and p. aeruginosa samples in the rna mix samples showed a significant number of chimeric candidates , the majority of them involving trnas and rrnas in both species , as well as a significant proportion of circular rnas . we also identified a small percentage  of chimeric mrnas. however, we found that the second orf was kept in frame in around 33% of the mrna chimeras, as expected by chance, for inter- and intra-species mrna chimeras, thus indicating random fusion events.

in the rna mix experiment at a ratio 1: <dig> we found around 30% of m. pneumoniae chimeras, 50% of p. aeruginosa and 20% with rnas from both species . assuming no biases towards the formation of chimeras intra- and inter-species, we calculated the expected percentage of chimeras of each class in the experiments corresponding to the different mixtures of rna. in this regard, it is worth considering that while m. pneumoniae has one rrna operon and  <dig> trnas, p. aeruginosa has four rrna operons and  <dig> trnas. for this purpose we considered the total number of fully mapped reads of each bacterium per sample. data analysis showed that the percentage of chimeras in which the two parts corresponded to only m. pneumoniae, or the two species was similar to what was expected by chance . in the case of p. aeruginosa there could be a higher proportion of observed chimeras than expected. in the cell mix sample, there were initially many more p. aeruginosa cells than m. pneumoniae cells, based on the number of reads that fully mapped each species. thus, both the expected and observed values for the chimeras of p. aeruginosa are much higher than in the rna mix samples, in which the proportion of rna was favoring m. pneumoniae .figure  <dig> 
identification of putative chimeric rnas. a) histograms show, from left to right, the percentage of different chimeric rnas  obtained after single end rnaseq data analysis of the samples obtained by mixing rnas in the different ratios . grey columns indicate the percentage of expected chimeras calculated by considering the total number of reads of each species per sample and red columns indicated the percentage of obtained chimeric rnas after rnaseq data analysis b) histograms obtained after analyzing rna-seq data by pair end. the data is represented following the same criteria than described for panel a.



all these results indicate that most chimeras observed are artifacts of the library preparation. for instance, a phenomenon named ‘template switching’ , consisting in an exchange of templates of the reverse transcriptase, has been reported to occur whenever duplicated sequences are close to the junction site  <cit> .

filtering criteria to discern in between real versus artifactual chimeric rnas
the initial analysis of the rna-seq data described above revealed the need to create an objective criterion to discern between artifactual or real chimeric rnas.

first, different filters were applied to the preliminary sets of se and pe candidates to discard the potential artifacts previously reported  <cit> . for example, to remove the ‘template switching’ effect  <cit> , all the se candidates that presented duplicated sequences of more than  <dig> nucleotides at both sides of the junction were discarded as likely reverse transcription artifacts during the process of library preparation. then, we grouped all se candidates spanning the exact same junction site. in fact, a vast majority of chimeric candidates  was supported by only one read and were thus discarded.

second, we considered the expression levels of the genes located at both sides of the junction. the expression values were calculated based on the fully mapped reads from the rnaseq datasets. the reason for considering expression levels is the fact that in m. pneumoniae, there is a good correlation between the expression of a gene and the number of chimeric fragments that map inside that gene  . this correlation is much lower in p. aeruginosa . the reason behind the poor correlation in p. aeruginosa, is the high abundance of ribosomal rna in the samples , which results in lower deep sequencing coverage . therefore, to find a true chimera, the number of reads supporting the junction has to be significant compared to the expression of the genes forming the chimera. this issue was assessed via two confidence scores . these scores relate the number of reads of a chimeric rna to its expression. the least expressed gene comprising the chimera was chosen to evaluate the expression, as the limiting factor for its formation. figure 3b represents the distribution of the scores for the 1: <dig> rna mixture sample.figure  <dig> 
validation of putative chimeric rnas. a)
relation between levels of expression and number of chimeras. the graph represents the number of chimeric reads per gene versus gene expression levels for m. pneumoniae  and p. aeruginosa . sample obtained after mixing rna of m. pneumoniae and p. aeruginosa in a ratio 1: <dig>  b)
representation of putative chimeric rnas in m. pneumoniae after validation filters. black dots represent the  <dig>  initial candidates. grey dots, putative chimeric rnas after filtering by Ωse and Ωpe scores . pink dots, candidates after applying staircase filter . dark red dots,the putative chimerias obtained after applying the unique reads filter . c) representation of a “box-pattern” profile of the reads corresponding to a m. pneumoniae chimeria comprising two regions of the rrna. grey arrow represents the genomic regions of m. pneumoniae and blue and black arrows, the junction positions in the pileup of the sequenced reads. d)
representation of reads for an artificial chimeric rna result of ligation of trna of m. pneumoniae and rrna of p. areuginosa. arrows represent the genomic regions of m. pneumoniae  and p. aeruginosa . blue and black arrows indicate the positions of the junction in the genome and in the pileup of the sequenced reads. e)
staircase profile can be observed for the different reads that cover the junction of the chimeric rna in p. aeruginosa. dark red arrow represents the genome region that codes for the rna. blue and black arrows indicate the positions of the junction in the genome. f)
representation of reads for a putative chimeric rna in m. pneumoniae. grey arrow represents the genome region that codes for the rna. blue and black arrows, the junction positions in the pileup of sequenced reads.



additionally, it has been proposed that the pattern of the reads covering the junction may reveal the existence of possible false positive chimeras arising from pcr artifacts or errors in the mapping process  <cit> . if all reads covering a junction are identical, i.e. mapping to the exact same positions, and thus they show a box-like pattern when the coverage of the junction is represented , this chimeric rna is likely to be an artifact. contrarily, if the reads spanning the junction are distributed along the chimera and show a staircase-like pattern , the chimera can be assumed to be real  <cit> . we followed two criteria that allowed us to distinguish in between these two patterns. first of all, we considered the number of unique reads  that spanned each junction. we related this number to the total reads that mapped to that junction. furthermore, we required that the distribution of the reads covering the same junction was uniform and thus showing a staircase pattern . this second criteria was added when a mixed pattern was found to occur in the false positive set of chimeras m. pneumoniae:p. aeruginosa. in this third case a staircase-like shape is also observed, but here, one unique read likely coming from a pcr artifact is responsible for more than 50% of the total observed read counts . figure 3b depicts the chimeras passing the different filtering criteria established, representing the Ωse and Ωpe scores.

in order to determine which threshold to use for each of the filters applied, we used the 1: <dig> rna mixture sample and we divided the fusion transcript candidates into two groups, one formed by inter-species chimeras  and another formed by intra-species chimeras. we tested different sets of parameters and used the ones that were able to eliminate the inter-species chimeras in the final set of results. with this approach, in the end we were able to obtain a set of  <dig> p. aeruginosa fusion transcripts in the 1: <dig> rna mixture sample that passed all the thresholds. all of these rnas represent a circular rna formed in the 23s rrna. no chimeric rnas were found in m. pneumoniae in this sample.

we applied the filtering with these same thresholds to the remaining samples. it was observed that in the rna mixtures 1: <dig> and 1: <dig>  in which the p. aeruginosa rna concentration decreased, no chimeras appeared from this species and only few chimeras of m. pneumoniae were found. all putative chimeras found after the filtering are represented in figure  <dig> figure  <dig> 
putative chimeric rnas in
m. pneumoniae
and
p. aeruginosa
. a)
circos plot representing chimeric rnas in the genome of
m. pneumoniae. rectangles represent a zoom of the genomic region indicated with a black arrow. these regions correspond to the two parts that compound the different chimeric rnas described in additional file 2: table s <dig> . red arrows in the rectangles indicate genes and lines in circos plot indicate connections between genomic regions. b)
secondary structure of m. pneumoniae rna species. upper part of the panel shows the predicted secondary structure of a putative chimeric rna of m. pneumoniae  obtained by clc workbench program. lower panel shows an example of the secondary structure for the mpnch <dig>  a circular rna of m. pneumoniae. in both representations the junction is indicated with a red arrow and second part of the chimeric rna is shadowed in blue. complementary regions are connected with black lines. c)
circular rna of p. aeruginosa. circular rna corresponding to the results described in additional file 2: table s <dig>  red arrow indicates 23s rrna gene, blue and black lines indicate the genome positions of the first and second regions of the circular molecule, respectively. circular graph is a schematic representation of the obtained molecule. d)
secondary structure of the 23s rrna chimera found in p. aeruginosa. the junction is indicated with a red arrow and second part of the chimeric rna is shadowed in blue. complementary regions are connected with black lines.



analysis by other software tools
after performing strand specific paired-end rna-seq  <cit> , sequencing data was analyzed by three different software tools aimed to detect fusion transcripts in eukaryotic rna-seq data: fusionmap  <cit> , chimerascan  <cit>  and tophat fusion  <cit> . all these three pipelines were applied using the specified default parameters except for the maximal intron length. as no introns are present in bacterial transcriptomes, this distance was minimized in the analysis, in order to find chimeras regardless the distance in between the two parts forming them. after applying each of these pipelines to the 1: <dig> rna mixture dataset, we observed large discrepancies among the results. the number of chimeras detected by the different pipelines varied largely . whereas tophat fusion found up to  <dig> chimeric rnas in this sample, which were grouped into  <dig> sets according to their genomic location, chimerascan and fusionmap found more than  <dig> fusion transcripts each, and ours only  <dig>  but grouped in one unique set according to their genomic location . furthermore, the three methods interrogated found chimeras formed by transcripts different than rrnas and trnas, the most abundant ones in bacterial genomes. whereas tophat fusion found  <dig> fusion transcripts formed by protein-coding or non-coding rnas , fusionmap found  <dig>  and chimerascan found  <dig> . interestingly, as shown in the case of the 1: <dig> rna mixture of both bacteria, not a single common fusion transcript was found by all three methods . also, all different pipelines  found inter-species chimeras, providing proof of the presence of false positives in the results . these results should be regarded with caution since the three used methods were developed for analysis of eukaryotic and not prokaryotic rnaseq data.

avoiding hodgepodge in rna-seq data
the fact that some chimeras passed all the established thresholds does not imply that they are real rna chimeras. in fact, no coincidences were found among the different protocols used to analyze the data . furthermore, chimeras found in m. pneumoniae were only derived from rrnas and trnas, the most abundant species. however, they were not found randomly within these molecules, but they appeared to be formed in between certain ‘hotspots’ . we observed that in many cases, these ‘hotspots’ corresponded to regions that showed base-pair complementarity . in the case of p. aeruginosa the only rna species that passed all filters using our custom pipeline in the different rna-seq experiments is a circular form of the 23s rrna  and there are 10 bps in both sides of the junction with exact base-pair complementarity . therefore, we hypothesized that the strong secondary structure of the native molecules prevents their fully denaturalization during sample preparation using the directional rna-seq library preparation method . thus, after shearing the rna molecules by sonication, the fragments that kept hybridized could remain close in the space, favoring their ligation in the following step of the library preparation.

to test if double-stranded rna could be behind the observed chimeras we used a different protocol  to prepare the libraries for deep sequencing of the m. pneumoniae unmixed rna sample . in this protocol, cdna is synthesized before the adapter ligation, and therefore the secondary structure of these molecules is removed . after sequencing the sample prepared with this second protocol, we observed that the number of initially non-mapped reads to the reference genome decreased dramatically . after performing the analysis and filtering previously described, the number of chimera candidates decreased to  <dig>  and no chimeric reads were found in the final filtering steps . also, when applying the three different published pipelines stated above, no chimeras were found in any of them . all these data taken together suggests that the truseq stranded rna-seq is the most accurate protocol to avoid artifacts in the library preparation and the described pipeline allows the filtering of artifactual chimeric rnas. directional rna-seq is widely used for microrna library preparation in eukaryotes and rnaseq in prokaryotes, which could lead to identification of non-real chimeras and/or underestimation of the expression levels of some genes.figure  <dig> 
comparison between different methodologies to prepare rna-seq libraries. a) schematic representation of the directional rna-seq and truseq stranded rna-seq protocols. b) histogram representing the percentage of reads that do not map against m. pneumoniae genome in the different protocols used to prepare rna-seq libraries. c) the inverted pyramids indicate the different number of chimeric rnas obtained in the consecutive steps of sample validation for both protocols of library preparation.



CONCLUSIONS
nowadays, rna-seq is becoming one of the most used approaches for transcriptome profiling. different studies using this methodology have suggested the existence of chimeric rnas and circular rrnas in different organisms. we showed that these rnas could be artifacts generated during library preparation, and that they are protocol-dependent. we compared two different protocols for rna-seq library preparation and observed that theyled to very different results in terms of reported chimeric rnas. moreover, different sequence analysis methodologies including ours don’t eliminate all non-real chimeras. therefore, care should be taken when selecting a protocol for library preparation and sequencing, as well as a pipeline for the analysis of the results.

