BACKGROUND
there is an urgent need for the development of novel antimicrobial agents to counter the increasing problem of multiply resistant strains of staphylococcus aureus  <cit> . a first step in the development of new classes of antibiotic is the identification of potential targets within the pathogen genome. priority targets are genes and gene products that are important for bacterial survival and growth  <cit> . several methods of identifying such "essential" genes are described in a recent volume  <cit> . the most rigorous method is the systematic construction of defined knockout mutants across the whole genome. this has been applied to bacillus subtilis  <cit> , with essential genes defined as those for which a mutant could not be obtained, in many cases being verified by conditional-lethal constructs. however this process is time-consuming and expensive.

an alternative is the use of transposon mutagenesis to generate a library of random mutants. in general, no transposons will be present within essential genes, since the presence of an intragenic transposon will disrupt gene function. the transposon insertion sites can be determined through the use of a transposon-specific primer to amplify the dna flanking the transposon by pcr. if the library is saturated with a large number of transposon insertions, then essential genes can be identified by genetic footprinting  <cit> . alternatively, the primer can be used to sequence the transposon junction directly  <cit> . however these approaches require a separate pcr and sequencing reaction for every mutated gene; consequently a whole genome screen is again time-consuming and expensive. a higher throughput can be obtained using microarrays to identify simultaneously the location of many inserts  <cit> ; we term these "tag-array" approaches. the regions flanking transposons can be amplified using pcr and hybridised to an amplicon microarray  <cit> , however this is labour intensive and in some cases may be non-reproducible  <cit> . an alternative is to use a custom transposon with one or two outward-facing promoters, from which labelled rna run-offs are produced  <cit> . the use of high-density tiling microarrays can improve resolution  <cit> , but this is still inferior to sequencing-based methods. small genes  are likely to be problematic since they are only covered by a small number of probes on the array. large transposon libraries may also be problematic since the signal from a particular probe may be influenced by rna derived from multiple transposons inserted within the same region.

in order to overcome the limitations of current tag-array approaches we have developed a simple method, transposon-mediated differential hybridisation   <cit> , that combines the advantages of both sequencing- and array-based approaches to determine the repertoire of genes required for the survival and growth of the target organism. application of tmdh to an analysis of the s. aureus genome identified  <dig> essential genes. many of these may represent potential targets for the development of new therapeutic approaches to fight this important pathogen. a comparison with the essential gene list of b. subtilis provides insight into the changes in core metabolism that have occurred since the divergence of the two organisms.

RESULTS
development of the tmdh procedure
the tmdh procedure is outlined in figure  <dig>  genomic dna from the tmdh mutant library is digested using an appropriate restriction enzyme and amplified using linker pcr. transcription is induced from the transposon t <dig> promoters in the presence of fluorescently-labelled dntps, and dnasei is used to remove dna, leaving labelled rna run-offs. the labelled rna is hybridised to a microarray, and the retrieved data used to screen for the presence of transposons as detailed below. following the screening process, candidate essential genes are further interrogated for the presence of transposon inserts using pcr and dna sequencing.

the restriction digest is critical for the tmdh procedure as it provides boundaries to limit the extension of the rna run-offs, preventing transcripts produced from transposons within non-essential regions from extending into adjacent essential genes. however, for any particular restriction enzyme the distribution of restriction sites may be sub-optimal for some genes, limiting the number of "informative probes" that can be used to assess gene essentiality . to minimise this problem two tmdh experiments were performed, one using the restriction enzyme alui , the other using rsai . even using two enzymes, some genes were still potentially problematic, but sufficiently few that an additional enzyme was not deemed necessary; the affected genes were investigated using pcr .

for each tmdh experiment, chromosomal dna from the library was digested using the appropriate restriction enzyme, and oligonucleotide linkers were ligated to the restriction fragments. linker pcr was performed using a linker-specific primer and a transposon-specific primer. in vitro transcription was performed from the t <dig> promoters, with direct incorporation of cy5-utp. the reaction was treated with dnasei and the resultant labelled rna was purified and used for hybridisation to the microarray.

construction of a tmdh transposon library in s. aureus
full details are presented in the methods section. briefly, a tmdh transposon, with an outward facing t <dig> promoter, was initially developed for use in e. coli based on the transposon tn <dig>   <cit> . the construct was adapted for use in s. aureus by the addition of mariner mosaic ends  and an erythromycin resistance gene. it was incorporated into a temperature-sensitive  plasmid that contains a chloramphenicol resistance gene and is stable for replication in s. aureus at 30°c and below.

a large transposon library of around a million mutants was generated in s. aureus sh <dig>  essentially using the procedure described by bae et al.  <cit> . a serial dilution of the resulting culture was used to determine library size  and dna sequencing and a preliminary tmdh analysis were used to demonstrate that the transposon had integrated throughout the s. aureus chromosome .

strain selection
the tmdh method is designed to work for strains for which sequence information can be obtained. this includes non-sequenced strains that are related to strains with a genome sequence. our experiments were carried out in the s. aureus strain sh <dig>  this was derived from the genome sequenced strain nctc  <dig>  through phage curing followed by reconstruction of the rsbu gene  <cit> . the microarray probes that were relevant to tmdh in strain sh <dig>  and their positions relative to the nctc  <dig> genome sequence, were determined using blast .

microarray procedure
a set of 60-mer oligonucleotide probes was designed based upon the s. aureus mw <dig> genome sequence . the probes were spaced approximately every  <dig> bases on both strands across the whole genome, with the exception of repetitive regions. in-house inkjet printers capable of generating around  <dig>  features per slide were used to produce microarrays  <cit> . as the total number of probes to span the genome exceeded this capacity, each experiment was performed using three separate slides. following hybridisation of the labelled rna and washing, the arrays were scanned using an agilent g2500a scanner, and the images analyzed using the agilent feature extractor software. full details of the microarray procedure are available in the methods section.

development of software to determine location of transposon insertions
for tmdh the primary interest is in a discrete binary property, i.e. the presence or absence of transposons. microarray data are continuously variable, so it is necessary to adopt a strategy for scoring transposons as present or absent. the log <dig> of the spot intensities measured from each microarray show a mixed distribution . in the absence of any transposons, low signal intensities with an approximately normal distribution would be expected . in contrast, "on" signals would be expected to have higher intensities but follow an irregular distribution, reflecting the multiple factors that influence the signal if transposons are present. these include the number of transposons present, their distance from probes, and local sequence elements that may affect transcription from the promoter located in the transposon.

to test our hypothesis that the low intensity signals represent the "off" distribution, we exploited the differences between the genomes of the s. aureus strains sh <dig>  in which the library was constructed, and mw <dig>  the genome sequenced strain used to design the microarray probes. probes designed to hybridise to mw2-specific genomic islands will not hybridise to any target from the sh <dig> genome, so act as negative controls. plotting the data from these probes demonstrates that the lower region of the full distribution corresponds to the signal produced in the absence of any specific hybridisation . the presence of a small number of higher signals within the negative control dataset suggests some non-specific hybridisation. this issue is addressed in the microarray analysis method detailed below.

for the analysis of tmdh data we developed a method for determining cut-off values to distinguish the "on" and "off" signals. the method is analogous to one commonly used in the analysis of microarray data derived from comparative genome hybridisation . the "off" distribution is modelled using a normal distribution fit empirically to the microarray data. a low cut-off point is defined at the point where the number of probes predicted to show that particular signal by the fitted distribution drops below the observed number. a high cut-off is defined at the point where the fitted distribution explains close to 0% of the observed data at that intensity. probes that gave a signal above the high cut-off were assigned a score of + <dig>  since they were likely to be influenced by the presence of transposons. probes with a signal below the lower cut-off were given a score of - <dig>  as it is likely that their signal represents the background level without any influence from the rna produced from the transposon promoters. probes with an intermediate score were assigned a score of  <dig>  since it was not possible to infer unambiguously the presence or absence of transposons. this method accounts for between-array signal variation, since the curve-fitting procedure is carried out independently for each array. it should also be noted that no account is taken of within-array variation. standard normalisation approaches cannot be applied due to the high proportion of "on" signals within the dataset.

in tmdh, a probe that hybridises within an essential gene may still give an "on" signal if it is downstream of a transposon that has integrated outside the gene, since rna run-offs are defined by restriction enzyme sites, and not gene boundaries. therefore the position of the restriction sites is critical. a method was developed to score only "informative" probes for each restriction fragment . probes were only considered informative if they could not be influenced by a transposon outside of the gene. these included probes downstream of an intragenic restriction site . if no transposon was evident anywhere within a particular restriction fragment, then all probes from within that fragment were considered informative, since there could be no interference from outside the gene.

to determine a list of candidate essential genes in an automated manner, we examined the score of informative probes overlapping each gene, across all arrays using both restriction enzymes. a simple sum of the scores was found to be the most robust indicator of the presence/absence of transposons. this exploits the presence of multiple probes per gene to minimize the impact of any aberrant signals due to non-specific hybridisation or the lack of normalisation. genes with a total score of - <dig> or lower were automatically classified as essential. this cut-off was chosen empirically to minimize the number of false positive genes that were considered unlikely to be essential based on their annotation or prior experimental evidence, whilst retaining most known essential genes. however, the cut-off also results in the omission of genes that had fewer than  <dig> informative probes, due to their short length or the distribution of restriction sites. the r scripts used to implement the tmdh scoring system are available upon request.

pcr-based identification of essential genes
since the automated analysis of microarray data was not expected to be comprehensive, we devised a complementary pcr-based footprinting approach to generate a robust list of essential genes . a pcr primer was designed between  <dig> and  <dig> bases upstream of the target gene. an outward-facing primer was also designed based on the mariner transposon sequence. these primers can be used to amplify a range of products, each corresponding to one of the transposon inserts in the library. the size of the products can be determined on an agarose gel, and from each of these the location of the insert can be determined. if a gene is essential, no transposons should be found within the boundaries of the gene, so no pcr products should be seen within the corresponding size range. most of these genes were investigated further by dna sequencing, and the gene was considered non-essential if any of the pcr products was confirmed to be derived from an intragenic transposon. an exception to this rule was made if a single pcr product was identified in the region corresponding to the c-terminal portion of the protein where a transposon insertion was considered unlikely to disrupt functionality. if a pcr product could not be obtained, the ability of the gene-specific primer to generate a pcr product was assessed by linker pcr .

manual inspection of the raw microarray data using an online genome browser () allowed us to identify a number of candidate essential genes . these genes were investigated using the pcr method. to validate the microarray analysis we also performed the pcr confirmation step on all genes identified as essential by the automated method, and also on all genes not identified as essential in s. aureus, but which had an essential orthologue in b. subtilis  <cit> .

s. aureus essential gene list
following the preliminary microarray screen and automated analysis,  <dig> candidate essential s. aureus genes were identified. these, together with a further  <dig> candidates chosen as potentially essential by manual inspection of the microarray data, or because of their presence in the b. subtilis essential gene list  <cit> , were further investigated by pcr and sequencing. following this process,  <dig> s. aureus genes were identified that were not disrupted by transposons and constitute our putative s. aureus essential gene list. the genes were classified into the same functional categories as used in the b. subtilis study  <cit> , and a summary of the findings is presented in table  <dig>  additional file  <dig> contains a full list of the  <dig> essential genes in s. aureus, together with a comparison with the essential gene list from b. subtilis  <cit>  and a number of previously published s. aureus "essential gene" studies  <cit> . the results are also presented in a more compact form in additional file  <dig>  the full results of the pcr/sequencing analysis are available in additional file  <dig>  unless otherwise stated, gene names below are those from the b. subtilis genbank entry, with the s. aureus gene name in parentheses if different. genes that are unnamed and do not have a b. subtilis orthologue are referred to by the s. aureus nctc  <dig> systematic nomenclature, with the prefix "saouhsc_".

influence of experimental conditions on the essential gene list
several studies have been carried out to determine the minimal set of genes that is essential for growth and replication of a bacterial cell  <cit> . however, any attempt to determine this experimentally will inevitably be influenced by the conditions under which the experiment is performed. a gene may be scored as essential in a particular assay because it is required for survival following exposure to a particular stress inherent in the method, or because it is involved in the uptake or metabolism of the particular nutrients provided in the growth media. an example of this in our method is the requirement for extended incubation of s. aureus at 44°c to remove temperature-sensitive replicons. consequently, genes required for high temperature survival will be scored as putatively essential. to test this, we examined defined mutations in mrpf, dlt, tago, fur and sara  and all were shown to confer heat sensitivity in s. aureus . furthermore, mutations in clpp and dnak can cause a growth defect at high temperatures  <cit> .

transposon insertions may not be tolerated within a particular gene even if it is not truly "essential", since they may have a polar effect on the function of a downstream essential gene within the same operon. examples of potential polarity issues include rimm and recu . under our experimental conditions, false positives may also be identified if transposon mutagenesis results in a reduced growth rate, since such mutants may be out-competed within the pool. conversely, false negatives are possible since it may be possible to insert a transposon close to the 3' end of some essential genes without impairing gene function. insertions close to the 5' end may also be possible if a suitable alternative initiation codon is available. this can also be considered an advantage of the technique, since the transposon screen effectively acts as a truncation assay that gives an indication of the minimal portion of the gene sequence required for function.

evaluation of the microarray method as a screen
the microarray procedure alone was not expected to comprehensively identify the complete s. aureus essential gene list, but was applied as a screen to reduce the workload for the more robust but laborious pcr-based analysis. however, for some applications an exhaustive essential gene list may not be necessary, so it is useful to evaluate the efficacy of the microarray screen. the robust s. aureus essential gene list obtained using pcr footprinting allows the sensitivity  and specificity  of the microarray procedure to be evaluated. figure  <dig> shows a roc curve of sensitivity against false positive rate  for cut-off values from - <dig> to - <dig>  the curve suggests that a cut-off value of - <dig> would give an optimal balance between false positives and false negatives in future studies. this gives a specificity of  <dig> %, with a sensitivity of  <dig> %.

the use of multiple restriction enzymes for tmdh has theoretical advantages, but increases the expense of the method since it involves an additional set of microarrays. knowledge of the robust essential gene list allows us to evaluate our use of two restriction enzymes, by investigating the data from each microarray screen separately. the analysis of the individual microarray screens is also shown in figure  <dig>  in these analyses, a cut-off value of - <dig> is optimal. the alui experiment performed better than the experiment using rsai, with specificities of  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, but both are inferior to the combined dataset. the choice of whether to use a single or multiple enzymes for future studies will depend on the application and available resources.

discussion
dna metabolism
the core set of  <dig> genes involved in dna replication from the b. subtilis essential gene list are all scored as essential in s. aureus using tmdh. of the  <dig> essential b. subtilis genes involved in dna packaging and segregation,  <dig> were essential in s. aureus. the exceptions were smc, ypug  and ypuh . the products of these three genes form a complex that is involved in chromosome condensation and segregation  <cit> . the reason for their apparent dispensability in s. aureus is unclear.

the essential b. subtilis dna methylation genes ydio and ydip do not have homologues in s. aureus. five additional genes in this category that were not essential in b. subtilis were identified as putatively essential in s. aureus: recu, ruva, ruvb, yrrk and yvci. these are all associated with recombination and repair, and could be essential to survive the experimental procedure, and thus may be an artefact of the particular methodology that has been used to generate the transposon library.

rna metabolism
the four components of the basic transcription machinery  are all essential in both b. subtilis and s. aureus. there are eight essential genes involved in rna modification in b. subtilis: cca, cspr, rnpa, rnc, trmu, trmd, ykqc and yqjk. all of these are also essential in s. aureus, with the exception of rnc, which encodes a ribonuclease, and cspr, which encodes a putative rna methylase. the trmu gene is split into two parts in the nctc  <dig> genome sequence, but this is due to a frameshift that occurs in a run of five consecutive adenine residues and most likely represents a sequencing error, or a consequence of slipped strand mis-pairing; the gene is intact in all other available s. aureus genome sequences. three additional essential rna modification genes were identified in s. aureus, rimm, ymfa and thdf. insertions in rimm may not be tolerated due to polar effects on the essential trmd gene. ymfa is a paralogue of ykqc that is non-essential in b. subtilis, but is evidently more important in s. aureus. the thdf protein  is a trna modification gtpase that is conserved across bacteria and eukaryotes, and is essential in some escherichia coli genetic backgrounds  <cit> . the three essential b. subtilis rna regulation genes, yycf , yycg  and nusa that are conserved in s. aureus are all essential, together with eight additional putative regulators: glnr, sara, rnr, yvhj , lexa, grea, yjbd and fur.

protein synthesis
there is no direct experimental evidence that the b. subtilis complement of  <dig> ribosomal proteins is essential, but they are considered as such since the ribosome itself is essential  <cit> . most of the ribosomal genes appear essential in s. aureus. however, the rpmg genes, of which there are two copies in both genomes, can each be mutated and are therefore not individually essential in s. aureus. the two s. aureus copies are more similar to each other than the two b. subtilis genes, both showing more similarity to b. subtilis rpmga than to rpmgb. rpme is non-essential in b. subtilis, due to the presence of two paralogous copies  <cit> , but essential in s. aureus, which possesses only a single copy. the rpli and rpst genes are essential in b. subtilis but not in s. aureus. the reason for this is unclear. rplk is not essential in b. subtilis but was identified as essential by tmdh, possibly due to its involvement in the heat shock response  <cit> . rpsj is not listed as essential as it is not annotated in the nctc  <dig> genome, but an orf is present that is predicted to encode a protein identical to rpsj from other s. aureus strains. it is likely that this is an oversight in annotation and rpsj is identified by tmdh as essential in s. aureus nctc  <dig> 

of  <dig> trna synthetases listed as essential in b. subtilis,  <dig> are similarly essential in s. aureus. two others, glys and glyq, which are adjacent in the b. subtilis genome and encode the α- and β-subunits of a glycyl-trna synthetase, are not conserved at the sequence level between b. subtilis and s. aureus. however, at the equivalent position within a syntenic region, s. aureus has an alternative glys gene that is essential. this encodes a class-ii glycyl-trna synthetase, similar to that encoded by bacillus cereus  <cit> . the thrs and thrz genes of b. subtilis can compensate for the absence of each other  <cit> , but only one copy  is present in s. aureus, and as may be predicted this is essential. the asns gene is essential in b. subtilis but not in s. aureus. yaca, a gene originally classified as essential but of unknown function in b. subtilis  <cit> , is involved in the modification of trna-ile  <cit>  and is also essential in s. aureus

the ten genes identified as essential translation accessory factors in b. subtilis are all essential in s. aureus. the s. aureus list includes three additional genes, homologues of efp, yrvi and smpb. the smpb protein is associated with tmrna-mediated rescue of stalled ribosomes, and is important for b. subtilis growth at high temperatures  <cit> . b. subtilis efp mutants are viable but defective in sporulation  <cit> , however this gene is essential for protein synthesis in e. coli  <cit> . the yrvi  gene in b. subtilis lacks a start codon, and cell extracts have not shown any d-tyr-trnatyr deacylase activity  <cit> , suggesting that the gene is non-functional in b. subtilis. the gene is intact in other bacillus genomes, so the inactivation may have occurred during the adoption of b. subtilis as a laboratory strain. the gene is conserved across most bacteria and eukaryotes, and has been suggested to counteract the toxicity of d-tyrosine  <cit> .

the two genes essential for protein folding in b. subtilis, groes and groel, are also essential in s. aureus. three other protein folding genes, dnaj, dnak and grpe, are scored as essential in s. aureus, however dnak mutants are temperature sensitive  <cit>  so may be viable but unable to survive the procedure for generating the transposon library. a homologue of the essential b. subtilis post-translational modification gene map is also essential in s. aureus, however, it shows more similarity to the non-essential b. subtilis gene yflg. deformylation is essential in b. subtilis, but the genome contains two genes associated with this process , and either can be inactivated singly  <cit> . in s. aureus only one deformylation gene, ykrb  is present, and it is essential. five of the six b. subtilis genes essential for protein translocation are also essential in s. aureus. the exception is prsa, which encodes a protein involved in extracellular folding of secreted proteins. three additional protein translocation genes, sipt , secdf and yqjg, are essential in s. aureus. in b. subtilis, yqjg has a paralogue, spoiiij, that is absent from s. aureus; in b. subtilis the double knockout is lethal  <cit> . sipt encodes one of four closely related type i signal peptidases in b. subtilis, whereas only two are present in s. aureus . spsb, which is most closely related to b. subtilis sipt, is essential  <cit> , and has been targeted for the development of novel antimicrobial agents  <cit> . spsa, however, lacks residues essential for catalytic activity and is not essential  <cit> .

cell envelope/cell wall and associated proteins
sixteen genes involved in the production of the cell membrane are essential in b. subtilis  <cit> . of these, only gpsa, which encodes an nad-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, is not essential in s. aureus. mutants in this gene in other bacteria are auxotrophic for glycerol  <cit> . four additional cell envelope genes are essential in s. aureus: fabh, fabi, ywpb and yuxo. the first three of these are non-essential in b. subtilis due to the presence of a second gene with an overlapping function, fabhb, fabl and ycsd, respectively  <cit> . the reason for the essential nature of yuxo, a possible thioesterase  <cit> , is unclear. three additional genes that are thought to encode membrane-associated proteins, pbpx , yfix  and ypbe , are also essential in s. aureus but not b. subtilis. pbpx may be involved in resistance to high temperatures. ebps in s. aureus is an elastin binding protein  <cit>  and although a mutant can be isolated it shows a growth defect  <cit> . the multi-subunit sodium-hydrogen antiporter encoded by the mrp  operon is essential in b. subtilis but not in s. aureus, most likely due to the presence of a paralogous system in the s. aureus genome. a transposon-insertion mutant of mnhd in s. aureus retains halotolerance and loses transmembrane potential during postexponential growth  <cit> , leading to the suggestion that the mnh operon is involved in electron transport. it is possible that the two systems have diverged following a duplication event, but retain the ability to functionally compensate for one another.

the essential b. subtilis genes involved in amino sugar biosynthesis prior to peptidoglycan polymerization are all also essential in s. aureus, with the exception of yvyh, which is present as three copies  in the s. aureus genome. diaminopimelate biosynthesis is not important in s. aureus as it uses lysine in its peptidoglycan. of the six b. subtilis essential genes involved in the process, only four  are retained in s. aureus. these are required for lysine biosynthesis  <cit>  but are not essential. of the two racemases that convert l-glutamate and l-alanine into the corresponding d-isomers, race is essential in s. aureus, but alr is present as two copies neither of which is individually essential. the other genes essential for the synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors in b. subtilis  are all similarly essential in s. aureus. three s. aureus genes absent from b. subtilis, fema, femb and fmtb , are essential in the formation of the pentaglycine interpeptide bridge, which is characteristic of s. aureus peptidoglycan  <cit> . also essential in s. aureus but not b. subtilis are pona , yrvj  and saouhsc_ <dig>  the essential genes involved in teichoic acid biosynthesis in b. subtilis are all essential in s. aureus. the genes dlta, b, c and d are also scored as essential, but this may be because they are part of the sigma x regulon which is associated with survival at high temperatures in b. subtilis  <cit> .

perhaps unsurprisingly, given the morphological differences between the two species, the orthologues of the essential b. subtilis cell shape determining genes, mrec and roda, are not essential in s. aureus, and there is no orthologue of the mreb gene. the essential b. subtilis gene ylan is involved in the determination of cell shape, with a similar phenotype to roda  <cit> , and is included in this category. like roda it is not essential in s. aureus. the seven essential cell division-related genes described for b. subtilis are all essential in s. aureus, together with five others: ylmf, ezra, yyaa, gida and ypsb. ylmf can complement the activity of the ftsz-binding protein ftsa in b. subtilis, to the extent that overexpression of ylmf complemented the otherwise lethal ftsa null mutant  <cit> . these overlapping roles seem to have diverged in s. aureus, since both genes are essential. ezra encodes a negative regulator of ftsz ring formation, which can be knocked out in b. subtilis resulting in multiple ftsz rings  <cit> . the nucleoid occlusion protein yyaa  is essential for cell division in the absence of the min system in b. subtilis; the genes encoding the min system are not present in the s. aureus genome. gida mutants affect cell division in e. coli cells grown on glucose  <cit> , and gida may be involved in trna modification  <cit> . it is also essential in helicobacter  <cit> . ypsb localizes to the cell division site in b. subtilis, but its role is unclear  <cit> .

carbon metabolism and respiration
the core essential genes involved in glycolysis in b. subtilis are also essential in s. aureus. three additional components of the glycolysis pathway are essential in s. aureus: pgi, gap, and pyka. the essentiality of these three genes means that all components of the pathway from glucose to pyruvate are essential in s. aureus, with the exception of the initial conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate. the pentose phosphate pathway also appears to be more important in s. aureus than b. subtilis, with the component genes rpe , zwf, yqii  and saouhsc_ <dig> all scored as essential. a number of genes that play an intermediary or regulatory role in metabolism are also essential. these are: succ, which encodes the beta subunit of succinyl-coa synthetase, glna, which encodes glutamine synthetase, yvck, which is of unknown function but is required for growth on krebs cycle intermediates and carbon sources metabolized by the pentose phosphate pathway  <cit> , the hpr  kinase/phosphatase gene hprk, and the phosphotransferase system component ptsh. none of these is essential in b. subtilis, although glna is essential in salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, mycobacterium tuberculosis and haemophilus influenzae  <cit> . interestingly, glnr, which encodes a repressor of glna, is also scored as essential. the genes are within an operon, so the essentiality of glnr could be due to polar effects on glna.

perhaps the most striking differences between the essential gene complements of s. aureus and b. subtilis are in the respiratory pathways. the menaquinone biosynthesis pathway, which is essential in b. subtilis, seems to be dispensable in s. aureus, with the exception of the final step catalyzed by the mena gene product. the isoprenoid pathway is essential in b. subtilis but in s. aureus it is replaced by the mevalonate pathway, where it is itself essential, as it is in other gram positive cocci  <cit> .

nucleotides and cofactors
there are  <dig> essential genes involved in nucleotide biosynthesis in the b. subtilis list. of these  <dig> are essential in s. aureus. guab was described as essential in the b. subtilis study, but this was a likely consequence of a lack of guanine in the growth medium  <cit> : it is not required in s. aureus, but the downstream gene that encodes gmp synthase, guaa, is essential. hprt, which was a surprising inclusion in the b. subtilis list, does not play an essential role in s. aureus. three other genes, rela, which encodes gtp pyrophosphokinase, pyrh , which encodes uridylate kinase, and thya, which encodes thymidilate synthase, were all essential in s. aureus. rela, which mediates the stringent response, has previously been reported as being essential for in vitro growth of s. aureus  <cit> .

of the genes involved in cofactor biosynthesis, those required for the production of nad and sam are essential in both s. aureus and b. subtilis. the genes required for the iron-sulphate cluster in b. subtilis are also essential in s. aureus, with an additional requirement for ferredoxin encoded by fer, which is not essential in b. subtilis. the pathways to produce coa and folate are more divergent. in b. subtilis, only the last gene in the coa biosynthesis pathway was essential, suggesting that the immediate precursor  could be scavenged from the medium  <cit> , but that process does not seem to occur in s. aureus under our experimental conditions, since three other genes involved in coa biosynthesis were essential, ylbi, yloi and saouhsc_ <dig>  these allow the synthesis of coa from the precursor pantothenate, which is presumably obtained from the growth medium. similarly, folate is not obtained from the growth medium, so all the genes required for its synthesis  are essential. there are two non-homologous genes in b. subtilis, ycia and mtra, that encode a type i gtp cyclohydrolase  that catalyses the initial stages of the pathway from gtp to folate  <cit> . the s. aureus genome contains an orthologue of only one of these, ycia, which is essential. the riboflavin biosynthesis gene ribc was not identified as essential in b. subtilis in kobayashi et al.  <cit> , but had been in an earlier study  <cit> , and is essential in s. aureus.

genes of unknown function
sixty-six putatively essential genes without a clear indication of their role have been identified in s. aureus. of these,  <dig> are also essential in b. subtilis. six members of the family of low molecular mass gtp binding proteins, proposed to have ribosome-associated functions  <cit> , are indispensible in b. subtilis and we have found them also to be essential in s. aureus. two of the genes, ynes and yfni have recently been functionally characterised. ynes  is a glycerol-3-phosphate acyl transferase required for fatty acid and phospholipid biosynthesis and is essential in b. subtilis  <cit> . yfni  is essential for lipoteichoic acid biosynthesis in s. aureus but not in b. subtilis due to the presence of numerous paralogues  <cit> . elucidation of the function of further unknowns will shed light on important facets of cellular physiology and form the basis for potential new antibiotic targets.

CONCLUSIONS
to aid in the selection of targets for drug discovery, we have developed tmdh, a method for the genome-wide identification of genes essential for survival and growth in vitro. an advantage of our system over other tag-array methods is the software developed for analysis of the microarray data. use of this automated scoring system allows unbiased prediction of essential genes from even large mutant libraries . this method could be applied in isolation to identify potential targets for drug discovery or, as is the case here, used as a preliminary screen to reduce dramatically the workload required for a pcr footprinting and sequencing follow-on strategy to locate unambiguously transposon inserts, and hence infer the essential genes. our approach incorporates the advantages of tag-array methods, genome-wide coverage and efficiency, and the high resolution associated with pcr/sequencing data.

application of tmdh to the genome of s. aureus allowed the construction of a list of  <dig> genes that were not disrupted by transposon insertions. it is expected that most of these are essential, although some could be included on the list for other reasons, such as the presence of "cold spot" regions that are refractory to transposon insertion, the possibility of transposon inserts exhibiting polar effects on downstream genes or an inability of some transposon mutants to survive the experimental process. nevertheless, the list of genes makes biological sense, corresponds well with the previously published non-comprehensive s. aureus essential gene lists  <cit>  and the rigorously determined b. subtilis list  <cit> , and should act as a useful starting point for the identification of potential targets for novel antimicrobial compounds. the comparison with the b. subtilis essential gene list sheds new light on the biology of both organisms. the major differences are in the respiratory pathways and genes associated with cell morphology, both of which are likely to reflect evolution in different environmental niches. in a number of cases genes that are essential in one organism are non-essential in the other due to the presence of multiple paralogous copies that can presumably compensate for each other. this comparative approach can be used to identify essential processes that are not dependent on a single gene product, but may still represent potential targets for drug development.

tmdh is a powerful technology that can be used for the determination of the essential gene repertoire of a target organism. our analysis of the s. aureus genome is the first such comprehensive study in this organism and highlights the potential of the approach. the application of tmdh to a range of pathogens may highlight important targets for the development of novel antimicrobial therapies. tmdh also has additional potential applications, notably for the identification of conditionally essential genes. one such application has been the use of tmdh to identify salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium genes required for infection of balb/c mice  <cit> .

