BACKGROUND
annelids are found throughout the world's terrestrial, aquatic, and marine habitats, and are the most abundant component of the macrofauna in the deep sea. as one of three major animal groups with segmentation, annelids are critical in any investigation of body plan evolution; we need to understand the composition and branching history of groups within the annelid radiation if we are to progress towards elucidation of the last common ancestor of bilaterians and evolution of segmentation. surprisingly, annelid evolution is poorly understood. to rectify this situation, data sets of multiple genes are being used to evaluate diversity and relationships of major annelid clades.

annelida is part of the lophotrochozoan radiation that includes mollusca, brachiopoda, bryozoa, nemertea and sipuncula  <cit> . traditionally classified as "polychaeta" and clitellata, three taxa historically assigned phylum status have been hypothesized to also fall within annelida: sipuncula, echiura, and siboglinidae . sipunculan origins are the most controversial of these three; some morphological data suggest molluscan affiliations  <cit> , but a growing body of data indicates annelid affinities for this group of unsegmented marine worms  <cit> .

both molecular and morphological data support echiura and siboglinidae as annelids  <cit> . echiura possess annelid-like features such as the ultrastructure of cuticle and chaetae, the development of the mesoderm, and structure and position of the blood vessels  <cit> ; additionally, their larval nervous system indicates a possible segmented ancestry even though overt segmentation is lacking in adults  <cit> . recent 18s rrna analyses support a sister relationship of echiura and capitellid polychaetes  <cit> , while an analysis of five gene regions  by colgan et al.  <cit>  supports a sister group relationship with terebelliformia, indicating that the former may reflect a single gene artifact. recent analyses of four gene regions  are inconclusive; one analysis favors a sistergroup relationship to capitellidae and to protodrilus purpureus and pectinaridae in the other one  <cit> .

the ultrastructure of the uncini  implies a closer relationship of siboglinidae with the annelid taxa terebelliformia and sabellida  <cit> , and rouse and fauchald  <cit>   presented a cladistic analysis of morphological characters that corroborates this. the placement of siboglinids with annelids is also supported, albeit weakly, by several molecular studies  . none of these hypotheses has been explicitly tested using a rigorous statistical framework.

analyses of morphological and molecular data support clitellate monophyly and have provided robust hypotheses of relationships within this taxon  <cit> . however, monophyly of "polychaeta" lacks support and resolving polychaete annelid relationships has been difficult  <cit> . although some authors regard "polychaeta" as sister to clitellata , increasing evidence based on molecular and morphological data suggests they are a paraphyletic grade including clitellates .

polychaete annelids have been classified into approximately  <dig> families, generally supported as monophyletic, but arrangement of these into well-supported more-inclusive nodes is wanting  <cit> . r&f's  <cit>  analyses provide the most taxonomically inclusive hypotheses of polychaete relationships to date. based on morphological cladistic analyses of polychaete families, they proposed a monophyletic "polychaeta" consisting of two major clades, scolecida and palpata, the latter divided into canalipalpata and aciculata. while these analyses provide objective and testable hypotheses of polychaete relationships, and thus significantly moved the field forward, many aspects of our current understanding of annelid phylogeny are still poorly understood. monophyly of scolecida, palpata and canalipalpata has been questioned by some morphologists  <cit> , and uncertainties of character scoring, homology assessment, and difficulty in rooting of the annelid tree make resolution of annelid relationships using morphology unlikely  <cit> . molecular analyses to date show no evidence to support the classification scheme developed from the r&f analyses, but most molecular studies have been based on single genes . in a recent study that included the most comprehensive annelid taxon sampling to date, incomplete character data for the four genes analyzed may explain the lack of resolution  <cit> ; of the  <dig> taxa, only  <dig> had data for all genes, and over  <dig> were represented by data for a single gene only. neither molecular nor morphological studies have yet convincingly eliminated the possibility that these clades are monophyletic despite the doubts raised.

to address these major outstanding issues of annelid inclusiveness and phylogeny, we reconstruct relationships of major annelid and lophotrochozoan taxa using two data sets. one data set is built on ~ <dig>  kb of sequence from three nuclear genes  for  <dig> taxa that span  <dig> traditional polychaete families as well as siboglinidae, echiura, clitellata, and sipuncula and nine outgroup otus to address both annelid inclusiveness and phylogeny. the other data set comprises the three nuclear genes and eight mitochondrial genes  for a restricted taxon sampling of  <dig> operational taxonomic units  to address annelid inclusiveness with respect to sipuncula, echiura and siboglinidae . these are the two largest data sets for annelids explored to date in terms of amount of numbers of characters for a full range of taxa, and it is our hope that the taxonomic representation of these datasets will continue to grow in order to provide a more holistic comparison to morphological hypotheses. besides analyses using maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference  a priori hypotheses about annelid relationships were explicitly tested against best trees using approximately unbiased  and non-scaled bootstrap probability  tests.

RESULTS
annelida includes echiura, siboglinidae, and sipuncula
phylogenetic analyses of  <dig> new and  <dig> previously published sequences for individual genes and combined data sets  all indicate annelida is much more diverse than traditionally recognized, and includes sipuncula, echiura, and siboglinidae, thus confirming previous suggestions. the nuc and nucmt data sets place sipunculans, echiurans, and siboglinids within an otherwise monophyletic annelida , suggesting that body plan segmentation is evolutionarily labile. although nodal support was weak deep in the nuc tree , this more inclusive annelid clade is significantly supported in all nucmt analyses  = 99; pp =  <dig>  for both protein-coding genes coded as either nucleic or amino acids; 1-p value of the au test =  <dig> ; figs.  <dig> & additional file 4). furthermore, our conclusions are significantly supported when we explicitly tested a priori hypotheses against the best trees using au and np tests of both the nuc and nucmt data sets . whereas the results of the 28s rrna analyses are consistent with those of the nuc and nucmt data sets  , separate analyses of 18s rrna and, to a lesser degree, ef1α show unexpected placement of outgroups throughout annelida  . none of these outgroup relationships are significantly supported; presumably phylogenetic signal in this region of the tree is limited when these genes are analyzed individually, a phenomenon well documented for 18s rrna  <cit> . therefore, we focus on the nuc and nucmt analyses.

 significant differences  in bold.

the hypothesis of a sipuncula/mollusca relationship is rejected by au and np tests for nucmt and thus corroborates some previous reports  <cit> . these results agree with previous studies suggesting that the molluscan cross organization of micromeres during spiral cleavage should not be regarded as synapomorphic for mollusks and sipunculans  <cit> . wanninger et al.  <cit>  discussed the possession of a ventral median nerve as additional morphological support for a sipunculid-annelid relationship, but these nerves are also observed in other taxa like gnathostomulida  <cit> . the position of sipuncula within the annelid radiation varies among analyzed data sets  and we were not able to significantly discriminate via the au or np test whether sipunculans were sister to or derived within annelida . however, in all of the resulting 81-otu trees  sipunculans were nested within annelids, and never placed as a sister taxon, consistent with the nucmt results and some previous studies  <cit> . interestingly, the lining of nephridial podocytes is a morphological feature shared by sipuncula and terebelliformia that bolsters the close, albeit weak association between these two groups in the 81-taxon tree   <cit> .

echiuran inclusion within the annelids, first suggested by ef1α data  <cit> , was significantly supported in our analyses . moreover, all of our analyses of individual genes or combined data with  <dig> otus, placed echiurans as sister to capitellidae  confirming earlier suggestions  <cit> , and in sharp contrast to recent analyses of several gene regions placing echiurans with terebelliformia taxa  <cit> . indeed, our explicit hypothesis testing significantly rejects such a close relationship . in the nuc analyses, echiura/capitellidae is sister to a scolecidan clade of maldanidae and arenicolidae clade ; this result is echoed in the nucmt data, which lacks a capitellid but places the echiuran and maldanid as sister taxa . due to this placement of echiura as a derived annelid group, interpretations of nerve development in echiurans as vestigial segmentation are fully warranted  <cit> .

the long-held hypothesis that siboglinidae  are within annelida  is supported with significant statistical rigor . our results corroborate previous molecular studies supporting a nested position of siboglinidae within annelida   <cit> . furthermore, the nuc data set and 28s rrna partition  show a close, albeit weak relationship between siboglinidae and sabellida, specifically oweniidae, as suggested by analyses of morphological data  <cit> , some molecular data  <cit>  and combined analyses of both  <cit> . the ultrastructure of the uncini and the possession of only one pair of nephridia with dorsal pores in the first segment are possible synapomorphic features  <cit> . morphological characters supporting the sister group relationship of oweniidae and siboglinidae are neuropodial chaetae in posterior segments emerging straight from the body wall and an intraepidermal nerve cord  <cit> . the close relationship to clitellata as shown by the nucmt data set  is not substantiated by morphological data.

position of clitellata
in all analyses, clitellata is derived from polychaetous ancestors; it does not form a major basal branch of annelids . this placement is significantly supported by hypothesis testing , and corroborates a series of previous studies . in all analyses with  <dig> otus except those of the ef1α partition, the small mainly freshwater meiofaunal aeolosomatid aeolosoma sp. is sister to clitellata; however, the support for this relationship is weak . previous authors have discussed aeolosoma as either a highly derived clitellate  <cit> , as sister to or the most basal clitellate   <cit> , or as not closely related to clitellata  <cit> . our findings strengthen the conclusions of previous but more limited studies  <cit> , and offer further evidence of a freshwater origin of clitellata  <cit> . however, additional sampling of terrestrial and freshwater polychaetes would be needed before the relationship between aeolosoma and clitellata can be considered resolved.

polychaete relationships
while the relationships of polychaetous annelids are still poorly understood, our testing of the four major polychaete clades proposed by rouse and fauchald  <cit>  are all significantly rejected by our analyses . these results provide rigorous support for previous ad hoc arguments based on morphological and molecular data  <cit> . due to the strong affiliation of echiurans with capitellids, we opted to provisionally include echiurans within scolecida during hypothesis testing to understand whether that group was natural regardless of echiuran position. rejection of scolecida, palpata and canalipalpata is not surprising due to dispersion of their taxa throughout the tree  and given that support of these groups by morphological data is weak  <cit> . for example, the presence of palps is doubted in some palpata group members , and palp nerves but no protruding palps have been shown in some scolecids   <cit> .

aciculata was the least problematic of the r&f taxa, in that it was the exclusion of only two taxa that precluded its monophyly on the tree. for the nuc data, rejection of aciculata by au and np tests is due to the placement of orbinia within aciculata  and the placement of amphinomids at the base of the tree . these results are in contrast to two recent multi-gene analyses where the aciculata taxa eunicida and phyllodocida are dispersed throughout the trees  <cit> . interestingly, supportive chaetae of orbiniidae may be homologous with the acicula of aciculata  <cit> , and amphinomida has been regarded as basal based on the tetraneurous organization of the nervous system  <cit> .

as in previous studies encompassing polychaete taxa , nodal support above the family level is weak . nonetheless, some taxa recovered by r&f's  <cit>  analyses are also supported in our analyses . for example, the traditional capitellida consisting of capitellidae, arenicolidae and maldanidae is recovered, but includes echiura; terebelliformia and aphroditiformia are also recovered; and a clade encompassing all sabellida and spionida except chaetopteridae appears in the tree. in contrast to rousset et al.  <cit>  and colgan et al.  <cit> , monophyly of annelida including echiura and sipuncula is also revealed by all combined analyses . thus, with an increasing number of characters our understanding of annelid phylogeny and inclusiveness is progressing, even using ribosomal rrna genes. a similar effect has been observed for protostomes, lophotrochozoans and eunicidans as well  <cit> .

evolution of body plans
segmentation has traditionally been thought to be a conserved morphological character complex supporting an arthropoda plus annelida clade, "articulata"; an implicit assumption has been that homoplasy of segmentation is unlikely. molecular phylogenetic analyses favor lophotrochozoa and ecdysozoa and reject articulata with steadily increasing support, which implies convergence of their body plans and specifically of the complex "segmentation" . interestingly, recent studies of annelida and arthropoda central nervous systems reveal a higher variability than previously expected and a typical rope ladder-like central nervous system, a key feature of the complex "segmentation" cannot be found . our results provide statistical support for trees that indicate a high plasticity in the evolution of this fundamental body plan character in annelids: the placement of unsegmented echiura and sipuncula within annelida implies that these two groups have independently lost segmentation; and members of siboglinidae possess highly modified segmentation that is only obvious in their posterior ophistosoma.

CONCLUSIONS
the molecular phylogenetic analyses presented here corroborate previous studies in suggesting a very different view of annelid evolution than is traditionally accepted; the tests of alternative hypotheses provide statistical support for our conclusions. sipuncula is most likely a derived annelid or the annelid sister group. echiura is the sister group to capitellidae as revealed by three nuclear markers and their exclusion from annelida is significantly rejected. accepting annelida as including echiura and sipuncula not only suggests that segmentation is more evolutionary labile than previously assumed, but that other characters distinctive of annelids, such as complex chaetae comprised of β-chitin and arranged in four groups, have also been reduced or secondarily lost in some of these derived taxa  <cit> .

hypothesis testing clearly rejects the exclusion of clitellata and siboglinidae from "polychaeta", and monophyly of scolecida, palpata, canalipalpata or aciculata. furthermore, some higher level annelid taxa are suggested by our analyses, i.e., aphroditiformia, terebelliformia, sabellida/spionida excluding chaetopteridae, capitellida including echiura, eunicida/phyllodocida including orbiniidae. however, we need to progress further in the resolution of annelid phylogeny, and we recognize that data from additional genes and for more complete taxonomic representation of annelids may robustly resolve the basal nodes in the annelid tree and elucidate the precise positions of sipuncula, clitellata, and siboglinidae.

