BACKGROUND
single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the genomic sequence underlie susceptibility to or protection from diseases by affecting biological processes at the molecular level, such as protein structure, transcription, alternative splicing etc  <cit> . there are a number of examples in which polymorphisms in the promoter regions, and those causing expression changes in the corresponding genes, have been found to be associated with disease  <cit> . in addition, genetic variation of gene expression has been utilized to identify causal genes for complex diseases  <cit> . however, the pattern of polymorphisms that underlie heritable variation of gene expression in segregating mammalian populations, as well as bioinformatic sequence analysis methods for identifying these regulatory polymorphisms, have not yet been investigated in a systematic way. here we characterize the pattern of cis-snps that could cause quantitative genetic variations in mrna levels in two mouse intercross populations.

we investigated the frequency and the potential role of the cis-snps for disrupting transcription factor binding sites  around the genes whose expression levels in murine intercross populations gave rise to strong cis-acting eqtl. we focused on this set of genes for the following reasons: 1) a sizable fraction of genes whose expression varies in a segregating population show cis-linkage  <cit> , 2) evidence for the medical importance of cis-regulatory variation has been demonstrated by positional cloning studies in which snps in susceptibility genes that were not located in the protein coding or splice-site regions were nevertheless shown to be associated with complex human diseases such as stroke, type  <dig> diabetes etc.  <cit> , 3) the polymorphisms that affect the expression levels of these genes are either in the genomic region of the gene or in the nearby upstream or downstream region , which significantly restricts the search space for these causal variations.

we found a significantly higher number of cis-acting eqtl genes  were in regions that were not identical by descent  between the parental inbred mouse lines used to construct the mouse crosses. in considering the genes that fall outside of these ibd regions, we found that a significantly higher number of cegs have cis-snps in their promoter  and non-coding regions  compared to genes that do not give rise to cis-acting eqtls . the density of snps in these regions is also significantly higher in the cegs compared to non-cegs. in addition, the enrichment of cis-snps is not limited to the highly conserved sequences between mouse and human, and in fact in a majority of the cegs the cis-snps do not overlap any conserved sequences in the promoter or non-coding regions, suggesting that the cis-snps in these genes do not perturb the highly conserved sequences in the immediate vicinity. a higher fraction of cegs have cis-snps that perturb predicted transcription factor binding sites  in non-coding regions, likely a consequence of the higher cis-snp density in these regions resulting in an increased number of intersections between cis-snps and the tfbss.

the implications of the above findings on the challenges related to the identification and annotation of genomic regulatory polymorphisms through bioinformatic sequence analysis methods are discussed. our results suggest that the approaches that are commonly employed in identification of putative regulatory variants, such as searches for polymorphisms in the immediate upstream regions and cross-species conserved sequences, are unlikely to elucidate a significant fraction of the cis-regulatory variations responsible for causing changes in gene expression in genetically segregating mammalian populations.

RESULTS
mouse intercross populations and cis-acting eqtl genes
mrna expression data for multiple tissues in f <dig> animals from two mouse intercrosses constructed from c57bl/6j and dba/2j   <cit> , and from c57bl/6j and c3h/hej inbred lines   <cit> , were available for analysis . the bxd f <dig> population  <cit>  consisted of  <dig> female mice and comprehensive mrna expression profiles were available for liver, while the bxh f <dig> population  <cit>  contained  <dig> mice  and expression profiles were available for four tissues, namely liver, white adipose, whole brain, and skeletal muscle. all of the expression data from the two crosses we have used here for analyses were generated and described previously  <cit> .

in the same manner as classic phenotypic trait data, qtls for gene expression levels can be computationally mapped using genetic linkage mapping strategies  <cit> . mrna levels of genes were treated as continuous variables and mapped to the genome using a standard interval mapping procedure  <cit>  to identify expression qtls . from the linkage results cegs were defined as follows: 1) eqtl lod score ≥  <dig>  , 2) eqtl is near the physical location of the gene itself , 3) the eqtl explains more than 10% of the genetic variation of expression for the gene in the respective f <dig> populations.

using the specific conditions described above, a total of  <dig>  distinct cegs were identified  over all four tissues in the bxh cross, and  <dig> cegs were identified in bxd cross. reasons for identification of significantly fewer cegs in the bxd cross relative to the bxh cross include: 1) availability of mrna profiles from only one  tissue compared to four tissues in the bxh cross, and 2) a lower number of animals  resulting in a reduced power to detect qtls. the number of cegs for the bxd cross given here is less than previously reported for this same cross  <cit> , given we employed a more conservative definition of cis-eqtls in this preset study for the purpose of minimizing the false positive calls and working with the highest confidence cegs. the cegs from all tissues in both crosses are provided in the supplementary materials . later we have described how we have prepared a common set of cegs and non-cegs for analysis by combining the data from the two crosses.

ibd regions between parental strains and the distribution of cegs with respect to the ibd status
genomic segments in different mouse strains that are inherited from a common ancestor are referred to as identical by descent or ibd. the ibd regions can be considered to be largely homologous sequence blocks between two strains, while the non-ibd  regions can be considered as polymorphic blocks. most of the polymorphisms between mouse strains exist in sequence regions that are not in ibd  <cit> , and reported variations that are in the ibd regions either represent sequencing errors or mutations that occurred in the strains after sub-speciation.

so that the readers can focus on the key findings of the manuscript, we present the details of the ibd map we have used here  <cit>  and the reason for its selection in the data and methods section. however, it is worth mentioning here briefly that a very significant enrichment of cegs was observed in the regions that were not in ibd  . the analyses described in subsequent sections were performed with the set of genes that are not in ibd regions. this is because genes in ibd regions would be expected to have significantly fewer snps if any, in the surrounding regions, and therefore the comparison of patterns of polymorphisms in those genes with the cegs, most of which contain cis-snps and are in nibd, would not be appropriate.

since the c3h strain has not yet been sequenced, a complete set of snps between the b <dig> and c3h parental strains used to construct the bxh cross was not available from public sources or the celera mouse snp database  <cit> . only a small number of snps  that mapped uniquely to the mouse genome were available between these two strains ). therefore, we used the set of snps that were polymorphic between b <dig> and dba for analysis of the cis-snps around cegs in the bxh cross as described below, imputing the regions of shared haplotypes between strains using the ibd map. genomic sequence blocks that were ibd between c3h and dba, but nibd between b <dig> and c3h and nibd between b <dig> and dba , were identified. these regions are called nibd-bxh for reference. the nibd-bxh regions identified in this way are expected to be homologous between c3h and dba, but polymorphic between b <dig> and dba as well as between b <dig> and c3h. in the nibd-bxh regions, snps occurring between b <dig> and dba should thus be the same as those occurring between b <dig> and c3h. of the  <dig>  snps polymorphic between b <dig> and dba identified as falling in non-repeat regions,  <dig>   were nibd-bxh. genes and snps contained in the nibd-bxh regions were used for analysis of data from the bxh cross.

creating a common set of cegs and non-cegs from the bxd and bxh crosses
to characterize the frequency and location of cis-snps in genes, we constructed a common set of cegs and non-cegs from the bxd and bxh crosses. given the number of cegs identified in the bxd cross was small , these data on their own would not be as highly powered to identify cis-snp patterns of interest in the cegs. therefore, we combined the cegs from the bxd and bxh crosses to carry out all subsequent analyses. combining the  <dig> cegs from bxd cross with the  <dig>  cegs from the bxh cross, and only considering the cegs within the nibd-bxh regions, resulted in a set of  <dig>  distinct cegs . the inclusion cegs from the bxd cross added  <dig> distinct cegs into the bxh data set. for the purpose of comparison with the cegs, we created a set of non-cegs by considering genes that did not give rise to any cis-eqtl in either cross. to be consistent with the ceg set, only non-cegs falling in the nibd-bxh were considered. thus, a combined set of  <dig>  distinct non-cegs was created by taking the intersection of the genes that did not show cis-acting eqtls in either of the two crosses. it is of note that some of the non-cegs defined here may show up as cegs in other segregating mouse populations, in other tissues, or in other f <dig> populations constructed from b <dig>  dba, and c3h mice . as additional comprehensive sets of cegs become available, the sets of cegs and non-cegs can be refined to produce more accurate positive as well as negative sets.

fraction of cegs containing cis-snps is significantly higher compared to non-cegs
cegs by definition are expected to contain genetic variations near their physical location on the genome which give rise to variations of their mrna levels in a segregating population. we have therefore studied the frequency and density of snps in the promoters and non-coding regions  of the cegs and compared them to non-cegs. these studies are described below.

in defining the promoters and non-coding regions, the gene boundaries and exons were first determined based on clustering of all mrnas and cdnas  aligning to a common genomic locus as described in detail earlier  <cit>  . the promoter regions were then defined to be the  <dig> kb or  <dig> kb sequence upstream of the gene start coordinates. the non-coding regions comprised of the introns and  <dig> kb sequence downstream of the genes. snps in the promoter and non-coding regions of genes are referred to here as cis-snps.

although transcriptional regulatory elements are often found to be concentrated in the immediate promoter region, they are also located in the introns and downstream regions  <cit> . on one hand examining only the promoter sequence would clearly be insufficient; on the other hand including the introns and down-stream sequences could dilute the density of regulatory elements , thereby making it difficult to identify any relationship between snps and these elements. therefore we analyzed the promoter and non-coding regions  separately. in addition to the immediate vicinity of the genes, regulatory elements such as enhancers or silencers can also be present at distances that are far away from the genes themselves  <cit> ; we have not addressed these in our present study.

we analyzed cis-snps in regions that were most conserved between the mouse and human genomes. functional non-coding sequences are often assumed to be under evolutionary selection pressure, and thereby conserved relative to the surrounding non-functional sequence. consequently, phylogenetic footprinting has been widely used for the analyses of non-coding regulatory sequences  <cit> . although phylogenetic footprinting methods have limitations , the alignments of rodent-human sequences have been demonstrated in many studies to be successful in identifying regulatory elements, and significant enrichment of known regulatory elements have been found in these regions  <cit> . we therefore investigated the presence of snps in the mouse-human aligned regions in the promoters and non-coding regions to see if a higher fraction of cegs contain cis-snps in these conserved sequences. for this purpose the mouse-human genome alignments were taken directly from the ucsc genome annotation project  <cit> , where the two genomes were aligned using the blastz software  <cit>  and post-processed to obtain the best alignments for each region . these alignments represent the most conserved sequences between the mouse and human genomes and cover ~6% of the mouse genome, which is roughly the percentage of mammalian genome that is estimated to be under purifying selection  <cit> .

a significantly higher fraction of the cegs contained cis-snps  compared to non-cegs. when we considered cis-snps contained only within regions that are conserved between mouse and human, the fraction of cegs containing cis-snps was still observed to be higher than non-cegs , but the significances were decreased for the conserved promoters regions  compared to all promoter regions . a ratio of over-representation  for cegs containing cis-snps may be defined as the ratio of the fraction of cegs containing cis-snps to the fraction of all genes  containing cis-snps . the ror values were decreased when considering cis-snps in the conserved promoter regions relative to all promoter regions. therefore the decreased significance of cegs containing snps in the conserved regions of the promoters could be explained by the decreased ror value. another reason contributing to the decreased significance could be the smaller sample size, given many fewer genes contained cis-snps in conserved regions.

higher density of snps in promoters and non-coding regions of cegs
next, we compared the cis-snp density in the promoters and non-coding regions of cegs to non-cegs. genes with no cis-snps in their promoters or non-coding regions were ignored for this analysis, since the absolute numbers of genes containing cis-snps were already compared earlier  . cis-snp densities between the two sets were compared using the non-parametric wilcoxon rank sum test . a non-parametric method was used because the distributions under study were non-normal. a significantly higher density of cis-snps  was observed in cegs compared to non-cegs .

in order to compare the density of cis-snps in the conserved and non-conserved regions, genes were partitioned into two sub-sets, namely, those with no cis-snps in mouse-human conserved regions , and those containing cis-snps in the conserved regions  . in subset  <dig>  containing a majority of the cegs, higher cis-snp density was observed in both promoter and non-coding regions . in subset  <dig>  a higher cis-snp density was observed in non-coding region  only. upon normalizing the number of snps by the length of the conserved or non-conserved sequence , significantly higher density was observed in both conserved as well as non-conserved non-coding region . in the  <dig> kb upstream promoter regions of genes in subset  <dig>  significantly higher snp density was observed only when the number of cis-snps in mouse-human aligned sequences was normalized by the length of these conserved regions.

a higher fraction of cegs has cis-snps that alter predicted transcription factor binding sites
in an attempt to study what effect the cis-snps in cegs have on the transcription regulatory machinery, the perturbation of transcription factor binding sites  by cis-snps was investigated. all known mouse, rat and human tfbss  from the transfac® database  <cit>  were first mapped to the mouse genome using blastn . however, none of the mapped sites overlapped with cis-snps of any of the cegs. consequently we investigated the overlap of predicted tfbss with cis-snps.

the rationale and caveats for using predicted tfbss are discussed below. it has been shown through experiments that the score of a transcription factor  binding site, as computed from a position weight matrix  built from a collection of its known sites, can give a fairly accurate estimate of the in vitro dna binding affinity of the transcription factor to that site . this observation and the thermodynamic principles behind it forms the basis of most of the generic bioinformatic methods that are in use today to predict tfbss in genomic dna . compared to in vitro, the tf-dna binding events are definitively more complicated in vivo since tf binding to dna in eukaryotes is context dependant , and influenced by factors like chromatin remodeling and concentration of the tf. but such contextual and other relevant information are available only in rare cases and cannot be generally leveraged in the prediction of tfbss  <cit> . therefore, although the change in tfbs score may not be accurately predictive of the binding of a transcription factor to its target dna site  in vivo, in the absence of other specific information such as chromosomal regions that are open for the regulatory proteins to bind, the dna binding partners for a given tf, concentration of tf etc., the approach we have taken here  is a reasonable strategy  that one can use to examine how snps may affect tf binding to putative tfbss. this is a common strategy that has also been used by others for the prediction of tfbss as well as prediction of putative regulatory snps that could perturb tf-dna binding and cause changes to expression of the target gene  <cit> .

in our study tfbs predictions were made with pwms representing the transcription factor dna binding sites available from the transfac®  database  <cit>  using the match™ software  <cit> . only pwms generated from the collections of vertebrate dna binding sites were used.  <dig> bp regions were taken around all cis-snps  and scored with the pwms . both the b <dig> and dba alleles were scored, since as explained earlier, these were the variants that were used in the analysis of data from both crosses. if a cis-snp location overlapped with a predicted binding site, and a difference was observed in the predicted binding site score due to the two alleles, the change in score was noted, and the predicted tfbs was considered to be perturbed by the snp.

since the tfbss are typically short and degenerate, predictions using pwms are known to contain a large percentage of false positives  <cit> . therefore, orthogonal data such as co-regulation of the target genes with the transcription factors or phylogenetic footprinting, are commonly used to increase the specificity of these predictions  <cit> . although the transcription factors and their target genes may not co-regulate at the mrna level, it is generally assumed that genes that do co-regulate across a diverse set of conditions may belong to the same regulatory pathway  <cit> . to reduce the number of false positive predictions for tfbss we employed a similar strategy, requiring that the transcript levels of the tfs and their putative target genes  be significantly correlated across a diverse set of mrna profiling experiments . using expression profiles available from a set of  <dig> diverse mouse tissues and cell-lines  <cit>  , we determined the spearman rank-order correlation  between all genes and the  <dig> distinct vertebrate transcription factors in the transfac®  database which have known gene symbols as well as pwm models for their dna binding sites. it is of note that the body-atlas expression data set was used instead of the bxd and bxh f <dig> populations given others have shown that significant correlation between any two genes in a segregating population can result from closely linked eqtls as opposed to biologically relevant co-regulation  <cit> . these effects can be amplified in cases where genes give rise to strong cis-eqtls.

we found that a higher fraction of cegs have cis-snps affecting predicted tfbs scores in non-coding regions  , when correlations were required between tfs and their target genes . significance was not observed when the tfbs predictions were not filtered by correlations , which may be due to the large false positive rate in the predicted tfbs set. interestingly, the p-value of the hypothesis that more cegs harbor cis-snps that disrupt predicted tfbss  is much larger compared to the p-value of hypothesis that more cegs contain cis-snps in the promoter and non-coding region . possible reasons for this observation include: 1) dna binding sites for most vertebrate tfs cannot be predicted since pwm models for their binding sites are not available, 2) a large fraction of the cis-snps are neutral with respect to their effects on the transcriptional levels  <cit> , and 3) cis-snps could perturb regulatory elements other than tfbss .

in order to determine whether the cis-snps in cegs perturb predicted tfbss with an increased frequency relative to the non-cegs, we compared the fraction of cis-snps affecting tfbss in cegs versus non-cegs using the fisher exact test. the fraction of cis-snps in cegs affecting predicted tfbss was not observed to be higher , suggesting that a higher rate of tfbs perturbation by snps in cegs is likely due to the increased density of cis-snps in these genes relative to non-cegs.

an example cis-eqtl and putative regulatory cis-snp
to illustrate how high-density snp data may be intersected with eqtl data to identify putative candidate quantitative trait nucleotide  underlying the eqtls , we highlight one example of a ceg with a cis-snp in its promoter region perturbing a predicted tfbs . the gene casc <dig>  gives rise to a strong cis-acting eqtls  in a number of tissues in the bxh cross . as casc <dig> is in a nibd-bxh region, the polymorphisms between b <dig> and c3h in this region should be identical to those between b <dig> and dba. there are five snps in the promoter  of this gene; only one snp , which is located close to the 5' end of casc <dig> , perturbs the predicted binding-site for a transcription factor, hand <dig>  <cit> , whose mrna level is correlated with that of the gene. the mcv <dig> snp genotype shows a significant association with the expression level of casc <dig>  . a conserved position in the binding site for the hand <dig> is perturbed by mcv <dig> . by affecting the hand <dig> binding site in the promoter, this cis-snp could be responsible for differential expression of casc <dig> in the bxh f <dig> population.

isolating the specific causative regulatory mutations underlying eqtls that are responsible for variation of gene expression in a segregating mouse population is difficult. this is especially true in an f <dig> population, where regions of linkage disequilibrium are very large in any given region . determination of the actual functional role of the causative polymorphisms is even more challenging, since there are several different molecular mechanisms through which mrna levels in cells can be regulated. although such challenges exist, putative candidate polymorphisms that affect transcription of a given gene may be prioritized for experimental validation, and hypotheses can be generated for the possible biological roles of candidate regulatory cis-snps based on examination of the data, as illustrated by the example above. for such candidates the gold standard is to introduce the polymorphism in question onto the background of a wild-type mouse and then compare changes in the in vivo activity of the gene and phenotypes to the wild-type mouse.

discussion
cis-snps in genes showing cis-acting linkage in segregating mouse populations
snps are often used as markers for disease, and as noted earlier, there are now several examples where cis-regulatory variants are associated with disease  <cit> . computational approaches for identifying the cis-regulatory polymorphisms would therefore be useful in prioritizing the candidate polymorphisms that a play causative role in disease, reducing the laborious experimental process of testing multiple candidate variants in vivo, selecting biologically meaningful snps for association studies, and ultimately in generating testable hypotheses for elucidating the molecular basis of a given disease. however, little bioinformatics research has been done in a systematic way to build predictors of variations that are likely to affect gene-expression in segregating mammalian populations  <cit> . in this study we have investigated the frequency and potential biological role of the polymorphisms underlying genes whose expression give rise to strong cis-linkage in segregating mouse populations. the study provides the first investigation of putative regulatory snps around genes showing cis-linkage, and insight into the challenges associated with identifying the causative regulatory variants in such populations through bioinformatic sequence analyses methods. in addition, the data we provide here  should benefit further investigations in this area.

there have been a few previous studies surveying the role of cis-polymorphisms and haplotypes in promoter regions of sets of human genes, and identifying those that change expression  <cit> . these studies considered a relatively small sampling of genes  and assessed the promoter snps that affected the expression in a limited number of cell lines with reporter gene assays  <cit> . since the changes in expression due to the polymorphisms were tested in cell-lines, it is not known if the snps that caused expression changes in the in vitro assays are responsible for varying levels of expression in vivo in genetically segregating populations. we started with large-scale genetic linkage data of gene expression and investigated the frequency of polymorphisms in the genes showing cis-linkage. therefore the work we present here , is complementary to the previous work, and provides a different approach to investigating cis-regulatory snps with murine populations.

one recent study reports the mapping of cis-regulatory variants in a small set of genes to haplotype blocks in human samples  <cit> , and another recent study reports the investigation of cis-regulatory variations in 3' utrs of a set of genes showing cis-acting regulation in a panel of mouse recombinant congenic strains  <cit> . however, to the best of our knowledge, the present study represents the first large scale genome-wide survey of cis-snps in genes that give rise to strong cis-eqtl in a mammalian population, and an investigation of their potential role in disrupting putative cis-regulatory elements. we observe a significantly higher fraction of cegs to contain cis-snps compared to non-cegs, and that the density of these snps is significantly higher in the cegs. we have not conclusively proven the functional role of any polymorphism in regulating the expression of cegs through in vitro or in vivo experimental validation, and many of the snps in the vicinity of the cegs could be neutral . however, cegs by definition should have variations near the genes themselves affecting their expression in a segregating population, and based on earlier work on human genes with promoter polymorphisms, it has been estimated that a sizable fraction of cis-variants  may alter gene-expression  <cit> . therefore, it is reasonable to infer that the higher density of cis-snps in cegs is associated with changes in expression of those genes, and one or more of the cis-snps would be responsible for causing variation of expression in a large fraction of the cegs in the mouse f <dig> populations, although we do not exactly know how many causal regulatory cis-snps are in this set of cegs.

we investigated the effect of a few other relevant biological factors which could give rise to cis-eqtls in our data-set instead of  cis-snps in the promoters and non-coding regions, such as non-sense mediated decay , polymorphisms in exons, and genomic segmental duplications. we estimated that a very small fraction of our set of cegs may arise due to nmd and segmental duplications . a higher fraction of cegs was seen to contain snps in their exons  relative to the non-cegs. but an increased fraction of the cegs that contained exonic snps also contained promoter and non-coding cis-snps relative to non-cegs . therefore, we did not exclude these genes from the analyses presented here . it is worth noting however that our analyses with the set of cegs and non-cegs which did not contain any exonic snps yielded results that were very similar to those obtained from the full set of cegs and non-cegs.

one of our objectives was to investigate the challenges involved in identification of the causative cis-regulatory snps through bioinformatic sequence analysis approaches. to that end, we have examined the propensities of the snps in potentially functional non-coding sequences  and predicted transcription factor biding sites. a few recent studies have suggested the use of mouse-human alignments to identify putative candidate regulatory snps  <cit> , and although snps falling in these conserved regions have been shown to affect transcription  <cit> , it is unclear whether a majority of the regulatory variants lie in these regions. in our analyses we find that the sequence variations around the cegs are not specifically enriched in evolutionarily conserved non-coding and promoter sequences, and in fact in the majority of the cegs all of the snps are outside of these highly conserved regions. it is possible that the causative regulatory snps lie further away in these cegs  where they alter conserved regulatory elements . however, the higher cis-snp density in the immediate vicinity of these cegs  suggests that a significant fraction of cis-regulatory snp could lie outside of regions that are most conserved in mammalian evolution. as comparative genomics and phylogenetic footprinting approaches are frequently utilized in the searches for functional regulatory elements in mammalian genomes, and computational prediction of transcriptional regulatory elements is a difficult problem  <cit> , the above observations imply that the identification of cis-regulatory variations in genetically segregating populations is likely to be difficult using sequence-driven bioinformatic approaches alone. since the information for transcriptional regulatory networks is in part hard-wired in the genomic dna itself through the array of regulatory elements  <cit> , one can hypothesize that for cegs where the cis-regulatory snps are not present in the highly conserved promoter or non-coding sequences, variations of expression may not cause a significantly perturbation of the transcriptional networks that have been conserved in the mammals. experimental validation of a set of snps affecting putative regulatory sites in conserved and non-conserved regions , will be ultimately required to fully understand how the in cis-snps affect gene expression in segregating populations. this would consequently lead to a better understanding of the bioinformatic approaches that would be effective in identifying cis-regulatory variants.

below we describe the examination of a set of characterized human cis-regulatory snps that are associated with inherited diseases. a collection of these rare examples is available from the rsnp_guide database  <cit> . from the examples presented in this database  we collected a set of  <dig> cis-regulatory snps in  <dig> distinct genes  that are: a) known to be underlying or associated with inherited human diseases, b) known or predicted to disrupt transcription factor binding sites, and c) have flanking sequences available from the human gene mutation database  <cit>  so that they could be used for mapping reliably to the human genome assembly. an examination of the locations of these regulatory snps indicates that  <dig> snps in  <dig> genes are in the human-mouse conserved regions, while the remaining  <dig> snps in  <dig> genes are in non-conserved regions. in addition to the above cases that were taken directly from rsnp_guide database, from two recent publications we examined the non-coding snps  within or around two genes, namely insig <dig>  <cit>  and tcf7l <dig>  <cit> , that represent extremely rare examples of variants associated with complex disease  that have been validated across diverse and multiple human cohorts. these causative snps were also outside of human-mouse conserved regions. this is a small sample of genes to draw concrete conclusions from; however this observation with the well characterized human snps supports our similar finding from the mouse data and suggests that a large fraction of the causative cis-regulatory snps, including those that are associated with inherited disease, could be outside of the sequences that are highly conserved in mammalian evolution.

perturbation of putative transcription factor binding sites by cis-snps
a higher fraction of cegs had tfbs predictions perturbed by snps in the non-coding region. no significant difference was observed in the fraction of total snps affecting binding sites between cegs and non-cegs, suggesting that the higher fraction of perturbations of tfbss in the cegs was a consequence of increased cis-snp density.

several factors are likely to have confounded our study with predicted tf binding sites: 1) it is possible that the false positive rate of tfbs prediction is high, even after requiring correlations of tfs to putative target genes; 2) at the time of our analysis binding site models for only ~ <dig> vertebrate tfs were available from the transfac database, whereas the number of distinct tfs in mammals are estimated to be around  <dig>   <cit> ; therefore prediction of dna binding sites for the majority of tfs was not possible; 3) although often enriched in the immediate promoter region, transcription regulatory elements in mammals can be spread over large distances  whereas in this present study we considered only the immediate vicinity of the genes ; 4) transcriptional regulatory elements frequently act in conjunction with others forming regulatory modules where multiple tfs bind dna ; consequently the change in score of one individual binding site by an overlapping cis-snp may often fail to reflect the extent to which transcription is affected by that mutation. it would clearly be useful to re-analyze the data when significantly more experimentally verified murine transcription factor binding sites are available in order to obtain a better understanding of how cis-variations specifically affect the transcriptional machinery, and whether a larger fraction of snps in the cegs perturb known binding sites.

it is of note that in a recent study of saccharomyces cerevisiae segregants it was shown that genes having cis-linkage contained a higher frequency of snps in promoters and 3' utr sequences  <cit> . the study also found moderate evidence for enrichment of snps in tfbs sequences that were mapped using the chip-chip technology  <cit> . the yeast study with tf binding sites was not confounded by some of the factors mentioned above, since most of the regulatory sequences were experimentally determined, and a comprehensive set of dna binding sequences for almost all of the yeast tfs were available  <cit> .

obviously, in addition to tfbss, other classes of regulatory sequences, e.g. those affecting transport from the nucleus, mrna stability or decay, rna mediated regulation, and those potentially involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expression, could be affected by cis-snps, which we have not studied here. coding snps that cause changes in the protein structure can act in trans to influence expression through a feedback loop as shown recently for the amn <dig> gene in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . such cases were also not studied here.

undetermined factors in our study
the specificity of the identification of cis-acting eqtls was unknown. recently doss et al.  <cit> , gives a lower bound estimate of the true positive rate for the bxd cross ; we have used more stringent thresholds for identification of putative cis-eqtls in our study to increase the true positive rate, so we anticipate the true positive rate would be higher than 64%, but the exact number is not known. the specificity of tfbs predictions is unknown; moreover binding sites for the majority of the tfs could not be predicted because transfac® pwms were unavailable. it is likely that additional snps exist between the strains we studied that had not been identified in the databases we used in our study  <cit> . even with these unknown factors in our current study, several observations have been made that shed light on the nature of variation in genes showing cis-linkage in segregating populations, as well as the bioinformatic challenges that are involved in characterizing the non-coding cis-regulatory polymorphisms using computational sequence analysis strategies.

future work
the problem of identifying and annotating the functional cis-regulatory polymorphisms is a difficult one that will require various experimental as well as computational approaches to address. our understanding of cis-regulatory variations and their biological role would benefit from in-vivo experimental evaluation of the contribution of polymorphisms around cegs towards changes in gene expression, characterization of more regulatory elements in the genome , examination of the multi-species genome alignments, and more accurate prediction of the  regulatory elements. the data on cegs and cis-snps that we supply here  will provide a valuable resource for further exploration in this area.

CONCLUSIONS
the analyses of cis-snps in the promoters and non-coding regions around cis-acting eqtl genes  in mouse f <dig> populations indicate that a significantly higher fraction of cegs contain cis-snps compared to non-cegs. cegs also contain higher snp density in the promoters and non-coding sequences relative to the non-cegs. since non-coding sequences that are conserved in mammalian evolution are often biologically functional, the propensity of cis-snps in the promoter and non-coding regions that are most conserved between mouse and human was examined. a majority of the cegs having cis-snps did not contain any cis-snp in these conserved regions, and in the cegs that contained cis-snps in conserved regions, the enrichment of cis-snps occurred both in conserved as well as non-conserved regions. this suggests many of the cis-regulatory snps underlying eqtls and responsible for causing gene-expression changes in segregating populations could lie outside of the sequences that are most highly conserved in mammalian evolution. to investigate the possible biological role of the cis-snps in disrupting the transcriptional regulatory elements, we studied the perturbation of the predicted transcription factor binding sites  by the cis-snps. relative to non-cegs, a significantly higher fraction of cegs harbor cis-snps that perturb the predicted tfbss. however the fraction of cis-snps in the cegs affecting the binding sites is not higher, suggesting that the increased incidence of tfbs perturbation in the cegs is due to the higher cis-snp density. these observations imply that the identification and annotation of cis-regulatory variations in genetically segregating populations is likely to be difficult using sequence-driven bioinformatic approaches alone.

