BACKGROUND
to understand the global regulatory network underlying specific transcriptomes, several distinct aspects have to be considered  <cit> ;  the genomic organization of those transcripts  <cit> ,  their regulation by general and specific transcription factors,  the influence of epigenetic effects such as e.g. histone modifications  <cit> ,  the local environment  <cit> , and  the functional role of the transcripts as well as their protein products as nodes of the network. in the present report, we show for the first time for a human transcriptome that there is a relationship between the genomic organization, transcriptional regulation and functional role.

it has long been known that transcriptional regulation is related to chromosomal gene order; prokaryotic operons are the best known example  <cit> . for lower eukaryotes coexpressed adjacent genes were first described in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . for a part of those gene pairs, a common transcriptional activation was proposed through a shared upstream activating sequence, which occurs in the promoter region of one of the two genes. furthermore, correlated triplets, but not quadruples, were found to occur more often than expected in yeast. reports for caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> , drosophila melanogaster  <cit> , homo sapiens and mus musculus  <cit>  showed coexpression of co-localized genes in higher eukaryotes, and reports of particular gene cluster such as the human β-globin locus  <cit> , the interleukin- <dig> gene locus  <cit>  and others  <cit>  indicate the association to regulated chromatin domains. however, on a global scale only few insights into the molecular mechanisms of the transcriptional regulation of clustered genes have been gathered so far, and data about small clusters of adjacent genes have only been partially analyzed. beside the finding of housekeeping gene clusters throughout the human genome  <cit> , no evidence for a functional correlation of clustered genes had been shown. however, coexpressed genes in general  appear to function in similar biological processes  <cit> .

in this paper we describe the chromosomal co-localization in adjacent pairs of a large proportion of the human transcriptome in heart in the context of their expression dynamics, their transcriptional regulation and their function in shared biological processes. we examined the cardiac transcriptome using data from our previous genome-wide array analysis  <cit>  and found profound evidence for a significant clustering of more than 37% of those genes located mainly in pairs or triplets. a significant proportion of these clustered genes have common putative transcription factor binding sites within their promoter regions and share common biological functions.

RESULTS
to characterize genomic organization of the cardiac transcriptome, we investigated a set of  <dig>  heart-expressed genes  identified in our previous study that represent the cardiac transcriptome based on the analysis of  <dig> human heart samples  <cit> . this gene set reflects all genes continuously transcribed in the analyzed heart samples. thus, we focused on the information whether or not a gene and herewith a particular genomic region is transcribed at all and considered expressed neighboring genes as coexpressed gene clusters regardless of the expression levels of individual genes. we assigned the position of this hxp set with regard to the whole human genome as represented by ensembl compared to the hu <dig> gene set represented on the arrays. in order to reflect the actual adjacency of genes on the chromosomes, we defined gene neighbors according to their ensembl annotation, rather than using the hu <dig> gene set as a basis .

chromosomal distribution and gene clusters
first, we analyzed the overall chromosomal distribution of hxp and observed no overrepresentation of hxp on specific chromosomes . on average each chromosome contained a proportion of 18% hxp genes out of the overall analyzed dataset. upon closer analysis of the distinct localization of hxp genes, we observed small groups of physically adjacent genes along the chromosomes throughout the genome. in figure  <dig> the chromosomal distribution of the overall hxp genes and neighboring coexpressed hxp genes is represented. we calculated the number of gene clusters made up of two to five physically adjacent hxp genes and measured the statistical significance of this local clustering by comparing the numbers of hxp gene clusters with a random distribution obtained by  <dig>  permutations of hu <dig>  we observed a significantly higher number of adjacent gene pairs  and gene triplets  in hxp than would be expected for a random distribution, whereas the number of quadruples and quintuples did not differ significantly . in total, we found  <dig>  hxp genes to be locally clustered. further, we analyzed whether there was any prevalence regarding gene orientation within these clusters compared to a random distribution obtained by  <dig>  permutations. besides an enrichment of co-oriented gene pairs within clusters of size ≥  <dig> , we observed no bias in the numbers of anti-oriented gene pairs in clusters ≥  <dig>  as well as for co- and anti-oriented gene triplets in clusters ≥  <dig> .

ensg represents the number of unique ensembl genes in all clusters of the given size. the p-values and z-scores result from a comparison with a random distribution obtained by  <dig>  permutations of the hu <dig> dataset.

gene clusters and housekeeping functionality
previously, it had been suggested that housekeeping genes are arranged in clusters along the genome  <cit> . therefore, we assessed the tissue expression of our hxp gene set and the subset of coexpressed adjacent genes in  <dig> human tissues, for which the expression information of protein-coding genes had been recorded by the gnf symatlas  <cit>  . we observed a slightly bimodal distribution for the overall hxp gene set, with a major peak corresponding to expression in  <dig> tissues. this distribution differed from the one observed for coexpressed adjacent genes. here, the majority of genes showed an expression in a distinct number of tissues, not reflecting a housekeeping-like expression profile.

transcriptional regulation of gene clusters
we extended our analysis to determine to what extent these gene clusters are regulated by common transcription factors. for this purpose, we identified the putative transcription factor binding sites  for the hxp set using the corg database  <cit> . corg is based on tfbs in non-coding regions conserved between human and mouse , and enabled us to identify binding sites of  <dig> distinct binding site models in the promoter regions of a total of  <dig>  hxp genes. for the remaining hxp genes no conserved non-coding region could be identified.

taking into account that several models can represent binding sites of one transcription factor, the identified tfbs pertained to only  <dig> distinct transcription factors. within the hxp set with assigned tfbs,  <dig> genes belonged to chromosomally clustered gene pairs and for  <dig> pairs, binding sites for both genes were predicted . we observed the largest number of common predicted transcription factors for the antisense-sense gene pair consisting of the hook <dig> protein and transcription factor junb, which share binding sites for  <dig> transcription factors. the mean number of observed common transcription factors predicted to regulate adjacent genes was  <dig> . there were  <dig> genes in the hxp set with binding sites for more than  <dig> different transcription factors, which we consider to be outliers.

finally, we tested the significance of the observed number of gene pairs potentially regulated by at least one common transcription factor by comparing this number to the numbers of gene pairs with commonly assigned transcription factors seen in  <dig>  random permutations of hxp genes. regardless of whether the calculation was based on the number of distinct tfbs or distinct transcription factors, the common transcriptional regulation was significantly greater within the observed gene clusters than expected from the random distribution . this significance was not influenced by genes defined as outliers with regard to their large number of common tfbs. furthermore, the identified common transcription factors belonged to a broad panel of transcription factors classes without prevalence of particular families. taking the gene orientation into account again, we found a homogenous distribution of strand orientation within observed gene pairs regulated by common transcription factors. an example of a gene cluster regulated by common transcription factors is given in figure  <dig> 

functional relationship of gene clusters
further, we analyzed to what extent heart-expressed genes organized as adjacent pairs are involved in the same biological process using the gene ontology  database as a source of annotations of biological functions. naturally, our analysis was limited to those genes annotated with go terms that were around 60% of all hxp genes  including those located in  <dig> gene clusters. a total of  <dig>  different go terms could be assigned to the overall hxp set with  <dig>  go terms mapping to genes located in clusters. to focus on non-generic functional annotations, we calculated the number of go terms shared within pairs of adjacent hxp genes for the 5th and 6th level of granularity of the go hierarchy and compared these to a random distribution generated from hxp genes to account for the tissue-specificity of the analyzed dataset. we observed a significant enrichment of shared go terms within pairs of adjacent genes for both levels of granularity . only eight of the  <dig> and  <dig> pairs sharing the 5th and 6th level of functional classification are conspicuous in terms of having originated by gene duplications  .

expression pattern of adjacent genes
finally, we attempted to determine whether genes located close to each other show a correlation of their expression levels within our previously analyzed patient cohort, which consisted of  <dig> cardiac phenotypes with characteristic expression profiles  <cit> . first, we built correlation maps for visual inspection of the overall hxp gene set. to construct such matrices, we sorted the hxp genes of each chromosome according to their arrangement on the chromosome and calculated the correlation of expression of each possible gene pair using pearson's correlation coefficient. we observed groups of coexpressed genes  on several chromosomes. as an example, the correlation matrix of human chromosome  <dig> shows areas of coexpressed genes between genes 7– <dig> and 27– <dig> . correlation maps provide a gross overview of the coexpression of genes located nearby each other. therefore, we further analyzed the coexpression of gene pairs with respect to their distance on two different scales: the base pair distance and the number of genes located between pairs. for neither of these scales do we observe significant coexpression of co-localized gene pairs.

discussion
our data suggest that a large proportion of the cardiac transcriptome in human is linearly arranged in small groups of adjacent genes such that the genes within each group tend to be regulated by the same transcription factors and appear to share granular biological processes. even though the numbers of shared transcription factors and shared go terms are small, they are considerable larger than what could be expected by chance. these findings provide powerful evidence that gene clustering plays a potentially important role in concerted gene regulation through the location of regulatory elements with respect of the regulated genes.

we focused our analysis on the information whether or not a gene and herewith a particular genomic region is transcribed at all in the human heart and did not consider rates of transcription. the proportion of genes arranged in clusters exceeded the number reported previously, which could be explained by different definitions of coexpression, as other reports defined coexpression mainly based on the correlation coefficient of continuous valued expression levels or considered only highly expressed genes  <cit> . creating an expression neighborhood through the localization of regulatory elements would be an efficient means to increase regional gene activity, which has been shown to be influenced by the local concentration of regulatory proteins  <cit> . in addition, such regulatory elements may influence the expression status within a chromosomal region e.g. by spreading of histone modifications. further support for concerted regulation of clustered genes is provided by our observation of functional relatedness between clustered genes. apart from the identification of housekeeping genes arranged in clusters such relatedness has not been reported in human  <cit> . however without considering gene localization, it has been shown recently that coexpressed genes are often functionally related  <cit> . further studies will be required to show if there is an evolutionary constraint upon the disruption of co-localized genes. so far, sequencing projects are still in process and a comparison between close relatives such as human and for example mouse would not be sufficient due to their high synteny. from our analysis, we propose that duplication events alone are not sufficient as an explanation.

in the past some reports suggested that tissue-specific genes, e.g. genes specifically expressed in human skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, are preferentially located on certain chromosomes  <cit> . for the cardiovascular transcriptome in human, a disparate chromosomal distribution has been reported with enrichment on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . with the present knowledge of genome annotation that reveals the inhomogeneous chromosomal distribution of the human genome, we cannot confirm such observations for the cardiac transcriptome.

finally, we analyzed correlation of expression levels of genes located in clusters, as it has been suggested for the human transcriptome and other organism. by using the base pair distance as well as the gene distance between gene pairs, we failed to observe any significant correlation between co-localization and expression levels. recently, it has been proposed that such correlation could be influenced by the probe localization on the array  <cit> , which was corrected for in our primary array analysis. further, we took into account that our dataset was based on different cardiac phenotypes caused by multiple factors, which could increase background noise and reduce the ability to recognize distinct coexpression of genes in our sample collection.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we provide evidence that the linear arrangement of genes expressed in concert is due to coordinated regulation by common transcription factors. we suggest that determining the relationship between nuclear organization and gene arrangement will lead to a deeper understanding of how transcriptomes, dedicated to a particular cellular function or fate, are controlled. here, meta-analysis of the large-scale transcriptome array data beginning to appear in public repositories, could build the basis for the discovery of the nodes between gene regulation and nuclear organization. those analyses could provide insights into a regulatory constraint such that genes localized in clusters tend to be coregulated throughout several tissues. furthermore, such a regulatory constraint may be a crucial factor in the development of human diseases caused by partial deletions or insertions of chromosomal units separating genes regulated in concert.

