BACKGROUND
the problem of discovering functional dna or protein subsequences  in biological sequences data has driven the development of numerous motif-finding tools. two approaches dominate motif-finding algorithms: enumerative word-based methods and probabilistic sequence models that optimize model parameters by applying expectation-maximization techniques or bayesian inference
 <cit> . these ideas were first applied in a handful of tools developed more than twenty years ago
 <cit> . most subsequently developed motif-finders recapitulate these approaches with subtle variations, and report incremental improvements in motif detection. motif searches have become more sophisticated in terms of the patterns they can recover - where we could once only discover identical sequence matches, we may now discover gapped, palindromic, and degenerate subsequences
 <cit> . the incorporation of another type of meaningful prior information to the motif search may also improve motif detection: motif searches have improved to incorporate background sequence models, phylogenetic information, experimental data, and other large-scale prior information
 <cit> .

interest in the problem of motif discovery has inspired work on two related problems:  the generation of a set of candidate motifs from a data set of sequences, and  the problem of meaningfully condensing a set of motifs into a single non-redundant motif . to generate a set of candidate motifs from a data set of sequences, researchers have entered the same input set of sequences into several different motif-finding tools
 <cit> , as well as applied one or more motif-finding tools to different random subsets of the input set of sequences
 <cit> . to meaningfully condense a set of motifs to a single motif, various statistical tests
 <cit> , linkage tree construction and parsing
 <cit> , and other motif compression approaches  have been developed. the relatedness of the problems of motif discovery, candidate motif set creation, and motif set condensation to a single motif has inspired the creation of integrated frameworks
 <cit> – tools that first generate a candidate set of motifs , and then meaningfully parse this set of motifs to produce a meaningful representative motif .

here we present motifcatcher: an integrated framework for motif discovery. our framework utilizes random sampling of the input data set to generate a candidate list of motifs. we extend upon previous random sampling approaches by developing and applying  <dig> different random sampling-based candidate motif-generating protocols. we examine the effects of each approach in turn, and discover the best results with a novel position-specific iterative process. we create a linkage tree of these candidate motifs by integrating with existing motif tree generating software, which allow for  <dig> possible motif comparison and evaluation metrics. the user may decide to segment the linkage tree at various thresholds in order to condense individual motif leaves into a single, aggregate motif. generation and parsing of a linkage tree of motifs has been used previously
 <cit> , however, in that case, the condensation of a set of motifs into a single motif focused on similarities and differences among the individual candidate motifs. an average motif is computed based on an analysis of the output motifs, without consideration of the subsequences from which they are created. the transfer of aligned subsequences to motif representation incurs a loss of information: a motif describes only the frequency of individual sequence elements at particular positions in a set of aligned subsequences, discarding the actual subsequences from which these sequence elements arise. our motif condensation approach is based on the frequency of occurrence of individual subsequences in the output motifs, which allows us to retain dependent positional relationships between sequence elements in each subsequence string, and explicitly filter out subsequences erroneously included in the set of output motifs.

for motif-finding to operate smoothly, sequence data sets should be assembled with as high a ratio of motif signal sequence to background sequence as possible
 <cit> . we accomplish this task by randomly sampling the whole data set, and searching for motifs in these random subsets, with the expectation that certain subsets will have a high ratio of motif signal to background sequence. sequence entries are incorporated in sequence data sets because they are suspected to contain a significant motif, but this need not always be the case - for example, chip-chip  and chip-seq  experiments generate sequence data sets reflecting dna binding events of a particular protein of interest, but not all reported binding events necessarily involve the presence of a unique motif . sequence data sets with non-motif-containing sequence entries also arise from non-experimental analyses, such as the comparison of upstream regions of one or more putatively co-regulated genes across a set of related organisms
 <cit> . motifcatcher’s emphasis on random sampling allows it to find significant motifs in data sets containing a very large number of non-sequence-containing entries . in this regard, motifcatcher offers an advantage over integrated motif discovery frameworks that only aggregate the output of many different motif-finding tools
 <cit> , because these motif-finding tools may fail to find motifs in data sets containing many non-motif-containing sequence entries. it is worth mentioning that a number of tools have been developed to discover motifs exclusively in chip data
 <cit> . motifcatcher is appropriately applied to chip data, however the generality of its algorithm makes it applicable to any sequence data set, and especially effective in discovering motifs in sets of sequences where a large number of sequence entries do not contain a motif.

to evaluate the performance of motifcatcher, we explored several published and unpublished chip-chip and chip-seq data sets. our investigations incorporated organisms from all three domains of life and highlighted biological phenomena with associated motifs spanning a large range in length, degeneracy, and prevalence among input sequence entries. we developed two implementations of the motifcatcher approach, each employing a different mainstream motif-finding program . in every investigation, we compared the performance of the motifcatcher extension of the motif finder to the performance of the motif finder alone. additionally, we evaluate motifcatcher’s output motif tree to yield meaningful biological insights.

RESULTS
theory and motivation
if an input set of sequence entries is corrupted with non-motif containing sequence entries, from the standpoint of motif discovery, these non-motif containing sequences do not belong in the dataset – ideally, we would like to remove these sequences from the data set prior to carrying out a motif search. however, without knowing the identity of the motif or the sequence entries that contain them, we cannot remove these sequences directly. this problem has been addressed previously, in the meme zoops  algorithm. in the meme algorithm, sequence data is thought of as the product of a finite mixture model with unknown parameters
 <cit> . using an expectation maximization algorithm, the values of the parameters are estimated based on the observed sequences data. using the zoops generalization, sequence entries are each assigned a prior probability that they contain a motif. the posterior probabilities are determined during the expectation maximization process
 <cit> . low posterior probabilities therefore may effectively remove sequence entries from the data set. this protocol is very effective when the true motif stands out from the background, however it is more challenging to retrieve the motif in cases where the motif is obscured by a large amount of noisy background sequence. instead of estimating parameters based on a collective input body of sequences, we explore the more extreme possibility of excluding these sequences entirely – effectively, assigning to a large set of sequences a prior probability of zero, even before any parameter estimation of the data set has occurred.

in order to discover which sequences contain motifs and which do not, we use a random sampling approach combined with motif searches to determine a set
r¯ of candidate “related subsets” r. certain r will not yield significant motifs at all, and are discarded. among the r that yield a significant motif, certain highly similar motifs will tend to be re-discovered from many different random seeds. candidate significant motifs are hierarchically clustered and joined by linkage tree, where frequently re-occurring motifs from
r¯ naturally cluster into highly dense branches. in our analyses, we discovered that convergence to a common point  from many different starting states  is often an indication that the motif is meaningful. our emphasis on convergence to a common end point from many random starting states bears much similarity to a classic monte carlo markov chain algorithm
 <cit> .

algorithm
the algorithmic approach of motifcatcher is summarized in figure 
 <dig>  the following describes an implementation specifically tailored for use with the meme suite, though in principal any motif-discovery algorithm could replace meme, and any motif-scanning algorithm could replace mast 
 <cit> . the meme suite was chosen based on its confirmed effectiveness, usability, and prevalence of use in the bioinformatics community. in addition to the described meme/mast workflow, we developed an analogous workflow with the gibbs recursive sampler replacing meme. for a longer alternative version of this algorithm, please see additional file
1: s <dig> and additional file
 <dig>  screenshots of our implemented gui framework are available in additional file
1: figure s <dig> and additional file
 <dig> 
y¯:  a set of random subsets of
y¯,s¯=s <dig> s <dig> …sn, where each
si⊂y¯, are converted into a set of related subsets
r¯=r <dig> r <dig> …rn, using one of the three related subset determination protocols. 
ri⊂r¯  are organized into a branching diagram according to the similarity of their motifs using the stamp platform.  ri with highly similar associated motifs are clustered together into families fi according to a user-determined clustering threshold.  a representative motif of each family, the familiar profile , is computed, as well as a motif map of the subsequences from all sequence entries from
y¯ used to construct different fps.  application of the motifcatcher algorithm to a toy data set of  <dig> sequence entries, all  <dig> nt in length. two significant motifs  are recovered from a motifcatcher search of  <dig> seeds. in this example,  <dig> of the  <dig> sequence entries do not contain a significant motif .  <dig> of the  <dig> seeds converge to a meaningful motif , and  <dig> of the  <dig> seeds do not . seed subsets containing motif-rich sequence entries converge to related subsets with meaningful motifs, seed subsets lacking motif-rich sequence entries do not converge to related subsets with meaningful motifs . conversion of a seed subset si to a related subset ri is achieved by one of three different protocols, here represented by gears, and arrows pointing from each enumerated seed subset to its resultant related subset. the  <dig> related subsets are organized into a motif tree, thereupon the  <dig> related subsets lacking meaningful motifs are discarded, and familial profiles are determined for the  <dig> meaningful families. a motif map structure maps familial profiles back to the input data set
y¯.

monte carlo framework
from an input data set of n sequence entries
y¯=y <dig> y <dig> …yn, n random seed subsets
s¯=s <dig> s <dig> …sn are extracted, where each
si⊂y¯. ‘n’ is a user-specified value, and should be selected according to the size of
y¯ and the expected number of
yi⊂y¯ that is thought to contain a subsequence instance of a significant motif. three alternative schemes are available to create a library of related subsets
r¯ from the set of seed subsets
s¯, applied to each
si⊂s¯:  meme zoops mc  search: a meme zoops search is applied to si, and sequence entries that contain subsequences included in the construction of the meme zoops-produced motif comprise ri.  single mast mc  search: a meme zoops search is applied to si, and the meme zoops-produced motif is scanned over
y¯ using the mast. all sequence entries in
y¯ that contain a significant subsequence match to the preliminary motif comprise ri.  iterative meme/mast mc  search: a meme zoops search is applied to si producing a motif m. using mast,
y¯ is scanned for the motif m. all sequence entries in
y¯ that contain a significant match are collected. these sequences constitute the modified seed si'. meme zoops is then applied to the modified seed si', to produce a modified motif, m’ which is scanned over
y¯ with mast as before. this iterative search continues until convergence: a meme search of a modified seed simod produces a motif mmod, and a mast search of mmod over
y¯ finds subsequence instances of mmod in  simod. the sequence entries in simod comprise ri. typically, the iterative search  is to be preferred, as it will tend to converge upon meaningful motifs more often than the non-iterative and single-scan approaches .

motif tree construction
a branching diagram is constructed comparing the relative similarity of motifs associated with each of the different related subsets ri in
r¯ . some of the ri-associated motifs may not be statistically significant. thus, all
ri⊂r¯ with an associated motif with a high e-value  are excluded from further analysis. as
r¯ may be very large, all ri except a small subset of
r¯ with the lowest ri-associated motif e-values may be excluded. the stamp platform 
 <cit>  is utilized to organize the remaining
ri⊂r¯ into a distance tree according to similarities of their ri-associated motifs. the pairwise distance between two motifs is computed in a column-by-column fashion using one of several available statistical metrics that can be selected by the user
 <cit> . after a pairwise distance has been computed between all ri-associated motifs, the distance tree is assembled using either an unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  or self-organizing tree algorithm , according to the user’s preference.

organization and evaluation
the
ri⊂r¯ represented in the motif tree will naturally cluster into groups according to the similarity of their ri-associated motifs. each motif family fi is a collection of ri . the motif tree is therefore defined by a set of m non-intersecting motif families
f¯=fi,f <dig> …fm. the division of the motif tree into a set of non-intersecting motif families requires that a clustering threshold be imposed upon the
ri⊂r¯ represented in the tree. each motif family fk is a collection of ri, and each ri is a collection of sequence entries taken from the whole input set
y¯. the set of motif families
f¯=f <dig> f <dig> …fm is determined based entirely on the similarity of ri-associated motifs, without regard to the sequence entries from which subsequences are drawn to create these ri-associated motifs. the motif family fk can be described by a singular characteristic motif, which we refer to as a “familial profile” . among the collection of ri that forms fk, some sequence entries will be re-discovered more frequently than others. an fp is generated for each fk according to a user-selected fp frequency threshold. to compute the fp, sequence entries yj that re-occur among the related subsets in a motif family with frequency of greater than or equal to the fp frequency threshold are collected and a motif is generated from these sequence entries using a meme oops  model. to compare the occurrence of different motif families over the set of sequence entries, a “motifmap” matrix is created. this matrix compares the input sequence entries  to significant fps . when an instance of fp, the familial profile derived from family f, is found in a particular input sequence entry y, the coordinates that this instance spans within the sequence entry are noted at position  in the matrix.

tests on biological data
lexa binding in e. coli
the absence of clearly identifiable motifs in large subsets of chip-chip and chip-seq data is a common occurrence. this can result from experimental error or protein binding to degenerate or motif-free sites
 <cit> . to test motifcatcher’s ability to discover a motif in a data set with a large number of motif-free sites, we reanalyzed chip-chip data collected by wade et al.,
 <cit>  who identified  <dig> binding sites for the well-studied regulatory protein lexa in e. coli mg <dig>  twenty-five of the binding sites were consistent with previous experimentally determined targets  and  <dig> were novel sites. wade et al. scanned the novel binding sites for a significant match to the canonical tactg10cagta lexa motif
 <cit> . five of these sites were found to have a canonical lexa motif , and  <dig> were determined not to have a canonical lexa motif 
 <cit> . we sought to test whether or not motifcatcher could improve upon the previous interpretation of this dataset. in our reanalysis of the chip-chip data, we assembled a sequence data set based on the  <dig> lexa binding sites reported by wade et al., and an additional sequence data set with random genomic sites substituted for the type iii sites. a motif search was carried out on both data sets with meme zoops, recursive gibbs sampling, meme zoops mc, single mast mc, and an iterative meme/mast mc.

for the data set with random sites substituted for type iii sites, type i and ii sites are true positives , and random sites are true negatives . the erroneous discovery of a lexa binding site at a random genomic location is therefore a false positive, and the failure to discover a lexa binding site at a genomic location where the lexa protein binds is a false negative. the most accurate binding site motif representation should be built from only true binding sites , and include all true binding sites . the meme zoops and recursive gibbs sampler approaches produce only one final output motif, while the three mc searches offer alternative versions of output motifs, according to the fp threshold value. selecting a higher fp threshold value produces a conservative estimate of the motif, while a lower value may include more degenerate subsequences, at the cost of erroneously incorporating more non-motif-containing sequences. in our analysis, we explored the whole range of fp threshold values , and discovered that the statistically best f-measure always correlated with the best e-value . . this finding corroborates previous work that has suggested that e-value may be a better statistical measure to optimize than the more traditional measure of information content, which is the objective of the meme zoops protocol
 <cit> . a comparison of the various motif-finding strategies applied to this data set revealed that each of the three mc searches demonstrated comparable performance to the gibbs recursive sampler and outperformed meme significantly. a significant difference in the actual motif profiles determined by the motifcatcher and gibbs sampling approaches further suggests a distinct directionality of the motif not reported by the meme zoops search .

the meme zoops searches produced motifs similar to the canonical lexa-binding site motif  for both data sets. subsequences from both type iii sites and random sites were included in the creation of each respective binding site motif at approximately the same rate . from motifcatcher’s tree-building process, additional meaningful quantities emerge in both the total number of significant related subsets, and the fraction of ri that comprise the largest motif family . a comparison of these values for the original data set versus the random sites substituted data set reveals that the original data set exhibits both  a significantly greater proportion of total ri runs with an associated motif with a significant e-value, and  of these significant ri, a greater fraction of these have an associated motif similar to the canonical lexa-binding site motif . for all three types of mc searches, it was easier to discover the canonical lexa motif when type i and type ii sites were supplemented with type iii sites instead of random sites.
r¯, all related subsets r with associated motifs with an e-value greater than e-value threshold are filtered out , and the remaining
ri⊂r¯ are organized into a motif tree. the largest motif family describes the motif most likely to be biologically significant. depending on the input sequence data set, smaller clusters may also represent biologically significant motifs. in this example, ri-associated motifs are represented as simple polygons . gray polygons represent ri-associated motifs with an e-value above the e-value threshold, and so are eliminated in the initial filtration step. the remaining colored polygons are organized into a motif tree, in which the red circles form the largest cluster . in this toy system, there are  <dig> total
ri⊂r¯, of which  <dig> pass the e-value filter, of which  <dig> segregate into the largest cluster. comparative ratios from the lexa study shown in the table in  reveal that regardless of the related subset determination protocol, it was always easier to recover the lexa motif from the original data set versus the set with non-traditional lexa binding sites replaced by random sites. in all trials, the largest cluster motif recapitulated the canonical lexa motif.

an analysis of the degenerate motif subsequence matches suggested by motifcatcher revealed that motifcatcher consistently preferred a single subsequence from each sequence entry to incorporate in the lexa motif from the type iii sites . conversely, motifcatcher typically did not settle on a single subsequence match from the random sites data set. as each sequence entry was derived from a single chip-chip derived lexa binding site, only one subsequence from the set ought to represent the genuine lexa binding site location. in this way, the type iii sites were again distinguished from randomness . an investigation of the degenerate subsequence matches suggested by motifcatcher revealed that  <dig> of the  <dig> type iii sequence entries contained subsequences that were identical to the canonical site , but with one or more ctg half-site motifs replaced by atgs. one of these subsequences was identified by wade et al., and ectopically introduced into the coding region of the mela gene. significant in vivo binding was observed at this ectopic site
 <cit> . as they share the ctg to atg mutation, and are otherwise canonical lexa binding sites, the motifcatcher-suggested sites shown in table 
 <dig> are especially likely to bind lexa in vivo. the remaining  <dig> type iii sites were also found to have degenerate subsequence matches , however due to a lack of previously published data showing lexa binding to similar degenerate motifs, these matches were not directly interpretable. interestingly, an additional motifcatcher analysis carried out on only the  <dig> type iii sites yielded a novel motif in  <dig> of the  <dig> sites , however we were unable to discover a meaningful biological interpretation for this motif.

in the canonical lexa binding site consensus sequence, atctg10cagta, two ‘ctg’ half-site motifs in reverse compliment to each other separated by an intervening sequence of  <dig> nt are implicated as the most important sequence elements for protein-dna contact. among the motifcatcher-suggested lexa binding site matches for unconventional  sites,  <dig> of the  <dig> were defined by substituting one or both ‘ctg’ groups from the canonical consensus sequence with ‘atg’ . the chip-chip score column  reflects the experimentally observed binding strength at each site. the ptr binding site sequence has been experimentally verified to bind lexa when inserted ectopically to a non-lexa-binding region
 <cit> . given that the other  <dig> sites in this list share the ‘ctg’ to ‘atg’ mutation, it is likely that these motifcatcher-suggested degenerate lexa binding sites also bind lexa in vivo. 

evidence for alternative cse4p binding mechanisms in s. cerivisiae
we were interested to test motifcatcher’s ability to characterize general binding profiles for proteins whose dna binding signatures are longer and have fewer highly conserved elements than classical transcription factor binding site motifs. cse4p is a histone h <dig> variant protein essential for kinetochore function in s. cerevisiae <cit> . the protein is known to localize to the centromeric  site on each chromosome. the protein is recognized at these cen sites by a ~125-bp stretch of three sequence elements 
 <cit> . a detailed analysis of the biophysical interactions of cen-binding proteins suggests that cse4p genetically interacts with only the cdei and cdeii sites, with the majority of direct protein-dna interaction occurring with the 74– <dig> bp a/t-rich cde ii segment
 <cit> . a recent chip-seq experiment examining dna-binding of cse4p demonstrated that in addition to the  <dig> cen binding sites, cse4p also bound at  <dig> additional sites
 <cit> .

we tested motifcatcher’s ability to provide additional insight into the mechanism of cse4p binding for these  <dig> non-centromeric sites. an iterative meme/mast mc search was carried out on a sequence data set derived from chip-seq derived coverage regions. the ri-associated motifs naturally clustered into two families . familial profiles were generated for each family using an fp threshold of  <dig> . a careful examination of the output revealed that the data set naturally segregated by motif into two non-overlapping groups of sequence entries. this separation of the data set by motif similarity suggests that from a sequence analysis point of view, this data set is more appropriately represented as two completely independent sets.
 <cit>  that cse4p is transiently localizing to regions of high histone turnover. the a/t-richness of the second motif family resembles the canonical cdeii motif, which is known to be responsible for the majority of direct interactions between cse4p and dna.

lefrançois et al. determined a high correlation of the  <dig> novel cse4p binding site target genes with the  <dig> highest ranked polii targets  finding  <dig> sites in common. this led to the hypothesis that the  <dig> novel binding sites were the result of transient localization of cse4p to regions of high histone turnover. our iterative meme/mast mc analysis segregated the data set into three non-intersecting groups: family  <dig> , family  <dig> , and sites that belonged to neither group . of the  <dig> novel sites reported by lefrançois et al. that associated with highly ranked polii targets, 37/ <dig>  belonged to family  <dig>  1/ <dig>  belonged to family  <dig>  and 11/ <dig>  belonged to neither group. the distribution of polii target sites among unconventional sites in motif families  <dig>   <dig>  or neither group could not be explained by a uniform normal distribution .

our analysis suggests that sites included in family  <dig>  but not family  <dig>  may be consistent with lefrançois et. al’s hypothesis of transient localization of cse4p to regions of high histone turnover. while the motif defining family  <dig> does not contain any highly conserved features , it does demonstrate a general sequence profile distinct from the  <dig> % a/t content of the whole s. cerevisiae genome. the absence of sites in family  <dig> in the list of the top  <dig> polii sites suggests that this hypothesis is not appropriate for the sites in this family. however, the second motif family was defined by a a/t-rich motif similar to the canonical cdeii motif. all sixteen canonical cen sites were found in this subset. considering the similarity of the motif defining the second motif family to the canonical motif, we hypothesize that sites in this group describe sites where cse4p interacts with dna directly, in a manner similar to cse4p binding to the cdeii region of canonical cen sites.

coordinating the motif families, familial profiles, and branching diagram outputs generated by motifcatcher, we conclude that only a fraction  of the novel cse4p binding sites previously thought to localize to sites of high histone turnover actually do so. another fraction  of the novel sites report a sequence profile similar to the canonical cdeii motif, binding at these sites therefore likely occurs directly to the dna following the binding mechanism associated with the cdeii region at centromeric sites.

discovery of closely related motif variants for a family of homologous transcription factors: general transcription factors tfbb, tfbd, and tfbg in halobacterium sp. nrc-1
one of the main mechanisms for the evolution of gene regulatory networks is the duplication and subsequent divergence of transcription factors
 <cit> . often this process happens multiple times and leads to the accumulation of families of transcription factors functioning simultaneously in the cell. depending on the degree of divergence, multiple homologous transcription factors may target both overlapping sets of promoters and unique promoter sets. the resultant partitioning of gene regulatory networks by this mechanism is thought to be at the basis of some important functional properties of gene regulatory networks and could inform re-engineering of biological networks. at the root of this problem is the ability to distinguish functional differences between often-similar binding sites of homologous transcription factors.

in archaea, two general transcription factors are thought to be necessary and sufficient for initiating basal transcription, homologs to eukaryotic  tfiib  and  tata-binding proteins 
 <cit> . these general transcription factors are present in multiple copies in several archaea. for example, the genome of the archaeon halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> encodes  <dig> different tbp proteins and  <dig> different tfb proteins. with  <dig> different tbps  and  <dig> different tfbs , hb. nrc- <dig> could use up to  <dig> different tbp-tfb complexes. evidence for at least  <dig> of these has been observed
 <cit> . in the same study, facciotti et al. observed that the sets of genes bound by each of the tfb homologs in hb. nrc- <dig> appear to be partially overlapping while still including distinct functional groupings
 <cit> ).

we hypothesized that given the overlap in promoter binding sites for many tfb assayed in
 <cit> , a binding motif common to all tfbs must be present and likely include a signature similar to the tfiib binding element  described earlier
 <cit> . we also proposed that direct protein-dna interaction could play a role in discriminating between these different types of tfb binding sites. however, previous efforts to simply identify a tfb motif from chip-chip data using the meme suite had been unsuccessful
 <cit> . testing this hypothesis requires  that there are subtle differences in the binding sites between these different tfb proteins,  an experimental protocol exists that could confidently reduce the search space for motif finding algorithms, and  a sensitive tool for detecting and classifying these differences can be applied. we investigated our binding hypothesis by using a new chip-seq protocol for hb. nrc-1
 <cit>  that provides greater spatial resolution than the previously adopted chip-chip
 <cit>  and motifcatcher to help discover a general tfb motif, and if possible, distinguish subtle differences between the tfbb, tfbd, and tfbg binding sites.

three separate chip-seq experiments were conducted as in wilbanks et al. <cit>  for three strains of hb. nrc- <dig>  each encoding a chromosomally tagged copy of tfbb, tfbd or tfbg. binding peaks were identified with the publicly available software package spp
 <cit>  . a comparison of peak lists generated for each chip-seq experiment revealed that among the putative binding sites, some were accessible to only one, some to any two, and some to all three of these tfb proteins. using these criteria, we constructed  <dig> non-intersecting chip-seq peak lists, detailing the genomic locations of putative binding sites accessible to one, two, or all three tfb proteins .

for each of the  <dig> tfb-binding chip-seq peak lists, five groups of data sets of sequences were constructed:  60-bp,  100-bp, and  200-bp stretches of sequence centered about the genomic location of each peak center, and  60-bp stretches of sequence centered around a site displaced  <dig> nt upstream of the center of each chip-seq peak. we randomly shuffled the members of the  <dig> tfb-binding chip-seq peak lists into  <dig> new groups, and extracted 60-bp stretches of sequence centered about the genomic location of each peak center . in addition to these five groups, we created a final data set containing  <dig> random 60-bp stretches of sequence taken from around the hb. nrc- <dig> genome.

each data set was subjected to a meme zoops search, an iterative meme/mast mc search, a gibbs recursive sampler search, and an iterative gibbs sampler/mast mc search. in selecting these four motif-finding strategies, we were able to compare the performance of two basic motif finders , with the performance of the mc iterative search extension of that finder. a particular statistically overrepresented sequence motif was repeatedly discovered from many of the gibbs recursive sampler and motifcatcher analyses . in a few cases, a version of this motif was reported which included fewer than 5% of the input sequence entries, which we evaluated for performance statistics as a “half-discovery”. it was not always possible to discover the motif using a reasonably small number of seeds , however application of the mc iterative search program to an “ideal” seed  could often yield re-discovery of the motif. comparative statistics  revealed that the motifcatcher iterative search framework applied to both the meme suite and gibbs recursive sampler offered improved performance versus the motif finder by itself . if a much larger number of runs were carried out, one would expect the motifcatcher program to randomly create an ideal or near-ideal seed, so the motif might now be discovered from data sets where  <dig> runs was insufficient for motif discovery.

five groups of  <dig> sequence data sets were constructed from the putative binding sites derived from tfbb, tfbd, and tfbg chip-seq experiments. various lengths of sequence taken surrounding each site  were examined, as were stretches of sequence  <dig> base pairs long displaced a distance of  <dig> base pairs from chip-seq sites , and data sets built from randomly shuffling binding sites from the  <dig> different tfb binding site groups into new groups of equal size . a data set of  <dig> 60-bp segments from the hb sp. nrc- <dig> genome was generated as an additional control . evaluation of these  <dig> data sets with  <dig> alternative motif-finding strategies revealed distinct differences in the ability of each strategy to discover the putative tfb motif. for all data sets except the random and displaced data sets, discovery of a strong match to the tfb motif was scored as a true positive . failure to discover a tfb motif could from the random and displaced datasets was scored as a true negative . if a weak match to the tfb motif was discovered in any dataset other than a random or displaced data set, it was scored as a half tp . one hundred runs were carried out for the iterative meme/mast mc and iterative gibbs/mast mc runs. a number of ‘ideal’ seeds were artificially created and were found to converge to the tfb motif. given a very large number of runs, an ideal seed or near-ideal seed is expected to occur by chance, so the tfb motif would be recovered in these cases. for both meme and the gibbs recursive sampler, the application of the motifcatcher extension significantly improved each finder’s performance.

in archaea, tbp binds to the 8bp a/t rich tata box sequence. localization of a tbp to dna forms a bent protein-dna complex, which is recognized by a tfb. the tfb binds to both the tbp through protein-protein interactions, and to dna at the adjacent bre . the tfb/tbp forms a transcription initiation complex, which then binds rna polymerase . a dnase footprinting assay applied to the gdh promoter in the hyperthermophilic marine archaeon pyrococcus furiosus revealed that in addition to the contacts upstream of the tbp protein at the bre, tfb makes significant contacts downstream, approaching the transcript start site 
 <cit> . an alignment of our discovered motif to the p. furiosus gdh promoter region  revealed a precise mapping to the putative bre, tata box, and ppe  sites. the ppe, which in general comprises any a/t-rich sequence elements between − <dig> to − <dig> relative to the transcription start site, has been implicated as essential to the activity of the 16s/23s rrna promoter of the archaeon sulfolobus shibatae <cit> . this sequence may be essential for stabilizing contacts between the n-terminus of tfb and rnap
 <cit> . examination of the promoters in several halophilic archaea has revealed a statistically overrepresented a/t rich pattern located precisely at − <dig> relative to the tss
 <cit> , which is in exact agreement with the location of the putative ppe. in the majority of cases, the distance between elements in our discovered motif to atg-predicted and experimentally determined tss in hb. nrc- <dig> agreed exactly or nearly exactly with corresponding elements in the p. furiosus gdh promoter .
 <cit>   compared to logo alignment of motifcatcher-derived motif . in the gdh promoter sequence, shading indicates the tata box and bre elements and a black rectangle indicates the transcription-bubble region. positions above the sequence are relative to the tss, and arrows indicate phosphates analyzed in
 <cit> . the logo motif was formed by aligning sequences near  <dig> of the  <dig>  reported tfbb, tfbd, and tfbg chip-seq peaks. conserved elements between the gdh promoter and motifcatcher-derived motif are indicated by green boxes surrounding the gdh promoter elements and by black lines extending vertically from the motif to gdh promoter sequence. the putative bre, tata box, ppe, and tss in the logo are indicated with colored rectangles , and text annotation. an axis under the motif displays the most commonly discovered distance of sequence elements relative to the closest tss in the hb. nrc- <dig> genome. the distance of elements from the hb. nrc- <dig> motif logo and elements in the p. furiosus gdh promoter to their respective tss matched precisely.

a multiple alignment of sequence entries from each individual data set was constructed which revealed differentially emphasized elements in the putative bre component . the variation among conserved sequence elements within the bre invites several hypotheses regarding dna-sequence specificity for binding one or more of the tested tfb proteins: sites that could bind tfbg  all contain a pronounced ‘aa’ 4bp upstream of the tata box. sites that do not bind tfbg do not show this pronounced ‘aa’. a ‘cg’ pattern located  <dig> bp upstream of the tata box is most pronounced in sites that can bind both tfbb and tfbd , intermediately pronounced in sites that bind either tfbb or tfbd but not both  and significantly less pronounced in sites that cannot bind either tfbb or tfbd . a sequence analysis of all tfb proteins in hb. nrc- <dig> demonstrated that the tfbs naturally segregated into four distinct groups, one of which contained both tfbb and tfbd, another contained tfbg
 <cit> . the variation among the protein structures might be recapitulated in variation among the protein-dna binding sites.

CONCLUSIONS
the motifcatcher algorithm frames an existing pattern detection tool  in a monte carlo simulation framework, and organizes significant candidate output motifs produced by that tool into a branching diagram that may be further processed. it is not in itself a motif-finder, but rather a generic strategy to extend the sensitivity and utility of existing motif-finders. here, we demonstrated that application of two motif-finders supplemented with our motifcatcher extension algorithm resulted in an increase in performance compared to the motif finder alone . we demonstrated this result using two widely used motif finders that rely on different motif-finding strategies .

beyond simple increases in detection performance, our novel approach of organization of candidate motifs in a tree diagram highlighted an exciting feature of motifcatcher: in our analysis of chip-seq-derived cse4p binding in yeast, we discovered that the input sequence entries naturally segregated into two non-intersecting groups, entirely according to the discovered motifs. we were able to support the conclusion that this segregation is appropriate by discovering a very similar segregation of the data set based on correlation with polii binding sites. from our motif-finding analyses related to homologous tfbs in hb. nrc- <dig>  we were able to repeatedly discover a statistically significant motif present in all of the data sets. comparing this motif with an archaeal promoter sequence used in a dnase footprinting experiment, we were able to map significant elements of our motif to the well-characterized tata box, bre, and ppe motifs. a comparison of the distance of elements in our motif to annotated and experimentally determined transcript start sites was in precise agreement with the distances described from the dnase footprinting experiment. significant differences were discovered among the bre element as it was discovered from the different tfb datasets. we hypothesize that these differences confer specificity for binding among various tfb proteins. our results suggest an experimental investigation, which could further elucidate crucial details of the mechanisms of tfb binding in hb. nrc- <dig> 

in general, motifcatcher may be used to suggest ways that a single data set might be more appropriately segregated into several smaller data sets . the motifmap utility, which maps discovered motifs to the input sequence entries themselves, coupled with statistical measures to evaluate significant co-occurrences and co-localizations of significant motifs, increases the power of this feature. in addition to improving motif detection sensitivity, motifcatcher allows one to better organize and categorize biological sequence datasets based on discovered motifs.

