BACKGROUND
the acquisition of a series of full-length cdnas can be time-consuming and expensive. in a first step, a cdna clone covering only part of a specific sequence is usually obtained by buying e.g. a clone with an expressed sequence tag . this dna is then expanded by 5'- and 3' rapid amplification of cdna ends  . however, the direct acquisition of full-length cdnas is a difficult task. in our experience, relatively frequently est clones from academic sources do not contain the target sequence, carry point mutations or represent incomplete splice versions. if clones are bought from a verified source, they are very expensive.

the techniques described in this publication permit the efficient direct amplification and cloning of full-length copies of most desired cdnas starting from a variety of sequence templates. moreover, the amplification of target cdnas in a high-throughput format requires a large amount of template cdna mixture that is usually purchased in form of an expensive commercial library. alternatively, an mrna sample is reverse transcribed to cdna which then serves as a template for pcr amplification of the targets. in both cases the template cdna is scarce unless it is cloned in a vector and amplified in e. coli cells. this procedure is inevitably accompanied by under-representation or loss of certain cdna sequences due to unequal transfection efficiency or stability of the different plasmids.

by use of the isothermal rolling circle amplification  method, the techniques described here can generate ample amounts of template cdna from any kind of source mrna/cdna without noticeable loss of sequence representation. a pseudolibrary, as described here, is generated entirely in vitro by a minimized number of experimental steps and omits transfection and amplification of the dna inside bacterial cell clones. furthermore, the synthesis of a second cdna strand ahead of amplification is avoided. the first strand cdna is synthesized by reverse transcription of mrna. the rna strand is removed by denaturation and cleavage with rnase i. the remaining cdna is treated with a specific ligase that produces closed circles from linear single-stranded dna. the circularized ss-cdna is subjected to rca using Φ <dig> dna polymerase and chemically modified random primers which boost amplification. the direct processing of the first strand cdna enhances the cloning of "difficult" target sequences. the subsequent rca generates ample dna to be used as template for high-throughput target amplification by pcr. finally, an in-house developed and exceptionally efficient cdna amplification protocol using pcr with phusion dna polymerase leads to capture of the targets upon the first attempt with a success rate of 80% or more.

in our approach, the combination of jointly optimized steps fuses several recently available techniques to a powerful cdna-amplification and -cloning ensemble useful in high-throughput settings like those heading for protein production for structural biology or other demanding applications.

RESULTS
plasmid cdna library quality and success of amplifications
because of the high copy fidelity of phi <dig> dna polymerase, the success of target cdna amplification is primarily determined by the quality of the source mrna or cdna. the megaman library  proved to be an excellent source for human cdnas. the rca product permitted us to amplify over 80% of all desired human cdna targets at the initial attempt . the primer design was carried out with vector nti  choosing tm values around 55°c  or with the primer selection tool of the joint center for structural genomics of the nih. both primer designs yielded similar results and are not distinguished in the table. corresponding cloning experiments applying standard conditions as suggested by the suppliers with vent polymerase  or a mixture of pfu polymerase and taq polymerase  in pfu buffer  gave significantly fewer positive pcr reactions . variation of the conditions such as adding dmso, tmso or changing the mg-ion concentration did not improve the percentage of positive reactions.

the other cdna pseudolibraries displayed a quality similar to that of the amplified megaman library, we could obtain 80–100% of the desired targets at first attempt. only a single target class proved to be notoriously difficult; we could not obtain amplification of any full length cdna of the plexin family from the chicken library. these cdnas span 6– <dig> kb and thus are unusually long. however, primers for shorter plexin fragments led to amplification of the expected fragments. somewhat shorter targets like semaphorin domains of about 3– <dig> kb length were amplified with a success rate of about 50%. not surprisingly, the amplification of very long cdnas required amplicon splitting or further optimization of the pcr conditions.

systematic study of a series of amplifications by robotics
two genetically engineered dna polymerases containing accessory dna binding domains  were compared with a mixture of classically used dna polymerases . the amplification conditions were kept as similar as possible. all pcr reactions were run at the same primer concentrations and in presence or absence of 2% tmso. the thermocycler program was also the same for all amplifications:  <dig> s at 95°c,  <dig> min at 65°c with  <dig> °c decrease per cycle,  <dig> s  or  <dig> min  per kb of the target at 72°c for  <dig> cycles; then  <dig> cycles at 95°c for  <dig> s,  <dig> s at 52°c, with the same extension time.

each primer contained an attb <dig> or attb <dig> site, respectively, to permit downstream cloning by the gateway technology . the results upon agarose gel electrophoresis  were scored by inspection of the gels for presence or absence of a band with the expected size . strong and weak bands were discriminated visually. a strong band indicated that the cloning of the fragment by gateway technology was highly probable; over 90% of the entry clones verified by sequencing showed the expected sequence.

recapitulating we can state that the fusion dna polymerases perform much better than the mixture of the conventional enzymes pfu/taq : out of  <dig> tested cases phusion polymerase was positive in 36; herculase in  <dig> and pfu/taq in  <dig>  only phusion polymerase could amplify all of the  <dig> tested targets, herculase failed in  <dig> cases and pfu/taq in  <dig>  the results described here are confirmed by many more target amplifications that were handled manually in our laboratory. we experience that over 80% of the targets will be amplified at first attempt when using the four phusion polymerase conditions. in organisms of lower genetic complexity like drosophila we obtained all targets at first go. at this time point we have set up amplifications for totally  <dig> targets in four species and have obtained  <dig> positive pcrs.

discussion
rolling circle amplification is an established technique for amplification of small samples of template dna mixtures  <cit> . the technique is well established and known to yield amplified dna with high fidelity and without loss of sequence representation  <cit> . it has been mainly used for amplification of genomic dnas or sequencing templates, but was so far not systematically applied for expansion of mixtures of ss-cdna to be followed by pcr amplification and cloning of target cdnas. this paper describes several variations of this kind of application: i) pcr template generation via poly+mrna or total rna, reverse transcription and second strand synthesis yielding ds-cdna followed by rca and high-efficiency pcr; ii) pcr template generation via poly+mrna or total rna, reverse transcription to ss-cdna, circularization of ss-cdna by direct ligation, rca and high-efficiency pcr. high-throughput cloning of cdnas requires relatively high template quantities because rare transcripts should be amplifiable.

upon production of genomic libraries employing rolling circle amplification, the rearrangement of dna has been observed  <cit> . the majority of these chimeras are inverted sequences with an intervening deletion  <cit> . such artifacts will probably not occur during the amplification of cdna as described in this paper, because the chimeras are formed during the cloning steps inside e. coli cells  <cit>  while our method comprises only in vitro amplification steps.

the procedures had to be optimized to achieve a good overall success; especially the final dna purification steps proved to be critical in this respect. the pcr enzyme and the amplification protocols also needed to be adjusted to the template in order to permit highly reliable cloning of target cdnas from complex mixtures like mammalian cdna pseudolibraries. we thus strongly recommend using the protocols described here as an entity.

CONCLUSIONS
the presented set of methods means saving time and money. the practical production of a specific cdna in the laboratory is less time consuming than the ordering and mailing of cdna clones from external sources. in our experience, the acquisition of clones from pre-existing libraries can fail in a considerable percentage of cases, and buying verified clones is rather expensive. we thus try to acquire cdnas by the described methods before we access outside sources. the techniques required for the insertion of the amplified cdnas into plasmid vectors are well established and for this reason have not been described here. the current methods of choice are the gateway technology , the strataclone topoisomerase-based cloning kit or the infusion cloning technique . employing a pseudolibrary as template for target amplification with phusion polymerase is thus established as an extremely useful combination to rapidly amplify multiple target cdnas at low cost.

