BACKGROUND
upon the discovery of the rnai phenomena in invertebrates  <cit>  and the discovery of functional sirnas in mammalian cell systems  <cit> , the identification of small rnas has become an important area of research. contrary to initial expectations, early studies based on the isolation and sequencing of small rnas  revealed the existence of a class of highly expressed small rnas termed micro rnas . since then, mirnas have been shown to regulate mrna expression in a large variety of biological contexts, including cell development, differentiation and cancer. recent studies have discovered further mirnas by large-scale sequencing based on recent advances in sequencing technology  <cit> .

other efforts to isolate small rnas , sometimes termed " rnomics"  <cit> , have systematically identified additional species of small rnas. recently, the analysis of rnas binding to the piwi family proteins has revealed a novel, small , and yet uncharacterized class of rnas restricted to the germ line cells  <cit> , which does not depend on cleavage by dicer  <cit> . these discoveries suggest the possibility of yet undiscovered classes of small rnas in mammals. despite this, recent studies to profile small rnas have focused on mirna and/or sirna rather than on the exploration of additional classes of rnas  <cit> .

here, we explore small rnas by large-scale unbiased sequencing of rnas with sizes of 20– <dig> nt. we provide substantial evidences for independent classes of small rnas. although these rnas may be expressed at levels that are orders of magnitude lower than certain mirnas and other highly expressed rnas, our data reveals the existence of multiple layers of cellular small rnas, which are likely to be specifically processed and maintained in the cell.

RESULTS
library preparation
to address fundamental questions about the existence and variety of small rnas in mammalians, as well as mirna, we prepared two small rna libraries. we used hepg <dig>  a cell line derived from human liver carcinoma, because small rnas from cultured cells can be obtained with a minimal risk of contamination due to non-specific degradation of longer rnas. small libraries were prepared from rna extracted from hepg <dig> cell lines and by ligating the rna-oligonucleotide adapters to the total rna, followed by a size based separation . using this cloning strategy, we focus on molecules that have a phosphate at the 5' end and a oh group at the 3' ends, like the known mirnas. these would not include the non-phosphorylated degradation products. such rna molecules, which might have different groups at the 5' and 3' ends, will not be identified with this strategy and will be subject of future studies.

we decided to analyze not only the mirna fraction , but also a fraction of slightly longer rnas . the former is expected to represent mirnas mainly due to i) the size constraint and ii) our protocol which clones 5'-end phosphorylated rnas. the latter fraction has not yet been characterized by large-scale sequencing and may contain new classes of rnas, which have not been explored in depth so far. to further explore these potentially novel small rnas, we prepared two libraries: i) the fraction likely containing mirnas  and ii) a broad 30– <dig> nt fraction, referred here as "short" and "long" libraries, respectively.

small rnas may be relevant even if their expression levels are lower than the highly expressed mirnas, as large mrnas can often function successfully even with low copy numbers. we concatenated the obtained small cdnas, cloned them into plasmids and subjected the libraries to the riken risa large-scale sequencing pipeline, based on sanger sequencing  <cit> . we obtained  <dig>  and  <dig>  sequences from the short  and long  rna fractions, respectively.

sequence classification and library quality
we classified the sequenced rnas based on sequence comparison and genome annotations. in the alignment of the rna and the genome sequence, we used exonerate  <cit> , which approximates a dynamic programming algorithm, and discarded poor alignments which cover less than 85% of the rna or which sequence identities are less than 90%. subsequently, we picked up only the best alignments for the classification. this criterion was adopted due to potential biological variation, rna modification, and errors during the experimental protocols . besides mirnas, we found considerable amounts of other rnas derived from transfer rna , ribosomal rna , small nucleolar rna , small nuclear rna , known gene loci, and transposable elements. the number of rnas belonging to each class is shown in fig  <dig>  demonstrating striking differences between the short and long libraries .

if random degradation or contamination during library preparation are enriched in our libraries, rather than 5'-phosporylated small rnas constituting cellular rna, we would expect higher ratio of rrnas due to the high constitution  of the total cellular rna. however, this is not likely to be the case; the constitution of rrna fragments in our libraries is just a minority of the small rna content. the sequenced rnas corresponding to the rrnas constitutes only 5%  of the short library and 3%  of the long library, which is considerably lower than the hypothetical distribution deriving from random rna cleavage. in a previous study of mirna in a human cell line, hela, the fraction of known ncrnas including rrna, snrna, and trna was 24%, while the ratio in our short fraction library in our study  was 15%   <cit> . this suggests that the our libraries include few artifacts resulting from early stages of library construction.

evolutionary conservation
the general evolutionary conservation level of functional ncrnas varies considerably among rna classes  <cit> . therefore, lack of conservation does not necessarily mean lack of function; nonetheless, observed conservation implies selective pressure and thereby function. for the long and short libraries, we investigated the evolutionary conservation level of each small rna cluster and surrounding genome sequence using mean phastcons scores  <cit>   . the small fraction is highly conserved, while the longer fraction is less conserved than typical exons but more than intergenic or intronic sequences. the high conservation of the rna sequences from the small library is consistent with the high mirna content in the library; as noted in  <cit> , mirnas are generally more conserved than other ncrnas. a large part of the long library consists of trna-derived sequences . such sequences are often labeled as repeats, and thus ignored by phastcons. nevertheless, the moderate increase of conservation at the long fraction rna loci suggests that non-trna sequences are under higher selective pressure than their proximal regions.

sequence length preferences
the short fraction contains sequences with a median length of  <dig> bp, while the large fraction predominantly contains sequences with lengths of  <dig> and  <dig> bp . each of the small rna classes has a distinct length distribution , which argues against random cleavage of rna precursors. together with mirnas , two additional classes, trnas and transposable elements, show peaks centered around  <dig> nt. although some repeat-derived small rnas have been reported as rasirna  from plants to mammals  <cit> , identifying trna products of this length was unexpected.

small rnas assigned to snornas and snrnas show peaks at  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, respectively, whereas their full-length cognate forms are longer . there is also a difference between the lengths of small rnas mapping to known genes and those mapping to intergenic regions. the former group shows a peak at  <dig> nt, while the latter shows a peak at  <dig> nt. although these classes of rnas are not as abundant as trna-derived small rna, the length bias depending on rna species suggest independent mechanisms of controlled processing by specific enzyme producing 5'-end phosphorylated rnas, such as rnase iii, or specific stabilization of randomly processed rna followed by and/or coupled with some uncharacterized 5'-end phosphorylation mechanisms.

uncharacterized pathways associated with trna processing
a substantial number of small rnas are assigned to the trna category, while our small rnas are shorter than  <dig> nt and mature forms of trnas are between  <dig> nt to  <dig> nt long. the identified small rnas are aligned only to well-defined regions of mature trnas. based on the alignments between trnas and sequenced small rnas, we identify a unique characteristic suggesting independent pathways of trna processing. these partial trnas are unlikely to be the result of non-specific degradation for two reasons: i) lack of correlation to trna expression and amino acid usage and ii) specific cleavage patterns. we describe our analysis of these properties below.

expression correlation
if the small rnas matching trnas are the result of a non-specific degradation process, the expression levels of such rnas should correlate to that of the corresponding trna genes. dittmar et al  <cit>  have presented an effort to profile relative trna expression in different tissues using microarrays. unfortunately, we cannot compare our results directly to this data since our expression data is not relative – it is an estimation of the abundance based on the small rna counts in one library. an earlier work suggested that the trna abundance correlates with the number of trna genes in caenorhabditis elegans, as a result of evolution to optimize the efficiency of translation, based on an evidence that trna gene number correlate with amino acid frequency in c. elegans  <cit> . accordingly, we have compared the frequencies of small rna sequences mapping to trnas per isoacceptor family  with trna gene copy numbers  . the small rna frequencies have no correlation with trna gene copy number or amino acid frequency distribution  and - <dig>   respectively, where p-values are computed based on a null hypothesis that compared distributions have no correlation), while trna gene copies correlate with amino acids with pearson correlation  <dig>  . this implies that the cleavage is directed towards certain trna types, rather than being a function of trna expression. for instance, our libraries identified  <dig>  his trna cleavage products , while the number of ser trna cleavage products was only  <dig> . although the trna copy number is an indirect way of measuring trna expression and thus should be treated with caution, the discrepancy in proportions is also demonstrated in the northern blotting experiment , and this suggests that trnas are differentially cleaved and/or their products have differential stability in the cells.

*... small rna sequences subjected to northern blot

specific cleavage patterns
intriguingly, we found a cleavage at specific trna sites: the anticodon-loop and t-loop region within the trna cloverleaf structure. an example of the former case is the his trna cleavage pattern. rna molecules of  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt long are observed from 3'- and 5'-end of the trna. the end of these two products are adjacent to each other at a specific site at the anticodon-loop ). this exact cleavage and maintenance of its products is strongly supported by hundreds of sequence reads from the long fraction. precise cleavage at the same site occurs also in ile trna. however, this is different from his as only 3'-end products of ile trna were found in our libraries and its 5'-ends were not found ). another cleavage at the t-loop region produces rnas that are exactly  <dig> nt long. this cleavage is found in glu and asp trna, and only their 3'-ends are identified in our libraries. the asp trna has a unique cleavage pattern at the anticodon-loop ). the length distribution patterns of trna derived small rnas show distinct tendencies between isoacceptors , demonstrating distinct specific cleavages depending on trna species.

to confirm these cleavage products by independent means, we performed northern blotting . the results are consistent with our findings using the sequenced small rnas: the 3'-end products of his and ile trna were detected as  <dig> nt rnas, while the 5'-end of ile trna was not found. this demonstrates that the cleavage of trna occurs in living cells. the northern blot could not detect the small rnas corresponding to the ile trna 5'-end, which suggests that only the corresponding 3'-end rna is maintained in the cells. these findings are consistent with the sequencing of our libraries, and fig  <dig> also shows tissue specificity of the trna products. intriguingly, the his trna products are clearly detected in hepg <dig> and brain, but their presence is uncertain in other tissues and cell lines tested. the lysctt 5'-end is clearly detected in brain, kidney, and stomach, while the abundances of the mature form of lys trnas are not drastically different from the hisgtg. the cleavage events producing  <dig> nt rnas are also supported by northern blotting ).

the observed cleavage events can be interpreted in several ways:  controlled cleavage of trna and/or specific maintenance of the cleaved products,  random degradation of trnas at the exposed anticodon loop,  artifacts during rna cloning caused by inefficient reverse transcription at the modified nucleotides,  artifacts due to the limitation of our libraries, which cover only  <dig> nt– <dig> nt and cannot cover longer products of trna. in case  , we would expect that the abundance of trna products correlate with the abundance of trna, which is not the case, as described above. the northern blotting confirms this; the abundances of hisgtg 3'-end and lysctt 5'-end products do not correspond to the full-length trnas in brain and kidney .). the case as in  is unlikely, because ligation of adaptors to the rna is performed before the reverse transcriptase step. rna molecules causing stops of the reverse transcription cannot appear in our libraries, since rna sequences considered in this study carry the processed linker sequences ligated at both ends, whereas our reverse-transcription can incorporate mismatched nucleotides at very high efficiency  <cit> . the northern blotting also rejects the possibility of the case , as the cleavage products are detected in both the sequencing and the northern blotting. the ile trna 5'-end, which is  <dig> nt long rna potentially and might not be included in our libraries, is not detected even by the northern blotting ). the correlation between our sequencing and northern blotting strongly suggests that the small rna corresponding to the ile trna 5'-end is not maintained in the cell. therefore, we concluded that our first hypothesis is the most likely: the trna cleavage processes are controlled by the cell, and/or its products are maintained in a tissue-specific manner. notably, we have found no specific base-pattern sites for the cleavage in anticodon loop, but the cleavage separates the conserved u-u dincucleotide when it takes place in the t-loop. it suggests either that different enzymes with different sequence specificity are responsible, or that the exact cleavage is determined based on the rna structure of the trna loop and not the actual sequences. these pieces of evidence suggest the existence of unknown pathways of trna processing, where the cleavage patterns are distinguishable between trna species.

 <dig> nt rnas derived from ltr antisense or trna
about 8%  of the rnas from the short library and  <dig> %  from the long library are derived from transposable elements and have distinct length distributions depending on families . the most abundant class within transposable elements is the ltr , but not line  or sine , despite the fact that sines are the most abundant repeats in the genome. furthermore, the small rnas are in opposite  orientation to ltrs and lines, whereas alu derived rnas appear in the same orientation to the repeat element sequence. finally, the length of small rnas aligned with ltrs and lines is exactly  <dig> nt, resembling the size of mirna, sirna, and a subset of trna cleavage products.

each of the three ltr families consists of a remarkably abundant  sequence and considerably fewer minor variations including 5'- and 3'-end variations, which might be caused by imprecise processing and/or by expression of repeats diverging from the consensus sequence. intriguingly, the representative sequences derive from the antisense strand of ltr, and they are very similar to trna 3'-end. alignments of the representative small rnas, complementary sequences of ltrs, and trna 3'-ends  show that the trna sequences differ from the other two sequences just in two positions. the first is a mismatch from "a" to "u" at the 57th or 58th adenine on the trna, t-loop. the second difference from the trna is that the putative repeat-derived small rna has the trinucleotide signature "cca" at the 3'-end. 1-methyladenosine at position  <dig>  of trna is reported in many organisms including human  <cit>  and therefore the m1a <dig> might have been copied into "u" during the reverse-transcription of our library preparation in  <dig> cases, versus  <dig> sequences where it reads as an "a". however, a such high frequency of purine-purine misincorporation during reverse transcriptase seems improbably high if compared to experimental evidence  <cit> , and the fact that in the trnas the m1a <dig> still pairs with an "u"  <cit> . the "cca" is added during the maturation process of trnas  <cit> . therefore, two hypotheses can be made about their origins: they could be i) antisense transcripts from ltrs or ii) trna cleavage products whose sequence can be aligned with ltr antisense, which could be derived from multiple polymorphic loci. the existence of sirna derived from transposable elements was reported as repeat-associated small interference rna  in various organisms  <cit>  and was only recently started to be identified in mammals  <cit> . these originate from various scattered regions within repeats rather than from a specific site, and are generally represented on both strands. in contrast, the small rnas described above are putatively derived from just the antisense strand of specific region in the transposable elements. therefore, besides being rasirnas, these rnas could be the unprocessed variants of the trna cleavage products.

c/d box type snorna and snrna products
small nucleolar rnas  are between 60~ <dig> nt long rnas, and contribute mainly to 2'-o-methylation and the pseudouridylation of rrna, snrna, and potentially other rnas. some small rnas,  <dig> %  from the short library and 1%  from the long library are cleavage products of the corresponding mature snornas. surprisingly, 90% of these snorna cleavage products  are derived from a single gene: the c/d box type snorna gene mgu6- <dig>  <cit>  . the small rnas match  <dig> nt sequence just at their 3'-end.

small nuclear rnas  constitute a class of small rna  localized in the nucleus, where they form small nuclear ribonucleoprotein  that are involved in rna splicing. some small rnas,  <dig> %  from the short library and  <dig> %  from the long library, correspond to snrna. their length distributions show peaks at  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt in the short and long library, respectively . all of these small rnas correspond to specific 3'-end region of u <dig>  u <dig> and u <dig> , while no snrna products derive from the other regions. these products of longer well-known rnas, snorna and snrna, also suggest a controlled cleavage or stabilization of its products, which is analogous to but distinct from the suggested pathways of trna cleavage.

small rnas overlapping known genes
a substantial number of small rnas derive from known gene loci. there is a remarkable difference in sequence lengths between rnas derived from sense and antisense strands . the most abundant lengths of rnas derived from introns are  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt for the sense and the antisense strand, respectively. their length distributions are significantly different . there is also a remarkable difference between 3'utr and introns in terms of small rnas mapping to the antisense strand. the most frequently occurring lengths of such rnas are  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, respectively .

a possible pathway to produce these small rnas is the cleavage of long dsrna that are derived from simultaneous transcription of a region on both strands, which resembles the l1-derived rasirnas in human  <cit> . interestingly, a substantial number of small rnas in each subclass are derived from one locus :  <dig> of  <dig>   of all small rnas from that locus are both intronic and antisense are mapped on the frmpd <dig> locus ,  <dig> of  <dig>  of all small rnas from the intron sense strand are mapped on c3orf <dig> , and  <dig> of  <dig>  of all small rnas derived from the 3' utr antisense strand are mapped on cend <dig> . to examine the hypothesis that those small rnas are processed products of sense-antisense derived dsrnas, we used cage  tags, which are 5'-end reads of full-length cdnas by capturing 5'-capped sites  <cit> . in a previous study, more than  <dig> million cage tags were sequenced and mapped onto the human genome sequence  <cit> . using the cage data, we found evidence of sense-antisense transcription on both strands for these three loci . these findings are consistent with the above hypothesis of dsrna originated small rnas .

we cannot rule out other explanations at this moment. one of them would be cleavage of folded rnas harboring dsrna. to examine this possibility, we checked local secondary structures of these loci and found that the potential precursor of the small rnas located in cend <dig> locus can comprise a secondary structure harboring the dsrnas, where cleavage of the dsrna could produce the small rnas .

bidirectional promoters
one of the sense-antisense relationships that have received considerable interest in recent years is the bidirectional promoter, where two closely located promoters are on opposite strands. these have been found to be abundant in mammalian genomes  <cit> . cage data indicating transcription starting sites  in this orientation occur more often than previously appreciated  <cit> .

for clarity, bidirectional promoters can produce transcripts that can be overlapping – this occurs when the promoter on the reverse strand is located downstream with reference to the other promoter. a large subset of bidirectional promoters have this property, producing transcripts that are overlapping but on different strands, and giving rise to potential formation of dsrna by sense-antisense hybridization, which might be a regulatory event in itself. we reasoned that some of the small rnas identified in this study could be derived from such dsrna formation, analogous to the frmpd <dig> locus case above. using cage, we identified overlapping bidirectional promoters where there are at least two tsss on opposite strands within  <dig> bp, and where the two transcripts can potentially hybridize. such bidirectional promoters could principally be located further away than  <dig> bp: however, we choose  <dig> nt cutoff since cage tags have a characteristic length of 20– <dig> bp and thus the tags under analysis are guaranteed to cover the entire region between the tss on both strands. this makes overlapping transcripts likely. since we focused our study on strong promoters, we only assessed tss having at least  <dig> cage tags. using these criteria, we obtained  <dig> overlapping proximal bidirectional promoters. there are  <dig> clusters of our small rnas that directly mapped on these  <dig> bidirectional promoters . in most cases, the small rna clusters are located between the tsss , consistent with the dsrna hypothesis. this outcome is highly unlikely to happen by chance  judged by randomization trials : although correlation does not necessarily imply causation. however, if the causation is true, this would mean that the bidirectional promoters can function as an origin of natural dsrnas that are specifically cleaved.

apart from the significant overlap with the small rnas, we noticed a second interesting feature associated with these bidirectional promoters: a partial but exact match of both cage tags  and small rnas to ribosomal rna sequences . there are several clusters of rrna genes  tandemly repeated hundreds of times  <cit> , while ribosomal rna sequences are not part of the current genome assembly . partial copies of rdna occur in the genome assembly, and the small rnas within bidirectional promoters are located in these interstitial rrnas. due to the  sequence identity between the interstitial rrnas and rdna repetitive clusters, we cannot unambiguously conclude about the origin of our small rnas and cage tags. it is possible that our small rnas and cage tags are degradation products caused by abundant ribosomal rna within a cell. however, the cage tags on the antisense strand are unlikely to be such degradation products, because the cage method does strictly maintain the strand directionality, as demonstrated by its capability to detect sense-antisense rna transcription  <cit> . note that typical rrna should not be captured by cage because that rrna is transcribed by polymerase i, not ii, and have no cap structure at its 5'-end. these evidences underline the complexity of the transcription and/or processing pathways of rrna or rrna-related sequences.

to examine whether these are general characteristics to the interstitial rrna, we identified  <dig> regions on the genome assembly, which are similar to or partially identical to rrna as identified by using blat  <cit>  . of the  <dig> interstitial rrna,  <dig>  and  <dig>  express small rnas of the same strand to the rrna and bidirectional transcription  respectively, and  <dig>  encode both of them. it is possible that the two characteristics, small rna encoding and bidirectional transcription, are a generic feature of interstitial rrnas. if we assume that the small rnas are derived from rdna repetitive clusters, then they can be considered as rasirna. selective regulation of histone lysine methylation was reported on mouse rdna  <cit> , and these small rnas might be involved in epigenetic modification.

novel mirna candidates
over 60% of the sequences in the short library can be assigned to known mirnas . this is consistent with previous findings  <cit> , which demonstrates that our experimental procedure has succeeded to identify endogenous small rna in human cells. in order to discover novel mirnas, we applied standard criteria for mirna annotation  <cit> , consisting of expression and biogenesis. since the sequences in our libraries are expressed , we focused on predicting possible folding patterns. we did not use conservation as a criterion for identifying mirnas, because there are specie-specific rnas that are not significantly conserved even in the recent primate evolution  <cit> . there are  <dig>  novel sequences that did not correspond to any known mirna, trna, rrna, transposable elements, or other ncrna, which are located in  <dig>  clusters of small rnas. we inspected genomic regions proximal to these clusters and determined whether they can fold as hairpin-loop precursors, whether their stem regions correspond to the sequenced rna, and whether their structures are conserved among several species. finally, we found six novel mirna loci potentially encoding mirna precursors, from which  <dig> nt– <dig> nt mature mirnas corresponding to the small rnas in our library can be cleaved out .

intriguingly, a novel mirna and its complementary counterpart within the precursor stem are derived from the first exon of an imprinted non-coding gene h <dig>  which is expressed from the maternal allele during development  <cit>  . during the preparation of this manuscript, the counterpart was reported as mir- <dig> in the 293t cell line  <cit> . the mirna is sequenced only once from our library, and the novel mirna , mir-675b, is sequenced three times. these findings indicate that the h <dig> derived mirnas varies depending on its context or on the tissue it is expressed in.

discussion
we have investigated the existence of small functional rnas in the hepg <dig> cell, a liver carcinoma cell line. by taking precautions to minimize artifactual random rna degradation, our data demonstrates that besides new mirnas, there are further classes of small rnas that have not yet been properly described. previous studies analyzed small rnas similar in length to the short fraction   <cit> . they mainly focused on rna-silencing related rnas, mirna and on sirna, and did not further analyze other rnas after classification. no studies have examined small rnas equivalent to the long fraction , except for pirna  <cit> .

the first surprise is the content of the short and long fractions, revealed by classification of the sequenced small rnas. the main content of the short fraction is mirna, and this observation is consistent with previous studies. unexpectedly, the long fraction consists mainly of trna. the classification also shows that a substantial number of rnas is derived from intergenic regions. this is consistent with previous reports showing that at least  <dig> – 70% of the genome is transcribed  <cit> .

potential trna cleavage pathways
a surprising class of small rnas is composed by short forms of trnas. detail examination of the sequences and the subsequent experiments suggest that the sequenced rnas are likely to be non-random cleavage products of trna. this leads two hypotheses which are not mutually exclusive:  the cleavage products are functional by themselves and produced intentionally,  the products are the result of a controlled cellular process, which has not been reported previously. we did not examine these hypotheses here with targeted experiments; they remain to be answered in future works.

the cleaved products do not resemble a result of trna degradation by the nuclear surveillance pathway shown in yeast, where defective trnas are at first polyadenylated, followed by exosome processing  <cit> . some rnases are known to cleave trna internally, such as onconase  <cit>   and m1rna  <cit>  , but there are no reports of such endogenous rnase activity in human. another possible enzyme to cleave out the small rnas  is an rnase iii enzyme, such as dicer, which cleaves dsrnas and produce 5'-end phosphorylated rnas. to examine this possibility, we analyzed the nucleotide composition of the trna products , since cleaved products of rnase iii enzymes tend to have "u" at the 5'-end  <cit> . we found a clear bias towards "u" at the 5'-end in the  <dig> nt long products. after detailed assessment of the trna sequence, the high frequency of "u" at the 5'-end of 22nt rna arise from a nucleotide corresponding to the position  <dig> of trna, which is commonly "u" in all of the trnas. thus, this bias does not strongly support the hypothesis that the cleavage enzyme is of the rnase iii type, although on the other hand it does not conflict with this hypothesis. another possible pathway is the association with ltr's primer binding sites, although this cannot explain all of the cleavage because the trna cleavage occurs in trnas which are not used as primers . in particular, the  <dig> nt sequences resembling trna and ltr antisense exactly correspond to 3'-end region of trna, which can hybridize ltr primer biding site . the base-pairing of trna and ltr could contribute to the  <dig> nt rna production from trna.

a possible effect of trna cleavage is indirect silencing, which is best explained by an example, onconase. cancerous cell line growth is suppressed with a delay of 24– <dig> hours when the cells are treated with onconase  <cit> . this delayed response lead to the hypothesis that growth suppression is not caused by direct toxicity due to protein synthesis inhibition caused by trna cleavage, but through the production of secondary messages  that would interfere with yet unknown cellular mechanisms  <cit> . similarly, human rnases of yet unknown functions may contribute the specific cleavage of trna to produce new rna effectors. a candidate for such an effecter is the  <dig> nt cleavage product of trna, 3'-end of glu trna, which might be involved in rna silencing in a similar way to mirna and sirna. based on the sequence complementarity, possible targets for silencing are transposable elements that use the trna 3'-ends as primers. besides the fact that rna silencing is used in many organisms to protect the host genome from retroviruses and retrotoransposons, the use of trna would have additional benefits such as being readily available and being effective: trna is abundant within a cell and active transposable elements to be repressed should have a priming site for reverse transcription. another possible machinery to suppress mrnas is the use of rnase p and/or rnase z. mrnas of influenza virus and hiv- <dig> can be cleaved by the rnases with external guide sequence , which is an rna similar to the trna short form and plays its role as a guide to specify its target rnas  <cit> . these rnases may use the cleaved product of trna demonstrated here as a guide to regulate genes. all of the above hypotheses, based on our novel data, await future experimental validation.

overlaps between bidirectional promoters and rrnas
besides unknown cleavage of trna, snorna, snrna, we found a significant overlap between bidirectional promoters and small rnas, suggesting a connection between naturally formed dsrna and cleaved small rnas. we also found that these regions are located in rdna repetitive clusters or interstitial rrnas. this is the first report showing that rrna or rrna related sequences can be transcribed in a bidirectional way and, encoding small rnas, despite mature rrnas are classical functional rna studied in-depth previously. although we cannot conclude the origins of these cage tags showing bidirectional transcriptions and these small rnas due to partially identical sequences, small rnas are likely to be related with these antisense transcription events. elucidation of the detailed mechanisms requires further studies. more deep sequencing will be necessary to correlate these short rnas with the whole genome tiling array studies  <cit> , which identify the signal deriving from short rnas overlapping tss of mrnas

CONCLUSIONS
we have discovered multiple classes of small rnas derived from many different sources, in addition to six novel mirnas. specific cleavage of well-characterized non-coding rna, such as trna, snorna, and snrna, is likely to produce the small rnas observed in our libraries. bidirectional  transcription might also contribute to their biogenesis. our new dataset and its analysis show that there are distinct patterns of small rna biogenesis that greatly expand our knowledge, paving the way to downstream studies to elucidate various complex patterns of rna expression, cleavage, maintenance and mechanisms of actions. in particular, trna cleavage and bidirectional transcriptions within rrna  underscore the complexity of the transcriptome and add yet another layer to the complexity of transcription in mammalian cells.

our data also emphasize on the inconvenience and constraints of having hard definitions for biological molecules. indeed, a part of known rnas  is present in multiple forms, which may play different biological roles. these data imply that cells use the same small rna molecules multiple times for a variety of functions. multiple roles of the same molecule are widely recognized for mrna as alternative splicing, and an analogous concept should be applied for entire rna molecules including mrna and non-coding rna. in our study, it was possible to unambiguously distinguish the origin of our small rnas, between trna and antisense of transposable elements, and between frequently repeated rdna sequence and just partial copies. small rna derived from these ambiguous regions is putatively linked to genome and transcriptome evolution. the unrevealed pathways implied in this study underline the importance of a less dogmatic approach to study and annotate the transcriptome and its regulation.

