BACKGROUND
the most commonly applied gene regulation system is the tetracycline inducible gene expression  system, originally described by gossen and bujard  <cit> . it allows effector dose-dependent regulation and consists of two components, a tetracycline controlled transactivator  and a tet-responsive promoter  regulating the gene of interest. the transactivator binds with high affinity to the tetr-moiety of the trp, a minimal promoter physically linked to the tet-operator sequence. two transactivator variants have been developed, differing primarily in their response to the effector molecule tetracycline. in the tet-off system, the tta is released from its dna binding site in the presence of doxycycline , a tetracycline derivative, thus abolishing gene expression. the opposite is true for the reverse transactivators rtta2s-m <dig> and rtta- <dig>  <cit>  in the tet-on system. stable tet-controlled gene expression requires the transfer of both ta and trp into the target cell. their step-wise integration/selection ensures independence of the constitutive transactivator expression unit from the trp driven regulated gene expression, thereby enabling the selection of highly regulated clones. however, this strategy can not successfully be applied to systems where clonal selection is difficult or undesirable e.g. primary cells. to overcome this hurdle, so called “one-vector” systems were developed that allow for simultaneous integration of both components. these technologies have mostly been explored in the field of gene therapy, where primary cells are the major target. almost all approaches were based on either retroviral or lentiviral vectors, since they allow for highly-efficient and stable integration of dna into the host genome. regarding the mode of transactivator expression, two systems have been applied. transactivator expression is controlled by a constitutive promoter in self-contained vectors   <cit> , while both transactivator and transgene expression is driven by the trp in autoregulated vectors   <cit> . so far, for both vectors dose-dependent induction, as determined by either luciferase or gfp reporter gene expression, did not exceed 400-fold, with best regulatory properties being observed in clones rather than cell populations. while in self-contained vectors potential promoter crosstalk between constitutive promoter and trp might be responsible for the observed low dynamic range  <cit> , in autoregulated vectors basal expression of the inducible cassette is an essential requirement for initiation of the positive feedback loop. however, autoregulated vectors were generally favored when employing tet-on systems, since low transactivator abundance during the ”off-state“ minimizes potential cytotoxicity  <cit>  and immunogenicity  <cit> . additional problems arise in “one-vector” systems, where transgene and transactivator reside on one viral backbone. unidirectional expression of the two components can either be achieved by construction of bicistronic units  or by overlapping transcripts employing two promoters . in both cases, transcription terminates at the polyadenylation  signal located in the 3´-ltr, and expression levels were shown to be negatively affected  <cit> . in order to overcome this obstacle, bidirectional transfer vectors were constructed as illustrated in figure 1b. although proof of concept has been demonstrated for autoregulated bidirectional trp  <cit> , only moderate induction rates were achieved. applying bidirectional lentiviral vectors of the self-contained type  <cit>  resulted in a dynamic gene induction range of around 50-100-fold. only one such approach has been reported for retroviral vectors  <cit> , where application of improved trps resulted in an excellent dynamic range of more than 1000-fold.

in this study, we combined the key benefits of the self-contained and the autoregulated system with a bidirectional vector design. the two vectors explored in this study differed regarding their mode of transactivator expression. in the “self-contained” mov-sct <dig> vector, m <dig> transactivator expression is under control of the human pgk promoter  <cit> , while in the “autoregulated” mov-sct6ca vector m <dig> transactivator expression is driven by the newly developed synthetic "ca" promoter, a weak constitutive but inducible minimal promoter. selected cell populations were used to compare the regulatory properties of both vectors with respect to their effector dose–response and kinetics of activation.

RESULTS
design of the bidirectional vectors
as recently shown , introduction of the tet-responsive ptet-t <dig> promoter  into the es. <dig> retroviral vector  resulted in an excellent dynamic range of reporter gene expression in transduced hela-em <dig> cells, constitutively expressing the doxycycline  responsive reverse m2-transactivator. momulv-based one-vector systems  were constructed by insertion of a bidirectional expression cassette into the es. <dig> backbone . transcripts initiated at ptet-t <dig> were terminated at an antisense orientated sv40-pa signal , fused to the constitutive transport element  of simian retrovirus  <dig>  <cit> . to determine transgene expression levels in cell pools as well as at the single cell level, the dual reporter gene lmg* <cit>  was employed, enabling simultaneous determination of luciferase activity and egfp fluorescence.

two mov-vectors were constructed, “self-contained”  and “autoregulated” , where m2-transactivator expression was either placed under control of the constitutive human phosphoglycerate kinase promoter , or a newly designed tet-responsive “ca”-promoter . mov vectors also contained a shortened version of the woodchuck hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element . m <dig> transcripts were terminated at the pa signal of the viral 3´-ltr.

properties of the regulatory unit within monocistronic vectors and the self-contained bidirectional vector
for a comparative analysis of the tet-responsive promoter, the trp-unit was inverted within the monocistronic es.1-t <dig> vector ), thus resembling the orientation of the trp-unit within the mov-vector setting . following transduction and facs-based enrichment of hela-em <dig> cells, activities were analyzed in the “on-/off-states”. while background expression remained fairly constant, the inducible activity of es.1-sct <dig> was found to be decreased, resulting in an overall reduction in gene regulation by 60% . since the observed phenomenon can be explained by the absence of the pre*s element from the resulting transcript, ptet-t <dig> was considered to function independent of the orientation. subsequent insertion of the pgk-m <dig> expression unit into the es.1-sct <dig> backbone resulted in the “self-contained” mov-sct <dig> vector . determination of luciferase activity in transduced hela cell populations indicated that both, background expression as well as inducible activity were negatively affected by the insertion, resulting in a reduction of the dynamic range  by about 70%, when compared to the parental es.1-sct <dig> vector . while the presence of the constitutive promoter might directly account for the observed slight increase in background expression level, the decrease in gene induction levels might be explained by an insufficient concentration of m2-transactivator generated by the pgk-promoter.

luciferase activity  was determined after enrichment of transduced hela-em <dig> cells  constitutively providing the m <dig> transactivator, or hela cells  in the presence  or absence  of doxycycline . induction was calculated from the activities determined in the on and off state. ± values reflect sem. for each vector, two populations were established by one round of sorting  and were measured twice.

although the dynamic range of gene regulation was shown to exceed previously published one-vector systems, further improvement was necessary to obtain full induction.

replacement of the constitutive pgk-promoter by an artificial inducible-promoter
to improve vector performance, we developed a minimal promoter designed to inhibit weak constitutive as well as inducible activity, thus introducing the autoregulated principle into bidirectional vectors. the newly designed ca promoter  consists of an hiv- <dig> minimal promoter, with low background activity in the context of a trp  <cit>  fused to the caat-box of the momulv-ltr promoter. the latter was shown to be sufficient to provide residual activity of a minimal ltr  <cit> . this promoter was designed  to minimize crosstalk with the trp, and  to guarantee low basal levels of m <dig> transactivator during the “off-state”, while being sufficiently active to initiate the positive feedback loop. replacing the pgk by the ca-promoter resulted in the generation of mov-sct6ca vector , which was considered to be autoregulated, providing a low constitutive activity for m <dig> transactivator expression.

comparison of the self-contained vector mov-sct <dig> and autoregulated vector mov-sct6ca was performed in ht <dig> cell populations transduced at low moi and enriched by facs . while cell populations derived from the autoregulated vector showed reduced background expression, the level of induction was maintained , resulting in a  <dig> -fold increase in the dynamic range of gene regulation. northern analysis  of m <dig> steady state mrna levels revealed reduced levels for the autoregulated vector under non-inducing conditions, while levels strongly increased upon induction. interestingly, similar yet weaker effects were found for the self-contained vector .

increasing gene dosage  strongly enhanced gene expression upon induction , while the dynamic range of gene regulation was reduced. this phenomenon was observed in both vector systems. based on luciferase data, a reduction in background activity could only be demonstrated for cell populations of the autoregulated vector, transduced at low moi. this observation reveals the impact of the integration site, since under this condition variation due to position effect is pronounced.

furthermore, severe effects on cell growth were observed for the autoregulated vector system, when cells were treated with high gene dosage, followed by induction . this effect can most likely be attributed to high transactivator abundance and hence squelching.

autoregulation altered the mode of induced gene expression
as generally accepted, tet-controlled gene expression enables effector-dose dependent adjustment of transgene steady state levels. therefore, dose–response experiments were performed to further characterize the two construction principles.

ht <dig> cell populations transduced by either mov-sct <dig> or mov-sct6ca vectors were cultivated in the “off-state”, following cell sorting for a minimum of  <dig> days. cells were induced for  <dig> hours at the indicated dox concentrations  to allow for adjustment of the steady state expression levels. determination of luciferase activity  revealed a similar induction response for both vectors, whereby full activation of the reporter gene expression was demonstrated at effector concentrations of around  <dig> ng dox/ml. however, at low effector  concentrations, populations transduced by mov-sct6ca displayed reduced background activity yet slightly increased induction rates, indicating an increased dynamic range for the autoregulated vector.

further differences between the two vectors were revealed by facs-based analysis of enriched ht <dig> cell populations . as expected, transgene expression was found to be effector dose-dependent in cells transduced by the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector, with considerable intermediate levels at 10– <dig> ng dox/ml. in contrast, full induction rates were observed at already lower effector concentrations for the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector and further increase in effector  concentration resulted only in increased numbers of induced cells . therefore, kinetics of the autoregulated vector rather resembled a threshold mode.

according to the law of mass action, the ability to display a threshold response should be dependent on the abundance of the m <dig> transactivator during the off-state  and therefore on the basal activity of the ca-promoter. for further clarification, sub-populations of the originally tested cell pools displaying high induction levels at low effector concentrations  were enriched . total rna was prepared from the populations in the on- and off-states and analyzed by northern blot for steady state levels of m2-mrna. comparison of the initial and enriched sub-populations for the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector revealed only minor differences  during the off-state. however, induction at  <dig> ng/ml dox led to a  <dig> -fold increase in m2-mrna in the enriched population. contrary to what we observed for the self-contained vector, analysis of the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector showed that m2-mrna levels in the off-state were approximately doubled  in the enriched population and strongly increased upon induction at low dox concentration . yet, only a subset of cells of the enriched populations  exhibited induction at  <dig> ng/ml dox , while full induction could be achieved at maximum effector rates,  <dig> ng/ml dox . we therefore assumed, that in the remaining cells at low effector concentrations m <dig> transactivator levels might not be sufficient i) to saturate the tet-operators of the trp or with respect to the autoregulated vector ii) to trigger the positive feedback loop.

increasing the overall cellular abundance of m <dig> transactivator might be an approach to overcome this obstacle. to test this hypothesis, hela-em <dig> cells, which provide background levels of m2-transactivator via the ef1-promoter, were transduced with either mov-sct <dig> or mov-sct6ca. hela-em <dig> pools were generated at low moi and further enriched by one round of facs. all cells transduced by the autoregulated vector mov-sct6ca showed full induction at  <dig> ng/ml dox . surprisingly, a less pronounced effect could also be demonstrated for the self-contained vector.

taken together, tet-regulated transgene expression was found to resemble a threshold mode in the autoregulated system. following the law of mass action, full induction rates depended on the concentrations of m2-transactivator and its ligand , respectively. variations observed at single cell level indicated insufficient m2-transactivator levels for a subset of the transduced cells. since this could be overcome in systems were transactivator was provided from an independent locus, basal activity of the ca-promoter rather than of the trp had been affected at the integration site.

induction kinetics of self-contained and autoregulated vectors
since only subsets of cells transduced by the autoregulated vector had the potential to become fully activated at low dox concentrations, especially after enrichment , populations generated with the self-contained vector were thought to display a different induction kinetic. transduced ht <dig> populations were cultured in saturating dox concentrations  for different time periods and luciferase activity was analyzed. as expected, populations of the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector displayed faster induction kinetics, before they finally reached a steady state level . this finding was further supported by gfp fluorescence analysis at single cell level . mov-sct <dig> transduced cells migrated as total population starting about  <dig> hours following induction, reaching a maximum of gfp accumulation within 24– <dig> hours. in contrast, only a subset of mov-sct6ca transduced cells showed a fast response upon induction, while the majority of cells remained at the background level, indicating temporal control of the positive feedback loop.

this important difference is further illustrated in figure 7c. while about 60% of the cells transduced by the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector showed clear induction after about  <dig> hours, only about 10% of the population transduced by the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector displayed a fast response. during further induction, the percentage of induced cells increased only slowly compared to the rapid activation of all cells transduced by the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector, suggesting involvement of particular cellular events, which influence the chromosomal environment and thereby the activity of the trp/ca promoter.

discussion
since the mid 90‘s, numerous studies have explored strategies for simultaneous  transfer of both tet-system components into target cells. however, achieving tight control in “one-vector systems” has remained a challenge, as the dynamic range of gene expression was found to be hampered by high background and/or low transgene expression. in this study, we report on the design of a new momulv-based one-vector system, with promising features. firstly, open reading frames of the two components were expressed bidirectionally. overlapping transcripts can thus be avoided, as these might reduce expression levels and negatively effect the dynamic range of tet-regulated gene expression  <cit> . secondly, expression of the m2-transactivator was driven by the newly designed “ca” promoter, which exhibited weak basal as well as inducible activity. results obtained from ht <dig> cell populations transduced with either the newly designed autoregulated vector, mov-sct6ca, or the self-contained vector, mov-sct <dig>  demonstrate the superiority of the developed one-vector system . while both vectors showed high inducible expression, based on luciferase activity , the dynamic range of gene regulation in the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector was found to be increased by  <dig> -fold as compared with the self-contained mov-sct <dig> vector . this improvement was largely due to the reduced background activity in the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector. our results further suggest that promoter interference  <cit>  between the tet-responsive ptet-t <dig> and ca-promoter was reduced compared to the combination of ptet-t <dig> and pgk-promoter and that a selection for integration sites promoting basal activity of the trp/ca-promoter did not occur. these observations are in accordance with the findings of lindemann and co-workers  <cit> , who reported best results for an autoregulated momulv-based system with respect to expression levels and regulatory properties in vitro and in vivo, when transactivator expression was driven by an enhancer-deleted ltr. functionality of the ca-promoter design was further demonstrated by analysis of the m2-mrna steady state level in the absence of dox, revealing a 50% reduction compared to the pgk-promoter . infection of cell populations at increasing mois led to enhanced expression levels of the dual reporter gene lmg*, demonstrating an increase in gene dosage. however, at high moi , cell populations transduced by mov-sct6ca displayed strong growth retardation under inducing conditions , suggesting massive accumulation of m2-transactivator to levels that caused squelching  <cit> . the moderate growth retardation observed in cells transduced by mov-sct <dig> might be explained by exhaustion of other essential cell components, e.g. amino acids or nucleotides, since here expression levels of the dual reporter gene lmg* went into extremes .

as expected, the dose–response analysis of the two vector types, self-contained  and autoregulated , revealed a significant difference in their response mechanism . while the self-contained vector exhibited a more graded, dox-dependent induction of gene expression  <cit> , a threshold mode was observed for the autoregulated vector. this important difference was only detected at the single cell level, as demonstrated in cell based analysis of egfp fluorescence of the dual reporter gene lmg*, since it was masked in luciferase analysis of bulk cultures.

markusic and co-workers obtained similar results  <cit>  by direct comparison of a self-contained and an autoregulated unidirectional lentiviral vector. in their study, populations transduced by the autoregulated vector displayed a nearly full induction of gene expression at yet intermediate effector  concentrations and an increase in positive cells at higher dox concentration . from the combined results it may be concluded that the threshold response was due to the autoregulated mode for transactivator expression. further observations support the hypothesis that basal transactivator abundance might be the limiting factor: i) a sub population, enriched for its ability to achieve full induction levels at  <dig> ng/ml dox, displayed an increased steady state level of m2-mrna already before induction , and  hela-em <dig> cells, which provide a basal abundance of m <dig> transactivator, showed a threshold response of the total cell population at  <dig> ng/ml dox, when transduced by the autoregulated mov-sct6ca vector.

from these observations, a model following the law of mass action can be derived, with activation of transgene expression being proportional to the product of the concentrations of m2-transactivator and its effector dox. thus, full activation of the trp-driven transgene could be achieved at low m2-transactivator levels, given that effector concentration remained at optimum level , or, vice versa, at high levels of m2-transactivator at otherwise limiting dox concentrations .

our data further suggest that the basal activity of the ca-promoter is dependent upon the integration sites. only loci that favoured the start of the autoregulated circuit were able to induce the threshold response of the tet-system at low dox concentrations. the accessibility of the trp at the chromosomal integration site seems to be of minor importance for the conversion of the graded to a threshold response.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results demonstrated the advantageous properties of the autoregulatory compared to the self-contained principle for m2-transactivator expression, when using retroviral vectors with a bidirectional design, combined with the inducible ca-promoter. however, limitations occur when high vector dosages are applied. in particular, the observed on/off switch may have significant advantages, especially considering that full activation was achieved at suboptimal dox concentrations and thus might help to overcome induction problems related to tissue-specific barriers for effector penetration. however, graded induction of gene expression is not possible with the autoregulated ca promoter and thus excludes this promoter design from experiments where an adjustable mode of transgene expression is mandatory. moreover, the dependence of induced gene expression on the cellular abundance of the transactivator provides important evidence to help explain the large difference of effector concentrations reported to fully activate trps in various cell systems.

