BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes dna methylation occurs on cytosine residues of cpg dinucleotides. cpg islands, short genomic regions with a high frequency of cpg dinucleotides, are typically common near transcription start sites, and may be associated with promoter regions. these regions are not generally methylated in contrast to highly repetitive elements in the genome. dna methylation can directly affect transcription by inhibiting binding of specific transcription factors and/or enhancing necessary chromatin remodeling for gene silencing. this process is required for normal embryonic development, imprinting, and x chromosome inactivation, and plays an important role in the normal functioning of an organism. increasing numbers of studies are emphasizing the role of dna methylation in human diseases  <cit> . only until recently it has become clear that nutritional components can also affect epigenetic mechanisms like dna methylation and can lead to long term phenotypic changes  <cit> .

the study of dna methylation has become more accessible by recent development of various technologies  <cit> . the choice of methodology is highly dependent of the goal of the study, genome of interest and available resources. most commercially available micro-array platforms are developed for restriction enzyme and affinity based assays like the short oligonucleotide arrays , tiling arrays  and cpg island/promoter arrays   <cit> . like in other micro-array assays intensity changes are measured instead of actual levels of methylation and are subject for many sources of variation like array-lot variability and washing conditions. whether the hybridization intensity will be proportional to the level of methylation is still uncertain and could be platform dependent. while these approaches are able to evaluate methylation changes throughout the entire genome, they remain expensive and are not generally accessible. methylation specific digital karyotyping  is a non-micro array, genome-wide methylation analysis approach that relies on cleavage of genomic dna with a methylation sensitive restriction enzyme. the concept of this approach is similar to serial analysis of gene expression  and is based on the following principles:  <dig> bp sequence tags are derived from specific locations within the genome and can be directly matched to their corresponding loci, and concatenation of the sequence tags allows the serial analysis of multiple tags by high throughput sequencing  <cit> . the resulting genomic tag frequencies determine in a quantitative manner the methylation level of the corresponding loci. in this report, we present a modification and application of msdk, for the study of methylated loci throughout the mouse genome prenatally exposed to nutritional variations.

RESULTS
genome-wide dna methylation analysis
in an effort to uncover candidate genes directly affected by dna methylation in a mouse model of perinatal nutritional modification and allergic airway disease, we applied msdk, a comprehensive, quantitative and unbiased genome-wide method that offers accurate information on the genomic position of differentially methylated loci. the msdk method has been previously developed for the analysis of the human genome using the restriction enzyme asc i as the mapping enzyme. the asc i recognition site is preferentially found in cpg islands associated with transcribed genes  <cit> . for our study of the mouse genome we considered the methylation sensitive enzymes asc i, sac ii, not i and hpa ii as the mapping enzyme in combination with nla iii as the fragmenting enzyme. there are over a million restriction sites for hpa ii in the mouse genome and  <dig>  for sac ii. although both enzymes are excellent cutters, we concluded that the sequencing costs would be too high. we found only  <dig>  restriction sites for asc i and  <dig>  sites for not i with a respective average fragment size of  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp. we selected not i since the recognition site contains two cg dinucleotides and approximately 62% of these sites are associated with a cpg island in the mouse genome. though not all the genes are associated with a cpg island it has been estimated that at least 40% of the annotated genes have a cpg island in their corresponding promoter region.

for the generation of the mouse msdk libraries we chose lung tissue from c57bl/6j adult mice that were prenatally exposed to diets with increased  or decreased  methyl-donor content and challenged with allergen in adulthood  <cit> . the mice gestated on both diets developed features characteristic of an allergic phenotype including airway hyper-reactivity, lung lavage eosinophilia, and increase serum ige concentrations  <cit> . genomic dna was isolated from snap frozen lung tissue samples from two male mice for each group using a dneasy kit  according to manufacturer instructions. library construction was essentially performed as described for digital karyotyping with a few minor modifications  <cit> . the genomic dna integrity was accessed by digestion with sac i before use in library construction. for each library  <dig> μg of genomic dna was digested with the mapping enzyme not i, ligated to biotinylated not i linkers  and digested with the fragmenting enzyme nla iii. dna fragments containing the biotinylated linkers were isolated using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads  and ligated to linkers including recognition sites for mme i. the  <dig> bp sequence tags were released by digestion with mme i as has been described for long sage  <cit> . the isolated tags are self-ligated, pcr amplified, concatenated, cloned in pzero , and sequenced. dna from plasmid inserts containing serial genomic tags were purified and sequenced at agencourt bioscience corporation . the sage  <dig> software package enables the extraction of the genomic tags from the sequence files. tag sequences, tag counts and gene associations were stored in a microsoft access relational database for subsequent selection and matching to virtual tags.

we sequenced  <dig>  and  <dig>  tags for respectively the hmd and the lmd msdk libraries. after removal of all singletons, we found  <dig>  experimental genomic tags of which  <dig>  were present in both libraries,  <dig> were specific for the hmd and  <dig> for the lmd library. in order to match the experimental tags to their corresponding genomic loci, virtual genomic tags were extracted from the mouse genome sequence as obtained from ensembl  using a python script . this identified a total of  <dig>  virtual tags of which  <dig>  are unique. alignment of the experimental tags with the  <dig>  virtual tags showed that  <dig>   could be matched to a unique position within the genome. a remaining  <dig>   matched to multiple regions in the genome and  <dig>   were not found. it is expected that the percentage of unmatched tags will decrease in time with the new releases of updated public mouse genome sequences. comparison of the experimental tags with the virtual genomic tags per chromosome revealed an unbiased distribution of the experimental tags over the mouse genome .

we identify differentially methylated loci in the mouse genome between the two libraries by applying the following selection criteria: mapping to a unique position to the mouse genome, and a fold difference in tag counts ≥  <dig>  furthermore, in order to find genomic tags with a significant difference in tag counts we used a z-score to quantify the strength of the observed difference in the proportions of individual tag sequences in the two libraries and generate a p-value. we considered a p-value ≤  <dig>  as significant. similar results were obtained when analyzing the data according to the sequence odds ratio and significance test  or the significance test available as part of the discoveryspace application  <cit> . in this way, we identified  <dig> genomic tags with a higher count in the lmd library and  <dig> genomic tags with higher counts in the hmd  representing differentially methylated loci within the mouse genome . the msdk method screens for unmethylated restriction enzyme sites in the genome therefore higher genomic tag frequencies correspond with a decreased level of methylation. this implies that the  <dig> genomic tags with increased counts in the lmd library are likely to show an increased level of methylation in the hmd library. despite the limited sequence depth  we were able to find novel differentially methylated loci in our mouse model. since most of the not i sites are correlated with a cpg island in the genome it can be expected that the differences in tag counts as identified by msdk correlate with changes in transcription levels, which ultimately can influence the phenotype seen in our mouse model.

to validate the msdk results we isolated total rna from the same samples used in the msdk analysis and performed serial analysis of gene expression  profiling of these samples. this generated  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcript tags for respectively the hmd and lmd sage library. after normalization to correct for the differences in total tag counts in each sage library, we selected for transcripts with a fold-difference ≥  <dig> and a p-value ≤  <dig>  as previously described  <cit> . surprisingly we found  <dig> transcripts to be over expressed in the hmd sage library and about  <dig> in the lmd sage library . this is an almost 9-fold increase of transcription in the lmd sample . most likely this is due to a combination of increased dna methylation in the hmd samples and a reduced amount of methyl donors in the lmd resulting in hypomethylation and poorly regulated transcription. it is important to note that not all methylation changes will affect transcriptional levels. still, we could identify genes predicted to be methylated by msdk analysis and with increased mrna levels in the lmd sage library . we also selected four genes from the list of differentially methylated loci for which the not i site was located within a cpg island in close proximity of the predicted transcription start site , and which were not expressed in sufficiently high levels to be significantly differentially expressed in the sage analysis . real-time pcr demonstrated an increase of expression level for nfatc <dig>  jak <dig>  rcor <dig>  tmem151a, and the methyl-tranferases dnmt <dig>  dnmt3a and dnmt3b, in lung tissue from an independent set of animals prenatally exposed to a diet low in methyldonor content . similar results were obtained in lymphocyte-mononuclear cells isolated from spleen of hmd and lmd animals  <cit> . an increased expression of the methyl-transferases, especially those involve in de novo methylation , might partially account for the unexpected methylated genomic loci in the lmd library when compared to the hmd library  although other mechanisms of transcription regulation can not be excluded. taken together the sage profiling and the real-time pcr confirmed the predicted changes in expression level by msdk analysis.

genomic tags are indicated as  <dig> bp sequences with the corresponding counts as found in each msdk library. transcript tags are indicated as  <dig> bp sequences with the corresponding expression level as found in each sage library. genomic dna and rna for msdk and sage analysis was isolated from lung tissue from c57bl/6j adult mice that were prenatally exposed to nutritional changes as described in  <cit> .

genomic tags are indicated as  <dig> bp sequences with the corresponding counts as found in each msdk library, location within the genome, strand orientation and associated gene. a complete list can be found in additional file  <dig> and  <cit> .

a quantitative msp assay was developed for parts of a cpg island in close proximity of the genomic tags matched to runx <dig> and nfatc <dig>  although this assay demonstrated an increased methylation level  in the genomic region analyzed in lung tissue and spleen, the results could be masked due to the use of a mixed cell population. also the length of the cpg island  makes it difficult to design the assays. an extensive in vitro promoter analysis might be necessary to clearly identify the specific regulatory elements susceptible for methylation. interestingly, the transcription factor runx <dig> has been shown to be regulated by promoter methylation in human cancers  <cit>  and it was also shown that runx <dig> can be down regulated by an increase of histone h <dig> methylation in human cancer cell lines  <cit> . more recently we have shown  <cit> , that a demethylating agent can restore the transcription levels of runx <dig> in spleen cells from hmd animals, implying that the transcriptional changes are caused by methylation changes. the expression of nuclear factor of activated t cell  <dig>  has also been described to be regulated by hypermethylation in hodgkin's lymphoma as well as by histone h <dig> acetylation and h3-k <dig> trimethylation  <cit> . it is not known whether rcor <dig>  it self is regulated by methylation though depletion of corest can result in derepression of rest responsive gene expression and increased methylation of histone h3-k <dig>  <cit> . other examples of genes regulated by methylation that have been identified in our study as differentially methylated candidate genes  can be found in the literature like cited <dig>  which is epigenetically silenced in the vast majority of human oligodendroglial tumors  <cit> . taken together these findings indicate that it is very likely that our list of differentially methylated loci is actually regulated by dna methylation but it also indicates that the contribution of other epigenetic mechanisms like histone modifications affecting the accessibility of chromatin can not be excluded.

differential gene expression and functional analysis
we applied the ingenuity pathway analysis program to explore the list of differentially expressed genes. the top canonical pathways that are significantly associated with the differentially expressed genes in the lungs of hmd or lmd animals are represented in figure  <dig>  the significance is determined by a high ratio  and by a high negative logarithm of the p-value; indicating that the pathway is significantly associated with the data and that a large portion of the corresponding canonical pathway may be affected. interestingly, we see an association of the folate biosynthesis pathway in the hmd animals. this pathway plays a role in the synthesis of s-adenosyl methione, the main methyl donor group in the process of dna methylation  <cit>  implying an association between the maternal nutritional intake and increase of dna methylation in this group. dietary changes can clearly have an effect on the transcriptional profiles thereby adding another variably that can affect the phenotypic responses to exposure.

CONCLUSIONS
perinatal dietary changes in methyl donor content can lead to alterations in expression profiles as well as subtle changes in dna methylation. using msdk, a method that allows a comprehensive and unbiased genome-wide methylation profiling, we uncovered differentially methylated loci in the progeny of mice maternally subjected to diets high and low in methyl donors. the depth and coverage of the approach is dependent on the restriction enzyme used and can be adjusted as needed. the msdk technology is sequence based, quantitative and unbiased without the requirement of special equipment other than a dna sequencer. an increase in throughput and large reduction of the sequencing costs is expected with the recent development of multiplex paired-end ditag sequencing technologies  <cit> . most importantly; the data is digitally archived, relative easy to analyze and independent of an arbitrarily chosen reference. msdk is applicable for mouse models in a mixed cell population, and may be a useful approach to determine whether environmental exposures can lead to epigenetic changes in complex heritable human diseases.

