BACKGROUND
the legacy of the galápagos archipelago may be forever attached to the development of darwin's theory. yet, the unique character of these islands have continued to make them an ideal model for evolutionary study  <cit> . the galápagos archipelago is geographically isolated - approximately  <dig>  km west of south america - and has never been attached to any continental land mass  <cit> . consequently, it is home to many endemic taxa that have colonized the islands either once  <cit>  or very few times  <cit> . such a system offers an opportunity to study the radiation of species from a limited ancestral stock without the confounding signals of recurrent colonization. in addition, the islands vary significantly in size and degree of isolation, providing a range of conditions under which to examine the interplay between evolutionary diversification and different demographic processes  <cit> . finally, the geologic history of the galápagos is well known, supplying a temporal framework upon which to reconstruct the biogeographic history of various species. the islands were produced by a hotspot that lies beneath the nazca plate, which is traveling in an eastward direction. consequently, island ages generally decrease from east to west  <cit> , and the colonization sequences of many organisms show a progression from older to younger islands .

among the organisms that inhabit the galápagos, one of the most amenable to evolutionary study is the marine iguana . this species is endemic to the archipelago and is frequently found along the coasts of all the major islands as well as many smaller ones. marine iguanas exhibit a unique natural history among lizards, feeding almost exclusively on specific algae species in the intertidal or subtidal zones, while breeding and nesting completely on land  <cit> . they possess physical attributes that enable them to negotiate the marine environment, including a flattened tail for swimming and long, sharp nails for clinging to rocks in the surf. the presence of marine iguana populations on islands throughout the archipelago provides a rich system for examining the roles of island population size, age and isolation, as well as current flow, on patterns of migration, distribution, and long-term population history.

morphological and genetic data have revealed that the closest relative of amblyrhynchus is the genus of terrestrial iguanas, conolophus, which is also endemic to the galápagos  <cit> . molecular dating based on mitochondrial dna  and immunological comparisons yielded a divergence time estimate of 10- <dig> million years  for the two genera  <cit> , which is significantly more ancient than the 3- <dig> myr age estimate of the oldest islands  <cit> . a proposed explanation for these results is that marine and land iguanas diverged from each other on now-sunken islands lying to the east of the present-day archipelago  <cit> .

a comprehensive genetic study based on both mitochondrial cytochrome b  data as well as nuclear-coded loci , traced back the microevolution of  <dig> population/subpopulations of marine iguanas from  <dig> islands in the archipelago  <cit> . despite at least ten million years of independent evolutionary history on the galápagos, this study suggested that only one or a few related mtdna haplotypes were involved in the colonization of the present-day archipelago from now-submerged islands  <cit> . while the overall levels of genetic divergence at both mtdna and nuclear markers were low, these two markers revealed different patterns of genetic structuring and migration between island populations. based on cytb data, marine iguana populations were grouped into three major lineages: one occupying the older eastern and central islands, another found mostly in the geographically distant northern islands, and a third distributed across the northern and younger western islands. however, this genetic structuring was not supported by nuclear markers, which did not show any clear sign of population differentiation among islands. based on these results, nuclear gene flow was supposed to be high across the archipelago and is mainly the result of male-biased dispersal as males have been observed to swim to different islands during the breeding season  <cit> . this was one of the first examples of male-biased dispersal based on molecular evidence and is still used in textbooks .

in this study, we revisit the population genetic structure of marine iguanas in order to lend insight into the patterns of gene flow, genetic diversity, and demographic history of this species. data is presented from over  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations sampled at two different time points using an increased number of nuclear markers  as well as the typically fast-evolving mtdna control region . we use this information to unravel patterns of past and current dispersal in marine iguanas, and discuss results within the context of the island progression hypothesis and sex-biased dispersal.

methods
sampling and genetic data collection
marine iguanas were sampled during two different time periods, 1991/ <dig> and  <dig>  samples from 1991/ <dig> were a subset of those collected and analyzed from the rassmann et al. study  <cit> . the total sampling effort resulted in more than  <dig> marine iguana specimens spanning  <dig> islands and  <dig> populations . eleven of these locations were sampled during both time periods to meet the objectives of a parallel study examining changes in genetic diversity due to an intense el niño event  <cit> .

population localities, sample sizes, island ages, and summary data for  <dig> microsatellite loci and the mitochondrial control region .

island ages are in millions of years  and were derived from plate velocity and potassium-argon  dating estimates from multiple sources  <cit> . estimates of population sizes were compiled in  <cit> . microsatellite loci data: n, sample size for each population; nalleles, average number of alleles; hobs, observed heterozygosity; intra-locus k-test statistic, number of loci out of  <dig> loci that showed negative k values and the corresponding p value . control region data: n, sample size for each population; h, number of haplotypes; hd, haplotype diversity;, nucleotide diversity; k, average number of nucleotide differences between sequences; fs, fu's neutrality statistic  <cit> ; d, tajima's neutrality statistic  <cit> . for the complete table: * and ** denote significance at the =  <dig>  and =  <dig>  levels respectively. populations were sampled in 1991/1993aand/or 2004b.

total genomic dna was extracted from blood samples in a 96-well format using the qiaamp  <dig> dna blood kit  following the manufacturer's instructions. complete mtdna cr sequences  were generated for  <dig> marine iguana specimens using pcr protocols that are described elsewhere  <cit> . we genotyped thirteen microsatellite loci for  <dig> individuals: locus am <dig> from  <cit>  and twelve loci from  <cit>  following the same procedures as described before  <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis of cr sequences
cr sequences were edited in the program sequencher v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and aligned using the program muscle v <dig>   <cit> . unique haplotypes were defined and numbered using the program dnasp v <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . the program mrmodeltest v <dig>  <cit> , which is based on code from the modeltest software  <cit> , was used to evaluate the fit of different nucleotide substitution models to the data. the hasegawa-kishino-yano model  <cit>  with additional parameters for gamma distribution and fraction of invariable sites  provided the best fit to the haplotype data according to both the hierarchical likelihood ratio test and the akaike information criterion. this substitution model was implemented in a bayesian framework using the program mrbayes v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  with a search of  <dig>  ×  <dig> generations where the first 10% of parameter samples were discarded as burn-in.

since the point of branch connection between marine iguana mtdna phylogroups and galápagos land iguanas has previously been shown to be unclear due to the large divergence between the two species  <cit> , the root of the marine iguana phylogeny was inferred for cr sequences using a relaxed clock model implemented in the program beast v. <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . as in the phylogenetic analysis, the hky+g+i model of nucleotide substitution was applied. an evolutionary model was chosen where the substitution rates among branches were uncorrelated, and an expansion growth prior was assumed since marine iguanas exhibit shallow divergence and are likely still in the process of reaching population genetic equilibrium in parts of their range. the analysis was run twice with  <dig> ×  <dig> generations each, and the first 10% of parameter values were discarded as burn-in. adequate mixing was determined by examining the effective sample size and parameter trace values as visualized in the program tracer v <dig>   <cit>  and the two runs were combined to obtain an overall estimate of the posterior distribution of parameters.

cr analysis of genetic diversity and population structure
the number of haplotypes , haplotype diversity , nucleotide diversity , and the average number of nucleotide differences between sequences  were calculated for each population using dnasp. data were generated separately for the two temporal samples  from marchena island, as a previous study showed that a bottleneck occurred in between samplings  <cit> . for all other populations, samples from the two time-points were combined. fst calculations based on wright's fst 
 <cit>  and an analysis of molecular variance  were performed in the program arlequin v <dig>   <cit>  in order to determine the level of genetic differentiation within and between marine iguana populations and the following major island groups: north , west , central  and east .

we additionally tested for correlation of island age and molecular distance by applying a mantel test as implemented in the program arlequin v <dig>   <cit> . for this fst differentiation was estimated by haplotype frequencies between island populations and the corresponding age difference between islands was estimated as the difference of maximum island age as provided by table  <dig>  the significane of test results were determined by performing  <dig>  randomizations.

population structure based on microsatellite loci data
using microsatellite data, we employed a bayesian-based analysis of population structure in order to identify genetic clusters, patterns of migration, and gene flow within amblyrhynchus without using any a priori sampling information. starting from individual genotypes, the number of genetic clusters was inferred using the program structure v <dig>   <cit> . k  ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> with  <dig> iterations for each k. the run length was set to  <dig>  mcmc replicates after a burn-in period of one million replicates. for the ancestry model, we chose the admixture model with alpha being inferred from the data in combination with correlated allele frequencies. based on the log probability of these runs, the true value of k was estimated using the approach of evanno et al.  <cit> . the program distruct  <cit>  was then used to graphically display the number of genetic clusters as well as genetic intermixing of individuals based on the true value of k in structure. the program baps v <dig>   <cit> , which uses a slightly different bayesian approach than structure to infer population differentiation, was also used to identify the optimal number of genetic clusters. the upper bound for the number of populations was set to the number of sampling locations in our dataset. this corresponded to  <dig> different sampling locations/events when considering different time points from the same location as independent sampling events. the optimal number of clusters identified by baps <dig>  was selected from a list of the ten best visited partitions according to their log values . genotypic assignment of individuals to populations was tested by applying an individual-based self-assignment test using the program geneclass <dig>  <cit>  and the implemented bayesian approach of rannala and mountain  <cit> .

in order to allow a direct comparison between our results and those of the rassmann et al. study  <cit> , we calculated overall differentiation as reynolds fst = -ln using the program microsat  <cit> . analysis of molecular variance  was performed for the same sets of populations and major island groups as done for the equivalent mitochondrial analysis  in the program arlequin v <dig>   <cit> .

in order to determine the correlation between island age vs genetic distance  we used the same approach as described for the d-loop sequences . the correlation between possible dispersal distance of marine iguanas vs genetic distance  was tested with a mantel test as implemented in the program arlequin v <dig>   <cit> . the significane of test results were determined by performing  <dig>  randomizations. underlying dispersal distances in the matrix  were estimated under the assumption that iguanas from localities on different islands dispersed by drifting in the ocean, meaning that distances are the closest straight lines around intervening islands between localities. if localities were on the same island, the distances were the closest "coastal" distances - assuming that iguanas dispersed by either swimming or walking along the coast rather than walking across islands.

analysis of population expansion
tests of recent population expansion were conducted on the combined population samples  for the mitochondrial and microsatellite datasets separately. for cr sequences, we obtained frequency distributions of pairwise nucleotide differences between sequences , fu's fs test  <cit> , and tajima's d statistic  <cit>  using arlequin. particular focus was placed on marine iguana populations on the comparatively young islands in the western  and northern  regions of the archipelago, which may have been host to recent expansions in both range and population size. details on methods and parameters used for these analyses are provided in the additional material .

the distribution of alleles at microsatellite loci were examined for signs of population expansion using the intra-locus k test as implemented in the excel macro kgtests  <cit> . assuming a simple stepwise mutation model, locus-specific allele length distributions from constant-sized populations should have several modes, whereas a single mode is expected for expanding populations  <cit> . the intra-locus k test examines differences in allele length distributions for specific loci, where a negative k value is indicative of recent population expansion, as well as whether the number of negative k values across all loci is significant  <cit> .

tests of sex-biased dispersal
based on the results of the rassmann et al. study  <cit>  that indicated male-biased dispersal in marine iguanas, we performed four different tests of sex-biased dispersal for sets of adult individuals sampled in 1991/ <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> : i) the fis statistic describes how well genotype frequencies follow expectations under hardy-weinberg equilibrium and assumes that the dispersing sex will be a mixture of residents and immigrants resulting in a heterozygote deficiency and a positive fis value; ii) fst values should be lower for the dispersing sex because allele frequencies of the dispersing sex should be more similar across populations; iii) immigrants tend to have a lower assignment index  than residents. therefore, the dispersing sex should display, on average, a lower value of ai than the resident sex; iv) since members of the dispersing sex will include both residents  and immigrants , the variance of ai should be larger for the dispersing sex than for the resident sex. all tests were run in the program fstat version  <dig> . <dig>   <cit>  and the significance of different test results were determined by performing  <dig>  randomizations.

RESULTS
cr-based phylogenetic analysis and clade distribution
complete mtdna cr sequences were obtained for  <dig> marine iguanas and contained  <dig> bp, or  <dig> bp when positions with insertions/deletions  were removed as they did not provide significant information and would have extremly limited important applications within the program dnasp . d-loop haplotypes have been deposited in genebank under accession numbers gq293462-gq <dig> and eu278255-eu <dig> and detailed information on haplotypes  is provided by table s <dig> . the resulting alignment contained  <dig> haplotypes with a pairwise uncorrected sequence divergence of  <dig> % between the most distant haplotypes. thirty-five of these haplotypes were singletons.

the topologies of trees generated by the mrbayes  and beast  software were very similar and resulted in three general clades -designated a, b, and c - that were supported by high posterior probability values . under the relaxed clock model, bayesian-based analysis in the software beast placed clade b as the basal group in the phylogeny. many islands possessed haplotypes from multiple clades . clade a  possessed the fewest haplotypes  and was widely distributed across the archipelago; clade b  contained  <dig> haplotypes that were found mostly on the central and eastern islands, but also on southern isabela ; clade c  accounted for the majority of haplotypes  and occurred on the northern  and western  islands as well as on the two central islands of floreana and rábida at low frequency. the average pairwise divergence within each of the three clades was low  while the maximum divergence was apparently slightly higher in clade b  than for the other two groups . the average percent distance between clades ranged from  <dig>  -  <dig> % .

cr haplotype relationships and distribution
statistical parsimony networks were constructed separately for each of the three clades. in clade a, haplotype h <dig> was the only variant that was widespread and found on multiple islands, including san cristóbal to the southeast, marchena to the north, and santiago in the central archipelago . one clade a haplotype  was also found on northern isabela , showing that this lineage extends to the far west. in clade b, some haplotypes  were widespread across several of the eastern and central islands while others  formed groups that clustered within specific islands. members of clade b were generally restricted to the eastern and central islands, except that the majority of southern isabela haplotypes were also part of this clade. in addition, a clade b haplotype  was identified from a single individual in the far western fpm population on fernandina. haplotypes from the island of floreana appeared at several disjunct places in the network.

for clade c a high degree of reticulation was observed in the network. as a result, the complete network could not be represented in a clear fashion, and singleton individuals  were removed from the statistical parsimony analysis to simplify the general phylogeographic patterns. the majority of clade c haplotypes were limited to the far western  and northern  regions of the archipelago, although two clade c haplotypes, h <dig> and h <dig>  were also found on two central islands, floreana and rábida.

population genetic diversity and differentiation based on cr data
many populations from the west  showed high levels of genetic diversity . conversely, a number of populations from the north, east, and central regions had particularly low levels of variation, many containing three haplotypes or less. the variation was particularly low on santa cruz, where  <dig> of the  <dig> individuals sampled shared the same cr haplotype.

the analysis of genetic structure  showed that populations from the older central/eastern islands were highly differentiated from those in the north  and west . there was also significant structure between northern and western islands, but to a lesser degree . within regions, genetic distinctiveness among populations was much greater in the eastern/central archipelago  than in the north  or west . however, some eastern/central islands  contained many individuals that shared haplotypes with populations from other islands . the most striking separation of marine iguana populations in the east/central region was observed on opposite ends of san cristóbal island ; a result of the fact that haplotypes from these populations are from two different clades . the results of the amova, in which populations were grouped into northern, eastern/central, and western regions, showed that variation was similarly partitioned among groups , among populations within groups , and within populations . these results were further supported by the fact that mitochondrial differentiation between island populations correlated with island age  and could explain 20% of the observed variation.

population structure of galápagos marine iguanas within and between islands and major geographic regions based on cr data  and  <dig> microsatellite loci .

only islands with multiple samples could be used to examine within-island differentiation. the two populations from southeastern isabela  were included in the east/central since they show a higher genetic affinity to those islands. standard deviations represent the mean over all pairwise comparisons.

microsatellite loci dependent population structure and gene flow
we found different patterns of genetic differentiation across the archipelago. individuals sampled at different time points  from the northern , central  and one of the eastern  islands each form a single island-specific genetic cluster with a low degree of intermixing with genetic clusters from other islands. on the other easternmost island of san cristóbal, two highly distinct genetic clusters were found corresponding to the western  and eastern  populations. the strong genetic differentiation among these islands  was further supported by the results of the individual-based self-assignment test. proportions of individuals correctly assigned to these island populations ranged from 96-100% indicating low levels of gene flow between islands . gene flow from española to floreana was indicated by 12% of individuals sampled on floreana, but incorrectly assigning to española. the smaller islands such as pinzon and rábida show signatures of genetic exchange with the larger islands of fernandina and isabela/santiago, respectively .

results of the self-assignment test of  <dig> galápagos marine iguana samples using the approach of rannala and mountain  <cit>  as implemented in the program geneclass <dig>  <cit> . proportion of "correctly" assigned individuals includes individuals that were assigned to their island of origin irrespective of the sampling period , whereas the second column gives the proportion of individuals assigned to islands other than the island of origin.

in contrast, structure analysis  showed that individuals sampled on fernandina and isabela are genetically similar, with populations on both islands showing a high degree of genetic mixing. the population from punta albermarle  in northern isabela was an exception since it was genetically differentiated from the remaining populations on fernandina and isabela. also, the self-assignment analysis indicated high levels of gene flow between these two islands as all of the incorrectly assigned individuals on fernandina  were from isabela and nearly all incorrectly assigned individuals on isabela  were from fernandina . importantly, the nine distinct genetic clusters recovered by our analyses on fernandina and isabela are mostly absent from the remaining islands of the archipelago .

the average fst values between the  <dig> populations sampled in 1991/ <dig> and the  <dig> populations sampled in  <dig> were quite similar . within-island fst differentiation ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>   and fst between islands from the same region ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . differentiation between geographic regions was low, ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>   . in line with these results, the amova analysis revealed that only 3% of the variation was partitioned between geographic groups, 8% among populations within geographic groups, and 89% within populations. also, no evidence for a relationship between island age and genetic distance was found on the basis of microsatellite loci . a slight , but highly significantly  correlation between possible dispersal distances and genetic distance was found that could explain 7% of the observed variation between matrices .

analysis of population expansion
for the mtdna dataset, both the western and northern populations conformed to the model of sudden-expansion , which was further supported by low raggedness values . however, only the west showed a clear unimodal mismatch pattern which is suggestive of recent population expansion . also, highly negative fs values  were obtained for two sites on fernandina  and for one site on western isabela , indicating an excess of recent mutations in these populations due to population growth . of these three sites, only fpm was also significant for tajima's d neutrality test , but with a much weaker signal than for the fs test. in addition, when all the western populations were combined, fs values were negative and significant , but d values were not .

intra-locus k-test statistics based on microsatellites showed evidence of significant recent population expansion for only two populations. ten out of thirteen loci  showed negative k values that are indicative of recent population expansion for the fpm site on fernandina and the saint james bay  site on santiago.

analysis of sex-biased dispersal
the results of four tests  are shown for females  and males  as sampled in 1991/ <dig> and  <dig>  note that none of the tests for both sampling periods provide significant differences  concerning dispersal of sexes.

discussion
do marine iguanas follow the progression hypothesis?
genetic studies have revealed that many species in the galápagos follow the progression hypothesis, where islands are colonized in order of their emergence . this pattern has been attributed to the relative ease in which migrating individuals can successfully occupy younger, uninhabited islands in comparison to older ones, where populations have already been established  <cit> . the progression hypothesis appears most supported by poorly dispersing species such as giant tortoises  <cit> , lava lizards  <cit> , land snails  <cit> , and galápagos land iguanas  <cit>  since the probability of back migration to older islands is low. conversely, the phylogeographic patterns of more mobile organisms such as darwin finches , insects , sea lions  <cit>  and hawks  <cit>  do not always conform to the geologic history of the islands. in the case of galápagos sea lions and hawks genetic data suggest that population structure was established and affected by quite different factors after a rapid population expansion across the whole archipelago: sea lions diverged according to ecological differences in a western and eastern clade  <cit> , whereas an island-dependent population structure due to limited dispersal between islands was found for the galápagos hawks  <cit> .

galápagos marine iguanas feed exclusively on aquatic algae and are closely tied to the coastal environment throughout their lives  <cit> . large individuals are even known to forage offshore in the subtidal zone, swimming up to several hundred meters to reach feeding sites  <cit> . it is therefore reasonable to expect that these animals can disperse easily - either actively or passively - and that their evolutionary history should not conform to the progression hypothesis.

on a broad scale, the current study provides evidence that the progression hypothesis appears to hold true for marine iguanas. our cr analyses, as well as the previously published cytb study  <cit> , suggest that clade b may be basal to clades a and c . biogeographically, this makes sense since clade b is found almost exclusively on the eastern and central islands  that are considered to be the oldest in the archipelago. meanwhile, the majority of clade c haplotypes was identified on younger islands in the north and west. the basal position of clade b would be made stronger if galápagos land iguanas - the acknowledged sister species of marine iguanas -could be used as an outgroup for phylogenetic analysis. however, when this was attempted using bayesian-based phylogenetic inference, independent runs failed to converge after  <dig> ×  <dig> generations. this outcome is likely due to the large divergence between marine and land iguana cr sequences  compared to the low divergence within marine iguanas , reflecting the long timeframe in which the two species have independently evolved on both existing and submerged islands.

due to the difficulty in rooting the marine iguana phylogeny with cr data, frequency-based genetic information provides important additional support for the progression hypothesis at the large scale. the genetic division between populations from the eastern/central archipelago and those from the northern and western islands was evident in the cr haplotype frequencies, which showed high levels of differentiation as expressed by rather high fst-values between regions . fst differentiation based on microsatellite loci for corresponding comparisons is much lower  and not in line with the mitochondrial data.

one consequence of the progression hypothesis is that levels of genetic structure are higher among populations on older islands since these are more likely to be at equilibrium and to have undergone significant lineage sorting. for example, in galápagos tortoises, mitochondrial haplotypes are largely endemic to specific islands in the eastern archipelago while those in the west are often shared between populations and depict an intricate history of genetic exchange  <cit> . a qualitatively similar pattern is also seen for marine iguanas. mitochondrial cr differentiation was much higher between populations from the older eastern/central archipelago than among the younger western and northern islands. moreover, levels of genetic differentiation among populations on the youngest  and westernmost islands of fernandina and isabela were not significantly different from  <dig> .

there are some exceptions to the general east/west division of marine iguanas in the archipelago that are evident from the cr data. while clade b haplotypes did predominate in the eastern/central region in our study, they were also in the majority on southeastern isabela, suggesting that this part of the island is biogeographically more connected to the east/central archipelago than to the west. in addition, a single clade b haplotype  was also found on the far-western island of fernandina, demonstrating the potential for rare long-distance dispersal from the east. similarly, haplotypes from clade c, which were previously shown to be restricted to the north and west, were also identified on two of the central islands, floreana and rábida. a unique clade a haplotype was also identified on northern isabela, showing that this lineage extends across the entire northern archipelago. the ancestral haplotype in this clade  was widely distributed, existing on san cristóbal to the east, and santiago and marchena in the north-central archipelago. since san cristóbal is one of the two oldest islands in the galápagos, clade a likely radiated from there to the north and west, all the way to the northern tip of isabela. this fits well with the patterns of island age as well as the path of the prevailing humboldt current which approaches the archipelago from a southeasterly direction  <cit>  and is thought to have produced similar east to west colonization patterns in other galápagos organisms  <cit> .

while the progression hypothesis generally explains the overall east/west division of marine iguanas, dispersal patterns have produced a more complicated history within regions. unlike tortoises and other galápagos organisms that exhibit complete genetic structuring among older populations, many marine iguana cr haplotypes are shared between different islands in the eastern/central region . for example, more than half of the marine iguanas sampled on santa fé have cr haplotypes in common with individuals from other islands. in addition, the statistical parsimony analysis  shows that haplotypes restricted to several of the older islands in the eastern archipelago  are connected to other eastern/central island haplotypes via haplotypes from younger central islands , suggesting that migration routes have not proceeded strictly according to the age of island emergence. the appearance of floreana haplotypes throughout the network shows that this island has been subject to continual genetic exchange with other islands.

microsatellite loci based population structure - evidence for sex-biased dispersal in marine iguanas?
bayesian cluster analysis of microsatellite loci genotypes shows that most marine iguanas belong to highly distinct genetic island clusters . this result was independently supported by the high assignment rate of individuals to their island of origin for the majority of islands . the bayesian cluster analysis is especially convincing for two reasons. first, individuals sampled at different time points  but at the same sampling location were grouped together as one genetic unit. second, the same number of genetic clusters was obtained by two different bayesian clustering methods . the microsatellite loci data therefore suggest that the structuring of marine iguana populations generally follows a pattern of one genetic unit per island. a similar pattern was also recently demonstrated for galápagos lava lizards from the genus microlophus  <cit> .

based on fstanalyses of nuclear genetic data, high levels of gene flow between islands and populations were reported  <cit> . the overall fst was approximately  <dig>  for the  <dig> marine iguana populations examined. although the average fst differentiation found in our study was in the same range , the high level of genetic differentiation between islands indicated by bayesian cluster analyses suggests that recent gene flow has been limited, and consequently that fst values may provide little information about fine scale population structure . another issue of microsatellite-based fst estimates is the underestimation of genetic structure due to allele size homoplasy. such a pattern may result from the characteristically high mutation rates and allelic polymorphism of microsatellite loci and may diminish the observed genetic distance . as an example, when microsatellite loci and sequences of the nuclear coded internal transcribed spacer  were analysed in the coral species corallium rubrum across the western mediterranean, its- <dig> sequences revealed significant genetic structure between different geographic regions while microsatellite loci failed to show any correlation between fst-based estimates for geographic distances ranging from 30- <dig> km  <cit> . in another study in the same organism, however, very fine scale structuring based on microsatellites was observed for distances of ten meters to one km  <cit>  indicating that spatial genetic structure does exists in this system but may not be detectable using microsatellite-based fst estimates over large distances and/or time frames.

since the study of rassmann et al. found significant differentiation between islands and regions based on maternally inherited mtdna markers but not on bi-parentally inherited nuclear microsatellite and minisatellite loci, they concluded that male-mediated dispersal and gene flow was likely responsible for this discrepancy  <cit> . support for this hypothesis came from frequent field observations in which male marine iguanas have been observed to swim to different islands during the breeding season - apparently to establish breeding territories . after the breeding season they return to the larger island where they "live". on the other hand females have been observed swimming to some islands  during the breeding season and returned to their resident island after oviposition .

in our study none of the four tests conducted showed significant evidence for sex-biased dispersal in marine iguanas . since the set of individuals analyzed in the rassman et al. study  <cit>  for three microsatellite loci corresponds to the 1991/ <dig> samples analyzed for thirteen microsatellite loci in our study, it was possible to directly compare of fst-based test statistics between the two studies. in the former study  <cit>  males displayed a significantly lower fst-value  than females  suggesting that males disperse more than females. conversely, fst  estimates for the same set of males and females, which were genotyped at thirteen microsatellite loci, were not significantly different . for individuals sampled in  <dig>  we even found higher fst values for males  than for females , but also non-significant . these findings suggest that the results of the rassman et al. study  <cit> , which were based only on three microsatellite loci, should be approached cautiously. since sex bias has to be intense to be detected by any of the applied test statistics  <cit> , we cannot rule out that such a bias might exist in the case of single dispersers. however, we can exclude that this is a major demographic characteristic of marine iguana populations, as previously suggested.

beyond the results of the sex-biased dispersal tests, the observed genetic patterns make high dispersal rates in marine iguanas unlikely. bayesian-based population structure analysis  indicates that, except in a few cases , recent migration and gene flow between islands is low. the fact that we recovered separate genetic units in the west  and east  on san cristóbal  as well as detected population structure between populations on isabela  indicates that gene flow of marine iguanas can be limited even along the coasts of the same island. these findings are not in line with expectations of high male-mediated gene flow  <cit> .

evolution of high genetic diversity on isabela and fernandina
marine iguana populations on the westernmost islands of isabela and fernandina are among the largest in the galápagos, with fernandina alone numbering in the hundreds of thousands  <cit> . individuals from these populations are also the largest in the archipelago with a maximum body mass of  <dig> kg for individuals in southwestern isabela  <cit> . both large population size and individual body size have been attributed to the high marine productivity generated by upwelling of the nutrient-rich cromwell current along the western archipelago  <cit> . the same region also harbors nearly 95% of the overall galápagos penguin  population  <cit> .

the western marine iguana populations also possess a high level of genetic diversity for both mitochondrial and microsatellite data, even though they occur on the two most recently emerged islands. the emergence age of the oldest volcano on isabela is less than  <dig>  years, while the emergence age of fernandina is estimated to be only  <dig>  years  <cit> . in contrast, central and southern islands of the archipelago are 1- <dig> million years old. sixty-seven out of the total  <dig> mitochondrial control region haploytypes are found on fernandina and isabela with  <dig> haplotypes being distinct to these islands  resulting in high levels of haplotype diversity. in contrast populations on the other islands showed significantly fewer haplotypes and lower levels of haplotype diversity. also, at the level of microsatellite loci, up to nine different genetic clusters were detected for fernandina and isabela , whereas a single predominant cluster is found in populations from most other islands. these genetic clusters are unique to the isabela and fernandina populations and therefore must have recently evolved on these islands.

on a broad scale across all islands mitochondrial as well as nuclear diversity indices did not correlate with island size . the most obvious explanation for the higher level of genetic diversity on the younger islands is that large population sizes along with recent population growth have resulted in many new mutations combined with decreased effects of genetic drift. indeed, western populations on isabela and fernandina show clear signs of sudden-expansion based on mtdna data as evidenced by a clear unimodal mismatch pattern  and highly negative fs values for punta espinosa and punta mangle on fernandina  indicating an excess of recent mutations. the microsatellite loci-based k-test statistic showed significant support for recent population expansion for the punta mangle population on fernandina , but not for any of the other western populations.

however, the analysis of cr haplotypes also shows that western marine iguana populations possess mtdna haplotypes typical of some central, northern, and southern populations. this variation could have been introduced into the western populations through founder events from multiple sources. an increased variation within populations due to multiple recent colonizations has been shown for the invasive brown anolis  - a similar picture that is seen also in galápagos tortoises  <cit>  - underpins the colonization of isabela from multiple sources. in the land iguana c. subcristatus, mitochondrial dna sequence data indicate a single founder event of western islands from a single source located in the central islands  <cit> . subsequently c. subcristatus seems to have dispersed in a south to north direction on isabela. however, the occurrence of an old separate lineage on isabela  indicates that land iguanas have colonized isabela at least twice.

CONCLUSIONS
this comprehensive analysis of the population structure of galápagos marine iguanas both supports and transforms our previous knowledge about the microevolution of this unique species. the detailed mtdna analyses trace back migration routes in the evolutionary past and suggest that colonization of islands progressed from geologically older to younger islands in the archipelago. the existence of highly differentiated genetic clusters among islands as well as no specific support for sex-biased dispersal conflict with the previously held view of high male gene flow among islands. more generally, our study demonstrates how the development of recent analytical tools such as bayesian clustering analysis and dna sequence-based demographic analyses allow us to tease apart the role of past and present gene flow in shaping current patterns of population differentiation.

authors' contributions
project conception and design: ss sg ac hls. performed laboratory work: ss sg dl tch. data analysis: ss sg dl tch. wrote the paper: ss sg ac mr. figure design: dl sg ss. field sampling: ss sg ac mr cm sr hms gg go amp. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
table s1: possible dispersal distances of marine iguanas.

click here for file

 additional file 2
supporting information on mitochondrial cr analyses  <cit> .

click here for file

 additional file 3
table s2: detailed infromation on d-loop haplotypes.

click here for file

 additional file 4
table s3: general characteristics of the three mitochondrial clades of galápagos marine iguanas.

click here for file

 additional file 5
figure s1: estimation of genetic clusters according to evanno et al.

click here for file

 additional file 6
table s4: best found partitions according to baps v <dig> .

click here for file

 additional file 7
figure s2: scatter plot fst versus possible dispersal distance.

click here for file

 additional file 8
figure s3: mismatch distribution of galápagos marine iguana d-loop haplotypes.

click here for file

 additional file 9
table s5: intra locus specific k-values of thirteen microsatellite loci of galápagos marine iguana populations.

click here for file

 additional file 10
figure s4: scatter plot with regression analysis of island perimeter as measured by noaa gis resource  vs genetic diversity values.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
the authors thank the servicio parque nacional galápagos and the charles darwin research station for granting the sampling permits and for providing the necessary infrastructure, tame airlines for providing reduced airfare from mainland ecuador to the islands, kornelia rassmann, fritz trillmich, diethard tautz, martin wikelski, thomas roedl and maren vitousek for providing blood samples of a. cristatus. ryan garrick provided valuable comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. the sample collection trip of the year  <dig> was enabled through a grant from the national geographic society  to adalgisa caccone and sebastian steinfartz. sebastian steinfartz has been supported by a fellowship  of the german research community  and deborah lanterbecq by a postdoctoral fellowship of the belgian american educational foundation. the yale institute for biospheric studies supported this project through funds to adalgisa caccone.
