BACKGROUND
extant species are derived from a process of evolution and diversification from species now disappeared. these species are called ancient in general and ancestral if they left a descendant. ancestral genomic sequences can be estimated through computation from a set of extant sequences related by a phylogeny and a model of evolution  <cit> , while ancient genomic sequences in general can be sequenced from the remains of dead organisms  <cit> .

ancestral genome reconstruction
ancestral genome reconstruction can consist in predicting a gene content in ancestral species  <cit> , and for each gene its sequence  <cit> . while originally used to study proteins or isolated genes, ancestral genome reconstructions are now robust at a scale larger than the gene, for fragments where no rearrangement have occurred  <cit> . methods for inferring ancestral gene orders have also been explored  <cit> . together, these methods open the way to the reconstruction of complete ancestral genomes, including their sequences.

obtaining ancestral sequences can allow, through the study of physical properties of the reconstructed molecules, the inference of the paleoenvironnements in which these molecules evolved  <cit> . these methods also allow access to an oriented and ordered view of molecular events along the history of life. moreover, they offer a better understanding of this history and can further our knowledge of the mechanisms linking organic sequences to their functions  <cit> .

despite this, ancestral sequence reconstruction suffers from several limits. along with the study of molecular evolution, it relies on the validity of models and their fundamental hypothesis. furthermore, given that we are interested in a phenomenon often distant in time, it is at best difficult to obtain proofs validating proposed predictions. thus, the validation of ancestral reconstruction methods is often limited to robustness tests, or simulations that themselves rely on the validity of the models of evolution  <cit> .

ancient genome sequencing
ancient dna sequences is another way to have an access to the past history of living organisms. under certain conditions it is possible to obtain genetic material through the sequencing of the remains of an organism. ancient dna sequencing began in the middle of the 80s with the cloning and sequencing of fragments of mitochondrial dna in a museum specimen of equus quagga, an extinct equine species that disappeared in the xixth century  <cit> . the advent of pcr methods  <cit>  and high-throughput sequencing  <cit>  followed by what is called third generation sequencing  <cit>  allowed the sequencing of several extinct animals  <cit> , ancient unicellular eukaryotes  <cit> , bacteria  <cit> , metagenome  <cit> , or virome  <cit> .

the ancient sequences disclose a new source of information concerning the evolution of lineages of interest. they have already been used, among other things, to understand the dynamic of extant populations of the genus homo  <cit> , or other animals  <cit> , to correct and recalibrate phylogenies  <cit> , or to better understand past pandemics  <cit> .

however, along with the problems specific to sequencing technologies, ancient dna sequencing is limited by the post-mortem chemical degradation of dna molecules throughout time. thus, like fossils, ancient sequences are scarce while, unlike them, limited to recent times.

yersinia pestis
classified among enterobacteriaceae, yersinia pestis is the bacterium thought to be responsible for the bubonic plague and the pneumonic plague. it diverged from the yersinia pseudotuberculosis lineage, in part through the acquisition of two plasmids  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that strains of yersinia pestis caused the black death of 1347- <dig> ad that is thought to have killed between a third and half of the european population at that time and persisted in europe until the middle of the xviiith century  <cit> . an ancient genome has been extracted and sequenced  <cit> . it was the first whole ancient bacterial genome. based on a substitution pattern compared to extant yersinia species, it has been hypothesized to take place on the extant species phylogeny in the vicinity of a known speciation node leading to two set of extant, sequenced and annotated strains of the bacterium .

the existence of several sequenced and annotated extant genomes as well as the relatively short evolutionary time separating them make their ancestor a good candidate for an ancestral reconstruction including both sequence and gene organization along the chromosome and the plasmids. however despite the short evolutionary time, while substitutions are quite rare  <cit> , there is a very active dynamics of rearrangements, insertion sequences propagation, duplications, copy number variation , which makes the problem challenging.

the late-medieval ancient genome, likely close to that ancestor, offers a validation opportunity for the ancestral reconstruction method. we achieve here this reconstruction and perform the comparison.

note that a sequence of the same genome was proposed recently by rajaraman et al.  <cit> , but was not issued from ancestral reconstruction. the contigs of the ancient genome were scaffolded with a method including the phylogeny of relatives, and some parts of the assembly could be corrected, but what we present here is not using at all the ancient sequence in the reconstruction phase, it is done only from independent extant data.

methods
an overview of the method, including species tree construction, gene tree construction and reconciliation, gene order inference and gene tree corrections according to this gene order, and eventually genic and intergenic sequence prediction, is illustrated on figure  <dig> 

data set
the data consists in  <dig> yersinia annotated genomes  from which we extract  <dig> homologous protein gene families containing at least two genes, using the hogenom database  <cit> . of these,  <dig> have exactly one copy per extant strain. this step corresponds to part a in figure  <dig> 

species tree
using muscle  <cit>  , we aligned the  <dig> families, concatenated the variable sites of all alignments and obtained a phylogenetic tree using phyml  <cit>   that we rooted by separating the pestis from the pseudotuberculosis clades, according to a consensus in the literature. in our tree the branch separating the two clades is well supported, as well as the branches surrounding the ancestor that we wish to reconstruct . this step corresponds to part b in figure  <dig> 

gene trees
all gene families sequences were then aligned using prank  <cit>  and one gene tree per family was computed using phyml . because we are aligning recently diverged strains of the same organisms  <cit> , the sequences often have not diverged enough to allow an unambiguous tree reconstruction. so we collapsed all branches with a support lower than  <dig> and then used profilenj  <cit>  to solve the created polytomies. profilenj reconstructs species tree branches instead of collapsed branches and chooses among several solutions with a neighbor-joining formula. distances for the neighbor-joining part were computed with bppdist, a bio++ suite software  <cit>   model).

profilenj also roots the gene trees according to "last common ancestor" reconciliation method, annotating internal nodes with duplications or speciations, and choosing a root minimizing the number of duplications.

reconciled gene trees depict the history of the gene family, including all ancestral genes, uniquely defined by the reconciliation.

this step corresponds to part c in figure  <dig> 

gene families filtering
from the  <dig> gene families, some were discarded because they showed signal of a process that we do not handle well in our pipeline, gene transfer. transfer was suspected when a branch in the reconciled gene tree would correspond to at least  <dig> independent losses in the species tree. we also removed the families with more than  <dig> genes in the black death ancestor, suspecting insertion sequences, which are poorly handled by the method. we also removed families containing genes fully included in other genes: as we model the evolution of gene orders, these would be difficult to handle. we eventually removed families when the reconciled gene tree did not contain a gene in the ancestor we want to reconstruct.

the final data set contained  <dig> families. note that when removing gene families from the study, we do not necessarily give up the reconstruction of parts of the ancestral sequence. we just define the removed parts as intergenic. as we also reconstruct intergenic sequences, this simply modifies the resolution at which we are able to detect rearrangements.

extant gene order and adjacencies
each gene is a segment of a chromosome or a plasmid and has a start and an end position on it. we identify these positions as the extremities of the gene. a start position may be greater than an end position: the order of the extremities defines the orientation of the gene. we model each genome by a graph, whose nodes are gene extremities of genes in that genome. we put an edge, called an adjacency between pairs of extremities of a same gene. additionally if genes aa′ and bb′ are consecutive , we put an adjacency between a′ and b. so extant genomes are sets of disjoints cycles in a graph, modeling chromosomes and plasmids.

gene extremities can be clustered into families, inherited from gene families, and also inherit the reconciled gene tree.

ancestral gene order
ancestral adjacencies between gene extremities were inferred using deco  <cit> . it models the evolution of an adjacency between two gene extremities following a parsimony principle, i.e. minimizing the number of gains and breakages of adjacencies, due to rearrangements. it takes as input the species tree, all gene trees, and extant adjacencies, and proposes a set of ancestral adjacencies between ancestral gene extremities defined by the reconciled gene trees. this step corresponds to part d in figure  <dig> 

deco assumes that adjacencies evolve independently. this means in particular that ancestral gene extremities can be involved in an arbitrary number of adjacencies. ancestral gene extremities and adjacencies are not necessarily made of cycles as extant genomes, so we call this object an adjacency graph. figure  <dig> shows the obtained adjacency graph at this step. while most of it shows a linear or circular structure, there are some gene extremities with too many adjacencies, others with not enough.

there can be several reasons for the adjacency graph not to be a collection of paths and cycles, as we would expect if the data and methods were perfect. incorrect gene trees are probably the major source of such discrepancies, while others may come from uncertainties in adjacency history inference.

we transform the adjacency graph into a genome , first by correcting gene trees, by operations we call zipping and unzipping, then by removing a minimum number of adjacencies so that the remaining graph is a genome.

correcting gene trees
this step corresponds to part e in figure  <dig> and a more detailed picture is on figure  <dig> 

unzipping
each ancestral gene extremity of a gene g should have at most two adjacencies. if one has more than two, a first hypothesis can be that in the real ancestral genome, the gene g was duplicated in two copies, and each copy would carry some of the adjacencies of g.

if in one extant species, there are two homologous copies of the gene g, and their extremities share the homologs of the adjacencies attributed to an extremity of g, then we perform the unzipping operation.

it consists in making two genes out of g by modifying the gene tree t of the gene family containing g. only the subtree rooted at g is changed, into a subtree rooted at a new duplication node with two descendants: g and a new gene g′. then the two subtrees rooted at g and g′ are reconstructed, first by assigning all leaves to g or g′ according to their neighborhood; then by constructing subtrees on these leaves using profilenj. in the case where some leaves can't be assigned to either g or g′ using their neighborhood , then leaves are assigned to one of the two set of leaves according to their mean phylogenetic distances with them. where there is a tie , the leaf is randomly assigned to one of the two leaf-set.

if the unzipping procedure increases the number of adjacencies incident to a gene extremity of a gene h in the immediate neighborhood of g in the adjacency graph, then the unzipping procedure is applied to h as well, and then to its neighbors, until the region is linearized.

zipping
another possible reason for a gene g to be involved in more than two adjacencies is that two of these adjacencies gh and gh′ concern two paralogs h and h′ which in reality should form only one gene. in that case we perform a zipping operation, similar to the one described in  <cit> .

let hd be the last common ancestor of h and h′ in their gene tree. suppose it is assigned to species s, whose descendants are s <dig> and s <dig>  it is a duplication node, and we turn it into a speciation node by giving it two descendant nodes h <dig> and h <dig>  and assigning its descendant leaves to either one of them, depending on whether they are genes from descendants of s <dig> or s <dig>  then subtrees rooted at h <dig> and h <dig> are reconstructed using profilenj.

zipping produces a new ancestral gene hd instead of two paralogues h and h′. we propagate the same operation to the neighbors of the ancestral gene hd in the adjacency graph if they are themselves supernumerary paralogues.

note that for zipping and unzipping, the propagation mechanism allows the treatment of several consecutive nodes, such that a large segmental duplication containing multiple genes can be dealt with as long as there exists a node to start the unzipping move .

cutting
zipping and unzipping are tested independently for each ancestral node with more than two neighbors. each of them should decrease the number of gene extremities with more than two adjacencies. the operation that decreases it the most is kept.

if none of zipping and unzipping succeeds in removing all such supernumerary adjacencies , then we remove as few adjacencies as possible so that only gene extremities with at most two adjacencies remain. this is achieved using a maximum matching technique described in  <cit> .

ancestral sequence reconstruction
ancestral sequences have to be reconstructed by pieces, because they need a multiple alignment free of rearrangements. the pieces have to be glued together, and in order to avoid between pieces border problems, pieces have to overlap. this is why we reconstruct an ancestral sequence for all pairs of genes which are connected by an adjacency. then pairs are aligned together on their common gene, and merged.

we orient each adjacent gene pair with a first and a second gene, each gene should be once the first gene of a pair, and once the second in another pair. we use the gene tree of the first gene as a guide, to construct a multiple sequence alignment with the extant sequences that contain this adjacent pair , and the ancestral sequence using prank  <cit> .

gene sequences at the ends of contigs are reconstructed alone using their own tree. in consequence each inter-gene sequence is reconstructed once and each gene sequence is reconstructed twice and at least once with its own tree. we assemble the obtained ancestral sequences by aligning  the ones sharing a gene and then making the consensus sequence of that alignment, favoring the sequence reconstructed with the tree of the aligned gene.

for instance, consider the ancestral path abc , we reconstruct the ancestral sequence of a using its own tree, ab using a's tree, bc using b's tree and c using its own tree. afterward the ancestral sequence of a is aligned with the ancestral sequence ab, favoring the sequence of a when computing the consensus. then the sequence ab is aligned with the sequence bc, favoring the sequence bc in the consensus . finally, the sequence abc is aligned with the sequence c, favoring c in the consensus.

a graphical view of these steps are given in figure  <dig>  parts f and g.

note that, as stated before, the ancestral sequence reconstruction needs a multiple alignment free of rearrangements. this means that the size of the recombination events that can be taken into account for ancestral sequences reconstruction depends on the density of the markers  used in the ancestral order reconstruction step.

RESULTS
the shape of the ancestral genome
we perform the whole process of ancestral gene order reconstruction for three data sets: the whole set of filtered families, the set of d free families, without duplication and the dl free families, without duplication nor loss.

ancestral gene order is computed with the whole set, but it gives fragmented paths in the adjacency graph. the fragments are progressively assembled using the d free and dl free gene orders.

the ancestral gene order was reconstructed for the chromosome  and the three plasmids . the plasmids pcd and ppcp were obtained as circular elements in the adjacency graph, while the plasmid pmt was represented by one linear fragment. the chromosome was obtained as three linear components. to join these components, we ran deco on their six extremities using a gradient of adjacency gain/loss costs ratio  and scored each potential adjacency by the number of times it was observed. we then applied a weighted maximum matching technique  <cit>  to extract the best possible order between the fragments .

the ancestral gene order is different from all extant genomes. for example it is an intermediary between the two extant strains co <dig> and kim <dig>  figure  <dig> b and c show the gene order comparison between the ancestral genome and two extant ones, while a comparison between the two extant ones is shown on figure 6a. the isolated dots on the dotplots of figure 6b and c are probably reconstruction errors. while they could be explained as small rearrangements, they probably are artifacts of the adjacency graph linearization method, like a leaf falsely associated to a subtree in an unzipping event for instance.

the ancestral sequences of the plasmids pcd, pmt and ppcp were entirely reconstructed, for a total of respectively  <dig>  kb,  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb. concerning the ancestral chromosome, a total of  <dig>  mb of ancestral sequence was reconstructed, which is close to the size of the extant chromosomes of yersinia pestis strains . a lack of signal in extant genomes due to convergent rearrangements, prevented the reconstruction of four ancestral adjacencies. because of these, the ancestral chromosome sequence is actually composed of four disjoint fragments .

the reconstructed ancestral sequences are avalaible in additional file  <dig> 

comparison to the ancient genome
using megablast  <cit>  we aligned the  <dig> ancient yersinia pestis contigs obtained by bos et al. <cit>   against the obtained ancestral genome, including chromosome and plasmids.

we examine  <dig> hits of length > <dig> bp from  <dig> contigs . the others are full of repeated elements, making the comparison difficult. as a consequence the examined hits all match to the chromosome and none to the plasmids.

gene order
these hits show a quasi-total congruence between the organization of the ancient and ancestral sequence. figure  <dig> represents the correspondence between the two in the form of a dotplot, where contigs of the ancient genome are concatenated according to the ancestral sequence. three isolated dots deviate from the central line. two of them concern large repeated regions, that is, the whole contigs match at several places. only one seems to be a real discordance between the two genomes. two contiguous regions of the contig hit on two different ancestral sequence fragments. this chimeric contig  had already been observed by rajaraman et al.  <cit>  in their scaffolding of the ancient genome. this stretches the proximity and the differences between the two approaches. indeed, the latter, called fpsac, takes as input the ancient contigs and the extant genomes, fragments the contigs according to their alignments to extant genomes, and orders fragments. here we don't use at all the ancient contigs and start from extant genes. so we are independent of the extraction and assembly methodology for the ancient sequence, and we can compare to it. moreover, all our sequences are computationally reconstructed, which was not the case of those obtained with fpsac.

so at a large scale, there is only one difference which can be an assembly error in the ancient sequence or a derived mutation of the ancient bacteria, because the ancient configuration is not supported by extant genomes.

sequences
at a finer scale, differences are more numerous. approximately 81% of the  <dig> contigs with a hit are exact matches to the ancestral genome. we examined some of the remaining and found that the differences could be explained by three kinds of error sources in the ancestral or ancient sequences:

• lack of sufficient data for ancestral reconstruction: it is the case if only one of the two children which branches off the ancestor, in addition to an outgroup, support the presence of a sequence. in that case there is no comparison point to infer some bases, and some are inferred differently than in the ancient sequence.

• lack of a good model of evolution at an intermediary scale, like duplication of small elements. they are here included in alignments and indel models, which do not account for repetitions.

• assembly errors in the ancient sequence.

consider for example the ancient contig number  <dig> where a mismatch occurs when aligned with the ancestral sequence. the mismatch is situated in an intergenic region of the ancestral genome that is present in one descendant of the reconstructed ancestor and two outgroup yersinia pestis species. consequently, the ancestral sequence was reconstructed using a tree where the node of interest was along a branch, missing a comparison point  to choose between its descendant allele and the outgroup allele.

consider also the ancient contig number  <dig> which aligns with one mismatch to the reconstructed ancestor. at the position of the mismatch, all extant  sequences bear the same allele and thus the reconstructed ancestral sequence bears it too. however, the ancient contig bears another allele at that position. if we consider the ancient contig as correct, then this difference would be an original mutation on the ancient strain. such an hypothesis could be checked by mapping the ancient reads to their contigs in order to assess the validity of that specific allele. however, we note that the original study  <cit>  that used read data to call snps did not detect any that were specific to the ancient strain.

there are also differences that are more structural in kind. for example  <dig> contigs show some structural differences with the ancestral genome. on  <dig> of them, the ancient contig displays two contiguous or slightly overlapping hits that are more distant on the ancestral genome , as in figure 8a. on  <dig> ancient contigs, contiguous regions are shown as overlapping in the ancestral genomes, as in figure 8b.

such discrepancies can sometimes be explained by errors in the ancient sequence, especially in regions where repetitions occur. for instance, the case illustrated on figure 8a, is seen on the contig number  <dig> obtained by bos et al. <cit>  . around position  <dig>  that ancient contig displays one occurrence of a 20-mer. however, the reconstructed ancestral sequence has two consecutive occurrences of that 20-mer. this region is situated in an intergenic region, so it has been reconstructed by an alignment of an adjacency with its two flanking genes. the extant species  which have this gene adjacency all display two occurrences  at the exception of yersinia pestis strain co <dig>  the yersinia pestis reference genome which was used to map the ancient reads in  <cit> . while the fact that we did not use the raw reads obtained in  <cit>  prevents us to draw any definitive conclusion, this appears to be an error in the ancient sequence assembly, caused by a derived mutation in the genome used as a reference.

conversely, it happens that similar patterns are better explained by errors in the reconstructed ancestral sequence. such a case occurs on the locus where the ancient contig number  <dig> maps. the situation is also similar to figure 8a. two contiguous regions hit at a distance of  <dig> bp on the reconstructed ancestral sequence. the sequence separating the two hits in the ancestor is only supported by one extant descendant  and the other extant descendants match the ancient contig in only one long hit. this seems to be an error due to the absence of an evolutionary model allowing big insertions. prank models indels but  <dig> bp is not really an indel but is rather an insertion of what should perhaps have been an evolutionary unit. it seems that the indel model prefers losing several times such a long dna segment rather than inserting it once in a terminal branch of the phylogeny. so we can expect a small number of such false additions in the ancestral sequence.

discussion
a complete reconstruction of an ancestral genome at the nucleotide level requires to take into account evolutionary events at several scales: nucleotide substitutions, indels, duplications, losses, recombinations, transfers, transposable elements propagation, rearrangements. each level is handled by dedicated bioinformatics tools which are rarely used together.

we associated here gene content/sequence/order tools in order to attempt the reconstruction of a whole ancestral bacterial genome, including a chromosome and three plasmids. we chose an organism from the yersinia pestis clade because of a recently published ancient sequence. despite being relatively recent at the evolutionary scale , the evolution at all levels, and in particular in genome structure and organization, makes the problem difficult. the difficulty can come from numerous events , but also from scarce events  that prevent reconstructing gene trees from sequences because of a lack of information.

we did not only assemble existing tools that handle evolution at different levels, but also report methodological novelties, like the zipping and unzipping processes to modify gene trees and linearize adjacency graphs. using synteny information to construct gene trees is rarely achieved  <cit>  and linearizing often only use cutting operations  <cit> .

we cannot explicitly handle recombination events or gene transfers, duplications at levels different from the gene, and propagation of insertion sequences. some tools exist to reconstruct gene content or order in the presence of transfers  <cit> , but not equivalent to profilenj  <cit> , which we used because of a lack of signal from the sequences in many gene families. it has not been developed for transfers apparently for algorithmic purposes  <cit> . transfers will probably limit the quality of the sequence, which at recombination points will be reconstructed with a wrong gene tree. we expect these limits to be rare, as we found only little evidence of gene evolution clearly discordant with the species tree.

another limit of this method is that it handles evolution at three different scales: sequence, gene content, gene order, while evolution happens at a continuum of scales, some part of it we don't explicitly model. this is for example the case for small duplications: gene duplications are handled but if they are smaller than genes, duplications will be part of sequence evolution, where the models and alignements take indels into account but not duplications. this is also the case of insertion sequence propagation. if insertion sequences are annotated as genes, their dynamics is sometimes so fast that parsimony duplication/loss principles are not accounting for it, even within a very small amount of time. if insertion sequences are taken in intergenic regions, they will again be handled inside alignments and yield a small amount of false positives.

a small part of the sequence is not reconstructed because of convergent rearrangements which have wiped the traces of some intergenic sequences. these convergent rearrangements also introduce one ambiguity in the ancestral gene order. it is possible that it reflects an ancestral polymorphism which has differently been resolved in different lineages.

polymorphism, and the absence of it in our ancestral genome, is another limitation of such an approach. the ancient population was probably composed of several variants, and the  <dig> years might not be sufficient to sort out all of it. so we are not sure that a single organism carried the genome we reconstruct, but it might be a consensus of several genomes.

yet these limits concern probably a very small percentage of the sequence, which is largely reconstructed with a total match to the ancient sequence. beyond the methodological challenge and the interesting comparison with an ancient genome, the goal of such a reconstruction is not to find an application in synthetic biology, but to understand the evolution of this dangerous pathogen. substitutions, which apparently are only a minor part of the story, are often the only marker of evolution  because of a better availability of performing tools.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we report here the reconstructed ancestral bacterial genome of an ancestral yersinia pestis. the reconstruction is achieved using already published software and methods but also introduces methodological novelties, especially concerning ancestral adjacency graph linearization, leading to the obtention of larger reconstructed ancestral chromosome fragments.

the comparison of the reconstructed ancestral genome with an ancient sequence provides the opportunity to assess the quality of the reconstruction. it appears that while the reconstruction methods display some limits for events spanning more than a few nucleotides and smaller than a gene , they yield good results concerning small  and gene-scale events.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
wd, vd and et conceived the method, wd implemented and tested it. wd and et wrote the article.

supplementary material
additional file 1
duchemindaubintannier <dig> supplementary file  <dig> fas. fasta file containing the ancestral sequences obtained for the chromosome and plasmids of the ancestral yersinia pestis species.

click here for file

 additional file 2
duchemindaubintannier <dig> supplementary file  <dig> pdf. histogram of the hit lengths  when ancient contigs are aligned to the ancestral genome of yersinia pestis.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work is funded by the agence nationale pour la recherche, ancestrome project anr-10-binf-01- <dig> 

publication charges for this work were funded by the agence nationale pour la recherche, ancestrome project anr-10-binf-01- <dig> 

this article has been published as part of bmc genomics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2015: proceedings of the 13th annual research in computational molecular biology  satellite workshop on comparative genomics: genomics. the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcgenomics/supplements/16/s <dig> 
