BACKGROUND
much of molecular biology aims to decipher the mechanisms organisms use to modulate their gene expression patterns. this has been greatly facilitated by genome sequencing and subsequent design of microarrays allowing determination of gene expression patterns with near full-genome coverage. while individual array experiments can be examined for differential expression of genes of interest, this may be misleading owing to irreproducibility, and only uses a small fraction of the data often available. further analysis of large amounts of microarray data en masse to calculate correlation coefficients can be used to rank genes according to how closely their expression follows that of a query gene of interest. strongly correlated genes are likely to be expressed in a similar manner and may indeed share a common function or regulatory mechanism; over-representation of go terms and promoter motifs can support such a prediction  <cit> . although it is not often possible to determine using co-expression analysis alone which transcription factors mediate this regulation, it is clear that large bodies of microarray data contain information which may allow reconstruction of regulatory networks. the affymetrix ath <dig> array service from the nottingham arabidopsis stock centre  represents an unusually valuable resource with rna samples provided by many different researchers, labelled, hybridized and analysed by the nasc arrays team  <cit>  to create a very large and diverse data set with consistent use of identical protocols within a single laboratory. the elucidation of networks from such a repository of data is one of the goals of systems biology and can be a valuable source of new hypotheses for experimental researchers.

arabidopsis thaliana, the model plant, is a good example of the challenges of network reconstruction. the genome contains around  <dig>  genes including around  <dig>  transcription factor genes and many other genes encoding proteins with regulatory roles. only a small proportion of these genes have been analysed by phenotypic characterization of mutants and fewer still have been subjected to microarray analysis to determine the groups of genes which are mis-regulated in these mutants. even for well-characterized genes, new roles can be found; furthermore, for well-characterized networks, new members continue to be added. the cost and time to make and analyse mutants in arabidopsis combined with the scarcity of phenotypic effects of mutagenesis means that computational tools suggesting candidate genes and roles are particularly useful.

much research into inferring networks from data, particularly gene expression profiles has been undertaken   <cit> ). in a review by bansal et al.  <cit>  various approaches to reverse engineering networks, including bayesian networks  and ordinary differential equation  models are discussed and applied to a range of datasets including experiments from steady state, time-series and perturbations. time series data allows a dynamic process to be modelled. both ode and dbn  models have been shown to be good at this task. the extra temporal information available from time series data allows the learning of causal relationships between variables  from smaller datasets. perturbation experiments where a particular gene's expression level is altered, through mutation, over expression or rnai knockdown, provide valuable information for inferring directionality of relationships between genes. sachs et al.  <cit>  learn protein signalling networks from protein flow cytometry data using perturbations and expert knowledge. incorporating information from other heterogeneous data sources has also shown to be valuable for network inference  <cit> . there are many other data sources which could be incorporated , but in the case of a. thaliana other data and network related literature are limited.

some approaches to identify gene regulatory networks in arabidopsis are covered in recent reviews  <cit> . these vary from learning association networks; gaussian graphical models/partial correlation networks, such as genenet  <cit> ; using a differential equation model and employing a singular value decomposition technique to identify the most consistent network across multiple time series datasets  <cit> ; and growing bayesian networks from seed genes by identifying conditional dependence relations between genes in order to identify the parents and children of the seed gene and to iteratively increase the radius of the network around the gene  <cit> . details of some these methods and their application to our data is contained in the discussion.

here, gene regulatory networks are learned for arabidopsis from nasc microarray data. starting from a small set of initial genes of interest, a network is learned in the form of a static bayesian network, and genes from an extended list are iteratively added to the network - with the gene that leads to a model that is statistically most likely to have generated the observed data being added at each iteration. to test the approach we apply it to the circadian clock network, which is probably the best-characterized regulatory network in arabidopsis. it enables the plant to optimize gene expression patterns and consequently physiology for different times of day. the genes in this network have been extensively characterized by expression analysis, protein abundance and analysis of multiple mutant alleles . in addition, modelling and experimental verification of properties of key regulators has been performed  <cit> . this body of work provides a benchmark against which modelling of larger numbers of genes can be assessed. the early models of plant clock regulation comprised reciprocal regulation of toc <dig> by the partially redundant myb transcription factors lhy and cca <dig> while expression of these two genes was in turn repressed by toc <dig>  current models of the clock have added additional interactions involving firstly toc <dig> and gi and secondly cca1/lhy and prr7/prr <dig>  additional components feed in light signals to modulate clock behaviour  <cit> . despite the extensive analysis of the clock network, new roles are regularly identified for previously-characterized factors and unidentified factors have been proposed to fill deficiencies in ode-based models  <cit> . nevertheless, this represents the best available standard against which we will validate the networks we learn from gene expression data.

progressing from the clock network, we then apply the method to less well characterized genes to suggest functional and regulatory roles. an important example is the photosynthetic apparatus, which is central to the biology of plants, and is strongly light- and clock-regulated, yet the factors mediating this regulation are incompletely characterized. the promoters of many genes encoding components of the photosynthetic apparatus contain conserved gata sequence motifs recognized by members of the gata family of zinc finger transcription factors . the arabidopsis genome contains genes for  <dig> gata family members, but, to date, it has not been conclusively demonstrated which gata gene  mediates the regulation of these photosynthetic genes  <cit> . indeed the recent identification of roles for some gata genes in seed germination and floral meristem development  <cit>  highlights a need for bioinformatics tools able to generate testable hypotheses of gene function.

RESULTS
we demonstrate that from the large  nasc microarray gene expression data set, we can infer biologically sensible networks in the form of static bayesian networks. three examples are presented. firstly, focusing on the circadian clock, secondly, looking at other networks and poorly characterized genes from a selection of  <dig> genes chosen from the literature, and thirdly, learning a network relating the poorly characterized gata genes with the clock, and linking them into the photosynthetic network by iterative addition from an unselected set of  <dig> + genes, representing the entire genome for which data is available. in addition to this, the algorithm is benchmarked against a ground truth model. an overview of the network learning algorithm is given in figure  <dig> . this novel approach to iteratively add genes to the network is enabled through a discretization mechanism for the gene expression data. through quantising the gene expression values into three equally sized discrete classes on a per gene basis, the entropy of each quantized expression profile is equal, and model comparison can be performed without bias, allowing model selection of the 'best' scoring network with an additional gene from the set . in the network hypotheses presented in the figures, cpdags  are shown, representing an equivalence class of the actual dags  learned by the bayesian network.

the arabidopsis circadian clock
to test the effectiveness of the algorithm in predicting regulatory networks, we selected genes encoding regulatory protein components of the circadian clock in arabidopsis . from an initial set of four genes encoding components of the clock, the structure of a bayesian network was learned from the quantized gene expression data. at each iteration of the algorithm, one gene was added to the model - the gene which when added to the current genes resulted in the 'best' learned network ). figure 3b shows the final output of the algorithm; the network learned for all the genes in the list in figure 3c. it also shows the order that these clock genes were incorporated into the model.

the output from the learning algorithm is a set of genes connected to each other where the experimental data indicate a predictive relationship between their transcript abundances; arrows indicate the direction of this relationship. they can indicate similar expression patterns, negative correlation and may perhaps represent regulatory interactions. in the case where the edges are undirected, it indicates that there are several markov equivalent networks which are equally good, and that these undirected edges are not compelled to indicate a particular direction to the interaction. this is illustrated with a learned network comprising a small set of key clock genes . this network is a highly simplified model, as it is the result of learning a model that captures the joint probability distribution over just these four genes. cca <dig> and lhy are connected to each other, reflecting their very similar expression patterns and as also reflected by strong correlation of expression  <cit> . in contrast, cca <dig> and toc <dig> are connected although their expression patterns are anti-correlated with peaks of transcript abundance at different times of day. the lack of an edge between lhy and toc <dig> indicates that lhy adds no further information about toc <dig> expression, consistent with models in the literature which treat lhy and cca <dig> as equivalent. as extra genes are incorporated into the network, prr <dig> and elf <dig> are incorporated first, indicating that these are the most closely related genes, and figure 3b shows that after all the clock genes in this limited set are added, these two remain highly connected central to the initial four key genes, with the link from cca <dig> to gi replaced by links from cca <dig> and gi to prr <dig> and elf <dig> 

multiple iterations to add all of the selected clock related genes, gives a network structure  which can be compared with current views of the clock in the literature. in this larger network, cca <dig> and lhy show different connections to other genes  although they are semi-redundant  <cit>  and in modelling studies are often assumed to behave identically. recent publications suggest there may be differences in their behaviour as part of the clock's ability to maintain phase lengths around  <dig> hours at different temperatures  <cit> ; we speculate that the different connections we see for lhy and cca <dig> may reflect these properties. there is a connection between gi and lhy, consistent with current three-loop models of the circadian clock, although a cca1-gi connection is absent. owing to the redundancy arising from large multi-gene families in arabidopsis, informatics tools generating hypotheses about how duplicated genes may differ in their roles are very useful. the cca1-lhy connection is present in each iteration of network learning although connections between other genes are sometimes observed to change. similarly, prr <dig> and prr <dig> are two similar genes, modelled as if behaving identically in other work  <cit> ; the algorithm connects these genes throughout each iteration of network expansion, consistent with their similar expression patterns but with each gene showing different connections to other genes of the network.

the first clock feedback loop model in the literature consisted of cca1/lhy and toc1; consistent with this, we see a cca1-toc <dig> connection in most iterations , although elf <dig> is inserted between them in some iterations. this latter interaction suggests a candidate for a proposed component of an interlocking three-loop model  <cit>  and is supported by recent experimental evidence  <cit> . these results demonstrate that the algorithm is able to identify biologically sensible relationships between genes from a large microarray dataset not specifically tailored for this purpose.

learning regulatory networks - other networks and poorly characterised genes
we were also interested to analyse some poorly-characterized genes, where there is little information on function or mutant phenotypes but where there is some transcript abundance information allowing an assessment to be made of the accuracy of network predictions. for this analysis, we have selected five gata transcription factor genes  which are subject to differing light and clock regulation  <cit> .

having shown that the network algorithm could generate biologically sensible relationships for clock genes, we also selected genes from other regulatory networks including cold/salt-responsive genes, light up-regulated and light down-regulated genes; . we have again used a set of clock genes to initiate network learning as this was effective in the previous experiment. many of the light-and stress-responsive genes are clock-regulated; indeed light is one of the key inputs for modulating the properties of the clock and response to cold is more important at night, thus many of these genes and networks would be expected to be interconnected. four clock and five gata genes were used to initiate network learning and genes added to the network iteratively from a list of  <dig>  genes used to initiate the learning are guided by what is biologically of interest. often we find that a handful of genes are thought to be key to a study, and one wishes to find a network into which these genes fit well.

a cluster dendogram showing the discretized expression values of each gene into low , medium  and high  categories across the  <dig> array dataset is shown in figure  <dig>  this figure demonstrates the complexity of the relationships between the  <dig> genes. the dataset contains microarrays from a number of experiments, shown clustered in the columns; note that sets of these may represent a time-series or experiments on similar tissues, or perturbations of genes involved in a particular process. note however that no explicit use of the information about the experiments is used in this work; each microarray is treated as independent.

the network structure for the final iteration is shown in figure  <dig>  notably, all the clock genes are linked to at least one other clock gene and more extensively linked to each other than to other network components. despite adding the additional clock genes from a list containing genes from a range of networks, the clock genes are linked in ways we would expect; both cca <dig> and lhy are linked to toc <dig> in a manner similar to the early models of the central oscillator; toc <dig> is linked to gi and elf <dig> as proposed for interconnected loop models; cca <dig> is linked to prr <dig> and prr <dig> as proposed for the most recent three-loop models  <cit> ; finally, other genes such as prr <dig>  prr <dig>  elf <dig>  col <dig> and col <dig> are also linked to the best-characterized clock components.

there is a trend to add genes in thematic blocks in more-or-less sequential iterations, as mentioned above for early addition of most clock genes to the network . the genes within each of these blocks tend also to be linked to each other and therefore they tend to be clustered in the network structure. it is likely that, once one gene has been added , then addition of related genes adds to the network score. it appears therefore that the learning algorithm is able to correctly group genes according to their regulatory roles.

the gata genes have connections to some well-characterized genes allowing an assessment to be made of the quality of predictions. gnc/gata <dig> and gata <dig> have connections to genes encoding key regulators of light-induced development, hyh and indirectly hy <dig>  all of these genes are strongly expressed in green, photosynthetic tissue, and the undirected edges in the cpdag indicate that there are a number of computational network models that are equivalent, indeed gnc/gata <dig>  gata <dig> and hyh are generally co-expressed. in contrast, gata <dig>  gata <dig> and gata <dig> have connections to each other and from some well-characterized genes which are down-regulated by light such as phya and det <dig>  the algorithm has therefore grouped this sub-set of light and clock-regulated gata genes, placing them in appropriate positions within the network.

a selection of genes with well-characterized roles in regulation of plant responses to cold and salt-stress  <cit>  were added to the network in nearly-sequential iterations and with connections to each other. these genes show circadian-regulated changes in transcript abundance with peaks at different times of day. two of these stress-response genes show connection to key clock component gi consistent with the ability of plants to respond to stress being regulated by the time of day the stress is applied  <cit> .

the ability of the algorithm to identify well-characterized relationships from a number of different networks suggests that it should also be able to identify relationships between components of other regulatory networks. moreover, the observation that the poorly-characterized gata factor genes are correctly placed with respect to other better characterized genes, suggests that the algorithm has the power to predict relationships for uncharacterized genes.

learning regulatory networks from an unselected list of  <dig> + genes
our interest in the possible roles of a number of gata genes led us to perform network learning starting with the same nine genes as in the previous analysis; four clock genes and five gata genes - gata <dig>  gata <dig>  gata <dig>  gata <dig> and gata <dig>  this time, we allowed any gene from a list of all possible genes which passed the expression distribution filter to be added to the network .

the algorithm was run to include  <dig> genes . col <dig> was added first and linked to cca <dig>  and this connection was also seen in the previous experiment from a list of  <dig> genes. col <dig> has itself been proposed to have roles in clock regulation of gene expression  <cit> . in addition to clock roles for col <dig>  gun <dig>  was identified in screens for genes with defects in signalling between chloroplast and nucleus  <cit> . of the other genes added to the network, most are chloroplast localized and many encode enzymes of chlorophyll biosynthesis or encode proteins of the photosynthetic apparatus, coloured green in figure  <dig>  there is therefore a clear theme to the roles of the proteins encoded by these genes. this gives confidence that biological relationships between these genes have been identified, although the algorithm is selecting from a very large number of genes with the possibility of identifying spurious relationships. indeed, through analysis of the distribution of network likelihoods, we can gain an insight into the confidence of our addition of genes to the network. the algorithm calculates a bic score for addition of each gene from the list of  <dig>  remaining genes to the network and a distribution of bic scores for each candidate gene in the first iteration is shown in figure  <dig>  the bic score for the first gene added  is well separated from the distribution, making this a clear unique candidate for addition to the network. this property of the distribution of scores may provide insight into why the algorithm works well in this case. the gene with the second best score at this first iteration, gun <dig>  was added to the network at the next iteration .

these photosynthetic genes incorporated into the model are closely linked to gata <dig> and gata <dig> - two genes expressed most strongly in photosynthetic tissue and with peak transcript abundance before dawn  <cit> . they are therefore better candidates to be regulators of photosynthetic genes than the other gata genes included in the analysis which are more strongly expressed in the dark and with evening phased clock regulation. the gnc  mutant shows reduced chlorophyll levels, although without showing mis-regulation of the genes encoding the photosynthetic apparatus  <cit> . it is likely that mutation of both gata <dig> and gata <dig> is necessary to produce gene mis-regulation and this is experimentally testable. indeed, after completion of these analyses, the phenotype of a gata21/gata <dig> double mutant has been reported, showing lower chlorophyll levels than each single mutant  <cit> . thus from computational analysis of microarray data alone, we are able to suggest roles for these poorly characterized genes.

evaluation on realistic synthetic data
for evaluation, we choose a network with the same structure as a learned network. we focus on a network similar to the second example on real data presented earlier. we construct a network with the same structure on  <dig> nodes, and add in two extra unconnected nodes, giving a network on  <dig> nodes . from this 'ground truth' network a bayesian network with cpts drawn from a similar distribution to those learned from real data  is formed and synthetic datasets are generated by sampling the bayesian network. next, networks are inferred from this data as in the previous examples on arabidopsis data. excellent results are obtained when comparing the inferred networks with the underlying ground truth network. . figure  <dig> shows the true positive , false positive , false negative  and true negative  counts for networks inferred from different size datasets taking into account edge direction on cpdags . here it can clearly be seen that network inference from  <dig> or fewer examples is poor, containing a small proportion of true positive edges. once  <dig> samples or more are used for inference, good results are obtained . the graphs are generally quite smooth reflecting the fact that large changes in the inferred network are not occurring as additional nodes are incorporated into the network, as is also shown in the grns at each iteration . for the networks with  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> nodes, the two unconnected nodes do not get added into the network and similar networks are obtained in each of these iterations, giving  <dig> fp,  <dig> fn,  <dig> tp, &  <dig> tn when using the dataset with  <dig> samples . this equates to a sensitivity of  <dig>  and specificity of  <dig> . this is considerably better than the results from inferring a correlation network. figure  <dig> shows a roc curve for correlation networks in which more edges are added as the correlation threshold is decreased from  <dig> to  <dig>  also plotted on this figure are the sensitivity and specificity results for the bayesian network inference on the full set of genes. this illustrates clearly the superior performance at inferring the network. it must be noted also that the score for the bayesian networks considers the directionality of the edges - if a compelled edge is oriented incorrectly then it counts as a false positive edge, whereas in the correlation network, no directionality is considered.

discussion
we have developed an algorithm which correctly identifies biological relationships between genes of different regulatory networks using a very large microarray dataset. in these networks, many components of the clock network are linked and often in ways consistent with current models of the clock based on experimental evidence. the biologically sensible linking of genes from other networks  suggests that the algorithm should be able to make good predictions for genes from networks we have not analysed. it is not possible to model genes not represented by probe-sets on the affymetrix ath <dig> array or which have been filtered out by the data quantization process, but nevertheless, probe-sets for regulatory genes controlling other processes have survived the quantization filter, including probe-sets for genes active in very specific or minor cell types such as shoot and floral meristems. the quality of results presented shows just how well networks can be learned from large data sets alone. these networks can function as hypotheses that might be tested by specifically designed expression experiments, for instance time series or genetic perturbations.

the learning of large networks is computationally hard: even with only a few nodes, there are too many possible networks to exhaustively search them. thus methods for learning network structures incrementally have promise. the greedy search method usually finds the same underlying network structure when an additional gene is introduced, although a new network is learned at each iteration with no constraint of similarity to networks from previous iterations. this demonstrates the robustness of the network predictions for similar sets of genes, and suggests that a much more efficient structure learning scheme could be developed by seeding the greedy search with the best dag from the previous stage . the learned static bayesian network consists of a 'best' network structure sh, and a point estimate of the model parameters , which are a set of conditional probability tables . from these it is possible to identify the type of relationship between genes .

the large number of microarrays in the nasc dataset plays a key part in the performance of the network inference. this data set is unique in its large size, diversity of content, uniform production and analytical treatment. the largest single experiment in the dataset we have used comprises  <dig> array hybridizations, only representing <3% of the entire number of arrays. furthermore, this experiment analyses whole and dissected flowers  of two different ages, thus covering a wide range of developmental stages and therefore expression patterns  <cit> . similar arguments apply for the six largest experiments  indicating that these large experiments contribute diversity of expression and will not therefore bias learning algorithm outputs. some experiments cover circadian and diurnal time courses using material with very similar morphologies but significantly different expression patterns  and which are relevant in the context of our analyses. similarly, many experiments use rna derived from seedlings, for example, which are morphologically similar but with very different treatments. it is clear therefore that experiments using material from the same developmental stages cannot be seen as redundant. these arguments underpin our approach of analysing the dataset en masse.

other recent research with a similar motivation is the identification of a b cell network  <cit>  through the use of aracne  <cit>  and network analysis of the mouse transcriptomic network  <cit> . both of these works identify association networks which contain no directionality to the edges in the networks. aracne adds edges between genes based on pairwise mutual information above a threshold, and prunes away the weakest edges in each triple of connected genes; they show that this removes many false positive  edges . freeman et al.  <cit>  present ways to visualize and cluster on networks to identify components of networks and identify biological relationships. our work uses bayesian networks to model the regulatory transcriptomic networks, which allow the identification of the directionality of  the regulatory relationships. bayesian networks have been applied to several datasets, for example, learning networks from  <dig> arrays of the s. cerevisiae cell-cycle  <cit> , where the multinomial models use data discretized into three classes based on differential expression. our analysis shows good results for learning a static bayesian network at each iteration for a given set of genes, partly owing to the large and diverse microarray data set used. the quantization of the gene expression signals into three equal sized classes on a per gene basis, in order to ensure equal entropy of each gene, allows for incremental growing of the bayesian networks in this special case. bayesian networks are known to discover networks with good accuracy. in a recent evaluation, werhli et al.  <cit>  showed bns to have good performance at recovering a network based on the raf signalling pathway identified in  <cit>  from synthetic data generated in a number of ways, and documented the differences in performance for learning from observational and interventional datasets. they evaluated relevance  networks , gaussian graphical models /partial correlation networks and bayesian networks, and showed that on small datasets  bayesian networks outperform ggms and rns for interventional data. in this work, we first compare our results to a widely accepted current network model in arabidopsis, that of the circadian clock, to validate our approach, and secondly on synthetic data with similar properties generated from a known network. the compendium of microarrays used here contains a host of over-expressed and knockout mutant experiments, as well as a wide range of environmental influences, and as such we expect bayesian network inference to perform well - particularly due to the size of the dataset. correlations are valuable, and resources such as act  <cit>  have been widely used by arabidopsis researchers to identify co-expressed genes. ggms tend to have been used on expression data from small specifically designed experiments where important factors have been perturbed, and there is not enough data to consider a bayesian network. these show a marked change in expression, and the correlations between genes can be found, and partial correlations used to distinguish direct form indirect correlations. one advantage of bayesian networks over correlation or partial correlations is that they do not just capture pairwise relationships between the genes. they allow combinatorial effects between genes to be found. they capture a set of relationships that allows prediction of the states of genes based on a  number of other genes they depend upon, and structure learning allows the elucidation of dependencies between genes. these dependencies can be found, particularly where there is an increase in predictive performance, through a particular dependency structure. the score of different networks incorporates both a likelihood term and a complexity term such that for each gene its main relationships with other genes are captured. with association networks, a single threshold tends to need to be specified, resulting in some parts of the network being densely connected and other genes of interest being unconnected as all correlations with other genes are below that threshold. our method, specifically aims to try to identify a network into which relevant genes are added, to identify dependencies between variables which best encode the joint probability distribution over all the genes included as opposed to identifying sets of pairwise relationships.

we investigated the performance of the gpc algorithm  <cit>  on our data, and found that comparable good performance was observed when learning from the synthetic data, although it tends to need twice as much data to achieve similar accuracy, and comparison can only be done on the final network. it specifically learns a local bayesian network, and appears to be used in  <cit>  to add a neighbourhood of radius up to  <dig> around the single seed gene. the model appears to grow without refinement - once an edge is determined to be present or absent, it is not re-evaluated later in light of other dependencies in the new neighbourhood, thus we found that very different networks were learned from different starting genes with the gpc algorithm on real data, giving little confidence in the method once away from local dependencies . inspecting final networks also showed that the clock genes were not highly connected, as we would expect - for example, one example result of our method illustrated in figure  <dig>  shows that the  <dig> clock genes highlighted in light green have  <dig> connections between them, and  <dig> connections to non-clock genes, whereas in a network grown using pena's gpc algorithm, the  <dig> genes had only  <dig> connections between them, and over  <dig> to non-clock genes.

in recent years, computational modelling of the circadian clock has been performed to include properties such as protein levels, protein localization and light inputs as well as transcript levels  <cit> . the approaches reported here do not rival this intensive modelling. instead we use the clock as one example where there is sufficient literature to allow assessment of the accuracy of our model predictions. using transcriptomic datasets it is not possible to model post-transcriptional processes explicitly. however, where light-dependent transcription factor degradation occurs, for example, this will produce effects on downstream transcript levels which we can model, thus capturing post-transcriptional processes implicitly.

CONCLUSIONS
the approaches reported here offer a generic approach to modelling an extensive set of genes with the complementary goal of generating experimentally-testable hypotheses about the networks to which poorly-characterized genes may contribute. significantly, large bodies of microarray data are becoming available for crop species such as barley, wheat, potato and tomato where it may be difficult to perform the genetic perturbations necessary to generate the best data for modelling. analysis of these data for crop species will require methods which have moved beyond synthetic data and  model organisms. in addition, researchers will want access to tools giving them information and predictions specifically for the genes they are interested in, avoiding idiosyncratic differences between organisms and the problems of identifying bonafide orthologs between model and crop organisms.

