BACKGROUND
the structural characterization of proteins by pulsed epr methods such as pulsed electron electron double resonance  has become increasingly popular in recent years  <cit> . a prerequisite for the peldor experiment is the presence of at least two paramagnetic centres in the protein. since most proteins are diamagnetic, spin labels such as mtssl  <cit>  are routinely attached to the surface of proteins via site-directed spin labelling techniques  <cit> . the peldor experiment measures distances between such spin labels. the obtained distance information can then be used to analyse conformational changes e.g. of membrane proteins  <cit>  or to reconstruct macromolecular complexes  <cit> . although spin labels, such as mtssl, are small compared to fret labels , they still act as a flexible link between the protein and the spin-centre itself . thus, the problem arises, that on the one hand, the peldor experiment delivers an accurate distance between the two spin centres, but on the other hand, the exact position of the distance vector with respect to the protein is unknown. many studies have investigated this problem. for example, the crystallographic analysis of multiple spin labelled t4-lysozyme mutants provided insights into the interactions of spin labels with proteins and preferred rotameric states of the labels  <cit> . the problem also led to the development of in silico spin labelling programs, which aim to predict the conformation of the spin label in the local environment of the attachment site  <cit> . these programs attach a model of the spin label to a macromolecular structure and generate an ensemble of possible rotamers of the label. the programs either allow all possible rotamers  are randomly set,  <cit> ) or the angles are set based on calculated rotamer libraries and/or crystal structures  <cit> . with each method, distances between the generated ensembles can be measured and compared to experimental distances. surprisingly, extensive benchmarks have revealed that independent of the approach, the average error of the predicted distances is around  <dig> Å,  <cit> . this indicates that current in silico spin labelling programs do not accurately enough model the complex interactions between a spin-label and its molecular environment. it is therefore important to gain further experimental insight into label-environment interactions. this will help to further extend available rotamer libraries with experimental rotamer data and provide clues concerning possible improvements of in silico spin labelling algorithms.

we present here the high-resolution  structure of azurin from pseudomonas aeruginosa pao <dig> spin labelled with mtssl at position t <dig>  due to the crystal-packing environment in the triclinic crystals, the label is observed in two different but fully ordered states. the excellent quality of the electron density allows precise measurements of all five dihedral angles in both conformations. whereas one of the conformations fits to calculated rotamer libraries  <cit>  the second conformation does not, illustrating how the environment of the label can force it to adopt a conformation which is less favourable for the free label. the implications for in silico spin labelling are discussed. further, we present a newly developed, affinity chromatography based purification and spin labelling protocol for azurin.

RESULTS
protein production, spin labelling, crystallisation and structure solution
the classic purification protocol for azurin describes the isolation of recombinant azurin from the periplasmic fraction of e. coli <cit> . although this reportedly works well, we aimed to use affinity chromatography methods to streamline the production of azurin and to be able to use “on-column” spin labelling. to achieve this, the coding sequence for the mature azurin protein  was cloned into the phisgsttev vector. the t21c mutant was introduced by pcr techniques  <cit> . the protein was then overexpressed in e. coli, bound to the ni2+ affinity resin, washed and spin labelled during the elution step. the gst tag was cleaved off with tev protease and removed by gel filtration. using this method, ~ <dig> mg of pure, spin labelled azurin was obtained from a  <dig> l bacterial culture. note that this yield is lower than the yield reported for the conventional protocol  <cit> . however, in our hands both methods yielded very similar amounts of pure azurin. the spin labelled protein  was crystallized at room temperature using a commercial crystallisation screen  and several initial hit conditions were obtained. the components of these conditions were combined in a stochastic optimisation screen. after several days, plate shaped, blue azurin crystals  appeared. a 200° diffraction dataset was collected at bessyii . the data could only be processed and scaled in space group p <dig>  the structure was then solved by molecular replacement using the structure of zinc bound azurin as search model  and refined until r/rfree converged at  <dig> / <dig> . data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in table  <dig>  the refined structure was analysed with labelit to confirm that no higher crystallographic symmetry than p <dig> is present  <cit> .

1
values in parenthesis refer to the shell of highest resolution.

overall structure of azurin t21r1
the asymmetric unit of spin labelled azurin t21r <dig> contains four independent monomers of azurin  that are related by a two-fold ncs axis . the electron density for all four monomers is of excellent quality and a complete model with very good stereochemistry could be build . all four molecules have nearly identical structures amongst each other  and to other azurin structures .

structure of the r <dig> side chain
after the molecular replacement step, positive difference electron density for the label was observed at the expected positions . following initial refinement with omitted r <dig> side chain, models of the label could be unambiguously placed into the electron density in all four monomers, resulting in two distinct conformations of the label . in monomers i and iii, the label is involved in vdw interactions with residues t <dig> and k <dig> of the same monomer and vdw interactions with residues a <dig> and l <dig> of a neighboring azurin monomer . an analysis with the pisa server  <cit>  revealed an accessible surface area of  <dig> Å <dig> for the r <dig> sidechain at this position,  <dig> Å <dig> of which are buried. henceforth, the r <dig> conformation found in monomers i and iii will be referred to as r1-i/iii. in monomers ii and iv, the r <dig> side chain lies at the heart of a crystal contact and is involved in numerous van-der-waals  interactions and a hydrogen bond between the nitroxide oxygen and an ordered water molecule. this water molecule is again interacting with a <dig> of a neighboring azurin molecule . for this r <dig> conformation  pisa calculates a solvent accessible surface area of  <dig> Å <dig>   <dig> Å <dig> of which are buried. the higher number of stabilizing contacts in r1-ii/iv is also reflected in a slightly higher quality of the electron density for this conformation . interestingly, a glycerol molecule from the cryo-protectant interacts with the main chain atoms of r1-ii/iv . in our structure, this molecule does not interact with the r <dig> side chain atoms. however, high concentrations of glycerol or ethylene glycole  are also used to cryo-protect peldor samples. thus, it might well be, that in other cases, these molecules influence the dynamics of the spin label, either by direct interactions or indirectly by restricting its accessible volume.

mutual influence of r <dig> side chain and protein environment
figure 3a shows polar plots of the dihedral angles  measured from the two r <dig> side chains in r1-i/iii conformation. the two side chains were independently refined but have almost identical dihedral angles. the angles fit nicely to the angular distribution of a rotamer library derived from md simulations of the free label  <cit> . in monomers ii and iv, the crystal-packing environment precludes the r1-i/iii conformation due to steric constraints . the label adjusts to this new environment and therefore adopts the r1-ii/iv conformation. again, the side chains were independently refined but show almost identical dihedral angles . as described above, the r1-ii/iv conformation is stabilised by multiple vdw interactions and a bridging water molecule . interestingly, the nearby k <dig> side chain rotates from the position found in monomers i and iii by 180° to accommodate the r1-ii/iv conformation . figure 3b shows polar plots of the dihedral angles measured in the r1-ii/iv conformation. compared to r1-i/iii, the χ <dig> and χ <dig> angles change significantly. at the same time, χ <dig> undergoes a smaller transition. comparison with the rotamer library reveals that χ <dig>  χ <dig> and to a lesser extend χ <dig> of r1-ii/iv adjust to values that are less favorable for the free label .

discussion
in silico spin labelling programs are important tools to translate epr-derived distances into structural information, despite rather unsatisfying deviations between experimental and predicted distances  <cit> . to improve the algorithms, it is important to understand the reasons for these deviations, and to identify the most promising points for improvements. in published benchmark studies, the performance of individual programs is usually compared based on a comparison of predicted and experimental distances. but, the primary results of in silico spin labelling programs are predicted ensembles of spin labels. the two well-defined conformations of mtssl in our crystal structure give rise to a number of inter-spin distances in the crystal packing and we thought this to be an interesting way to investigate how well predicted ensembles correlate with predicted distances. it should be noted that spin label conformations found in a crystal structure can be biased by interactions with the crystalline protein environment. however, in contrast to crystals of small molecules, protein crystals are interspersed by large solvent channels and usually consist of around 50% solvent. also, before x-ray data are collected at low temperature, the crystals are typically cryo-protected by soaking them in e.g. 35% glycerol . this prevents the formation of crystalline ice in the solvent channels, which would otherwise destroy the crystal or severly degrade its diffraction quality  <cit> . thus, a spin label, which points into a solvent channel of a protein crystal is surrounded by the protein lattice, some ordered solvent molecules interacting with the spin-labelled protein and, a glassy, frozen solution of the solvent. nevertheless, because of the flash-cooling process and interactions with the protein lattice, the spin label conformations observed in a crystal might be different from those that are found at room temperature and/or in liquid solution.

to address the issue of interactions between label and protein lattice in our analysis, the complete subset of the crystal packing shown in figure 5a was selected as input model for two programs: mmm  and mtsslwizard . this selection contains the spin labelled monomers i-iv  and, to complete the protein environment of each spin label, a symmetry equivalent of monomer iv  was additionally included  were excluded, because neither of the programs uses them). in principle, this selection can be seen as an experimental structure of one larger, continous protein chain  with multiple attached labels in either the r1-i/iii- or r1-ii/iv-conformation. importantly, the complete protein environment of each label is present in this structure. for the purpose of the analysis below and for the reasons discussed above, we assume that in a flash frozen peldor sample of azurinbm, the spin label will adopt very similar conformations to those that we found in the flash cooled azurin t21r <dig> crystals .

the table in figure 5b compares the inter-label distances taken from this experimental structure to the equivalent distances obtained from mtsslwizard and mmm. details of the mmm analysis  are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  further, a comparison of the predicted mean spin label positions is shown in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  as found in larger distance-based benchmarks  <cit> , both programs predict some of the distances quite accurately , whereas large deviations are found for other distances . this indicates that errors stemming from the generation of the spin label ensembles are sometimes compensated for by the relative geometric arrangement of a pair of ensembles. a similar observation has also been made in the crystal structure of the spa <dig> chaperone  <cit> . figure 5c illustrates this for the ii-iii distance: whereas the absolute values of the distance vectors are very similar between x-ray structure, mmm and mtsslwizard, their directions differ considerably. this pair of labels is analysed in more detail below.

the r1-i/iii label in figure 5c is located at a relatively “open” labelling site on monomer iii . in the crystal structure, the spin label at this site adopts a conformation that fits rather well to calculated rotamer libraries . figure 6a  shows a close-up of this site with the mtssl ensemble predicted by mmm. indeed, it contains some rotamers that are similar to the conformation found in the x-ray structure. but, even when only the rotamers from this ensemble are considered, the nitroxide group can still sample a large volume . thus, especially at open sites, it is crucial to also correctly predict the occupancy of the individual rotamers. in figure 6a occupancies predicted by mmm are illustrated by the radius of the stick models  <cit> . in this case, the program outputs very similar occupancies for all rotamers. in contrast, the x-ray structure exhibits only one defined conformation and no indications for further conformations were found in the electron density . assuming, that due to its interactions with the environment , this single conformation of the spin label would also be present in a peldor sample of azurinbm, the failure to correctly predict the occupancy of the rotamers effectively neutralizes the advantage of the rotamer approach. this becomes clear by comparing the mmm ensemble with an ensemble predicted by mtsslwizard at the same site . the overall volumes of both predicted ensembles are similar. thereby, the uncertainty that will be introduced into predicted distances from or to this site will be similar between rotamer and accessible volume approach.

clearly, the influence of the protein environment will be more pronounced at tight labelling sites, such as the one on monomer ii . as a result, deviations from the rotamer libraries become more likely, and we observe this in the crystal structure . consequentially, the r1-ii/iv conformation cannot be correctly predicted when the rotamer library shown in figure  <dig> is used . it should be noted that this limitation of the rotamer approach at tight sites was pointed out by the authors of the mmm software  <cit> . in such cases, the rotamer approach effectively boils down to an accessible volume approach and would again deliver results that are very similar to the latter if the occupancies for all rotamers were set to the same value .

in the examples above, the spin labelled x-ray structure was used as a basis for in silico spin labelling. usually, the problem is even more difficult, since it is unknown, how the protein will structurally react to the addition of the spin label. the k <dig> side chain in our structure is an example for a structural response of the protein . in silico spin labelling programs try to deal with this problem by allowing a certain number of clashes between protein and label. however, by doing this, the ensemble of created rotamers will simply grow in size whereas in reality the ensemble might merely change its shape, not necessarily its size. in the end this again leads to an increased uncertainty of the prediction.

CONCLUSIONS
our observations vividly illustrate why in our test case , the accessible volume approach and the more sophisticated rotamer approach often deliver very similar results. in essence, employing rotamer libraries will only increase the accuracy, when not only the rotamers but also their occupancy can be correctly predicted. the occupancy prediction is crucially dependent on the interaction of the label with its environment. the current software programs use only relatively simple  descriptions of the protein environment, whereas solvent molecules such as the bridging water shown in figure  <dig> are completely ignored. recently, the formation of hydrogen bonds has been found to be a very common type of interaction for nitroxide spin labels on proteins  <cit> . also ignored are cryo protectants such as ethylene glycole or glycerol which are used at high percentages in peldor samples. these can bind close to the labelling site and thereby potentially influence the label dynamics . for labelling sites close to lipid bilayers or detergent micelles it is also important to consider label-lipid or label-detergent interactions since these will likely have profound effects on the conformation of the label. thus, to increase the prediction accuracy, more sophisticated algorithms, which accurately account for label-environment interactions will have to be employed. it has been tried multiple times to use md simulations for this purpose, but so far, the increased effort does not seem to pay off in terms of better prediction accuracy  <cit> . promising ways to alleviate the described difficulties on the experimental side would be the use of spin labels with shorter or conformationally restrained linkers, such as the rx side chain  <cit>  or the recently published v <dig> side chain  <cit> .

