BACKGROUND
the ongoing threat of emerging hemorrhagic diseases has made the search for reservoir species with a history of coevolution with filoviruses a priority  <cit> . outbreaks of filovirus infections are known from africa and the phillipines  <cit>  and, in some cases, the mortality of primates is so severe as to raise concerns of extinction  <cit> . bats are considered a candidate for a reservoir based on the detection of filovirus-specific rna, antibodies, and viral particles  <cit> . still, the average seroprevalence in tested bats is much smaller than expected  for large colonies of a main reservoir  <cit> , and the ability of bats to maintain a persistent hypovirulent infection is unknown. rodents and insectivores  have further been proposed as the leading candidates for filovirus reservoirs by modeling, the detection of filovirus rna, and in one specimen, the potential detection of a dna copy  <cit> . rodents  share one expected feature of coevolution -- asymptomatic infections from wild-type filoviruses  <cit> . however, a reservoir role for rodents and shrews has been questioned because only one study has detected filovirus rna fragments in these small mammals, and many more outbreaks than observed are expected from a rodent reservoir that is commensal with humans  <cit> . moreover, no live viruses, filovirus particles or antibodies to filoviruses have been found in rodents or shrews. distinguishing principal reservoir species from "spillover" infections remains a challenge.

filoviruses are a family of non-segmented negative sense rna viruses with filamentous virions . the protein-coding genes in the filovirus genomes  have a transcriptional gradient from np to l protein  <cit> . the two major evolutionary groups of filoviruses have been assigned to the genera ebolavirus and marburgvirus. filoviruses are estimated to have diverged for less than  <dig>  ya  <cit> --about the same timescale as the rise of agriculture. although high mutation rates in rna viruses have shrouded nearly every interfamilial relationship, the order mononegavirales, which contains filoviridae, is an exception  <cit> . here, filoviruses show significant sequence similarity to some of the paramyxoviridae such as morbillivirus   <cit> . notably, the n-terminal  <dig> amino acid residues of np, which is examined in the present study, shows significant conservation among the mononegavirales and is needed for self-assembly of the nucleoprotein  <cit> .

there are now several cases in eukaryotes where non-retroviral integrated rna viruses  have been detected  <cit> . still, this type of transfer is believed to be extremely rare in mammals  <cit>  because the process requires the cooption of reverse transcriptase and perhaps replication within the nucleus. the sole mammalian example is bornavirus, which is unique among rna viruses of animals in developing persistent infections within the nucleus. the study of nirvs requires an evolutionary approach where the direction of transfer is tested. evolutionary comparisons among nirvs have been carried out for the totiviridae in yeast  <cit> , and the bornaviridae in mammals  <cit> . in the totivirus system there strong support for the direction of transfer from virus to fungus, and a role for the expression of nirvs in viral interference has been proposed  <cit> . we proposed that nirvs are more common than presently known and might be detected in other systems with persistent infections of non-retroviral rna viruses. as part of a search for nirvs in ncbi databases we found strong blast matches of np sequences from filoviruses to translated genomic sequences from small mammals. we aimed to test if these sequence similarities might indicate nirvs of filoviruses.

RESULTS
tblastn with marburgvirus np amino acid sequence yielded matches with low expect values , indicating that similarity is unlikely to be a chance result. we found twenty matches with expect values less than the standard "significance" value of 10- <dig> . the tammar wallaby,  showed the strongest similarity  and also had at least  <dig> different strong sequence matches. the little brown bat  had four significant matches, while the guinea pig , ord's kangaroo rat , the common shrew , and the gray short-tailed opossum  each had single matching sequences with expect values <10- <dig>  another marsupial, the common brushtail possum  had six strong matches from the expressed sequence tags  database. all but three of these sequences  had at least one apparent disruption of the open reading frame . tblastn with the l protein yielded one value with a low expect value , the gray short-tailed opossum . a tblastn search using the best matching placental mammal match from the original np search as a query sequence also yielded strong matches in mammals: the pygmy hedgehog tenrec , the mouse  and the brown rat . the filovirus-like est nucleotide sequences from the common brushtail possum had a blast match to a single region of the wallaby genome with longest match  having a 78% identity  for  <dig> bases.

we tested for integrated dna based copies of the filovirus-like sequences in the two mammals with the most copies, the tammar wallaby and the little brown bat. we designed pcr primers from mammalian genomic sequence flanking the longer blast matches and carried out pcr amplification of dna extractions from different specimens than used for existing genome projects. our sequence of the tammar wallaby had only a single transition difference from the genome project sequence. the sequence of the little brown bat from minnesota  had a similarity of 96% with four indels compared to contig  from the existing genome. to test for the presence of a filovirus-like dna sequence in an additional insectivorous bat, we extracted dna from a specimen of big brown bat . using primers designed from the little brown bat, we again obtained pcr product and sequence. in this case, the identity between the sequences of the two genera of bats was 87% with  <dig> indels. in each case the similarity of the new sequences obtained from dna to genomic sequence is consistent with an integrated filovirus-like dna copy in these mammalian genomes.

we next carried out a phylogenetic analysis of the np and l protein amino acid sequence alignments with mononegavirales  to assess the direction of the transfer. because the l protein gene is known to be the most conserved gene in the mononegavirales, a large number of blast matches with expect values <10- <dig> was found between the families of mononegavirales in l protein compared to the np. the midpoint rooted maximum likelihood  phylogram placed the potential mammalian nirvs within the mononegavirales, and revealed that the mammalian sequences are more closely related to filoviruses than to paramyxoviruses . indeed the l protein-like sequence from monodelphis was more closely related on the best ml tree to marburgvirus than to other known filoviruses  . this result suggests that the most recent integration of filoviruses from our data involves south american marsupials. the np analysis also revealed that the south american monodelphis is more closely related to known filoviruses than to other mammalian sequences . although many of the sequences are of different lengths in the np alignment , it is now well known that sequences of very different lengths can be accurately placed on phylogenies  <cit> . however, there could be long-branch effects or alignment effects for the np phylogeny as the exclusion of the distantly related morbillivirus sequences yielded the same mammalian paraphyly, but increased the support values . for both genes, the placement of the mammalian nirvs with the filoviruses  had maximum support for each measure of reliability. the placement and the strong support values for this node are consistent with the direction of transfer from viruses  to mammalian genomes. endogenous reverse transcriptase activity has been shown experimentally to integrate non-retroviral rna viruses in mammals  <cit>  and may have played a role in filovirus integration. interestingly, the closest flanking coding regions of integrated filovirus-like elements to at least five of the nirv's of macropus, and the separate np and l-like nirvs of monodelphis, are truncated or disrupted non-ltr retrotransposons of the line- <dig> family. our results represent the first case of nirv formation in mammals with a virus that has extranuclear replication  <cit> .

the observation that most of the mammalian sequences have orf disruptions and possess only truncated np-like genes  is also inconsistent with a transfer from mammals to virus. only monodelphis has more than one different filovirus-like gene  and these  are on separate chromosomes. the apparent genic bias of nirvs for the np gene could have a biological explanation. because of the transcription gradient in the mononegavirales, the most common primary transcript is np  <cit> . we also note that experimental expression of an n-terminal portion of the ebolavirus np gene  that is positionally homologous to the region of np spanned by mammalian nirvs  is sufficient to inhibit the formation of ebolavirus minigenomes in a dosage specific fashion  <cit> . a background transcription bias could account for overrepresentation in nirvs of np, but such a bias fails to explain the n-terminal bias within the nirvs of np. the bias is consistent with the experimental filoviral interference mechanism involving the n-terminal of np.

despite orf disruptions, it is clear that at least some mammalian filovirus-like nirvs of np are expressed. in the marsupial trichosurus, we detected six different np-like ests  from three tissue-specific cdna libraries: liver, spleen/lymphatic system and gonads. these tissues play an important role in the pathology and replication of filoviruses  <cit> . we did not detect the nirv in the cdna libraries made from brain, whole embryo, kidney, uterus/reproductive tract, or gut tissues. still, non-functional pseudogenes can be transcribed by interactions with neighboring functioning loci  <cit> . we tested for selective maintenance of codon structure in the filovirus-like nirvs as a further indication of function. comparisons of rates of amino-acid changing substitutions  to rates of silent substitutions  do bear the signature of selective codon maintenance or purifying selection. non-functional regions should conform to neutral expectations where dn = ds and dn/ds =  <dig>  <cit> . for regions undergoing purifying selection, the silent substitution rate should prevail whereby dn-ds <<  <dig> and dn/ds <<  <dig>  the codon-based test of neutrality using the model of kumar  indicates that silent mutations are significantly overrepresented in an alignment of filovirus-like nirvs   <cit> . likewise, bayesian calculations of site-specific ka/ks using evolutionary models that accommodate codon usage differences  <cit> , reveal a prevailing pattern of values significantly less than  <dig> . under a model that allows purifying, neutral and positive selection , the distribution of ka/ks peaks at about  <dig> . for the m <dig> model,  <dig> percent of these alignment sites  have upper  <dig> percent confidence limits for < <dig>  while these ka/ks values are larger than is typical of strong purifying selection, they are markedly less than neutral expectations or even the range of ka/ks =  <dig>  to  <dig>  that is reported for disrupted transcribed pseudogenes in mammals  <cit> . even though there appears to be selection for preserving codons, the tests cannot differentiate between past and present function. moreover, the products need not be protein-based -- rna interference products can elicit codon-like selection to interact with protein-coding genes  <cit> . the functionality and potential role of nirvs in the well-known resistance to filoviruses of some nirv-containing mammals  will have to be addressed with experiments.

more than one endogenization is required to account for the paraphyly of mammals and the paraphyly of marsupials with filoviruses. the finding of a monophyletic clade for placental mammals with samples from several continents requires a single ancient integration with several losses of nirv signal or multiple integrations of a related virus in unrelated mammal groups . a single origin for eutherian nirvs is supported by the rarity of the process -- endogenization of non-retroviral rna viruses with extranuclear replication is previously unknown in mammals. ancient transcribed pseudogenes > <dig> million years old are known from mammals  <cit>  and the primate bornavirus integration is believed to be older than  <dig> million years  <cit> . although much of the deeper groupings have weak support and there has been gene duplication, there are some well-supported groupings that agree with mammalian phylogeny. the strongly supported groups are the two bat genera, the genera of mouse-like rodents, and the australian marsupials, trichosurus and macropus. these genera of marsupials are believed to have shared a common ancestor from  <dig> to  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . a clear indicator of antiquity is the syntenous genomic location of a rat and mouse filovirus-like nirv . these are the same copies that have a sister group relationship . it is unlikely that integration of filovirus np genes at the same genomic position occurred independently in rats and mice. the rat-mouse orthology provides a minimum date of nirv formation at  <dig> to  <dig> my  <cit> . of the species with filovirus-like elements only the rat, mouse and monodelphis have detailed chromosomal maps, but further mapping and taxonomic sampling will permit a more robust assessment of the age of eutherian nirvs. still, we conclude that the association between filoviruses and mammals is likely to be 10's of millions of years older than the previous estimate. filoviruses join bornaviruses as the only demonstrated prehistoric non-retroviral rna viruses.

the eutherian orders with nirvs of filoviruses closely match the proposed candidate reservoir groups of bats, rodents, and insectivores  <cit>  . this pattern is not a sampling artifact that we can attribute to the available genome assemblies. seven of the ten genomes  sampled from predicted reservoir orders had integrated filoviruses, while only  <dig> of  <dig> from non-candidate eutherian orders had detected integrated filovirus-like elements . the sole eutherian species from a non-candidate group to have a potential nirv was the pygmy hedgehog tenrec, which is the afrotherian small insectivore analog on the island of madagascar. the three assemblies of genomes from candidate orders that lacked apparent nirvs were the ground squirrel , the european hedgehog  and the fruit bat . at present it is unclear why some small mammal groups  appear to have an association with filoviruses. still, the study of filovirus-like nirvs could have predictive value for identifying filovirus reservoirs, ancestral proteins, outbreak modeling, undetected lineages of filoviruses and virulence in mammalian species. for example, the close relationship of south american and expressed australian marsupial filovirus-like nirvs with rapidly evolving african filoviruses now makes it more likely that the new world harbors undetected filoviruses or has acted as a source region for extant filoviruses.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate that filovirus infections are recorded as paleoviral elements in the genomes of small mammals. these elements are candidates for functional gene products . the integration is unexpected because filoviruses lack reverse transcriptase and the ability to replicate within the nucleus. our results indicate that the association of mammals with filoviruses is likely tens of millions of years older than previously thought.

