BACKGROUND
traditionally, biological resources have been designed to be accessed and processed by humans. in such resources, data have been usually been represented in a non-standard format; consequently, data could not be managed and processed appropriately by computers. hence, the representation of the information in a computer processable manner has become a major research issue. in order to achieve this goal, the availability of computational methods for organizing, accessing and retrieving information in a systematic way has become crucial, as well as the development of methods that allow the definition and maintenance of shared domain models  <cit> .

a large number of biological databases have been developed in the last years. the  <dig> update of the molecular biology database collection reveals the existence of more than  <dig> databases  <cit> . there are databases for almost any biological field of study, although most of them contain information about genes and proteins from different organisms. some examples are the saccharomyces genome database, the mouse genome informatics, flybase or wormbase. most of the initial development efforts were done by reduced research communities, which defined their own terminology. one major limitation of such approach was that research results could not be efficiently used by and shared with other communities. consequently, new databases were designed to integrate that disperse information in order to provide a common reference for genes and proteins, such as ncbi entrez  <cit>  or uniprot  <cit> . due to the terminological heterogeneity, different groups worked together to develop common vocabularies. that was the origin of the gene ontology   <cit> , which solves the semantic heterogeneity associated to the annotation of gene products between different databases. an ontology is a formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualisation  <cit> , which provides a shared vocabulary and can be used as a domain model. the success of go provoked a huge interest in designing, developing and using biological ontologies, whose number has rapidly increased  <cit> . projects such as the obo foundry  <cit>  promote the development and use of bio-ontologies.

from the technical perspective, ontologies are the cornerstone technology for the semantic web  <cit> , which is an extension of the current world wide web in which the semantics of web information and services is well defined; hence the web content become understandable by both humans and machines. in fact, different semantic web technologies such as rdf  <cit> , owl  <cit>  and sparql  <cit>  have been used for developing semantic biological solutions . in this work, semantic web technologies will be used to integrate biological information about orthology.

as stated in  <cit> , it is common practice in biology to obtain key information about the function and evolution of a protein of interest through the identification of homologous proteins in other organisms. there are three types of relevant homologous relations:  orthology, which is the relationship between two genes in different species that have evolved from a common ancestral gene via speciation;  paralogy, which describes the relationship between two genes concerned to a gene duplication event; and  xenology, which describes the relationship between two genes in cases in which one has been derived by horizontal gene transfer. there exist also systems and databases related to orthology, among which the eukaryotic orthology system   <cit>  is the most important. yogy is a web-based resource for retrieving orthologous proteins from ten eukaryotic organisms and one prokaryote: homo sapiens, mus musculus, rattus norvegicus, arabidopsis thaliana, dictyostelium discoideum, drosophila melanogaster, caenorhabditis elegans, plasmodium falciparum, escherichia coli, schizosaccharomyces pombe, and saccharomyces cerevisiae.

yogy is an application that retrieves information about orthology from five independent resources: kog  <cit> , inparanoid  <cit> , homologene  <cit> , orthomcl  <cit> , and a table of curated orthologs between budding yeast and fission yeast. the queries are performed by gene or protein identifier. moreover, yogy is able to associate go terms to the genes included in the search results. the integration of such complementary data provides a practical tool for identifying known or predictable parenthood relations between proteins from different species.

the clusters of orthologous genes are shown by resource in yogy, thus providing a common, integrated query interface, which implies that searches can be done in all the databases by using one query. however, the results retrieved include redundant information about genes and proteins and, consequently, the benefits of providing a common query interface are minimized by the non integration of the output information. this is a clear drawback for both humans and machines, because it makes the automatic, efficient analysis and processing of such information more difficult. as it has already been mentioned, yogy searches for biological terms in independent databases, and it shows the results by resource. the meaning of the information contained in each repository is unknown for machines, so yogy cannot analyze, compare and integrate the data or do any knowledge-intensive task.

hence, this work aims at providing mechanisms for integrating the information of the resources used by yogy. the results should not be shown by resource in an independent manner, including redundant items, but in an integrated one, allowing users to know the origin of data. hence, the exploitation of the information can be semantics-driven, making it processable by machines, facilitating its understanding and increasing its usefulness to researchers.

in the last years, different methods have been applied to data integration in biomedical domains: federated systems, ontology-based mediation systems, data warehouse and workflows  <cit> . these range from the usage of an individual model or parser per resource to the representation of the information sources in a common format. other methods are based on the application of rdf, owl and sparql to integrate, store, query, and view the information from different resources. some examples are the thea portal  <cit> , biomart  <cit>  for the integration of phenotypes and genotypes, and automed  <cit>  for reconciling biomedical services.

however, the use of heterogeneous schemas makes it usually more difficult for users to query the resources in an integrated way. semantic solutions have been applied to this end. an example is biomoby  <cit> , which defines an ontology-based messaging standard for the automatic discovery and interaction with biological data and data analysis service providers.

in summary, the integration of biomedical resources is necessary due to the huge amount of information that is continuously being generated and considering its inherent diversity and heterogeneity. otherwise, the mentioned caveats would limit the efficient use of such resources. in this work, a semantic web-based approach for the integration of biological knowledge will be applied to orthology. the integration will be facilitated by a domain ontology, which will be used for mapping the different resources to achieve a common machine processable representation. this will allow the generation of an integrated ontological knowledge base, to which biologists will have access through a user-friendly web interface.

RESULTS
the ontological gene orthology  methodology has been developed  for integrating, managing and exploiting biological information about orthology. this methodology is based on semantic web technologies, which facilitate handling the biological data and orthology-related knowledge and support the development of integration processes using the semantics of the domain. this methodology  has four steps:  capture of the information from the resources;  development of the ontology;  definition of the mappings between the resources and the ontology; and  construction of the integrated ontological knowledge base.

the application of this methodology to orthology resources has generated three main results:  an ontology about orthology;  an integrated ontological knowledge base about orthology; and  a user-friendly web interface for querying the semantic repository.

the ogo ontology
this ontology has been developed to model the knowledge related to orthology  and to guide the integration of data by means of mappings between the resources and the concepts of the ontology. it was the result of analyzing the bioinformatics resources used in this work: kogs, inparanoid, homologene, orthomcl, ncbi taxonomy, and gene ontology. since it contains the concepts, relationships and restrictions of the domain, the consistency of the data integrated can also be checked.next, the most important concepts of the ontology are described:

gene
this is the most important concept and it has many relationships associated. the property isorthologousof represents the orthologous relationship between genes and it is defined as symmetric. the property hasreference connects genes with concepts that define how genes are identified and named in the different resources, so genes may have several references. the property hasresource represents the relation between a gene and the bioinformatics resource from which the information is extracted. a gene has to be in at least one resource. the concept species is related with gene through the property fromspecies. genes and proteins are linked through the property fixprotein. genes may also have functional categories associated, which are represented by the property hasfunctionalcategory, and this information is obtained from kog. finally, each gene has different go terms associated in the property hasgo.

protein
analogously to genes, proteins have also the property hasreference which includes identifiers and names of proteins in different resources.

resource
this concept represents the repositories from which genes and proteins are collected.

species
this is a taxonomy obtained from ncbi species taxonomy database. it has  <dig> concepts and about  <dig> organisms.

category
 <dig> functional categories obtained from kogs have been included in the ontology. these functional categories are grouped into  <dig> main subsets: cellular processes and signalling, information storage and processing, metabolism and poorly characterized. they are the functions of the orthologous group to which a particular gene belong.

go
go terms are related to genes but also linked to other concepts in the ontology. the property hasevidencecode connects go terms and evidence codes. the ontology contains  <dig> types of evidence codes: author statement, automatically-assigned, computational analysis, curator statement, experimental and obsolete. this taxonomy has  <dig> instances. besides, a go term is connected to go aspect. the ontology includes three go aspects: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function.

the ontology was implemented in the web ontology language  by using protégé  <cit> . owl is the current w3c recommendation for the exchange of semantic content on the web and it is the language used by the semantic web community for representing ontologies. our owl ontology contains  <dig> concepts,  <dig> object properties, and  <dig> data type properties. cardinality constraints and disjoint axioms have also been defined in the ontology. figure  <dig> shows the most relevant concepts  and relationships  of the ogo ontology.

the integrated ontological knowledge base
as it has already been mentioned the ogo ontology has been used to guide the integration of the orthology resources. as a result of this process, the ogo knowledge base was obtained, containing approximately  <dig> , <dig> orthologous genes,  <dig>  proteins related to those genes, and  <dig>  orthologous clusters.

due to the huge amount of individuals, efficient and scalable methods for building the knowledge base are required. the jena semantic web framework  <cit>  was used to develop the repository, because it provides relational persistence for ontology models, as well as the use of reasoners and semantic query languages. in this work, the relational persistence was provided by the mysql open source relational dataset  <cit> , and pellet  <cit>  was the reasoner used to check the consistency of both the ontology and the integrated instances.

the web tool
the ogo knowledge base was built using semantic technology so that languages such as sparql can be used for querying it. since our goal is to provide access to biologists to integrated information about orthology and, provided that we cannot expect or force them to master languages such as sparql, alternative query methods are needed. to solve this problem the web interface shown in figure  <dig> has been developed. this interface allows for querying the knowledge base using both the protein or gene identifiers, thus retrieving orthology information about genes, species, information about their corresponding proteins and gene ontology terms. besides, it permits users to filter the information by species and by bioinformatics resource. this tool can be accessed at ogo portal  <cit> .

discussion
traditionally, bioinformatics databases have been represented using flat files. in this work we have approached the representation of data and knowledge using owl, which allows humans not only to understand the contents but also software tools to use the biological knowledge for different purposes. furthermore, formal representation technologies and languages such as ontologies and owl provide native mechanisms for ensuring the consistency, quality and correctness of the contents which cannot be granted by flat text files and relational databases.

this technology facilitates the integration of biological information as well as its connection with other repositories by adding more concepts and relationships into the ontology. in fact, we are currently defining the mappings between our ontology and relevant bio-ontologies to achieve this objective.

it should be noted that the data captured from the resources is not integrated on the fly. the files of the resources are periodically updated by their developers, so they are periodically downloaded and the knowledge base construction process is launched. we have tried to make this process automatic, but this has not been possible to date, mainly because of problems caused by the structure of the data files. the files available for downloading are not always well-formed and are not precise enough for enabling automatic machine processing. therefore, some manual pre-processing is needed to identify and repair the structural errors of the files according to their specifications. then, the automatic process for information retrieval and integration is launched and the knowledge base is updated.

another advantage of our approach is that the ontological knowledge base allows queries with semantic languages such as sparql. thus, we can incorporate in the queries all the restrictions modeled from the biological domain and represented in the ontology. the current web interface allows for a reduced set of queries, since our initial goal is to provide easy access to integrated information about orthology. we plan to extend such interface to allow users to make more complex semantic queries in a friendly way.

the response time of the system has also been considered. the performance of the ontological repository is worse than using a relational database, although our experiments with more than  <dig> simultaneous, simulated users have not reported significant problems, so the new possibilities by the semantic technology are worthwhile.

the ogo methodology has been applied in this work, and it could easily be adapted to cover new orthology resources. it might also be adapted to other biological areas in which data integration is required.

finally, yogy was a reference system for us, since we shared the same biological goals but used a different technological approach. we think there are three main aspects in which the ogo approach outperforms yogy:

 less redundant information is retrieved in ogo because of data integration. yogy retrieves information from each resource and this is displayed to the user on a resource-by-resource basis, so the users have to manually combine the results. ogo performs an integration process, which makes the exploration of the results easier for the users.

 our repository integrates all the information available from the biological resources, whereas yogy is specialized in ten eukaryotic organisms and one prokaryotic.

 the existence of inconsistencies can be controlled by the appropriate use of reasoners in ogo, so that inconsistent results can be removed from the set of results. this cannot be done in yogy due to the non-integration of data.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have presented the ogo approach for integrating and managing bioinformatics resources that contain information about orthology. first, we analyzed the resources to develop the domain ontology, which supported the integration of data. as a result of this process, the ontological knowledge base was obtained, and the friendly user interface was developed. the results show the potential of semantic web technologies to represent biological knowledge, to facilitate the integrated access to biological data and to support the development of semantics-rich applications for biologists. the semantics of the domain has been used in this work to support the integration and the query of the knowledge base, showing its advantages against traditional systems.

