BACKGROUND
transcriptomic approaches such as gene expression microarrays are being used routinely in diverse fields of research, such as toxicology and cancer biology, in order to characterize biological processes and find biomarkers indicative of pathological states and processes  <cit> . compared to traditional clinical outcome measurements where a single biochemical measurement or histopathological score is interpreted, gene expression signatures resulting from microarray experiments generate a molecular fingerprint consisting of multiple biomarkers which cannot otherwise be interpreted in isolation. this approach has been applied successfully in the area of breast cancer prognosis, where the first in vitro diagnostic multi-variate index assay  using gene expression measurements, mammaprint , was approved for use by the fda in  <dig>  <cit> , while oncotypedx, a reverse-transcription quantitative pcr  -based assay profiles  <dig> genes in proliferation and estrogen receptor-related pathways  <cit> .

in order to expedite the approval of new recognized biomarkers in other areas of diagnostics and in drug discovery, regulatory bodies such as the fda and eu commission have highlighted the need to standardize results from 'omics' platforms using reference materials  in order to aid regulatory decisions   <cit> . it has been reported that better standardization during initial processes of biomarker identification would also improve the interpretation of meta-analyses where studies have been performed using different experimental protocols, platforms and designs  <cit> . upon approval of multigene biomarker tests for clinical applications, reference materials would play an integral part in ongoing quality control  procedures and proficiency testing  in clinical laboratories  <cit> .

at the moment standardized reference materials for assessing results from different gene expression platforms are lacking  <cit> . in the field of gene expression microarrays, array manufacturers usually supply controls which can provide information on platform performance and ascertain the quality of sample labelling and hybridization procedures. however, platform-specific do not allow direct comparison of gene expression data from different platforms, leading to calls for universal microarray reference materials  <cit> . gene expression studies by rt-qpcr techniques often use reference gene levels as a means for assessing sample processing and normalising for the mrna content of a sample  <cit> . however, reference gene expression is often influenced by the experimental conditions under investigation, requiring thorough validation of their stability  <cit> . in contrast, in vitro produced rna spike-ins are independent of the biological process and can act as controls for both the rt and qpcr steps  <cit> . artificial spike-ins are also useful for assessing the presence of inhibitors from the sample in the rt-qpcr reactions  <cit> . however, like microarray spike-ins, cross-platform rna standards are not widely available for rt-qpcr applications.

efforts to address these issues are in progress through the ercc initiative for developing a large set of publicly available rna standards  <cit> . a panel of  <dig> different standards developed through the ercc project consists of artificial sequences or sequences from bacterial and other genomes which lack homology to human sequences  <cit> . these rna standards have been produced by in vitro transcription  and contain synthetic 3' polya sequences, which enable them to be processed in the same way as mrna transcripts, using oligo-based priming strategies which are commonly used in microarray sample labelling and rt-qpcr protocols.

in this study we tested panels of selected rna standards with potential application for biomarker validation for the two most commonly used technologies for gene expression quantification-dna microarrays and rt-qpcr. the study focussed mainly on the detection properties of the standards using agilent one-colour oligonucleotide microarrays and taqman® real-time pcr methods. the standards were used to investigate some of the performance characteristics on two representative platforms, namely linear dynamic range, limit of detection  and technical reproducibility. we also developed two separate panels of these standards designed to mimic 'normal' and 'disease' states, where some biomarkers are differentially expressed whilst others remain unchanged in their expression. finally, we have demonstrated the use of such panels informed decision-making regarding fold change cut-off thresholds and assessment of the impact of technical factors on the discrimination between control and treatment groups.

RESULTS
characterisation of gene expression platforms using rna standards
our initial aim was to demonstrate the use of universal rna standards to characterize different methods for gene expression quantification and provide technical information which can be applied to mrna biomarkers of differing levels of abundance. in order to closely mimic biological scenarios  <cit> , rna standards were spiked into human total rna prior to setting up microarray labelling or reverse transcription reactions. eight different standards, ranging in length from  <dig> to  <dig> bases, and varying composition of gc bases were selected to provide balanced differences in reaction efficiencies due to transcript sizes and secondary structure considerations .

the detection of eight rna standards was investigated using common microarray and rt-qpcr approaches- agilent one-colour  <dig> ×  <dig> k microarrays and taqman®-based real-time pcr using abi 7900ht real-time pcr system, incorporating in- house designed oligonucleotide probes and assays respectively . in the first of two experiments, copy number for rna standards was varied across seven orders of magnitude between  <dig> and  <dig> copies per ng total rna, in a background of universal human reference rna  . copy numbers were chosen to extend over the natural physiological levels of transcript abundance, approximating to a range of between  <dig>  and  <dig> copies of an individual mrna transcript per mammalian cell with a total rna content of  <dig> pg  <cit> . a negative control with zero copies of each standard was also included in each sample in order to measure background signals and check the specificity of the assays.. the composition of each sample was balanced to contain the same total number of transcript copies  and the addition of spike-in materials did not increase the mrna content of the sample by more than 4% .

eight different rna standards were mixed in a background of stratagene universal reference rna across a range of copy numbers between  <dig> and  <dig> copies/ng total rna.

the signal output of each platform at different levels of copy number was measured in terms of microarray raw signal intensity or qpcr ct values  for all eight rna standards. characterisation of the platform signal output for each level of rna standard abundance may be a useful means of relating spike-in metrics to endogenous genes, as, unlike the copy number of in vitro produced rna which can be ascertained by uv spectroscopy, the absolute copy numbers of endogenous transcripts are not normally known for microarray or rt-qpcr experiments. therefore if a gene of interest falls within a given range of microarray signal intensity or ct value, the performance characteristics in terms of the linearity, precision and accuracy of detection at that level of abundance can be used to inform these metrics for the candidate markers. such platform-specific performance characteristics are further investigated in the following two sections.

linear range and lod of microarray and rt-qpcr platforms
the detection range of rna standards was modelled across a range of copy numbers for each standard on both microarray and rt-qpcr platforms in order to define the linear dynamic range and lod. example plots of normalized microarray and rt-qpcr signal in correlation with the copy number are shown for ercc- <dig> in figure  <dig>  with results for the other seven rna standards presented in additional file  <dig>  visual inspection of the results suggested that the linear region of the range was between  <dig> and  <dig> copies/ng rna for agilent microarrays and upwards of  <dig> copies/ng for the rt-qpcr platform. in order to confirm that the linear range of the instruments also corresponded to the dynamic range of signal output, the 10-fold differences in copy number between samples were compared with signal output to check for proportionality. log2-transformations of the copy numbers for the standards were plotted against normalised signal outputs  or Δct values  and linear regression was performed across the linear range marked in figure  <dig>  the resulting slope and r <dig> values from this analysis are displayed in table  <dig>  these results show that the expected slopes for all eight standards are close to the ideal value of  <dig>  and the r <dig> values indicate good correlation of data across the defined linear ranges .

the accuracy and precision of the platforms across the linear range  were assessed by the slope  and pearson correlation coefficient  values respectively, based on linear regression of transcript copies/ng vs. normalised signal intensity  or Δct values . rt-qpcr values were adjusted for the pcr efficiency of the assay.

the lod of both platforms was also compared using data generated from all eight standards. for microarrays, the lod was defined as the upper 95% confidence interval of the signal intensity of the baseline for the blank sample and the percentage of data points with signal output above the lod for each copy number level calculated . for rt-qpcr, since the zero copy sample results in an 'undetermined' call, it is not possible to model a baseline signal level. therefore the percentages of positive reactions were calculated for each level of abundance as the percentage above the lod . at  <dig> copy/ng , it is evident that the standards could not be detected effectively on either microarray or rt-qpcr platforms as only 25% of microarray data exceeded the lod, and 22% of pcr reactions resulted in a positive ct value. when the copy number was increased to  <dig> copies/ng, 75% of microarray data exceed the lod and 94% of qpcr reactions resulted in a ct value. therefore the lod at which both platforms could discriminate between the presence and absence of the standards was estimated as  <dig> copies/ng. similarly, at  <dig> copies/ng, the lod was exceeded, with 100% of both microarray data and qpcr reactions yielding positive results based on the above criteria .

technical reproducibility and precision of microarray and rt-qpcr platforms
technical reproducibility and precision are another two important aspects of platform performance as knowledge of the technical 'noise' associated with the biomarker measurements is useful for informing the confidence with which results are interpreted, and assigning measurement uncertainty values for standardized assays. the standards were used to characterize the technical variation associated with each platform, both in terms of technical reproducibility  and precision .

the reproducibility of measurements from both gene expression platforms was calculated across a range of concentrations mimicking different transcript abundance levels . the variation in microarray measurements between different arrays performed on three separate occasions is displayed as raw or normalized signal intensities . it can be observed that technical reproducibility is poorer  for low transcript abundance levels  which also happen to be at or below the lod . the effect of normalization increases the spread of variation for the  <dig> copy/ng level, possibly due to calculation of expression values relative to the 75th percentile . however, above  <dig> copies/ng, the percentage variation of raw data is below 10%, and drops to 5% or less as a result of data normalisation .

the technical reproducibility of microarray experiments across all probes  on the array, as opposed to the rna standards only was also compared to determine if technical reproducibility of the standards correlated with the observed reproducibility for endogenous gene expression values. the results show that pair-wise correlation of replicate arrays of the same sample exhibited a high degree of correlation for the platform  .

for rt-qpcr experiments, the data was compared between three different experimental runs  based on the mean ct value for each run. due to the high number of failed reactions at  <dig> copy/ng , technical variation between runs was only calculated for greater than  <dig> copies/ng. similar to microarray data, technical reproducibility was reduced at the low end of the linear detection range  reflecting a greater spread in ct values. above  <dig> copies/ng, technical variation between runs equated to 10%. ordinarily, ct values are not compared between runs since relative expression measurements are compared to a standard curve or reference sample incorporated on the same plate. therefore ct values were also expressed relative to the mean ct value for the highest copy number  within each run in order to normalize for the effect of run-to-run variation. transformation of rt-qpcr data to relative expression levels reduced the technical variation between runs to below the 5% level for copy numbers of  <dig> or more .

the technical precision of each platform, within the same hybridization experiment or qpcr plate, was also calculated for different copy number levels based on data from duplicate arrays or triplicate qpcr reactions . results for within-run variation show that deviation in signal output was higher for both microarray and rt-qpcr platforms at the lower end of tested range . within-run variation for microarrays was 10-20% above  <dig> copies/ng for all levels of abundance , whereas higher technical reproducibility for rt-qpcr data correlated with increasing copy numbers .

construction of 'normal' and 'disease' panels
further to investigation of the applicability of rna standards for provision of technical information on biomarker measurements, their usefulness for validating expression analyses of biomarkers between different conditions, e.g. normal vs. disease states was evaluated. often the first stages of biomarker screening involves selecting the genes showing the largest and/or most significant fold changes in expression between different experimental groups, and studying the differences in global expression profiles using multifactorial analysis methods such as principal component analysis  and anova. for testing the utility of rna standards in providing information on the success of discriminating different groups in the context of a trial or experiment, we constructed two panels  consisting of eight standards each, simulating normal and disease states .

to mimic the composition of 'normal' and 'disease' states which contain both differentially expressed genes  and non-degs, two panels were produced using the eight standards at defined ratios and copy numbers.

in order to mimic candidate biomarkers showing differential or unchanged expression in different experimental groupings, four of the standards exhibited an altered expression profile between the two panels, with ratios of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  between groups, whilst the other four had a fold change of  <dig> , with equal copy numbers in both panels . a range of transcript abundance levels were included in the design of the panels, with the aim of mimicking, for example, transcripts with low abundance in the 'normal' state with a large increase in expression in the 'disease' states  or transcripts of average abundance with a moderate fold change in the disease-state  . three independent microarray experiments were set up for investigating the effect of variability due to labelling  and hybridisation  on the discrimination of two panels.

accuracy of fold change estimation by microarray and rt-qpcr platforms
initially the simulated 'normal' and 'disease' panels were used to assess the accuracy of fold change measurements using microarrays. since  <dig> replicate probes specific for each of the rna standards were present on the microarrays, they were treated as individual entities in order to model the distribution of fold change measurements for an individual feature, as is the case for most genes represented on whole genome microarrays. the accuracy of fold change estimation for each feature was assessed based on six pair-wise comparisons between the two panels, spanning the three independent experiments . overall the observed fold change measurements correlated closely to the expected values. the standards represented at medium to high abundance  showed the closest agreement between observed and expected fold change values with over 75% of entities within 10% of the expected values. however, low abundance transcripts  in the panels , resulted in just over 60% entities falling within the same threshold, whilst trace abundance transcripts , exhibited significantly impaired accuracy with less than 25% of entities falling within 10% of the expected values. as real-time pcr is the main strategy used for validation of microarray fold change measurements  <cit> , the microarray fold change data  was compared with rt-qpcr measurements of the panels. similarly, replicate independent rt and qpcr experiments were performed in order to encapsulate full run-to-run variation for the technique. good agreement between the two platforms was shown by correlation analysis of the fold change measurements for microarray and rt-qpcr platforms  .

classification of differentially expressed genes
fold change cut-offs and statistical analysis are the most commonly used approaches for generating gene lists which are further interrogated in terms of biological significance by gene ontology and pathway analysis  <cit> . we investigated whether individual features  were classified correctly using a 'volcano plot' approach with fold change cut-off thresholds of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  with a p-value cut-off of  <dig> . figure  <dig> shows that using the higher fold change cut-off thresholds of  <dig>  and  <dig> , almost 100% of features are classified correctly as differentially  or non-differentially expressed . however using a fold change cut-off threshold of  <dig> , only 2% of ercc- <dig> features are correctly classified as differentially expressed despite being spiked at a  <dig> -fold ratio in the two panels. using the low stringency  <dig> -fold cut-off, some features are misclassified as exhibiting differential expression despite their presence at the same level in both panels. of the  <dig> incorrectly classified 'false positive' features,  <dig> were probes detecting ercc- <dig> and  <dig> were those detecting ercc- <dig>  the two standards with the lowest abundance of the four unchanged standards between the panels.

discrimination between 'normal' vs. 'disease' panels
further to the application of the panels to fold change analysis, their usefulness for assessing the robustness of discriminating between normal and diseased states, using multigene expression profiles, was also investigated. the impact of technical factors such as target labelling and microarray hybridization on the discrimination between the two simulated 'normal' and 'disease' panels was investigated by pca of the microarray data and the results are presented in figure 8a. the two panels, a and b, are separated clearly by the first principal component, which accounts for the majority  of the variation in expression profiles. the second principal component accounts for a further 27% of the variation in the data which may be surmised to be due to technical 'noise' in the experimental system . experimental run does not appear to have a systematic effect on the expression profile of the rna standards, as individual runs do not cluster together on the pca . the discrimination of the microarray data based on entities  with a similar expression profile was also investigated using pca . the analysis indicates clear discrimination between rna standards with different ratios between the panels, with over 90% of the variation in expression profile being due to this factor. standards, whose expression is 'up-regulated' in panel b compared to panel a, are clearly separated from those with no fold difference between panels or down-regulated in panel b. ercc- <dig>  which exhibited only a  <dig> -fold difference between panels, clustered close to the four standards with unchanged expression levels between panels . the second principal component, which could be attributable to technical variation, accounts for only 5% in the variation  and shows highest spread for ercc- <dig> which has a ratio of  <dig>  between panels a and b. as noted for accuracy of fold change estimation for different standards, the expression of ercc- <dig> may be more variable due to a higher level of technical noise in the region of lower transcript abundance .

discussion
the complexity and multivariate nature of gene expression profiling techniques, measuring thousands of different transcripts has raised issues over the last decade regarding suitable approaches for standardized data comparison. in addition to the different techniques available , factors such as platform, laboratory, experimental run, experimental design and methodological parameters such as labelling approach for microarray studies or choice of rt priming strategy rt-qpcr experiments can all impact on the results  <cit> . furthermore, processing and normalization of the results set can also influence both microarray and rt-qpcr data  <cit> . significant progress, in improving the confidence in the extent to which technical variability influences results from different microarray platforms, has been made through the application of reference rna sample titrations by the maqc  <cit> . however, as microarray and other transcriptomic approaches move from being predominantly research tools into clinical and regulatory applications, reference materials are required in order to ensure high levels of quality control and traceable results  <cit> . the development of generic rna standards by the ercc are expected to fulfil such function as reference materials  <cit> . in this study we have sought to demonstrate how carefully constructed panels of rna standards can be used to characterize platform-associated technical factors and provide information relevant to biomarker discovery and validation.

for this study, technical aspects of platforms performance were investigated using eight different rna standards, mimicking transcripts covering a wide physiological range of abundance levels. by varying each standard across the full range of copy numbers, some of the confounding influence caused by individual microarray probe specificity, which is present when a single spike-in is used at a set concentration, is negated  <cit> . likewise, variations due to taqman assay efficiency are likely to be minimised by performing rt-qpcr reactions for a panel of multiple standards.

the linear range of both microarray and rt-qpcr platforms was assessed by the slope of signal output vs. spike-in concentration and by characterizing the lower lod using the standards. the dynamic range of detection using the agilent one-colour platform encompassed four orders of magnitude over which the observed changes in signal intensity closely matched the expected values . this result conforms with product literature for the platform, reporting a five order of magnitude detection range . at concentrations of transcripts 10-fold below the lod range, the signal intensities were generally indistinguishable from non-specific background hybridisation data . results of rt-qpcr analysis of the same panels displayed linearity over the same range of copy numbers as the microarray results. however no plateau was observed at the maximum copy number tested  , in keeping with the dynamic range of seven to eight orders of magnitude reported for real-time pcr  <cit> . the lod for rt-qpcr was in the region of  <dig> copies , which is close to the reported sensitivity of rt-qpcr for single copy detection  <cit>  in view of the fact that the reverse transcription step is normally significantly less than 100% efficient  <cit> . concentration response curves using rna standards have previously been shown to be a useful tool for comparing the linearity of the response of different microarray platforms in terms of signal compression and precision  <cit> . it is proposed that panels of universally applicable standards, such as those used here, will provide directly comparable information on the performance of different platforms in terms of dynamic range and lod.

the panels also yielded useful information on the reproducibility of the two gene expression technologies investigated. for transcript copy numbers of at least  <dig> copies per ng total rna , technical reproducibility of microarray data  was within the 5-15% cv values for the agilent one-colour platform reported by the maqc  <cit> . for lower abundance transcripts, reproducibility between experimental runs was poorer with variation of up to 30-35% observed for raw and normalized microarray data . for genes expressed at such low levels, stringent filtering of the data based on present/absent calls or raw expression levels has been shown to improve concordance between replicate arrays  <cit> . likewise, for rt-qpcr, increased inter-run and intra-run variation was observed for low abundance transcripts  due to stochastic variation in both rt and qpcr stages when only a small number of molecules is present in each reaction  <cit> . the rna standards can therefore provide an indication of the measurement uncertainty associated with biomarkers of varying abundance and could be used to develop guidelines, e.g. for trace biomarker measurements and for calculating the number of replicate measurements required to ensure sufficient statistical power in a particular experiment or assay.

in addition to their utility for cross-platform comparison and measurement uncertainty considerations, we sought to demonstrate that rna standards can also facilitate internal quality control of biomarker measurements in terms of differential expression analysis and multigene expression profiling techniques. it is envisaged that such panels could be spiked into experimental samples in order to gauge the accuracy with which 'normal' and 'disease' states or control and treatment conditions are assigned.

by using the rna standards as surrogate biomarkers, the panels were tested to gauge the confidence of assigning differential or non-differential expression of a biomarker at particular levels of transcript abundance or magnitude of fold change . the observed fold changes highlighted the variable extent to which technical noise arising from microarray labelling and hybridisation may impact on biomarker regulation. transcripts of lower abundance showed wider variation in fold change measurements for both unchanged and differential ratios between the two panels. the distribution of fold change ratios between the panels modelled on the  <dig> probe replicates on each array  indicate that erroneous fold change results are more likely to arise in the region corresponding to lower signal intensity. comparison of microarray and rt-qpcr results revealed good consistency between the two technologies for fold change detection  and also confirmed that the agilent platform does not cause compression of fold change measurements  <cit> . the panels of standards provide further opportunities for qc of gene expression results when applying different analytical methods, such as fold change cut-off thresholds and statistical testing. for example, our results highlighted that biomarkers, with a  <dig> -fold change between experimental groups, are less easily discriminated than at higher fold changes  .

the discrimination between the 'normal' and 'disease' panels using global profiling methods such as pca  was also shown to be a potentially useful qc tool for investigating technical noise within an experiment and could be employed for identifying anomalous microarrays within a dataset. such analyses of the panels also indicate whether run-to-run variation has greater impact on the dataset compared to true differences in conditions  or between entities, i.e. differentially expressed genes  and non-deg. for the agilent microarray platform used in this study, experimental runs did not have a systematic effect on the profile of the eight rna standards. also, individual sample labelling using a one-colour approach did not seem to cause any observable bias in the resultant expression profiling . however, it has been reported that two-colour sample labelling had a significant effect on the gene expression profile, especially between different laboratories  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
rna standards provide a means of internal quality control for all stages of the gene expression experiment, namely sample processing, assay methodology, data processing and analysis. in this study, we have demonstrated that panels of generic rna standards can be used to assess inter-platform variations in terms of dynamic range, lod and precision of different technologies. we found that agilent one-colour microarray hybridisation data and rt-qpcr measurements both provided accurate and reproducible measurement of the standards, although transcript abundance has a significant influence on these parameters. furthermore, simulated 'normal' and 'disease' panels proved to be informative for the analysis of fold change accuracy and the discrimination of transcriptomic measurements. we conclude that such prototype reference panels could be useful qc materials for the standardization of gene expression measurements between laboratories and platforms, and in aiding interpretation of biomarker profiling data in regulatory settings.

