BACKGROUND
often times, the gathering of reagents to preform a specific experiment can be more difficult than the execution of the experiment itself. this can especially true of experiments that examine the molecular interactions between proteins, which require the expression and purification of recombinant protein from both eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems. both systems have unique advantages for recombinant protein expression: prokaryotic e. coli allow for large quantities of recombinant protein to be easily and rapidly expressed and s. cerevisiae allow for eukaryotic proteins to be expressed with native binding partners and for in vivo function assessment. however, for the same protein to be produced in both systems multiple expression plasmids are typically used since the elements needed for efficient replication, selection, mrna transcription, and protein translation for the two systems are different. the construction and verification of these multiple plasmids is time consuming, laborious, and error prone. additionally, plasmids must be shuttled between different host strains for the cloning and expression steps.

we set out to overcome these experimental hurdles by combining into a single vector all of the essential elements for recombinant protein expression in both bacteria and yeast in a one-step, ligation-independent process. the benefits of expression plasmids that work in both bacterial and other eukaryotic cells have been noted previously
 <cit> . additionally, these vector systems have also touted the benefit of one-step cloning. however, the use of existing vectors has been limited to recombinant protein expression in either mammalian or insect cells and leaves a gap in the available expression tools in yeast. the vectors described here have several advantages;  genes can be cloned into the vectors in a ligation-independent method by homologous recombination in yeast,  a screen for protein expression and functionality can be used to identify positive clones in yeast before isolation of the plasmid dna,  a protein can be expressed in both bacterial and yeast from the same vector,  a gst-fusion tag, which can be removed by the treatment with tev protease, is provided to enhance protein solublility and purification, and  the entire protocol is very time efficient taking less than a week  to complete. to our knowledge, these are the first examples of dual promoter vectors that allow for one-step cloning for both bacterial and yeast expression.

the pdep vectors contain all of the fundamental features spanning plasmid replication to protein translation within both bacteria and yeast. the plasmids were named pc-dep and pm-dep for dual expression promoter  and are otherwise identical except the open-reading frame of interest are under the control of either yeast cup <dig>  or met <dig>  promoters, respectively. the cup <dig> promoter drives intermediate levels of protein expression upon the addition cuprous ions to growth media
 <cit> . the met <dig> promoter drives modest levels of expression in complete media, but is derepressed in the absence of methionine to drive high levels of protein expression
 <cit> . for protein expression in bacteria, a t <dig> bacteriophage promoter and ribosome-binding site is located between the yeast promoter and the translation start codon. the vectors contain the ura <dig> gene for growth selection in ura <dig> mutant yeast grown on uracil deficient media. also, the ampicillin resistance gene, β-lactamase , is included for selection of bacteria grown on ampicillin-containing media. the yeast cen/ars <dig> origin of replication and the bacterial pmb <dig> ori affords replication of the plasmid in the respective systems. an additional feature is the inclusion of a gst-fusion tag at either the n-terminus or c-terminus of the open-reading frame of interest to enhance protein solubility and protein purification. combination of these features into a single plasmid streamlines the process of recombinant protein expression.

despite of what appears to be a simple modular combination of the above-mentioned features, several unexpected difficulties had to be overcome in our studies to isolate a fully functional set of plasmids and procedures to enhance their performance. we demonstrated the utility of our system to rapidly clone, screen, express, and purify recombinant proteins by cloning  <dig> different ubiquitin-like  proteins into the vectors.

RESULTS
design of pdep vectors
the pdep vectors were designed to include all of the essential elements for efficient replication, selection, mrna transcription, and protein translation within both bacteria and yeast . the yeast origin of replication chosen was the cen <dig> and the ars associated with histone  <dig> . the ura <dig> gene, which allows for growth on media lacking uracil, was included as an autotrophic selection marker in yeast. protein expression in yeast is under the control of the copper inducible promoter from the cup <dig> gene or the methionine-regulated met <dig> promoter. the cyc <dig> terminator was selected as the yeast translation terminator. the bacterial origin of replication, pmb <dig>  and ampicillin resistance gene, β-lactamase , were also selected for inclusion. the t7lac promoter was chosen to drive protein expression in bacteria and was placed directly after the yeast promoter and ~ <dig> bp before a ribosome binding site . the t7lac promoter is a combination of the t <dig> bacteria phage promoter placed upstream of the lac operator  sequence, a binding site for the lac repressor. protein expression is induced upon expression of t <dig> polymerase in de <dig> lysogenized cells using iptg and the laco sequence functions to repress basal transcription of the gene of interest from the t <dig> polymerase. however, the final vectors did not contain the laco sequence, see discussion section for details.

additionally, the coding sequence of glutathione s-transferase  protein was incorporated to allow for an in-frame fusion-tag. the pdepn and pdepc vectors allow for the gene of interest to be inserted at the n-terminus or c-terminus of the encoded gst fusion tag, respectively.

a tobacco etching virus  protease cleavage site is integrated between the gst-fusion tag and the coding sequence of the gene of interest in the pdepc vectors. when recombinant protein containing this site is treated with tev protease, it is specifically cleaved at the tev site to produce native protein. a multiple cloning site  was also included between the tev cleavage site and the cyc <dig> terminator to allow for linearization of the plasmid for the insertion of a gene of interest.

construction of pdep vectors
the pdep vectors were assembled by the homologous recombination of multiple pcr amplicons to a linearized target plasmid . the target plasmid, prs <dig>  contained the yeast origin of replication  and nutritional selection marker , and the pmb <dig> bacterial origin of replication and the ampicillin resistance gene, β-lactamase . the pcr primers were designed to amplify the cup <dig> promoter, the t7lac promoter and ribosome binding sequence, the coding sequence for the gst-tev fusion tag, and the cyc <dig> terminator. the t7lac promoter was designed to have binding sites for both t <dig> rna polymerase and laci, which induces protein expression and prevents basal gene transcription in repressed bacteria, respectively. engineered within the pcr primers were additional flanking sequences of ~ <dig> bp, additional file
1: figure s <dig>  the flanking sequences targeted the resulting linear amplicons for recombination with the intended neighboring sequences and the target plasmid via an “ends-out” double strand break repair mechanism. this was achieved by co-transformation of the pcr amplicons and linearized target plasmid into yeast. a fraction of the linearized plasmid simultaneously acquired the pcr amplicons and was recircularized. recombinants that contain the recircularized plasmid encoding the ura <dig> gene were selected for on media lacking uracil. control transformations of linearized plasmid dna alone or pcr amplicons alone did not yield a significant number of transformants  while the ‘complete’ transformation contained several hundred transformants .

each individual yeast transformant represented a single recombination event and contained a single plasmid. a plasmid that correctly recombined would contain all the necessary elements for replication, selection, mrna transcription, and protein translation in yeast. hence, the ability to produce recombinant gst protein was used as a read out for these correct recombination events. this was assessed by immunoblot analysis with α-gst antibodies of individual yeast transformants. when transformants were grown in liquid culture containing  <dig> μm cucl <dig>  expression of gst protein was induced from the cup <dig> promoter. surprisingly, after screening  <dig> yeast transformants, only one was found to produce high levels of gst protein. this plasmid was rescued from yeast and transformed into e. coli. upon sequencing, it was found that this plasmid contained the t <dig> rna polymerase-binding site but lacked the flanking sequence required for laci binding. this suggested that by using screening in yeast, we were able to find a mutant variant capable of proper yeast expression. upon introduction of the plasmid into bl <dig>  cells, the production of large amounts of gst-fusion protein was assessed using sds-page and staining with coomassie brilliant blue. this initial plasmid then served as the basis for all of the modified pdep vectors described below. for versatility, a multiple cloning site replaced the 3’ region of this initial plasmid to produce pc-depc.

the pm-depc plasmid was constructed to have the met <dig> promoter in place of the cup <dig> promoter. the met <dig> promoter had the advantage that it is tightly regulated by the presence of methionine in growth media: strong protein expression is seen in the absences of methionine and is not detectable in the presence of  <dig> μg/ml methionine. a pcr amplicon was engineered to include the met <dig> promoter and ~ <dig> bp of flanking sequence on each end. this was integrated in place of the cup <dig> promoter of pc-depc to produce pm-depc, figure
 <dig> 

in a similar manner, the pc-depc plasmid was modified to produce pc-depn plasmid. the pc-depn plasmid allows for the expression of either native protein or with a c-terminal gst-fusion tag, figure
 <dig>  pc-depc differs from pc-depn by the inclusion of sacii endonuclease site after the start codon of the gst coding sequences. . once the pc-depn is linearized at the sacii site, a gene of interest can be recombined upstream of the gst coding sequence. if the coding sequence of the gene of interest includes a stop codon, the recombinant protein produced within the native, untagged form. however, if it does not include a stop codon, the recombinant protein produced will include a c-terminal gst-fusion tag.

using the pdep vectors
the workflow and time required for cloning a gene of interest into the pdep vectors is outlined in figure
3a. the first step involves preparing the target by digestion with endonucleases specific for the sites within the mcs of pc-depc or pm-depc or the sacii site within pc-depn. simultaneously, a pcr amplicon containing the gene of interest and ~ <dig> bp flanking sequences with homology to the target plasmid is made. the resulting dna fragments are then prepared and co-transformed into yeast. the transformation mixture is plated on selective media lacking uracil and incubated for two days. on the third day, the individual yeast transformants are inoculated into selective media containing the proper protein induction condition: either  <dig> μm cucl <dig> in the case of the cup <dig> promoter or absence of methionine in the case for the met <dig> promoter. the next day, day  <dig>  individual transformants are then assayed for the production of the gst-fusion protein by immunoblot with α -gst antibodies. this screens for correct recombination events of the pcr amplicon with the target plasmid. the recircularized plasmid is then rescued from yeast transformants that show robust protein expression in the yeast cultures on the same day. immediately this plasmid dna can be transformed into a bacterial expression strain and the bacterial culture grown overnight. on day six, the bacterial culture in induced with the addition of iptg to the culture media. again, the culture can be assayed for recombinant protein expression by either the presence of the a band corresponding to the predicted molecular weight of the gst-fusion protein by sds-page gel stained with coomassie brilliant blue or by probing with α-gst antibodies. overall, the procedure takes a total of five days  to produce a plasmid that has a confirmed protein expression in both yeast and bacteria.
3b was transformed into yeast and plated on selective media. top plate , negative control containing only digested plasmid, and bottom plate , successful recombination of pcr product and digested vector.  western blot analysis for positive recombination events using α-gst antibodies. lane  <dig>  gst protein expression from pc-depc not containing an orf, and lane  <dig>  expression of gst-rsp5hect from recombination plasmid pc-depc- rsp5hect.  schematic view of the plasmid insertion site and the pcr product designed to integrate into the pdep plasmids via homologous recombination in yeast. the flanking ends can be generated as part of the pcr primers and will place the open reading frame of interest in frame with the 5’ gst open reading frame.

figures
3b-
3d illustrate different steps in the workflow of cloning a gene of interest, in this case the hect-domain of the ubiquitin ligase rsp <dig>  into the pc-depc plasmid. using the sequences shown in figure
3e, pcr oligos were designed to amplify regions of the rsp <dig> open reading frame and included ~50pb of homology to the pc-depc vector. the resulting pcr product is shown in lane three of figure
3b. the pc-depc plasmid was linearized at restriction enzyme sites within the mcs, lane  <dig> in figure
3b. the dna fragments were then co-transformed into yeast and plated on selective media, figure
3c, lower panel. we found that ample yeast transformants were typically obtained using ~ <dig> μg each of linearized plasmid and pcr product. figure
3c, upper panel displays the typical results from the control transformation of linearized plasmid alone. comparison of the upper and lower panels of figure
3c clearly illustrates the efficiency of recombination of the pcr amplicon with the target plasmid.

in order to screen for correct recombination events that produced a recircularized plasmid with the rsp <dig> hect-domain inserted, individual yeast transformants were analyzed by immunoblot with α-gst antibodies after growth in selective media containing cucl <dig>  these conditions induced expression of the gst-rsp5hect fusion protein, which was under control of the cup <dig> promoter. an example of this assay is shown in figure
3d. lane one is recombinant gst protein  produced from the pc-depc vector without a gene insert and serves as a control. the dominant band in lane two of figure
3d is at ~ <dig> kda, the predicted molecular weight for the gst-rsp5hect fusion protein produced by the pc-dep-rsp5hect plasmid. in general, 5– <dig> yeast colonies were screened in this way for the presence of the gst-fusion protein. typically, less than 10% failed to combine the gene of interest into the target plasmid . these colonies either did not express any proteins detected with the α-gst antibodies or produced a band at ~ <dig> kda, representing gst alone. one major advantage of this workflow is that plasmids within individual transformants can be screened on the basis of their expression, ensuring that a plasmid can be identified that encodes a full-length protein and can be produced at desired levels.

protein expression and optimization
the pdep set of vectors allows for control of protein production in yeast to be under the control of the cup <dig> promoter  or the met <dig> promoter . comparison of protein expression from these two promoters is illustrated in figure
4a. in this instance, the gene encoding the class e vps protein mvb <dig> was cloned into both the pc-depc and pm-depc vectors. for the pc-depc-mvb <dig> plasmid, the addition of cucl <dig>  to the culture media rapidly induces strong production of the gst-mvb <dig> fusion protein at  <dig> kda, right lane mark i in the left panel of figure
4a. in addition, protein expression can be suppressed below the detectable range of the α-gst antibody by the addition of the copper chelating agent bcs to the culture media . low levels of expression is seen from the pc-depc plasmid in media without either cucl <dig> or bcs added, presumably due to residual amounts of cupric ions in the water used . the met <dig> promoter also yields robust and regulated protein expression. protein expression from the met <dig> promoter is induced by growing cells in the absence of methionine and suppressed by the addition of  <dig> μg/ml methionine to the growth media . in general the cup <dig> promoter produced tighter control over protein expression while the met <dig> promoter provided slightly stronger protein expression.

bacterial protein expression from the pdep plasmids is under control of the t <dig> rna polymerase in de <dig> lysogenized cells . robust protein expression was detected when  <dig> mm iptg was added to culture media. however, the method used to transform λde <dig> cells and, to a lesser extent, the specific strain of λde <dig> cells was critical for expression in e. coli. we found that the pdep plasmids could only be reliably transformed into λde <dig> cells if the transformants were grown in media  containing a lower amount of amplicilin . once transformants had grown overnight, the e. coli culture could be grown in media with up to  <dig> μg/ml ampicillin and robustly produced the desired recombinant protein .

several types of λde <dig> bacterial strains were screened for the highest and most consistent level of recombinant protein production from the pc-depc-mvb <dig> plasmid. in general, bacterial strains derived from the λde <dig> lysogenized k- <dig> e.coli strains  produced little or no detectable protein at the predicted molecular weight of  <dig> kda. however, several λde <dig> b strain derivatives including bl <dig>  blr, and turner cells all worked very well, figure
4b, marked by white dots. it was also found that comparable levels of recombinant protein were produced in bacteria when the same construct, gst-mvb <dig>  was contained in an e. coli expression plasmid pgex-3x .

to demonstrate the utility of the pc-depc system, we generated a number of gst-fusion constructs in parallel . several coding sequences for ubiquitin like  proteins of yeast were amplified and recombined in yeast using linearized pc-depc. recombinant plasmids were isolated from yeast and retransformed into yeast and bacteria ). production of gst-ubl proteins were induced with  <dig> μm cucl <dig> in yeast and visualized by immunoblotting with α-gst antibodies. the gst-ubl proteins produced in bacteria upon iptg induction were purified using gsh-agarose resin and analyzed by sds-page and coomassie brilliant blue staining. all of these constructs were made in the same time scale as the workflow described in figure
3a, showing that this system is robust for making several functional constructs in parallel.
5a.

to test the functionality of the pc-depn plasmid, which allows for c-terminal fusion of gst to proteins, several portions of the hua <dig> gene were incorporated, figure
 <dig>  after the pc-depn plasmid was linearized with sacii endonuclease, it recombined pcr amplicons encoding the n-terminal  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> residues of the yeast hua <dig> protein. two yeast colonies from each transformation were grown in cucl <dig> overnight and analyzed for expression of the hua1-gst fusion proteins by immunoblot analysis . plasmids were rescued from yeast and transformed into bl <dig>  cells. recombinant proteins from bacterial cultures induced with iptg were affinity purified over gsh-agarose and analyzed by sds-page and coomassie brilliant blue staining .

discussion
the pdep vectors designed in this study allow for the rapid cloning of genes for expression of recombinant proteins in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems from a single vector. genes of interest are cloned into the pdep vectors in a ligation-independent manner by exploiting the ability of yeast to perform homologous recombination rapidly and efficiently. a gene of interest is targeted for integration into the pdep vectors by the addition of specific homologous sequences, which are designed into the oligos for the gene of interest, by pcr amplification. this cloning procedure has several unique advantages over ligation-dependent subcloning methods. firstly, traditional subcloning is a several step process requiring the gene of interest to be cloned from genomic dna, put into a shuttle vector and subsequently transferred to an expression plasmid. most often restriction enzymes are used and the efficiency of subcloning decreases with the increased size of the insert. each step in this process has the potential for error and failure and requires sequencing to confirm the construct. furthermore, restriction endonucleases used for these procedures may not be compatible with the gene of interest and render it useless for recombinant protein expression. additionally, several plasmids are currently needed in order to express proteins in the two different systems, compounding the time and difficulty of the subcloning task. finally, subcloning methods require the resulting plasmid to be transferred into an expression strain, which can lead to the discovery that the construct either does not produce protein in sufficient quantities or that it is not soluble. many systems have been created  to help overcome these hurdles, yet do not address all of these difficulties.

the pdep vectors offer a cohesive and simple way to solve these problems. cloning into the pdep vectors is a one-step, ligation-independent process, streamlining the procedure greatly. a gene of interest can be directly amplified by pcr from genomic dna using oligos designed with flanking sequences homologous to all of the pdep vectors. this pcr amplicon can then be directly recombined into the target plasmid by transformation into yeast. this bypasses the problem of using restriction enzymes with the gene of interest. homologous recombination is also not hampered by a large sized insert, as gibson et. al. demonstrates the ability of s. cerevisiae to combine  <dig> dna fragments ranging from  <dig> to 31kbp in size
 <cit> . similarly, homologous recombination provides the ability to produce chimeric proteins constructed from multiple coding sequences.

moreover, the host strain for the recombination, yeast, is also able to serve as an expression strain when grown in the proper conditions to induce protein expression. this directly provides a critical readout of the quality and quantity of recombinant protein produced from the plasmid before it is isolated and sequenced. this is not possible with the commercially available systems. lastly, the pdep plasmid can then be transferred into a bacterial expression strain for recombinant protein expression in a prokaryotic system. this eliminates the need for additional subcloning and isolation steps and also the need for the sequencing of multiple constructs. from start to finish, the method takes roughly  <dig> days, including  <dig> hours of hands-on time, which is a significant timesaving over traditional subcloning.

it should be noted that there are commercially available technologies that would be compatible with the pdep vectors. although not tried here, it should be possible to obtain proper pdep clones using ligation-independent cloning in e.coli using the in-fusion enzyme  and similar pcr products used for yeast recombination. however, this method would require the resulting plasmid be transferred to an expression strain, either e. coli or s. cerevisiae.

having a bacterial/yeast expression system for recombinant protein expression offers other advantages beyond rapid vector construction and functional screening. isolating the same protein from both yeast and bacteria allows for a more stringent evaluation of eukaryotic specific post-translational modifications by methods such as mass spectroscopy, sds-page mobility, and others. the same polypeptide could be expressed in the two systems and then the properties directly compared. for example, atg8p is an integral component of the yeast autophagy system and is covalently attached to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylethanolamine  post-translationally. when produced in bacteria, the gst-atg <dig> fusion protein appears at the predicted molecular weight of ~ <dig> kda, figure
5b, left most lane. however, when produced in a eukaryotic system that includes the native conjugation machinery, additional bands are detected in for the gst-atg <dig> fusion protein, figure
5a, left most lane. a similar trend is seen for dsk2p, a known target for ubiquitination, fifth lane in figures
5a and
5b. the original pc-depc vector would not be ideal for investigating all post-translational modifications in this way since the n-terminus is critical for directing proteins into specific cellular locations and is blocked by the gst-fusion tag. however, the pc-depn plasmid allows for insertion of fragments upstream of the gst coding sequence, permitting the expression of either native, untagged protein or c-terminal gst-fusion tags. additionally, pc-depn plasmid would also enable recombination strategies where the entire gst orf could be replaced with other protein fusion tags. furthermore, the pdep vectors could streamline surface mapping studies designed to pin-point domains that mediate protein:protein interaction. using both bacterial and yeast expression systems could help differentiate between direct and indirect interactions.

during the construction of the initial pdep vector, pc-depc, very few of the recombinants screened positive  for the production of gst protein in yeast. this was quite unexpected because there were a considerable number of transformants. however, sequencing of this plasmid showed that a coincidental recombination event had excised the lac operator  site of the t7lac promoter. the lac repressor-binding site had been positioned between the t <dig> promoter and the rbs and was initially included to allow for tighter control of protein production in de <dig> lysogenized e. coli. when we repaired this error by site directed mutagenesis, the plasmid no longer produced gst to any detectable level in yeast . it is not clear why this small,  <dig> bp region between the cup <dig> promoter’s transcriptional start site and the start of the open reading frame would be detrimental for expression in yeast. our ability to screen through several yeast colonies at the initial stages of our study was critical to our ability to identify the rare plasmid variants that ultimately worked. this does explain why most of the initial yeast transformants did not express protein and underscores the advantage the pdep system had in screening for plasmid variants with desired expression characteristics.

another unexpected result in this study was the difficulty of reliably transforming pdep plasmids into bl <dig> cells for bacterial expression. transforming pc-depc plasmid, or the parent yeast expression plasmid prs <dig>  fails to yield ampicillin-resistant cultures using standard transformation conditions . some benefit was observed upon adding 1% glucose to cells during their initial growth in ampicillin media . this was encouraging since it is known that glucose can repress basal levels of t <dig> rna polymerase, which might create growth limiting products  from pc-depc or prs <dig> plasmids, which themselves are high copy plasmids
 <cit> . however, high levels of gst expression are not toxic for bacteria. we also observed transformation problems with yeast expression plasmids that contained no orf downstream of the t <dig> promoter, suggesting that it is not production of the gst fusion proteins per se that were the source of the transformation problem. rather it may be another rna derived from the plasmid. in side by side comparisons, we found the transformation problem to be even worse in bl <dig> star  cells, which contain the rne <dig> mutation that compromises the major enzyme responsible for mrna degradation
 <cit> . efforts to limit t <dig> rna polymerase activity by using bl <dig>  strains with plyss  did not correct this defect. we also made a derivative of pc-dep containing the rop gene, which is known to diminish the copy number of plasmids that have the cole1-related origin of replication . however, while this did reduce plasmid copy number as assessed by yield from plasmid preparation procedures, it did not restore transformation into bl <dig> under standard conditions . the easiest and most reliable remedy was simply to grow the initial cultures of bl <dig>  cells in media  containing  <dig> μg/ml ampicillin after transformation rather than the 50– <dig> μg typically recommended for high copy plasmids . this level of ampicillin is high enough to select for the plasmid and consistently gave bl <dig>  transformants with all of our pdep plasmids.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, a set of plasmids was developed for the expression of proteins in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems and named pdep for dual expression promoter. genes of interest are cloned into the vector in a ligation-independent manner, greatly simplifying and streamlining this procedure. the cloning procedure also allows for protein expression, solubility, and functionality to be screened before the plasmids are isolated and sequenced. furthermore, the pdep vectors were optimized to overcome several unforeseen experimental difficulties. these vectors advance the available tools to researchers working with both e. coli and s. cerevisiae.

