BACKGROUND
mosquito species of the anopheles gambiae complex are the major vectors of the human malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum and pose an enormous burden on human health and economies. every year about  <dig> million people are infected by plasmodium parasites and over a million children die as consequence of malaria infection <cit> . while many insect pests species have long been successfully targeted by population control measures such as insecticides, for others, including a. gambiae, many countries lack the resources and the logistics to successfully implement these measures over prolonged periods of time. alternative vector control strategies that are affordable, easy to implement and sustainable are needed. the search for new solutions has prompted an unprecedented research effort aimed at generating new molecular tools and a better understanding of the biology and genetics of anopheline mosquitoes that resulted in the sequencing of the a. gambiae genome  <cit>  and the development of gene transfer technology for a series of vector species  <cit> . these advances have made it possible to generate genetically manipulated mosquitoes expressing genes that block the transmission of malaria in experimental systems  <cit> . the translation of any such achievements into suitable control measures would require the development of strategies to spread the genetic modification from few laboratory reared insects to large wild type populations, since population replacement strategies based on the massive release of genetically modified mosquitoes carrying a desired trait such as malaria refractoriness are obviously difficult to implement. this represents a major scientific and technical challenge. recently genetic drive systems, based on naturally occurring 'selfish' genetic elements have been proposed to overcome some of these challenges. a number of candidates have been proposed including transposable elements, medea complexes or homing endonuclease genes   <cit> . hegs are highly specific dna endonucleases that promote the movement of their encoding dna from one allele to the other by creating a double-strand break  at a specific, long  target site in the allele that lacks the heg  <cit> . the host cells dsb repair machinery then uses the homologous chromosome containing the heg containing allele as a template for repair, converting what was initially a wild type allele into one that contains the heg, a process called homing. the observation that hegs can be engineered to cleave novel dna sequences  <cit>  offers a multitude of opportunities to utilize these elements for mosquito control. for example, hegs could be used to drive genes that confer parasite refractoriness through a mosquito population. alternatively, hegs designed to target an essential mosquito gene or a gene required for female fertility could be utilized to introduce a genetic load on the population leading to population size reduction or collapse  <cit> . for homing to lead to genetic drive and thus have an effect in the spread of hegs in mosquito populations, homing would have to occur in cells of the germline and only expression of the endonuclease in germline cells prior to meiosis would ensure the availability of the homologous chromosome, and thus the heg allele as a repair template, prior to chromosomal disjunction. expression of a transgene in this pattern requires the availability of suitable regulatory sequences. the regulatory regions of the β2-tubulin gene have been utilized to drive transgene expression during late, predominantly postmeiotic stages of spermatogenesis in anopheles stephensi and gambiae  <cit> . the female germline-specific regulatory elements of the nanos gene have been used to express transgenes in the mosquito vector species aedes aegypti  <cit> . however, a regulatory sequence that would allow sufficiently early pre-meiotic expression in both male and female germlines suitable for a heg strategy is not currently available for anopheles. one of the first genes to be expressed in the germline of drosophila and some other species is vasa, which encodes a protein of the dead-box rna helicase family  <cit> . vasa is essential for embryonic patterning, the assembly of the pole plasm and germ cell function  <cit> . the pole plasm serves essential functions for the formation of the embryonic pole cells, the progenitor cells of the drosophila germline. pole cells form at the posterior pole of the syncytial blastoderm embryo and then migrate into the abdominal region of the embryo, where they are encapsulated by somatic gonadal mesodermal cells to form the embryonic gonads  <cit> . in drosophila, zygotic germline vasa expression starts immediately after gastrulation and continues into oogenesis and spermatogenesis persisting throughout the adult life cycle  <cit> . the regulatory regions of this gene have been used successfully to drive expression of ransgenes in the drosophila germline  <cit>  and could therefore represent an excellent candidate for an early germline-specific regulatory element for anopheles mosquitoes. here we report the identification and the expression pattern of the a. gambiae vasa orthologue using transgenic reporter strains. we show that the activity of this anopheles regulatory region depends on distinct elements and that such activity is suitable not only for the expression of transgenes in both the male and the female germline prior to meiosis, but also allows us to propose a novel inundative genetic control strategy that combines the advantages of genetic drive and dominant sterility.

RESULTS
identification and characterization of the anopheles gambiae vasa orthologue
using the d. melanogaster vasa as a template, agap <dig> was identified as the likely a. gambiae orthologue with an overall amino acid sequence identity of 49%. a likely orthology relationship with vasa was confirmed by a reverse blast of agap <dig> against the d. melanogaster genome. high level sequence conservation was observed in putative rna and atp interacting residues. regions spanning canonical dead-box rna helicase family domains, including all motifs within the two tandemly repeated reca-like domains, were the most conserved . n-terminal sequences, which are unique to vasa and dep1p orthologues showed lower levels of conservation. the rna-interacting residues arginine  <dig> and glutamine  <dig> that distinguish vasa from other drosophila dead box helicases  <cit>  were also present in agap <dig> within their conserved motifs. to establish the expression profile of agap <dig> we performed reverse transcriptase-pcr  on total mrna extracted from dissected adult tissues of wild type a. gambiae . the analysis demonstrated that agap <dig> transcripts could only be found in testes and ovaries. all somatic tissues tested, including the head, thorax and abdomen from male and female mosquitoes, did not show detectable levels of transcript . we therefore concluded that agap <dig> is the a. gambiae vasa-like gene; for simplicity this gene will be referred to as vasa for the remainder of this report. we established the organisation of the anopheles vasa locus by combining available a. gambiae est clusters , rapid amplification of cdna ends  experiments  and in-silico exon prediction. together these data indicated that two alternative vasa transcripts are generated by the alternative utilization of either one of the first two exons both mapping in the 5' untranslated region . both types of transcript were found in all tissues of both sexes that show vasa expression  and the significance of these alternative transcripts is unknown.

generation of transformation constructs vas1gfp and vas2gfp
based on our understanding of the organisation of the vasa locus we generated two reporter constructs pbac{3xp3-rfp}vas1-egfp and pbac{3xp3-rfp}vas2-egfp. vas1gfp and vas2gfp reporters were designed to drive expression of egfp from putative regulatory regions of the a. gambiae vasa gene . approximately  <dig> kb putative regulatory sequence  upstream of the first predicted transcription start site was included in vas1gfp together with exon 1a , in an attempt to minimize the size of the vas1gfp expression cassette all subsequent sequences downstream of exon 1a of the 5'utr leading up to the start codon were omitted. in contrast, vas2gfp was designed to contain a much shorter regulatory sequence  upstream of the transcription initiation site  but included the entire vasa 5'utr starting from exon 1a  and leading up to the start codon . at the 5' end the two constructs therefore shared only  <dig> base pairs upstream of the first transcription start site and exon 1a. for both constructs a sequence of  <dig> kb starting from the vasa stop codon  containing the entire vasa 3' utr was utilized 3' of the egfp stop codon. in addition both constructs contained the 3xp3-rfp cassette as a visual marker and piggybac inverted repeats for transposasemediated integration.

the vas1gfp regulatory regions drive expression in male spermatogenesis
three independent transgenic a. gambiae lines were generated using the vas1gfp construct. in all three transgenic lines the expression of egfp was detectable exclusively in the vicinity of the developing gonads. expression of egfp was only detectable in approximately half of the transgenic larvae, irrespective of the sex of the transgenic parent. when separated and grown to adulthood all gfp positive larvae emerged as males and all gfp negative larvae as females . to examine this phenotype further, rt-pcrs were performed on dissected adult tissues which revealed that egfp transcript from vas1gfp was only detectable in transgenic testes, unlike the endogenous vasa transcript which appeared in both testes and ovaries . exclusive activity of vas1gfp in testes was further verified by western-blotting with anti-egfp antibody , confirming that absence of egfp fluorescence in ovaries results from the absence of transcription from the vas1gfp construct. to confirm this result we generated two anopheles stephensi transgenic lines using the vas1gfp construct . transgenics of this related vector species showed an identical egfp expression pattern indicating that the vas1gfp construct lacked the regulatory sequences required for transcription in female ovaries. the tissue specific expression pattern from vas1gfp was similar to that reported for the a. gambiae testis specific promoter, β2-tubulin  <cit> . we compared egfp fluorescence in developing larval stages and found that unlike the β2-tubulin promoter, in which testes-specific egfp staining is only detectable in late 3rd instar larvae , egfp fluorescence from vas1gfp was detectable in neonatal larvae . confocal analysis of dissected testes from vas1gfp transgenic males revealed a widespread distribution of egfp signal along the longitudinal axis of the organ  ranging from the gonial amplification stages, developing spermatocysts up to individual mature sperm cells. sperm transversing the vas efferens or removed from wt female spermathaeca showed cytoplasmic localization of egfp . when compared to testes from transgenic β2-tubulin egfp reporter lines, the egfp expression in vas1gfp males was, albeit weaker overall, starting slightly closer to the hub of the organ , thus indicating that transcription  from vas1gfp is likely initiated at an earlier stage of spermatogenesis than β2-tubulin. vas1gfp expression was however not detectable in the apical tip of the testes indicating that the included regulatory regions did not direct expression in male germline stem cells  .

vas2gfp drives egfp expression during early male spermatogenesis and female oogenesis
we generated three independent transgenic a. gambiae lines using the vas2gfp construct. in these mosquitoes egfp was detectable in all larvae, regardless of sex, in the vicinity of the developing germline. as in vas1gfp lines, fluorescence was detectable immediately upon hatching in l <dig> larvae and persisted throughout development. we were not able to detect any differences in the morphology of the fluorescent germlines between sexes of early larvae . in l <dig> larvae and pupae, ovaries appeared as rod-like longitudinal structures whereas the testes adopted a more spherical-like shape, allowing robust larval sexing . rt-pcr experiments performed on dissected adult tissues from vas2gfp transformants revealed that egfp transcript was detectable in gonads of both sexes but not in somatic tissues, mirroring the expression pattern of the endogenous vasa gene . in dissected testes from vas2gfp lines, the egfp distribution pattern was detectable in all stages of spermatogenesis including the gscs in the apical tip . dapi staining of the hub region demonstrated that cells in the anterior tip of the testis were expressing egfp thus indicating that the regulatory regions of vas2gfp were active in gscs. below the gscs a ring of cells, presumably the somatic stem cells  surrounding the gscs, did not show any fluorescence, supporting the observation that in testes vasa is only expressed in germline progenitor cells and developing spermatocytes and not in supporting somatic cells. to investigate the activity of the vasa promoter in developing oocytes, ovaries from vas2gfp heterozygous females were fixed and counterstained with dapi for confocal analysis  <dig> and  <dig> hours post-blood-feeding. all oocytes examined exhibited similar levels of green fluorescence indicating that egfp expression was not dependent on the genotype of the oocyte nucleus . fluorescence was distributed around the seven nurse cells of both primary and secondary follicles in a uniform pattern . within the oocyte, a distinct band of egfp fluorescence advancing from the adjacent nurse cells in an anteroposterior direction towards the posterior pole was detectable . germaria were also clearly labelled with egfp, indicating that vas2gfp is active in female gscs. . the central mass of the germarium, containing the germline stem cells and cystoblasts  <cit> , showed ubiquitous distribution of egfp fluorescence, staining both the nuclei and the cytoplasm. egfp was not detectable in the follicular epithelial cells of the germarium or the ovarian follicle . apart from size we found no obvious difference in the expression pattern of ovarian follicles developing at  <dig> hour and  <dig> hour after blood feeding . on the basis of these findings we concluded that sequences present in the vas2gfp construct but absent from vas1gfp are required for the expression of vasa in the female and early male germline cells including the gscs.

maternal deposition of egfp in vas2gfp embryos
in drosophila, vasa protein and mrna are deposited into developing oocytes as maternal derived factors  <cit> . we observed that  <dig> hours post-blood-feeding, developing oocytes of vas2gfp transformant female mosquitoes contained ubiquitous distribution of egfp signal . to investigate maternal deposition of the egfp transgene by our vasa regulatory sequence, we mated vas2gfp transgenic females to wild type males and, as a control, vas2gfp transgenic males to wild type females. maternal deposition of egfp from vas2gfp heterozygous females was readily detectable in uniformly fluorescent embryos and neonatal hatchlings but not in control embryos or hatchlings, where the transgene was transmitted from transgenic fathers . the phenotype of nearly all larvae from heterozygous vas2gfp maternal crosses was egfp positive , whilst the transgene, detected by the 3xp3-rfp marker, segregated to the expected 50% of the progeny. in progeny originating from crosses of vas2gfp transgenic males to wild type females the egfp phenotype  was linked to the expression of the rfp marker . we extracted total mrna from embryos at several time points after oviposition and performed rt-pcrs to specifically amplify both the endogenous vasa and engineered egfp transcript. similarly to what was observed for vasa, the egfp transcript could be detected up to  <dig> hours after oviposition  thus showing that this promoter directs the transfer of both protein and mrna from transgenic follicles to offspring of the next generation.

impact of maternal deposition on a heg-based invasive control strategy
based on the properties of the vas2gfp construct we set out to investigate how the expression characteristics of the a. gambiae vasa regulatory region would affect its performance in potential vector control strategies. in particular, we were interested to determine how maternal deposition would affect the effectiveness of heg-based control methods that aim to reduce mosquito population numbers by imposing a genetic load. previous models have considered a heg designed to target a somatically expressed gene essential for female viability or fertility, whose knockout is recessive but has no effect on male fitness  <cit> . the models predicted that if such a heg is released at low frequencies into a population it would invade and reach an equilibrium frequency. the maximum equilibrium frequency achievable would depend upon the efficiency of target cleavage and the relative frequencies of homologous repair  and non-homologous repair   <cit> . in our model, by virtue of maternal deposition, the homing endonuclease is also active against the zygotic genome of embryos originating from females carrying the heg allele. homozygous mutant offspring, inviable or sterile in the case of females, can thus arise by inactivation of the target genes via hr or nhr in embryos even if the paternally derived allele is originally wild-type. since maternal deposition of the homing endonuclease can reduce the reproductive fitness of heterozygote females, because their daughters are inviable or sterile, the heg will not necessarily spread from rare, but instead will only invade the population if the rate of repair by homologous recombination is above a threshold value in reference to a particular rate of cleavage . moreover, the equilibrium frequency of a heg that is maternally deposited will significantly depend on the outcome of heg-induced cleavage in the embryo. heg equilibrium frequencies remain unaffected, when the relative rate of hr in embryos mirrors that of the germline , but when all cut sites in embryos are repaired by nhr  then the equilibrium frequency is lowered . the genetic load imposed by a maternally deposited heg can be higher, due to the extra lethality or sterility. reduced population fitness can therefore be achieved, although this would require hr in embryos .

modelling of a novel non-invasive control strategy based on vasa-driven heg expression
we also modelled an alternative non-invasive vector control strategy, based on the observation that the vas2gfp regulatory regions could drive expression in the earliest developmental stages of both male and female germlines. if a heg was designed to target a germline-specific gene expressed in ovaries downstream of vasa which is required for female fertility, then vasa driven heg expression in heterozygote females and cleavage of the target gene would lead to sterilization of those same females. in this approach the heg would drive in the male germline without affecting male fitness and cause dominant sterility in heterozygote females . unless homing rates are very low, maternal deposition has little effect in this strategy as heterozygote females are sterile, and the minimal contribution it provides to female sterilization becomes evident only in later generations. we modelled this approach and compared it to classical inundative strategies like sit or ridl   <cit> . in the simplest case of males and females having equal rates of cleavage and repair, such a heg cannot invade a population from low frequencies. measured in terms of the number of sterile females produced per male released, such a heg-based approach can be several-fold more effective than sterile insect technique  or release of insects carrying a dominant lethal , depending upon the rates of cleavage and hr .

discussion
both sequence homology and analysis of the expression profile indicate that agap <dig> is the anopheles gambiae orthologue of the drosophila vasa gene. transgenic reporter strains utilizing different sequences upstream of the vasa gene provided information about the regulatory regions required to mirror the endogenous vasa transcription pattern. we have demonstrated that this region can be utilized to drive transgene expression in the mosquito germlines. interestingly, we observed expression to be restricted to the late spermatogenic stages of the male germline with one of the two constructs generated  that only contains exon 1a of the 5'utr and upstream sequences. the second construct, , that contains the entire 5'utr and only  <dig> bp of upstream sequence directed egfp germline expression throughout development including expression in the gscs of both sexes. this indicates that regulatory elements essential for female germline expression are located within the 5' utr of the a. gambiae vasa locus. our data also suggest that elements important for expression in the early gscs of both sexes map to this region. regulatory elements important for female and early germline expression could function cooperatively or independently of each other. for example, expression in later stages of the female germline, may depend on expression in previous developmental stages although in males lack of expression in the gscs of vas1gfp testes does not abolish egfp expression later on during spermatogenesis.

we have observed uniform egfp distribution in ovarian nurse cells and in freshly laid embryos as a result of maternal deposition from transgenic vas2gfp females. the localization pattern does not match the expected distribution of endogenous vasa, as inferred from experiments in drosophila. in this species vasa protein localizes to the posterior end of the embryo, which will later develop into the pole plasm, whereas in the ovarian nurse cells it is found exclusively in the perinuclear region  <cit> . this localization to the posterior pole of the embryos requires a putative protein localisation motif of the vasa n-terminus, which is absent from our egfp reporter, but which has been shown to be essential for localization of a gfp fusion protein to the pole plasm of drosophila embryos  <cit> . such an amino acid sequence, if identified within the anopheles vasa coding sequence could be used to specify transgene localization to the pole plasm although such localisation may interfere with transgene function.

in general, it is likely that strong expression in the female germline  is tightly associated with embryonic maternal deposition. as gene drive systems may depend on regulatory elements that direct expression of effector molecules in female germ cells we modelled the effect of maternal deposition on the outcome of a heg based strategy  <cit> . we found that fixation of hegs that are active in both male and female germlines can occur in the target population even when hegs are maternally deposited, regardless of whether this leads to homing or induces mutation of target genes in the embryo. however, the mean frequency of heg alleles within the population at the time of fixation can be moderately reduced by maternal deposition if no homing occurs in embryos. if homing does occur in embryos our models suggest that the frequency of mean population fitness, i.e. the fraction of females in the population whose reproductive potential remains unaffected, reaches a lower level as opposed to strategies without maternal deposition. previously described heg-based driving constructs are predicted to invade a population even at low rates of homing  <cit> , but with maternal deposition of homing endonucleases a minimum threshold of homing is required for such constructs to be invasive, i.e. be able to increase in frequency in successive generations. apart from influencing heg-based gene drive systems, the observation that vas2gfp is able to deposit the products of transgenes into embryos may allow the construction of maternal-effect selfish genetic elements for anopheles control  <cit> .

non-invasive control strategies like the sterile insect technique  or release of insects carrying dominant lethal  depend on the ability of released males to negatively affect the reproduction of the females they mate with. however, to achieve a substantial impact on the size of the target population these strategies rely on continuous large-scale releases because dominantly lethal genes or sterile males quickly disappear from the population. to substantially increase the efficiency of such strategies suggestions have been made to link the advantages of genetic drive with dominant sterility or lethality  <cit> . here, we propose a mechanism for such a system: if a heg was engineered to target a female fertility gene that exerts its function only in the female germline cells at a time point after initiation of transcription of the vasa promoter, expression of the heg from the vas2gfp regulatory regions would lead to dominant sterilization of females expressing the heg. we used simple computational modelling to compare this approach to classic inundative control strategies. as the heg will dominantly sterilize females but will spread in males it's persistence in the population is dramatically increased. our models suggest that this approach remains non-invasive even at high homing rates and that the heg will ultimately disappear. however, the effect on population reproduction, as measured by the amount of sterile females produced per released male, is predicted to be several fold higher than the effect of sit or ridl, depending on the rate of homing achieved. while the expression profile of the vas2gfp regulatory region is well suited for the use in such a strategy, other early promoter elements may be equally utilized for this approach once available.

the vas2gfp driven gfp transgene is an excellent germline marker for mosquitoes and allows expression in the germ line stem cells of both sexes. expression in gonads can be observed throughout development from early larval stages to the reproductive tissues of adult mosquitoes. in addition to providing the opportunity of studying basic biological questions this expression pattern and the strong intensity of fluorescence make the vas2gfp lines a suitable reporter system to identify compounds interfering with gonad development. using a combination of high throughput fluorescent sorting of larvae and a combinatorial library it could therefore be used to screen for active substances e.g. inducing chemical sterilization. the injection of dsrna species into embryos or adults would also allow studying other genetic aspects of gonad development.

CONCLUSIONS
in recent years, several genetic control strategies have been proposed as methods for reducing the transmission of mosquito-borne diseases. these often rely on the ability of the control trait to increase in frequency once released, a feature that is inherently determined by its function in the mosquito germlines. our results show that the regulatory regions of the an. gambiae vasa gene are suitable for driving transgenes in the early germlines of both sexes and for depositing their products in embryos of transgenic females. we developed computational models to assess whether an invasive heg-based gene drive system can function in the presence of maternal deposition when driven by the vasa regulatory elements and describe a novel non-invasive control strategy that couples female sterilisation with transmission ratio distortion through males.

