BACKGROUND
in the natural environment, microorganisms do not exist in stable and optimal growth conditions. instead, microbial populations are often challenged by harmful external factors. the formation of complex multicellular communities, such as biofilms or colonies, provides an advantage for survival in the wild due to the cooperative behavior of cells and the establishment of common protective mechanisms  <cit> . moreover, the adaptive responses of individual cells and their phenotypic heterogeneity, factors that enable efficient adaptation to a rapidly changing environment, are also important characteristics that allow populations to thrive in natural settings. phenotypic switching is a mechanism by which phenotypic heterogeneity is achieved. this process generates cell phenotypes that are better adapted to a particular environment, thereby allowing a population to react flexibly to environmental changes  <cit> . in yeast, phenotypic switching generates a diverse array of changes, leading to the emergence of colonies with altered morphologies  <cit> . the appearance of different colonies occurs more frequently than somatic mutations. although relatively stable during subsequent passages, the switched variants retain the ability to revert to their original phenotype  <cit> .

phenotypic switching is a phenomenon that is commonly observed in pathogenic yeasts  <cit> . switching occurs at infection sites to generate phenotypes that effectively evade the host immune response  <cit> . the new phenotypes also exhibit features that contribute to increased virulence  <cit> . a phenotypic switch is defined as a random event that is not necessarily induced by external factors; however, environmental conditions can affect the frequency and direction of the switch. for example, certain strains of candida albicans undergo a transition from a “white” to “opaque” colony phenotype and vice versa. exposure to temperatures above 30°c increases the frequency of switching to the “white” phenotype  <cit> . thus, white cells predominate in the blood stream at a physiological temperature of 37°c, whereas “opaque” cells more efficiently colonize the skin surface, an environment with a lower temperature  <cit> . furthermore, anaerobic conditions and other environmental factors also mediate the transition to the “opaque” phenotype  <cit> . thus, switching provides a mechanism of adaptation to certain niches and to a variety of physiological conditions.

wild saccharomyces cerevisiae strains isolated from their natural habitat also exhibit phenotypic heterogeneity and the ability to switch between two or more different colony phenotypes  <cit> . during laboratory cultivation on rich media, the switch is usually oriented toward the formation of less-structured colonies that differ in many features from their structured counterparts  <cit> . such a switch, that we term “domestication”  <cit>  results in the formation of strains that are stable during subsequent passages on agar media and that form smooth colonies similar to those formed by standard s. cerevisiae laboratory strains  <cit> . the formation of a domesticated derivative, br-s, of the wild s. cerevisiae br-f strain on a non-fermentable medium occurs efficiently with an average frequency of approximately 2-3%  <cit> . this frequency suggests that switching is caused by a regulated event rather than by random mutations. during cultivation of a br-s strain under adverse conditions, we demonstrate the occurrence of reverse phenotypic changes that lead to the re-appearance of cell clones that form more structured colonies. we termed these strains “feral” strains. by comparing the transcriptomes of the original wild br-f strain, its domesticated br-s derivative and the feral br-rf strain , we determine the genome-wide expression alterations involved in phenotypic changes. in addition, we specify the factors involved in the formation of structured biofilm colonies. finally, we show that at least some individual strain properties are under the control of epigenetic mechanisms and that recombination and genome rearrangements occur during phenotypic switching.

RESULTS
feral subclones derived from a br-s strain under stress conditions form structured colonies
to induce the conversion of a br-s strain to a strain with a wild-type phenotype, the opposite process of domestication, we set up various stressful and long-term starvation conditions. we incubated the br-s strain statically  for several months in various media with a limited carbon source. during incubation in mm medium with 2% ethanol, the number of colony-forming units  in the suspension was monitored. in parallel, the morphology  of the arising microcolonies was determined on gma plates . after inoculation, the static cell culture grew slowly until approximately the 60th day, as indicated by the slowly increasing number of cfu. from approximately the 75th day, the number of cfu started to decrease, suggesting a gradual dying of part of the population . during this period, the number of cells forming smooth colonies decreased to a rate of about  <dig> ×  <dig> cells per ml of culture per day. colonies with a structured morphology started to appear rarely among the smooth colonies on the 28th day or later. the frequency of their appearance reached approximately 0-7% of the cfu . interestingly, between days  <dig> and  <dig>  the number of cells forming structured colonies increased to a rate of up to  <dig> to  <dig> cells per ml of the culture per day in parallel cultures. thus, at later stages of static cultivation , the proportion of structured colonies increased to as high as 26% . in some static cultivations the cells forming structured colonies reached as high as 40% of all cfu . structured colonies also emerged in static cultivations with mm medium that contained lower or higher ethanol concentrations. in addition, colonies appeared in cultivations without any carbon source, in which ethanol was replaced with nano <dig>  when ethanol was replaced with fructose, structured colonies only appeared when the starting fructose concentration was  <dig> % or lower; with a fructose concentration of  <dig> - 2%, no structured colonies were observed in cultivations lasting more than 200 days.

the morphology of the emerging structured colonies was not uniform, varying from moderately structured to a fully structured colony phenotype. we classified the emerging colonies into four typical colony phenotype categories . most of the isolated subclones were unstable; after re-plating, these colonies domesticated at a high frequency, thus preventing a more detailed characterization. the most stable subclones formed colonies of the ivth category, phenotypically resembling biofilm colonies of the original wild br-f strain. one of these subclones, designated br-rf, was used for further analyses.

the br-rf strain domesticates more efficiently than the original wild br-f strain
with the aim of monitoring the stability of the br-rf strain, we compared the frequency of its domestication on fermentative and respiratory media  with that of the br-f strain . in br-f colonies, the percentage of domesticated subclones ranged from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  when grown on respiratory medium and from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  when grown on fermentable medium . in individual br-f colonies, the frequency of domesticated subclones varied from 0% to 15% on respiratory and from 0% to 24% on fermentable medium . in br-rf colonies grown on respiratory gma, domesticated subclones appeared with an average frequency of 2%  to 21% , with variation in individual colonies from 0% to 37%. similar to br-f domestication, the frequency of br-rf domestication was even higher when the br-rf colonies were grown on fermentable yega; domestication varied from 10%  to 26% , with variation in individual colonies from 2% to 53% .

morphology and physiology of colonies formed by the br-rf strain
the morphology of colonies  formed by the br-rf strain was identical to that of colonies formed by the original br-f strain . two-photon excitation confocal microscopy  confirmed that the br-rf colony was composed of an aerial part and of subsurface roots attaching the colony to the substrate. this composition is similar to the organization of the br-f colony  <cit> . the colonies of both strains contained internal cell-free cavities . in contrast to br-f colonies  <cit> , br-rf colonies were formed exclusively of oval cells, including the subsurface parts where chains of oval cells invaded the agar  instead of the pseudohyphae that are typical of br-f colonies. thus, although the br-rf strain gained the ability to form fully structured colonies, it did not revert its cell morphology and retained the oval cells typical of the br-s strain .

although they formed similarly structured colonies, br-f and br-rf strains may have differed in other physiological parameters. we therefore analyzed br-rf colonies grown on gma for prominent characteristics previously found to be different between colonies formed by the br-f and br-s strains  <cit> . the analysis revealed that in some aspects, br-rf colonies behaved as an “intermediate” between br-f and br-s colonies. this intermediate behavior was mostly related to wet biomass accrual  and colony size , while the water content  of br-rf colonies was almost identical to br-f colonies .

another typical feature of br-f colonies was the presence of high-molecular-weight glycosylated protein , a possible constituent of the extracellular matrix . the production of hmwgp was switched off in br-s colonies  <cit> . br-rf colonies restored production of this protein, but at a lower level than in br-f colonies. in addition, sds-page showed that the mobility of this protein was shifted to lower mw. this observation suggested that the molecule was shortened or underwent less glycosylation . the presence of hmwgp  and a high content of water, possibly trapped by ecm  <cit>  implied that br-rf colonies restored ecm production. to demonstrate presence of ecm we prepared a br-rf-pgal1-gfp strain to monitor the ecm in the developing colony by 2p-cm, as previously described  <cit> . as in br-f colonies  <cit> , internal br-rf colony regions were also protected via a low-permeable ecm .

the production of the adhesin flo11p is indispensable for the formation of structured colonies  <cit> , and flo11p production is switched off during wild strain domestication  <cit> . both flo <dig> gene expression  and flo11p protein production  are recovered in the br-rf strain. interestingly, the flo <dig> mrna of the br-rf strain is longer than that of the br-f strain .

genome-wide expression differences between br-f, br-rf and br-s colonies
to obtain an overall view of the transcription characteristics typical of the biofilm colony phenotype, we isolated total rna from 4-day-old and 7-day-old colonies formed by the br-f, br-s and br-rf strains. we then compared the transcriptomes of the br-rf versus br-f strain, the br-rf versus br-s strain and the br-f versus br-s strain using a microarray . mutual comparison of the transcribed genes enabled the identification of genes specifically activated or repressed in complex structured biofilm colonies  compared to smooth colonies  . however, the expression differences related to the structured biofilm colony phenotype were only a subset of the expression differences observed between the strains. other extensive differences unrelated to the colony phenotype were observed between br-rf and br-f colonies, as well as between br-rf and br-s colonies. some of these differences are summarized in figure  <dig> and discussed below. this finding supports the data described above indicating that some properties of br-rf colonies differ from colonies formed by both br-f and br-s.

,
genes only expressed differently on the 4th day are in standard letters, genes differently expressed on both the 4th and 7th day are in bold, and genes only expressed differently on the 7th day are italicized.

*genes are listed in the additional file 1: table s <dig> and discussed in the text.

expression characteristics of complex biofilm colonies
comparison of the structured biofilm colony versus the smooth colony transcriptomes revealed  <dig> and  <dig> genes with significantly higher expression in 4- and 7-day-old structured colonies, respectively. in smooth colonies, the expression levels of  <dig> and  <dig> genes were increased in 4- and 7-day-old colonies, respectively .

the structured biofilm colonies up-regulated genes involved in protein secretion and modification. some of these genes, such as mnn <dig>  cwh <dig>  bst <dig> and per <dig>  influence the structure and the composition of the cell wall and/or the membrane. in addition, the structured colonies highly up-regulated genes for cell wall proteins such as bsc <dig>  which is similar to the flo <dig>  and asp <dig> genes. on the other hand, the structured colonies down-regulated the expression of other cell wall-related genes such as sps <dig> and cts <dig> as well as genes related to secretion and protein modification. these data indicate that structured and smooth colonies differ in the carbohydrate and protein composition of their cell wall .

the structured and smooth colonies also differed in their expression of metabolic genes and nutrient transporters. the structured colonies up-regulated amino acid metabolism genes and transporter genes, including genes involved in arginine and methionine metabolism. the structured colonies also expressed genes involved in phospholipid biosynthesis and fatty acid β-oxidation, and they expressed the inositol transporter gene itr <dig>  in contrast, the few amino acid metabolism genes that were up-regulated in the smooth colonies were for the mitochondrial glycine decarboxylase complex. the smooth colonies also up-regulated a number of nucleotide metabolism genes, genes involved in copper and iron resistance and homeostasis and several genes related to lipid metabolism. these included genes involved in ergosterol, sphingolipid and ceramide metabolism . the transporter genes included those for the transport of hexoses and phosphate  .

in addition, the smooth colonies up-regulated a large group of genes related to the stress response , including genes for various chaperones, genes involved in cell wall stress response/maintenance and certain genes involved in the oxidative stress response. the few stress response genes induced in structured colonies included oxidative stress response genes  and genes involved in dna damage response and repair  .

the cells of structured and smooth colonies also differed in their expression of a remarkable number of genes involved in signaling cascades , transcription regulators  and genes involved in translation and rna processing . the transcription factor genes up-regulated in the structured colonies included tec <dig> and sfg <dig>  which are involved in yeast filamentation and pseudohyphal growth. in contrast, the smooth colonies up-regulated rlm <dig>  yfl052w and usv <dig>  which are related to cell wall integrity. they also up-regulated several genes related to chromatin structure and remodeling  .

in addition, the structured colonies predominantly expressed genes for transposons and a large group of genes with unknown function, some of which were localized to the subtelomeric regions .

br-rf colonies up-regulated expression of genes located at specific positions in chromosomes
br-rf colonies increased the expression of  <dig> genes and  <dig> genes in 4- and 7-day-old colonies, respectively, compared with br-f colonies. br-rf colonies reduced the expression of  <dig> genes and  <dig> genes in the 4- and 7-day-old colonies, respectively, compared to br-f colonies. for the comparison between the br-rf and br-s strains, br-rf colonies increased the expression of  <dig> genes and  <dig> genes in 4- and 7-day-old colonies, respectively, compared to br-s colonies . br-rf colonies repressed  <dig> and  <dig> genes in 4- and 7-day-old colonies, respectively, compared to br-s colonies. in addition, a relatively large number of genes were up-regulated  and down-regulated  in br-rf colonies when compared with both br-f and br-s colonies .

“positional gene enrichment” analysis revealed that many gene expression differences between the br-rf strain and either the br-f or br-s strain  involved the expression of genes localized to specific chromosomal regions  rather than genes randomly distributed in the genome. most prominently, a high number of genes up-regulated in 4-day old colonies of br-rf strain were localized to a 300-kbp region of the left arm of chromosome xv. this region included 33% of all activated genes in the br-rf versus br-s strain, 32% of all activated genes in the br-rf versus br-f strain and 60% of all activated genes in the br-rf versus both br-s and br-f strains. smaller groups of genes up-regulated in the br-rf strain versus either the br-s or br-f strains were localized to a 320-kbp region of chromosome ix , and a group of br-rf strain genes that were down-regulated compared to the br-f and br-s strains was localized to a 240-kbp region of chromosome xii . in contrast, neither the gene expression differences between the br-f and br-s strains, nor the genes expressed specifically in structured biofilm colonies  were localized to specific chromosomal regions .

as the higher level of gene expression related to distinct chromosomal areas could be caused by dna duplications, we measured the copy numbers of  <dig> genes located in the left arm of chromosome xv , relative to those of  <dig> genes located in the right arm of the same chromosome using real time qpcr. the results  showed significant differences between gene copy numbers in the left and right arms of chromosome xv in br-rf indicating partial genome duplications.

br-f colonies up-regulate expression of genes located in hast domains, which affect br-f stress resistance
analysis of the differently expressed genes revealed that some are localized near telomeres. it has been hypothesized that transitions between different phenotypes are controlled by transcriptional silencing via specific chromatin-remodeling enzymes  <cit> . thus, we compared the genes that were expressed differently in the br-f, br-s and br-rf colonies with the list of genes expressed differently in a mutant containing a deletion of sir <dig> <cit> , the gene encoding histone deacetylase. histone deacetylase sir2p has been shown to affect transcription at specific chromosomal locations near telomeres  <cit> . this analysis revealed a correlation between the genes down-regulated in the sir2Δ strain and the genes typically expressed in colonies with a biofilm phenotype . however, neither the structured colony morphology nor the domestication rate of the br-f-sir <dig> strain  was changed when compared with the br-f strain . this result implies that the function of sir2p is not important for the formation of structured colony morphology.

next, we compared our set of genes with a database of genes specified to be under the control of another deacetylase, hda1p. hda1p was shown to cause transcriptional repression in specifically localized subtelomeric chromosomal regions  <cit> . this analysis revealed a correlation between the genes localized to hast domains, i.e., regions controlled by hda1p histone deacetylase  <cit> , and the genes up-regulated in br-f colonies. in particular, 18% of the genes up-regulated in br-f versus br-s colonies, 19% of genes up-regulated in br-f versus br-rf colonies and 32% of genes up-regulated in br-f versus both br-rf and br-s 4-day-old colonies were localized to these domains. in contrast, upregulation of hast domain genes in br-s and br-rf colonies versus br-f colonies was less than 6%. thus, the upregulation of these genes in br-f colonies indicated decreased activity of hda1p compared to br-s and br-rf colonies.

genes in the hast domains that were specifically up-regulated in the br-f strain  included genes encoding various glucosidases , proteins with mostly unknown function and predicted localization to the cell wall  and various transporters . these data indicated that the cells in the br-f colonies could have specific cell wall and plasma membrane properties compared to the br-s and br-rf colonies; however, these properties seemed unrelated to the structured biofilm colony phenotype. to test this prediction, we prepared the strain br-s-hda <dig>  with both alleles of the hda <dig> gene deleted, which should de-repress hast domain genes. we then analyzed the morphology of colonies of this strain and the resistance to various stresses compared with the br-f, br-rf and br-s strains . the br-s-hda <dig> strain formed smooth colonies similar in morphology but slightly larger than colonies of the br-s strain of the same age . similarly to the br-f strain, the br-s-hda <dig> strain was significantly more resistant to the chitin binding dye calcofluor white, and it grew better at a higher temperature  than either the br-s or the br-rf strain. thus, deletion of the hda <dig> gene in the br-s strain increased its calcofluor white and temperature resistance to the same level as the br-f strain, but it did not change the smooth colony morphology.

discussion
wild s. cerevisiae strains are able to effectively domesticate when transferred to favorable laboratory conditions  <cit> . here, we show that the br-s strain can switch back to a wild-type-like phenotype and start to form structured biofilm colonies following long-term exposure to starvation and stress conditions. in contrast to the original br-f strain, which forms structured colonies with a uniform morphology, our isolated feral br-s subclones form colonies with different phenotypes. thus, the increased phenotypic variability of the feral br-s subclones seems to be induced by environmental stress and starvation. these data agree with previous findings that non-isogenic s. cerevisiae strains isolated from various habitats can form differently structured colonies  <cit> , similarly to pathogenic fungi  <cit> .

the first feral subclones of the br-s strain appear after approximately 30 days of slow growth in static cultures with limited nutrients. later, the proportion of subclones increases up to 26% of the viable cells in some of the parallel cultivations. at least between days  <dig> and  <dig>  such an increase could be caused by an increased rate of phenotypic switching as well as by the preferential dying of smooth cells during the “loss of viability” phase of the population growth curve . the number of feral cells starts to decrease from day  <dig>  i.e. 40 days later that in the case of domesticated cells. these findings suggest that feral subclones gain the ability to better survive starvation than domesticated cells. higher concentrations of a better carbon source  block the emergence of subclones forming structured colonies, thus indicating the importance of nutrient restriction for the evolution of feral subclones. similarly, various stress factors promote phenotypic switching of c. albicans, resulting in the production of cell variants that are more resistant to stresses  <cit> . exposure of c. neoformans cells to various host defense mechanisms in vivo also leads to phenotypic modulation of an originally homogeneous population and to the subsequent prevalence of variants that are more resistant to the host immune response  <cit> .

a br-rf strain forms structured colonies with a morphology that is visually identical to that of the colonies formed by the original wild br-f strain. the br-rf strain, however, differs in several aspects from the br-f strain. first, the br-rf strain domesticates  <dig> times more effectively on fermentable media and  <dig> times more effectively on respiratory media than the br-f strain. this finding suggests that the several months of starvation are sufficient to induce the formation of feral subclones but are not sufficient to make the feral subclones as stable as the original br-f strain, which evolved over a much longer time in a natural setting. this finding also agrees with the results from some feral subclones that emerged during static cultivation ; these subclones form less structured colony phenotypes that are even more unstable and quickly revert back to the domesticated phenotype. the data also demonstrate that the presence of a good fermentable carbon source such as glucose efficiently promotes the domestication of both strains  and prevents the switch to a structured phenotype as indicated above.

second, the colonies of the br-rf strain differ from the colonies of both the br-f and br-s strains in certain physiological parameters, behaving as an “intermediate” between the br-f and br-s colonies . similarly to the br-s strain, the br-rf strain also forms oval cells and is not able to form the elongated cells and pseudohyphae that are typical of the br-f strain. this finding supports the idea that the particular cell morphology is a dispensable factor in the formation of biofilm colony architecture  <cit> .

on the other hand, both the formation of the ecm and the production of flo11p adhesin, the traits important for the formation of structured colony morphology  <cit> , recover in br-rf colonies. the length of the flo <dig> transcript, however, differs from the original br-f and the feral br-rf strains. recombination of the central repeat domain of the yeast adhesin genes is frequently observed  <cit> , which often leads to the generation of a protein with different and/or enhanced adhesive function  <cit> . the change in the flo <dig> gene of the br-f strain most likely occurs during the domestication process; the flo <dig> transcript, although present at very low levels in br-s colonies, is the same size in both the br-s and br-rf strains. thus, it seems that rather than actual gene size and potentially protein size, the flo11p expression level is important in the context of structured colony formation. the altered flo <dig> transcript length also indicates that dna recombination may occur frequently during phenotypic transitions of the br-f strain. this conclusion is further supported by the observed differences in the mw of the hmwgp protein component of the ecm , which could be caused by different posttranslational modifications or by changes in gene structure. in summary, these data show that the br-rf strain, which was selected under the conditions of long-term nutrient deprivation and stress, develops some properties similar to the br-f strain  but also maintains some properties of the br-s strain .

genome-wide transcriptome analysis allows us to determine the typical gene expression profile for a structured colony phenotype compared with the smooth phenotype. structured biofilm colonies  both up-regulate and down-regulate distinct genes involved in cell wall remodeling as well as genes involved in the delivery and modification of secreted and cell wall/membrane-attached proteins. this finding indicates that, in addition to flo11p adhesin, the carbohydrate composition of the cell wall, the appearance of specific surface proteins and protein glycosylation may affect specific properties of the cells  and contribute to the formation of a biofilm colony. ty transposon genes and several unknown genes that are expressed in biofilm colonies are located in subtelomeric regions. this suggests that transcription of genomic regions that are influenced by chromatin structure  <cit>  differs in biofilm colonies compared to smooth colonies. in support, smooth colonies up-regulate the expression of a group of genes involved in histone modification and chromatin remodeling .

there is further evidence of the importance of chromatin remodeling in the diversification of properties of phenotypic variants derived from the br-f strain. br-f colonies  express genes located in hast domains, i.e., regions in the genome whose expression is modulated by histone deacetylase hda1p  <cit> . deletion of the hda <dig> gene  significantly increases the resistance of br-s cells to both calcofluor white and high temperature, thereby reaching the level of resistance of the br-f strain. calcofluor white interferes with cell wall assembly  <cit> , and strains with mutations that affect the cell wall composition are more sensitive to calcofluor white  <cit> . thus, the resistance of the br-f strain could be caused by expression of hast domain genes encoding various cell wall and plasma membrane-related proteins. in support of persistent repression of hast domain genes in br-rf colonies, cells from br-rf colonies behave similarly to br-s cells. on the other hand, de-repression of hast domain genes in br-s-hda <dig> colonies does not affect the smooth morphology of these colonies, indicating that hast domain genes expressed in the br-f strain are unrelated to the biofilm colony phenotype. however, other studies demonstrate the role of specific deacetylases, including hda1p, in controlling the phenotypic transition of the “white-opaque” c. albicans colony  <cit> . hence, epigenetic mechanisms mediated by chromatin remodeling enzymes have the capacity to regulate phenotypic heterogeneity.

in addition to the expression characteristics specific to structured biofilm colonies, gene expression specific to br-rf colonies is related to three regions of the br-rf genome. this finding indicates that some chromosome rearrangements occur during br-rf strain formation; these could result in the duplication of certain parts of chromosomes or in chromosomal rearrangement relocating the regions to more actively transcribed locations of the genome. real time qpcr comparison of relative copy number of three genes located in the left arm of chromosome xv that upregulate expression in br-rf  with that of three genes located in the right arm of the same chromosome , indicates large duplications in the genome . this finding also agrees with previous observations that diverse conditions can evoke aneuploidy in yeast, which can directly impact gene expression, as detected at both the transcriptional and proteomic levels  <cit> , and can also modulate the switch between different colony phenotypes  <cit> . however, the observed chromosome site-specific expression characteristics of the br-rf strain are unrelated to the structured colony phenotype, as only a few biofilm colony-specific genes are localized to these chromosomal regions. dna rearrangement events leading to karyotypic instability are also observed during phenotypic transitions of certain c. albicans <cit>  and c. neoformans strains  <cit> . these previously observed changes are not correlated with phenotypic variability and are irreversible. thus, it seems that dna rearrangements resulting in particular gene expression changes are not the cause of the br-f/br-s/br-rf phenotypic switch, which is in contrast to recent findings in other wild strains  <cit> . instead, these rearrangements in the br-rf strain could be a side-product of the increased rate of recombination events that occur during the phenotype transitions.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe the phenotypic, genomic and gene expression differences among three s. cerevisiae strains  that emerged by phenotypic switching under diverse environmental conditions. these strains form colonies with varying complexity and gain diverse features including altered resistance to stress. we show that the wide variability of natural s. cerevisiae strains can be further potentiated under stressful environmental conditions. we identify genes specifically expressed in the structured colony phenotype, such as genes that specifically affect the composition of cell surface structures; these genes provide clues as to the specific processes involved in the formation of structured colony architecture. we also document a role of hda1p histone deacetylase in strain resistance to stress. in addition, our data indicate that genomic rearrangement occur in the feral strain that are unrelated to the phenotypic switch. these changes contribute to expression characteristics of the feral strain that are distinct from both its ancestors, the wild and domesticated strains.

in summary, our findings show that extensive phenotypic modulation occurs in wild s. cerevisiae strains. phenotypic switching can be controlled by various mechanisms and enables flexible adaptation of these strains to a particular environment in the wild. the comparison of the three originally isogenic strains br-f, br-s and br-rf revealed many significant gene expression and phenotypic differences, but only a few of them seem to be related to the formation of structured biofilm colonies. in addition, the differences observed between br-f and br-rf showed that reverted structured colony morphology does not necessarily mean reversion of other strain properties. in other words, strains with different properties such as br-f and br-rf can form structured colonies. thus, an important question remains as to whether there is a single dominant mechanism that forces yeast strains to form structured colonies independently of other properties or, more probably, a variety of mechanisms that support the formation of structured colony morphology.

