BACKGROUND
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  has become the preferred method for studying low-abundant mrna expression  <cit> . the high sensitivity and specificity of rt-pcr makes it a particularly useful and powerful technique for monitoring the mrna expression of pathogen genes during host infection, where the pathogen's expression profile is often masked by the much higher concentration of host rna. however, the study of pathogen gene expression inside infected host tissue poses some problems, as there is no straightforward way of measuring the total pathogen rna concentration. an increase in target transcript at different time points after infection could either come from an up-regulation of transcription or merely from an increase in the pathogen population inside the host tissue, or both. therefore, normalisation of the data against reference genes  is an important step in the quantification of gene expression. reference genes are also used to correct for differences between samples, such as variation in the total quantity of rna and variation in rt-pcr efficiency. therefore, it is of paramount importance to find stably expressed reference genes, as the reliability of the normalised expression data is only as good as the reliability of the reference gene. any variation in reference gene expression could in principle mask real positives as well as create false positives  <cit> . to obtain a reliable normalisation, the use of more than one reference gene is recommended  <cit> . the expression of typical prokaryotic housekeeping genes has been reported to be highly variable under most experimental conditions  <cit> .

pectobacterium atrosepticum  is an important bacterial pathogen of potato in temperate regions, where it causes blackleg of plants and soft rot of tubers by the utilization of a huge machinery of plant cell wall degrading exoenzymes mainly encompassing pectinases, cellulases and proteases. the bacterium lies dormant in the plant or tuber until conditions are favourable for infection  <cit> . the recently published genome of p. atrosepticum strain scri <dig> has provided valuable tools for examining different aspects of pathogenesis  <cit> . our own  initial rt-pcr-based studies on differential gene expression in p. atrosepticum during potato infection revealed problems related to reliability of reference genes. therefore, we have conducted a wider search for reference gene candidates, with the aim of producing a set of reference genes that can be applied to future real-time rt-pcr experiments with p. atrosepticum, and potentially other bacteria, in infected plant material.

we have used a combination of different growth media, temperatures and growth phases to test the expression stability of twelve reference gene candidates in p. atrosepticum, and completed the test with an experiment in infected potato leaves. the following reference gene candidates were included in this study: signal recognition particle protein , glutamine synthetase , dna gyrase , pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase , recombinase a , transcription termination factor rho , 50s ribosomal protein l <dig> , 50s ribosomal subunit protein l <dig> , dna topoisomerase i , nucleoside-specific channel-forming protein , maltose-binding periplasmic protein  and 16s ribosomal rna .

RESULTS
selection of twelve reference gene candidates for real-time rt-pcr
on the basis of the p. atrosepticum scri <dig> genome sequence  <cit> , a set of twelve reference gene candidates were selected for an initial real-time rt-pcr study. the genes were selected from different parts of the genome to minimize the chance of transcriptional coupling affecting the results. they were also selected to encode proteins involved in different metabolic activity except for the ribosomal genes, in order to minimize the chances of a global co-regulation. the ribosomal gene 16s rrna is a commonly used reference gene in many real-time rt-pcr experiments, including studies on former erwinia species  <cit> . glna has been used as a reference gene in streptococcus pneumoniae real-time experiments  <cit>  and gyra has been used in studies on different bacteria including a very recent study on the plant pathogen pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato  <cit> . proc and rho have been tested as reference genes in similar studies of other bacteria, although no plant pathogens to our knowledge  <cit> . the genes rpli and rplq are part of a group of ribosomal proteins that have also recently been used as reference genes in real-time pcr experiments on both prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . reca is a common housekeeping gene that has been used as reference gene in studies on various bacteria  and was recently found to be a good reference gene for certain studies of p. atrosepticum . the genes ffh, topa, tsx and male have, to our knowledge, not been reported as reference genes previously. the latter four genes were selected merely on the basis of either being well-known housekeeping genes in other bacteria , or known to be expressed during different growth conditions in p. atrosepticum   <cit> .

expression analysis of reference gene candidates in cultures
an initial study of expression of all the genes selected as reference gene candidates  was performed in three different growth media  at 15°c. the genes rpli, rplq, tsx and male showed large variations in ct values in the different media , and were therefore discarded from further studies. the eight remaining reference gene candidates  were subjected to a second experiment testing the effect of increased temperature , different pectin  and growth phase  on expression. the genes glna, rho, topa and 16s were expressed at varying levels while the expression of the reference gene candidates ffh, gyra, proc and reca was relatively stable under all culture conditions . to get a statistical evaluation of the results, we analysed the ct values by the excel-based program bestkeeper  <cit> . the descriptive statistics of the eight genes based on expression in six different culture conditions are given in table  <dig>  bestkeeper expresses the ct range of each individual gene as the extreme values of ct towards the geometric mean ct, and gives their standard deviations, hence providing an evaluation of the expression stability of each reference gene candidate   and sd , respectively). based on this analysis, the ffh gene was ranked as most stably expressed and reca as the second most stably expressed gene, across all growth conditions. due to their high standard deviations , as well as their overall variable expression across all cultural growth conditions , the candidates glna, rho and topa were discarded from subsequent tests. we decided to include the 16s candidate, despite the fact that it had a fairly large ct range and a high standard deviation, because of its common use as a reference gene .

1values calculated from  <dig> samples . 2based on the inspection of the standard deviations , genes can be ranked from the most stably expressed , exhibiting the lowest sd, to the least stably expressed , exhibiting the highest sd. genes with sd  >  <dig> are considered to be inconsistent by bestkeeper. 3the   values are the x-fold under- or over-expression of samples towards the gm  according to the equations min  = emin -gm  and max  = emax -gm , respectively, where e is the specific pcr efficiency.

gm , geometric mean of ct;  , the extreme values of ct; sd , standard deviation of ct;  , extreme values of expression levels expressed as an absolute x-fold over- or under-regulation coefficient where min  = first value and max  = last value; sd , standard deviation of the absolute regulation coefficients  <cit> .

expression of selected reference gene candidates in infected plant material
from the bestkeeper analysis, the four most stably expressed reference gene candidates, ffh, reca, proc and gyra, as well as the 16s gene, were examined for expression after infiltration of detached potato leaflets with p. atrosepticum. in the experiment, leaflets infiltrated with bacteria showed clear rotting symptoms after  <dig> hours, while control leaflets infiltrated with only sterile buffer appeared fresh and healthy. the expression in culture and in planta cannot be directly compared, as the amount of starting concentration of bacteria or bacterial rna cannot be equalised, but the expression can be compared with respect to variation between different genes. rt-pcr analysis of rna collected after  <dig> hours incubation showed that four of the candidate reference genes had similar expression levels in all samples, whereas the 16s gene showed a clear up-regulation of mrna expression  in infected plant material compared to in culture, and relative to the other reference gene candidates . the 16s primers also gave a weak signal in the non-infected leaflets . none of the other primer pairs gave amplicons in the non-infected leaflets, confirming the absence of p. atrosepticum in these controls. to get a statistical evaluation of the candidates, we performed another statistical test to rank them according to expression stability.

statistical analysis of real-time rt-pcr data by genorm
a statistical analysis of the expression data from the five candidate reference genes, which were subjected to all experimental growth conditions, was performed using genorm  <cit> . this program determines the pairwise variation of a reference gene with all other reference genes and defines the reference gene-stability measure m as the average pairwise variation of a particular gene with all other reference genes. genes with the lowest m values have the most stable expression. stepwise exclusion of the gene with the highest m value results in a combination of two constitutively expressed reference genes that have the most stable expression in the tested samples. from this analysis, the genes ffh and reca were estimated to have the lowest m values and hence the highest stability, while 16s gave the highest m value  . genorm also calculates the pairwise variation  between the normalisation factors to determine the optimal number of reference genes needed for normalisation. the cut-off threshold was set to v =  <dig> , below which the inclusion of another reference gene is not required, as suggested by vandesompele et al.  <cit> . a low  value shows that the inclusion of the th gene has no significant effect. as shown by a v value of  <dig>  , the use of the two most stably expressed genes, ffh and reca, as reference genes are sufficient for a reliable data normalisation in this expression analysis in p. atrosepticum.

ranking of the most stably expressed genes from top to bottom and determination of the optimal number of genes needed for normalisation. the average expression stability value m was obtained by calculating the m for each gene and excluding the gene with the highest m  for the next calculation round. the optimal number of reference genes needed for normalisation is determined by the pairwise variation  between the normalisation factors. the cut-off value of v was set to  <dig> , below which the inclusion of another reference gene has no significant effect, as suggested by vandesompele et al.  <cit> .

discussion
real-time rt-pcr is becoming an important technology for studying host-pathogen interactions. however, proper and highly reliable reference genes are needed for normalisation of data, as normalisation by total pathogen rna in mixed host-pathogen samples is usually not possible. here, we describe a set of reference genes that can be used to normalise gene expression in the potato pathogen pectobacterium atrosepticum and potentially other related pathogens. we identified several genes that showed only minor variations in expression under a range of growth conditions. the expression of these genes was then further analysed using the excel-based programs bestkeeper  <cit>  and genorm  <cit> . both programs have been used in several recent studies  <cit> . while genorm requires that the data be converted to relative expression values, bestkeeper allows for the input of ct values.

from the statistical analyses it was concluded that two genes, reca and ffh encoding recombinase a and signal recognition particle  protein, respectively, were particularly stably expressed. also proc and gyra were relatively stably expressed under the conditions used in this study. on the other hand, the 16s gene was not stably expressed in the different culture conditions used in this study. this gene was included in our analyses because of its extensive use as a reference gene in several real-time pcr studies  <cit> . although commonly used, some reports suggest that this gene is also under regulatory control  <cit> . in addition, we discovered that 16s was amplified from leaf material that was not inoculated with the pathogen. since 16s genes are very conserved in different bacterial species and even within eukaryotic chloroplasts and mitochondria, this "non-specific" amplification could be from plant material in the samples as well as from bacteria naturally present in the phyllosphere. this result suggests that 16s is inappropriate as a reference gene when not analysing pure cultures, such as complex host-pathogen samples. another disadvantage of normalising against 16s is that the cellular quantity of ribosomal rna is much higher than that of mrna. this makes it necessary to dilute the cdna samples prior to real-time analysis, thus risking dilution errors. also, while mrnas have a rapid turn-over according to the bacteria's needs, the rrna is only degraded under certain stress conditions or when the molecule is defective  <cit> , hence, the rrna population is not comparable to the mrna population.

the choice of an acceptable level of reference gene expression variability depends on the degree of sensitivity that is demanded for each experiment. obviously, the goal is always to strive towards finding reference genes with the lowest possible expression variability. however, even a reference gene expressing some variability over the course of the experiment may be sufficient to detect target gene expression variations as long as these are larger than for the reference gene. generally, reference genes with genorm expression stability measures below  <dig>  have been regarded as suitable for normalisation in some studies  <cit>  and are also below the genorm default limit of m =  <dig>   <cit> . in this study, the five reference genes ffh, reca, proc, gyra and 16s all have an expression stability measure below  <dig> 

analyses by genorm suggest that the combination of ffh and reca is the optimal set of reference genes for studying differential gene expression in p. atrosepticum by real-time rt-pcr under the various conditions applied in this study. these conditions included two different growth temperatures, exponential and stationary growth phase, rich and minimal growth medium with two different types of pectin, as well as infiltrated potato leaves. however, it has been recommended that at least three reference genes should be used for correct normalisation of real-time rt-pcr data  <cit> . the results from this study suggest that proc could be used together with ffh and reca. however, increasing the number of reference genes means increasing the workload and cost. in addition, applying a large reference gene set could pose problems with limited sample availability. the use of a single reference gene is generally acceptable, but this gene should be subjected to extensive studies before use to ensure its stability  <cit> .

all methods for rna detection face problems concerning stability of rna as well as sensitivity and specificity of detection  <cit> . studying pathogens inside host tissues poses a further complication, as the amount of pathogen rna often becomes vanishingly small compared to host rna. although there are a few exceptions  it is not currently possible to avoid having to deal with mixed eukaryote – prokaryote rna when looking at pathogens inside host tissues. it is thus of utmost importance to find good reference genes for normalisation of real-time rt-pcr data from mixed host – pathogen rna samples. bacterial gene expression is highly diverse, and there is unlikely to be a single universally and stably expressed prokaryotic housekeeping gene. therefore, we support the general notion that tests should be conducted in any real-time rt-pcr experiment before deciding which genes to use as reference genes for a particular study, and the recommendations of using more than one reference gene, in particular when studying pathogen expression inside infected host tissue  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
here we present a study where manipulations of growth conditions for p. atrosepticum were used in order to find a set of reliable reference genes for monitoring bacterial gene expression inside infected plant tissue. a set of two reference genes, ffh and reca, proved to be the optimal set for use under the conditions applied. to our knowledge, this is the first time reference genes for studying gene expression by real-time pcr have been systematically examined in a plant pathogenic bacterium. the evaluated set of genes in this study could also provide valuable guidelines for reference gene selection when working on mrna expression in other bacterial pathogens, in particular from the family enterobacteriaceae.

