BACKGROUND
congenital heart disease  is among the most common human congenital defects, and is the leading cause of infant morbidity in the world  <cit> . although chd is known to arise from abnormal heart development during embryogenesis  <cit> , its molecular mechanism remains far from clear. currently, about  <dig> different genes have been known to cause chd. understanding the molecular functions, molecular interactions and represented pathways implicated in these chd genes contribute to our knowledge of chd pathogenesis, and therefore help improve clinical diagnosis and medical care of this disease. network-based methods are powerful tools of systematic analysis of complex diseases, and identification of major pathways, responsive modules and candidate genes  <cit> . previous works used those approaches to analyze heart development and cardiovascular disorders  <cit> , however, there is no such study on chd due to lack of its genome-wide expression data, which is publicly available only until very recently  <cit> . therefore, in this paper by exploring high-throughput genomic data to elucidate essential roles of local network structures in chd progression, we aim to provide such a network-based study on chd as well.

to discover molecular pathogenesis in complex disease, considerable efforts have been made to elucidate the relations between variability in gene expression and genotype  <cit> , and putative disease genes curated from literature research can be regarded as the source of molecular perturbations while differentially expressed genes identified from mrna profiling can represent the responsive components of source perturbations. it is also noted that disease genes are not necessarily differentially expressed  <cit> . differential gene expression level represents the changed phenotype that is potentially associated with the causal disease genes. hence, linking causal disease genes with responsive differentially expressed genes by modeling the information flow in protein interactome can better reveal dysfunctional subnetworks and help the identification of disease modules. previous research has established the analogy between random walks and electric networks  <cit> . doyle and snell  <cit>  showed that when a unit current flow enters a source node and leaves a sink in the circuit network, the amount of current passing through any intermediary node or edge is proportional to the expected number of times the random walker visits that node or edge. then, the amount of current passing though each node can be computed by solving a system of linear equations based on kirchhoff's and ohm's laws. several recent studies also used such circuit flow networks to discover causal genes and associated pathways or to analyze gene network centrality  <cit> .

in this paper, we construct a chd subnetwork and identify dysfunctional modules by developing a novel network-based computational approach which integrates protein-protein interactions, gene coexpression profiles and causal paths from putative chd genes to target genes. we evaluate the functional implications of our modules for phenotype classification, and further reveal their higher order topological relationships by exploring their represented biological processes and crosstalk. results show that our modules are better disease-markers than documented pathways, and have the discriminative power stably across several independent microarray datasets. in particular, correlation analysis reveals that each module is also a group of significantly coexpressed genes; module interaction analysis characterizes the higher-order topology of these identified modules; functional enrichment and module-pathway crosstalk analysis suggests that the topology of a module is highly related to its roles in chd. while the modules in central place of the chd subnetwork are enriched in core chd-related dysfunctional processes, such as anatomical structure morphogenesis, cell differentiation and cytoskeleton organization, and regulate key pathways of chd such as cardiac muscle contraction, notch signaling pathway and ecm -receptor interaction, the modules in peripheral place are enriched in auxiliary processes, such as cell communication and various metabolic processes, and regulate less disease-related pathways. in addition, we find that chd casual genes exhibit different network features, i.e. disease genes tend to have lower current flow and participate in fewer dysfunctional subnetworks than expected. moreover, we provide a list of candidate chd genes by module analysis, where the top ranked genes in the candidate list are all well supported by literature and experiment evidence. the results not only elucidate the functional roles of the modules on chd, but also provide some insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms of chd which lead to identification of candidate chd genes.

RESULTS
identified dysfunctional modules
the work flow of our method of identifying dysfunctional modules is shown in figure  <dig>  to capture the information flow from causal genes to target genes and to identify dysfunctional modules from these causal paths, we first identified  <dig> target genes which are defined as those differentially expressed  in sufficient proportion of patients , and then connected each known causal genes of chd with these target de genes via shortest paths shown in figure 1a and 1b. we model the protein interaction network as an electrical circuit where correlation coexpression of two end nodes of an interaction is used as the conductance of a resistor, and biological signals from disease genes propagate through ppi edges to responsive genes just like electrical current flows through resistors  <cit> . information from source genes will propagate its effect via protein-protein interactions, and de genes which cover the majority of patients represent common dysregulated pathways in chd. in the third step, we merged the paths from one causal gene to all target genes into a subnetwork, and computed the current flow for each gene to evaluate its importance in this local subnetwork as shown in figure 1c. to measure the importance of one node in conducting electrical current, we computed the current flows through the node using the electronic laws  <cit> , and defined the information flow score of the node as the sum of current through the node among all pair-wise combinations of the source node  and all target nodes . since the causal subnetwork can overlap, i.e. a gene can have several current flow scores, we assigned the gene to the subnetwork in which its current flow is maximum to derive mutually exclusive modules. the modules can also be thought of as an information-processing unit  <cit> , therefore we put the gene into the module where the largest amount of information passes through it. at last, reasoning that highly connected genes are more likely to coordinate and perform the same biological functions, we pruned the modules and iterated this process until each of them was connected as shown is figure 1d .

totally, our method resulted in a connected chd subnetwork consisting of  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges . we identified  <dig> major disjoint modules by assigning genes to the group which maximizes the information flow scores while keeping each module inter-connected the chd subnetwork . the size of each module is shown in table  <dig> and the list of all genes in each module is shown in additional file  <dig> 

size means the number of genes in each module. interaction score evaluates the topological relations between modules. hub modules have higher scores while peripheral modules have lower scores. mutual information evaluates the significance of synergistic differential expression within a module compared with  <dig> random gene sets of the same size. correlation measures the significance of correlation coexpression of two interacting partners within a module compared with  <dig> random edge lists of the same number.

modules as disease-markers
to quantitatively investigate the relationships of the identified modules with disease phenotype, we computed mutual information  of each module with sample phenotype. the results are shown in table  <dig>  we used the microarray data, which represents mrna extracted from right ventricles  of  <dig> children with tetralogy of fallot  at the time of reconstructive surgery with  <dig> controls , to compute the activity vector of each module across all  <dig> samples. we used mi as the discriminative score to assess whether each module activity vector has significant relationship with phenotypes. among  <dig> modules,  <dig> have significant mutual information  compared with  <dig> random gene sets of the same size . most modules are significantly correlated with disease phenotype, reflecting the synergistic differential expression within them.

to further evaluate the quality of our modules in terms of distinguishing disease from control samples, we computed the activity matrix of  <dig> modules  and build logistic regression models  <cit>  in a five-fold cross-validation approach. for comparison, we computed activity matrix of  <dig> kegg pathways that are most enriched in the chd subnetwork . we also used  <dig> random gene sets of the same size as each module for control, and repeated this process  <dig> times. for experiments within the gene expression dataset of gse <dig>  modules were first ranked by mi, and features were sequentially added to the classifier. pathways were ranked by enrichment p-value, and were added sequentially. the result shows that modules are consistently better in the classification accuracy than pathways and random sets, while pathways are better than random sets only for the first five features . to test the robustness of our module classifier, we also performed an independent cross-dataset experiment, in which classifiers were trained on gse <dig> and validated on gse <dig> . in cross-dataset validation, both modules and pathways achieved similar high performance of classification accuracy, and clearly are much better than the random sets. therefore, our modules are better classifiers of phenotype than pathways, and that their high classification performances are reproducible across independent microarray dataset. this provides evidence for the dysfunctional implication and importance of these identified modules.

within module coexpression and cross module coordination
besides comparing module expression profiles under disease and control status to evaluate its synergistic differential expression, another way to utilize microarray data is to exploit gene coexpression relationships within modules and across modules. under the well-accepted hypothesis that genes exhibiting similar expression patterns across sample status are likely to have functional relevance  <cit> , we reasoned whether genes within modules are significantly coexpressed, and whether modules have intense interactions in terms of interacting partners that are highly coexpressed. to analyze coexpression within modules, we computed the average pearson's correlation coefficient  of all interacting proteins in each module, and compared it with that of  <dig> random selected protein pairs of the same size . result shows that  <dig> modules have significant coexpression , and all of them also have significant mi at the same time. if all  <dig> modules are regarded as a whole and compared with  <dig> random gene sets, the result is also significant .

to analyze intra-modular connectivity, we detected the interaction among disjoint modules based on weighted protein interactions . module interaction network is visualized in figure 5c, where only the  <dig> significant interactions  are shown. for each module, we defined its intra-modular connectivity as the sum of the absolute value of correlation for all its outgoing edges, and used this score to evaluate its network centrality . module interaction network not only reveals connectivity patterns between modules and their positions in chd subnetwork, but also sheds light on the implications of various biological processes and pathways represented by each module. therefore, besides topological meanings of this score, we would identify its biological underpinnings after examining the compositions of modules using annotated gene ontologies in the next subsection.

functional enrichment analysis of modules reveals crucial biological processes of chd
utilizing our previously developed noa  method of functional enrichment analysis  <cit> , we identified enriched go terms in each module. the representative enriched go terms with fdr< <dig>  in each module are presented in table  <dig>  and the list of all enriched go biological processes are in additional file  <dig>  the top-scored module  <dig>  is enriched in anatomical structure morphogenesis, cytoskeleton organization and cellular component assembly. since chd manifests itself through various aberrations in heart morphogenesis, and more than half of known causal disease genes are transcriptional regulators of heart morphogenesis, the fact that anatomical structure morphogenesis ranks 1st in the most important module is expected. the other two categories, i.e. cytoskeleton organization and cellular component assembly, can contain downstream effector genes involved in muscle development, such as sarcomerec gene like actc <dig>  dynll <dig> and dmd. particularly, actc <dig> is a known causal gene in module  <dig>  <cit> . it encodes the cardiac actin protein that is an essential structural component of the thin filaments of sarcomeres. mutations in actc <dig> seem to reduce affinity of actin for myosin, and cause various chd phenotypes such as asd  and vsd   <cit> . actc <dig> contains all go terms significantly enriched  in module  <dig>  demonstrating the functional relevance of module  <dig> to chd. module  <dig>  ranks 2nd, and is enriched in negative regulation of apoptosis, programmed cell death, cell differentiation and developmental process. module  <dig> is also highly enriched in notch signaling pathway, which plays roles in various developmental processes by controlling cell fate decisions, and is known to be very important in cardiac development. module  <dig> contains  <dig> causal genes, notch <dig>  <cit>  and jag <dig>  <cit> , again, both of which participate in all of the  <dig> top enriched go processes . table  <dig> also suggests that in each module, chd genes participate in most of its top ranked go terms, and the functional of the module is very similar to its contained chd genes. this can also prove the functional coherence within each module, and functional correlation between these modules.

chd genes participate in most of the top enriched go processes in each module and the function of a module is very similar to those of the putative disease genes in it. only go terms with fdr< <dig>  are shown below.

we have shown that modules with highest scores, being in the central place of the subnetwork, are enriched in core processes related to heart development, and that chd genes participate in all the top ranked go processes in a module. we then investigated the modules with lowest scores in the marginal place of subnetwork and identified their relations with chd. module  <dig>  is ranked as the last, and is enriched in phosphorus metabolic process. module  <dig>  is enriched in cell communication, response to steroid hormone stimulus, lipid metabolic process and positive regulation of transcription. module  <dig>  is enriched in regulation of macromolecule biosynthetic process and nitrogen compound metabolic process. although these go processes seem to have less relationship with chd, these auxiliary roles are important to facilitate key processes of heart development. considering the fact that fetal heart developmental program involves intense transcription regulation, ligand-receptor interactions and signaling transduction, various macromolecules including hormones, cytokines and growth factors in the circulation or in the extracellular space of the heart, acting as ligands, can stimulate receptors in the cell membrane of cardiac cell  <cit> , it is reasonable to assume that cell communication, transcription regulation, steroid hormone stimulus and macromolecules metabolism are more generally associated with chd and can actually facilitate all related processes. since they are not specific to chd, they appear on the marginal place of the subnetwork. the fact that these modules can also contain causal disease genes demonstrates their relevance to chd. for example, gata <dig> and tbx <dig> are in module  <dig>  and both of them are important transcription factors in developmental processes. tbx <dig> protein associates with cardiac transcription factors including gata <dig> and nkx2- <dig>  and they activate many downstream cardiac effector targets such as sarcomeric proteins and vasoactive proteins. various kinds of mutations in gata <dig> and tbx <dig> can lead to various subtypes of chd  <cit> .

module-pathway crosstalk analysis reveals hub modules regulating key pathways of chd
to analyze pathways represented by modules, and how they are coordinated by modules to account for the observed phenotypes, we went beyond identifying lists of pathways significantly enriched in each module, or simply counting the number of overlapping genes shared by the module and the pathway. as previously shown, there is a distinction between a pathway and a module. a pathway is a specific information-flow conduit, consisting of a series of molecular interactions while a module is an information-processing unit with self-contained cellular functions  <cit> . therefore, modules can contain multiple pathways while pathways can be coordinated by various modules to allow inter-module connections. with this in mind, we implemented an analysis of module-pathway crosstalk similar to previous module interaction procedure. for a given module-pathway pair, we considered both common genes and weighted protein-protein interactions between them . network view of module-pathway crosstalk is shown in figure 6a, where circles represent modules, rectangles represent pathways, and edge width corresponds to strength of interaction between module and pathway. heatmap of pathway-module crosstalk is shown in figure 6b, where rows represent  <dig> pathways that are significantly  influenced by at least one module, and columns represent modules and their influence to the  <dig> pathways. module  <dig> is the most influential and many of its influenced pathways are closely related to heart progression, such as cardiac muscle contraction, dorso-ventral axis formation, gap junction and regulation of actin cytoskeleton. specifically, the gap junction is very important in cardiac muscle, through which the signal to contract is efficiently passed, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract in tandem. for example, gja <dig> encodes a gap junction protein, and gene conversion in gja <dig> has been found in patients with chd  <cit> . in brief, these influenced pathways are consistent with major roles of module  <dig> in biological processes like anatomical structure morphogenesis and cytoskeleton organization. module  <dig> is the only one that can influence notch signaling pathway, which is also consistent with its go enrichment. module  <dig> and module  <dig> are the only two modules that regulate ecm -receptor interaction, a very important pathway in tissue and organ morphogenesis and in the maintenance of cell and tissue structure and function. the extracellular matrix protein, flna, for example, can cross-links actin filaments and participates in anchoring actin cytoskeleton to membrane proteins. loss-of-functions mutations in flna are lethal to male and cause various chd-related phenotypes in female  <cit> . although module  <dig> and module  <dig> do not affect as many pathways as module  <dig> does, their dominant roles in regulating two essential pathways demonstrate their substantial importance during heart development. from figure 6b, module  <dig> also seems important because it interacts with many pathways, while we find that it has much less influence to pathways highly related to chd. compared with module  <dig>  it shows significant drop for many essential pathways related to chd such as cardiac muscle contraction, dorso-ventral axis formation, gap junction and regulation of actin cytoskeleton, while some pathways without direct relations to chd such as type i diabetes mellitus and olfactory transduction, exhibit significant increase. therefore, we reasoned that the importance of a module should be evaluated not by the number of pathway that it affected, but by its influence to important pathways implicated in chd.

prioritization of candidate disease genes by module analysis
we have proved the robustness of our modules for disease phenotype classification, investigated their functional roles during heart development, their implications in chd, and their interactions with each other as well as with those documented pathways. we also provided an application of identified dysfunctional modules to detect disease genes. we brought out a list of prioritized candidate disease genes by integrating module memberships, network centrality analysis and go semantic similarities . we first identified candidate genes that are either on the shortest paths connecting  <dig> causal disease genes or the first interacting neighbors of them in the chd subnetwork, then assigned a score to each of them with investigation of its module membership and its go semantic similarity with the putative disease genes in the same module, and at last filtered genes with significant different network locations , which resulted in a final list of  <dig> candidate disease genes. the top ten candidate genes are shown in table  <dig> and the full list of candidate disease genes are shown in additional file  <dig> 

score is a candidate's go semantic similarity with disease genes in the same module, and iea go terms are excluded. description briefly introduces the candidate's chd-related functions. supporting evidence lists the types of literature support, and pubmed ids of related articles are provided in the last column for reference.

hand <dig> has significantly higher score than other candidate genes and ranks 1st in our list. hand <dig>  and causal disease gene hand <dig>  whose somatic mutations have been reported to contribute to chd  <cit> , both belong to basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factors, and are expressed in cardiac mesoderm during embryogenesis. hand <dig> expression is limited in future left ventricle while hand <dig> expression is limited in future right ventricle  <cit> . targeted gene deletion of hand <dig> in mouse embryos resulted in embryonic lethality from heart failure  <cit> . in a recent research, shen et al.  <cit>  screened for mutations in the hand <dig> genes in  <dig> patients with various forms of chd. seven mutations in hand <dig> were identified in  <dig> out of these patients. it is very likely that hand <dig> is indeed a chd disease gene. fos is ranked 2nd, and can form transcription factor complex ap- <dig> with proteins from the jun family. fos proteins are implicated as regulators of cell proliferation, differentiation and transformation. literature text-mining using genecards version  <dig>  <cit>  reveals that fos is involved in cardiac hypertrophy. notch <dig> ranked 3rd, and together with notch <dig>  whose autosomal dominant mutations can cause chd  <cit> , belong to single-pass transmembrane receptors that regulate many developmental pathways. mutations in gene encoding notch <dig> leads to alagille syndrome  <cit> , with cardiac phenotypes of peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and septal defects. besides genes with high score and well supported by literature search, our candidate gene list also contains genes with low scores. currently, these genes have fewer, if any, favorable go evidence similar to disease genes in the module, but some of them would be potential novel disease genes and worth further experimental research.

discussion
it has long been noted that genetic, physical interaction and transcriptional expression data are complementary to each other in response to molecular perturbations  <cit> . we also found that not all chd genes are differentially expressed and that none of them can be the target gene. therefore, using a source-sink relationship is better than simply using disease genes as seeds for module identification in that the former regards the whole transcritome as phenotype data while the later merely utilizes disease/control status as phenotype. actually, it was pointed out previously that a gene-disease phenotype association provides little insight into the molecular mechanism for the association  <cit> . bridging the discordance between chd genes and target genes through a source-sink approach can not only identify intermediary genes not discovered in the transcriptional data itself, but also reveal dysfunctional or even causal pathways and modules for chd. in our approach, information from the source gene will propagate its effect via protein-protein interactions, and de genes which cover the majority of patients represent common dysregulated pathways in chd. it is reasoned the common pathways, regardless of various kinds of source mutations, are responsible for the final set of similar chd phenotypes. one of the applications of methods like ours is that by identifying intermediary genes involved in signal transduction, it can suggest potential intervention nodes for drug targeting.

our method simulated the causality-response relationship between the known disease genes and differentially expressed genes. the dysfunctional information transferring between them in the network is utilized to identify the disease modules, which have proved to be highly related to the phenotypes. the robust performance has to be evaluated for our approach in computing information score -- we identify the shortest paths from a source gene to all target genes, and compute information score in this subnetwork, which means that the information score for each gene in this subnetwork is only related to a particular source gene. the choice of subsets of source genes changes available subnetworks, and can influence the result during the module identification procedure, in which a gene is reassigned to the modules which maximize its information score while maintaining connectivity. to evaluate the robustness and reproducibility of modules when some known disease genes are withheld , we generated  <dig> alternative sets of testing modules and computed the overlap with the reference modules. the modules have significantly consistent overlap with testing modules . this indicates that our methods are robust to identify these modules when we eliminate some source genes. the details of the tests and results are available in additional file  <dig>  from these dysfunctional modules, we also identified some candidate chd genes which are based on the score of associating with the causal disease genes.

CONCLUSIONS
using a network-based approach, we identify dysfunctional modules and disease genes in chd by modeling the information flow from source disease genes to targets of differentially expressed genes. several other studies also inferred causal genes, dysregulated pathways and central nodes of a network using flow-based approach  <cit> . however, we went a step further and brought a group of dysfunctional modules. by considering only one source node and multiple target nodes in each circuit flow instance, and iterating over all source nodes, we identified  <dig> dysfunctional modules which are well validated by various types of statistical measures, an independent dataset and biological annotations. although not required by our method, each module contains chd genes, making it possible to prioritize candidate chd genes using a "guilt-by-association" approach. the identified dysfunctional modules show their biomarker properties for chd phenotypes and these candidate disease genes will benefit further research.

