BACKGROUND
salinization due to sea-level rise, decreased ground water recharge, inappropriate irrigation regimes, and increases in evapotranspiration is a major threat to sustainable land-use  <cit> . to prevent soil degradation and to maintain productivity in areas affected by salinity, cultivation of salt tolerant plants is required. this applies not only to agricultural crops, but also to woody plants that are gaining importance as renewable resources.

over the past years, poplar , a fast growing species with high biomass production, has been established as a model organism for tree research  <cit> . among the species of this genus populus euphratica olivier occurs naturally in salt afflicted areas  <cit>  and exhibits high salt tolerance  <cit> . under saline conditions, p. euphratica is able to maintain higher growth rates and higher photosynthetic rates than other poplar species  <cit> . to gain insight into the molecular basis of its ability to resist salt stress, transcriptional changes were investigated during short-term salt exposure under controlled conditions as well as in long-term salt acclimated mature trees grown in natural environments  <cit> . previous microarray analyses based on a stress-responsive est collection of approximately  <dig> unique p. euphratica genes revealed surprisingly few, i.e., only  <dig> genes whose transcript abundances were affected by salinity under field conditions  <cit> . we, therefore, hypothesize that p. euphratica developed innate mechanisms to tolerate salt stress that may require no immediate gene regulation.

salt cress , a close relative of the herbaceous model plant arabidopsis thaliana, occurs in harsh environments. when salt cress was exposed to excess salinity only relatively few stress-responsive genes were detected compared with arabidopsis that exhibited a global defense strategy  <cit> . transcriptome and metabolome analyses suggested stress-anticipatory preparedness in salt cress  <cit> . high levels of stress tolerance are the result of evolutionary adaptation. in addition to other possibilities, plants thriving in extreme environments may achieve protection by constitutive activation of stress-related gene networks. as a consequence these regulons can not be detected by classical microarray approaches analyzing transcriptional changes in response to stress.

to elucidate differences in constitutive gene regulation of salt tolerant and sensitive species, direct cross-species comparisons are required. a difficulty, usually limiting straightforward whole genome comparisons between different species, is that for non-model species microarrays are not available and hybridization efficiencies of different species are affected by sequence dissimilarities of bait set  and prey set . in spite of the above problems, cross-species hybridizations have recently been successfully applied to a number of species when their evolutionary distances were close  <cit> . the problem has also been partially circumvented by disregarding genes with lower transcript abundances because 'apparent decreases' might have been caused by lower hybridization efficiencies, whereas stronger responses between non-model prey and model bait set are indicative for higher transcript abundance  <cit> .

the major goal of our study was to investigate whether p. euphratica possesses a preventive stress defense strategy involving constitutive activation of protective pathways. to this end we compared available sequence data of p. euphratica genes with those of populus × canescens , a salt sensitive species  <cit> . since this analysis revealed high nucleotide identity we used affymetrix genechip poplar genome array to examine transcriptional differences of p. euphratica and p. × canescens. the poplar genome array contains  <dig>  probe sets  that can be interrogated, each composed of  <dig> individual probes. the array covers the whole genome of p. trichocarpa  and contains additionally  <dig>  probes sets of  <dig> further poplar species  including p. euphratica as well as p. × canescens  <cit> . here, we provide evidence that evolutionary distance of prey and bait sets affect the results but that a condensed data set can be used after application of appropriate quality filters. key pathways identified by this approach to differ between the two poplar species were validated by targeted biochemical and physiological analyses as well as by non-targeted metabolite profiling applying fourier transform-ion cyclotron mass spectrometry   <cit> . metabolome and transcriptome data were combined by pathway analysis tools  <cit> . we provide evidence that energy metabolism, ion compartmentalization, and phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathways constitute major differences between p. euphratica and p. × canescens.

RESULTS
sequence identity of structural genes of p. trichocarpa, p. euphratica and p. × canescens is high
a prerequisite for a transcriptional comparison of p. euphratica and p. × canescens is a high sequence identity of their mrnas with the probe set oligonucleotides on the microarray, which are mainly based on p. trichocarpa genome data  <cit> . therefore, we compiled available sequence information for cdnas of p. × canescens , p. euphratica , and p. trichocarpa . we found full-length and partial sequences of  <dig> genes for all three poplar species, which were used to assess their relationship by analysis of nucleotide identity . identity was usually high with mean values between  <dig>  and  <dig> %, and no significant differences between the pair wise comparisons of pc/pt and pe/pt, between pe/pc and pc/pt or between pe/pc and pe/pt were found at p ≤  <dig>  . however, there are individual examples for low sequence identity, e.g., ndid .

*partial sequence, published in  <cit> .

public id: accession number for genbank , respective jgi p. trichocarpa project protein id ; ni: nucleotide identity; al: length of aligned sequence fragments; ap: aquaporin ; atpase: h+-transporting atpase; bsp: boiling stable protein, chain a;fla12: fasciclin-like arabinogalactan-protein; gast:gast-like protein;gd: glycine dehydrogenase; gs: plastid glutamine synthetase-like; ill3: iaa-amino acid hydrolase ill3; ipp: inorganic pyrophosphatase; mads: mads-box; mcp: mitochondrial carrier protein; ndid: nad+ dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase; nhad1: na+/h+ antiporter type d; nifu: nitrogen fixation protein nifu; rgp3: reversibly glycosylated polypeptide 3; rp: ribosomal protein l34e; rpm: dna-directed rna polymerase; sis: salt induced serine-rich; til: temperature induced lipocalin; ubi2: ubiquitin.

detection and evaluation of transcripts differentially expressed between p. euphratica and p. × canescens
the transcriptomes of mature, fully light-exposed leaves of soil grown p. euphratica and p. × canescens plants were compared by microarray analysis on genechip poplar genome arrays. in the first step, differentially expressed transcripts were identified by established methods employing significance analysis of microarrays  and removing transcripts with low signal intensities . as cross-species comparisons may be affected by sequence divergence  <cit> , we also removed genes whose standard deviation  of mean signal intensities was in the upper 5% quantile. this procedure was based on the following reasoning: since each mean signal is the result of signal intensities of  <dig> oligonucleotides from different regions of a gene , it is likely that sequence divergence will lead to irregular binding of cdnas within the probe set and thus cause higher sd. high sequence divergence may affect binding efficiencies and thus lead to erroneous results regarding transcript abundance. the validity of this filtering step was corroborated by qrt-pcrs conducted for genes with high and low sds. indeed, only those with sds within the  <dig> to 95% range showed a significant correlation with the probe sets on the array , whereas those within the upper 5% quantile showed no correlation of qrt-pcr and array signal intensities .

number of significant transcripts
* including transcripts interrogated by probe sets constructed from p. × canescens sequences that were higher expressed in p. euphratica, and transcripts interrogated by probe sets constructed from p. euphratica sequences that were higher expressed in p. × canescens

f <dig> = raw list: raw lists are the list of significant genes as calculated by sam and all probe sets on the microarray; f <dig> = probe set id present/absent: filter f <dig> removed probe sets identified as absent by the mas  <dig>  algorithm; f <dig> = probe set sd: filter f <dig> removed probe sets with sd in the upper 5% quantile; f <dig> = annotation available: filter f <dig> removed probe sets without annotation; f4: species of origin of probe set: filter f <dig> removed probes sets biased due to the poplar species used for their construction; f <dig> = duplicate gene models: filter f <dig> removed duplicate gene models.

despite these efforts, three different groups of transcriptional responses of the pe/pc ratio were detected depending on the species used to produce the array probe set . the first and largest group was based on sequences from poplars of the tacamahaca and aigeiros sections . the transcript ratios of pe/pc in this group showed a homogenous distribution of increased and decreased transcript ratios . this result is expected if the binding efficiencies of transcripts of the test species p. euphratica and p. × canescens with genes used to construct the probe sets on the array are similar. only genes of this group were used for go-term enrichment analyses.

the second group consisted of probe sets based on species of the leuce section of which p. × canescens is a member . in this group, the distribution of pe/pc transcript ratios showed a clear shift towards lower values. since it is unlikely that the leuce section contains an overabundance of down-regulated genes this result is probably influenced by sequence divergence resulting in relatively stronger binding of p. × canescens-derived cdnas to the probe sets than those of p. euphratica, consequently leading to an apparent decrease of the pe/pc ratio. we have therefore excluded the genes with decreased pe/pc ratio in the leuce group from further analyses. vice versa, in the last group, the turanga section which is formed by p. euphratica, the pe/pc ratio was increased. along the same line of argument, the genes with increased pe/pc ratios were excluded .

since the goals of this study were functional categorization and pathway analyses, all transcripts without annotation were removed from the list of significant genes as proposed by falcon and gentleman  <cit> . the final list of differentially expressed transcripts contained  <dig> genes, of which  <dig> had higher transcript abundances in p. euphratica and  <dig> in p. × canescens than the respective other species .

the transcriptomes of p. euphratica and p. × canescens exhibit differences in transport, energy metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites
to characterize differences between the transcriptomes of the two poplar species, we used the go slim terms of the complex gene ontology annotations  <cit> . a 'gene universe' of  <dig>  eligible genes was compiled after appropriate filtering from all  <dig>  probe sets on the microarray . significant over- and underrepresentation of go slim terms for p. euphratica and p. × canescens were determined by a hypergeometric test. in p. euphratica go slim terms associated with transcription and regulation like 'nucleus', 'dna or rna binding', 'transcription factor activity', 'kinase activity' and 'transcription' were significantly underrepresented . this suggests that mechanisms to react to alterations of external conditions and to adapt the transcriptome accordingly were less active in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens. overrepresented go slim terms in the group of genes with higher expression in p. euphratica were 'other membranes' , 'mitochondria', 'cell wall', 'hydrolase activity' and 'transporter activity' . in p. × canescens, the only significantly overrepresented go slim term was 'plasma membrane'. neither of the species showed an over- or underrepresentation of the go slim term 'response to stress' contrary to our expectation .

for more detailed analysis, the best match of the poplar gene models with arabidopsis thaliana was searched, agi numbers were assigned to the poplar genes, and mapman was used for a functional classification  <cit> . in the category 'transport' a number of genes for cation transport with higher transcript abundance in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens were especially conspicuous with respect to the increased salt tolerance of p. euphratica . in the category 'cell wall' numerous glycosylases and hydrolase such as putative xyloglucan endotransglycosylases, glycosyl hydrolase family proteins in addition to pectin esterases and fasciclin-like proteins had higher transcript abundance in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens . analysis of the category 'mitochondria' revealed that most components of the mitochondrial electron transport chain were up-regulated in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens . furthermore, out of twelve significantly differentially expressed genes encoding mitochondrial metabolite transporters, ten showed higher transcript abundance in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens .

among all genes with significant changes that were uploaded into mapman , the category 'secondary metabolism' was significantly enriched . this result was corroborated using the original go annotation of the poplar gene models. both go terms 'phenylpropanoid' and 'flavonoid biosynthetic process' were significantly enriched in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens with p =  <dig>  and p =  <dig> , respectively, after benjamini hochberg correction.

integration of metabolomic and transcriptomic data on pathway maps and validation by physiological and biochemical analyses
the metabolomes of leaves of the two poplar species were analyzed by fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry . identification of ions was performed using 'mass translator into pathways' .  <dig> ions were found with had significantly higher peak intensities in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens. to  <dig> of these ions, a bulk chemical formula could be assigned, of which  <dig> were annotated in poplar. where metabolites share an identical bulk formula, multiple alternative annotations may be possible. therefore, the  <dig> ions represent  <dig> different bulk chemical formulas for metabolites with higher abundance in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens . in p. × canescens,  <dig> ions with significantly higher peak intensities than in p. euphratica were detected. assignment of a bulk chemical formula was possible for  <dig> ions, of which  <dig> with  <dig> different bulk formulas were annotated in poplar .

identified and annotated metabolites were automatically mapped to kegg pathways using masstrix, simultaneously implementing the transcriptomic data. for this, enzyme commission  numbers were obtained for significant genes from the jgi p. trichocarpa project  <cit> . of the differentially expressed genes,  <dig> genes with higher expression in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens and  <dig> genes with higher expression in p. × canescens than in p. euphratica could be annotated by ec numbers and were added to the masstrix pathway analysis query.

based on the results of the go term enrichment analysis that indicated significant effects in secondary metabolism and mitochondrial energy metabolism, five pathways were chosen from the  <dig> kegg pathways available for poplar: 'phenylpropanoid biosynthesis', 'flavonoid biosynthesis', 'citrate cycle' with the connected pathways 'glycolysis/gluconeogenesis' and 'starch and sucrose metabolism'.

the pathways of phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis showed higher transcript abundances of enzymes from p. euphratica than for those from p. × canescens, whereas the intermediate metabolites, with the exception of sinapyl alcohol, were usually higher in p. × canescens than in p. euphratica . since this result may indicate higher flux through the phenolic pathway in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens, which would be expected to result in increased concentrations of end products, we determined soluble and non-soluble phenolics and tannins. in fact, the concentrations of the final products, especially condensed non-soluble tannins, were significantly higher in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens .

since our transcriptome analysis pointed to higher activity of the mitochondrial electron transport chain in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens, we mapped enzymes and metabolites of the glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle, necessary to supply the respiratory chain with reductant and localized in the cytosol and the mitochondrial matrix, respectively . while many of the enzymes involved in these pathways were up-regulated at the transcriptional level in p. euphratica, only few differences were found regarding the participating metabolites. among these metabolites most were increased in p. × canescens compared with p. euphratica . interestingly, the increases of metabolites were observed at the entry point of the tca cycle , which may indicate lower demand and thus, slower turn over of this pathway in p. × canescens. this assumption was corroborated by lower dark respiration in p. × canescens than in p. euphratica .

photosynthesis and transpiration were determined at  <dig> μmol m- <dig> s- <dig> par, a temperature of 26°c and an air humidity of 60%. dark respiration was measured for  <dig> min after keeping the plants in darkness for  <dig> minutes . glucose and fructose content were determined in mature fully light exposed leaves . significant differences are indicated by  for p ≤  <dig> , * for p ≤  <dig>  and *** for p ≤  <dig> .

further analyses of carbohydrate metabolism indicated up-regulation of transcripts for genes involved in starch and carbohydrate metabolism in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens . in addition, pathway analysis of metabolome data pointed to increased concentrations of glucose and fructose in p. euphratica relative to p. × canescens . independent biochemical carbohydrate analyses revealed that p. euphratica contained double the glucose concentrations of p. × canescens . higher activity of sugar metabolism can also be inferred from six carbohydrate transporters with increased transcript abundance in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens, whereas no transporters of this class were found to be increased in p. × canescens . the net co <dig> assimilation rates were, however, lower in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens . it is likely that this difference was mainly caused by rubisco activase, a chaperone that maintains rubisco activity  <cit> , which showed significantly lower transcript abundance in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens 

since carbohydrates also play roles in salt tolerance by counteracting osmotic stress, transcriptional and metabolomic differences for 'minor carbohydrates' according to mapman categories were also studied. the raffinose and myo-inositol pathways with enzymes leading to formation of galactinol, raffinose and stachyose as well as to myo-inositol were transcriptionally increased in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens . increased concentrations of myo-inositol and of raffinose were detected in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens .

discussion
direct transcriptome comparisons of different poplar species are affected by their phylogenetic distances
in spite of its regular application, correct use of cross-species hybridization on microarrays is still an intensively discussed topic. mismatch as a result of single nucleotide polymorphisms can decrease the signals of single probes and influence the mean probe set signal leading to a higher standard deviation as shown here and in cases of strong sequence divergence to systematically lower signal intensities  <cit> . to avoid species-related bias when comparing the transcriptomes of arabidopsis thaliana and its close relative the salt tolerant cress thellungiella halophila on an arabidopsis cdna microarray, only genes with higher signal ratios of thellungiella/arabidopsis were considered  <cit> . however, this may lead to loss of important information with respect to the biological differences.

recently, renn et al.  <cit>  showed for different cichlid fish species that the consistency of cross-species hybridization microarray results increased with decreasing phylogenetic distance of the analyzed species. for species with a time of genetic divergence of less than  <dig> million years  ago, transcription profiling gave most robust results, but divergence times of greater than  <dig> mya were still acceptable. the genus of populus diverged from salix around  <dig> to  <dig> mya ago and evolution of populus proceeds relatively slowly, approximately at one-sixth of the rate of arabidopsis  <cit> . in line with this notion sequence identity of structural genes between p. × canescens, a species from the oldest section leuce and p. trichocarpa, which is member of the relatively young tacamahaca section  <cit> , was not significantly different from that between p. euphratica in the section turanga, which assumes a phylogenetically intermediate position, and p. trichocarpa. still, a clear species-related bias for signal ratios was observed that reflecting the genetic phylogeny of different poplar species. we, therefore, conclude that interspecific transcriptome comparisons using poplar genome array between species from different sections require the exclusion of false positives by appropriate filtering procedures, whereas comparisons within a phylogenetic section are unproblematic.

pathway mapping reveals differences in energy and secondary metabolism between p. euphratica and p. × canescens
applying tools of systems biology, we demonstrated that pathways of energy metabolism and for the production of secondary metabolites constituted major differences between p. euphratica and p. × canescens. it has been demonstrated for species in different kingdoms including poplars that transcript-level variation is under genetic control and heritable  <cit> . the identified differences between the transcriptomes of a salt tolerant and a susceptible poplar species reflect their inherited molecular phenotypes since developmental and environmental factors, that are also influencing gene regulation, were excluded. however, in contrast to our expectation no evidence for general increases in typical pathways mediating stress tolerance were found in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens. similarly, transcriptional comparisons of the salt tolerant t. halleri and the susceptible a. thaliana did not show activation of general stress responses but rather pointed to a precise defence strategy  <cit> .

it is debatable if all observed differences between p. euphratica and p. × canescens were specifically related to their differences in salt susceptibility. for example, increases in phenolics induced by chemical effectors that resulted in ameliorative effects on salt stressed plants also correlated with increases in other antioxidative compounds  <cit> . therefore, the contribution of phenolic compounds to improve salt persistence is still elusive and requires further investigation. however, it is well known that phenolic compounds have antioxidant properties  <cit> . since excess salinity causes oxidative stress  <cit> , it is likely that phenol-based compounds prevent negative effects of salt-related oxidative stress by scavenging free radicals, thereby, contributing to maintain cell and tissue integrity. notably, the phenylpropanoid metabolism was also among the significantly increased pathways identified in a comparison of drought susceptible and tolerant poplar species  <cit> . since p. euphratica is not drought tolerant  <cit>  we suggest that phenolic compounds do not constitute a primary line of defence to prevent osmotic imbalance but that their enrichment may enhance stress tolerance by downstream effects such as affording increased radical scavenging.

further major transcriptional differences between the two species were related to carbohydrate metabolism and confirmed by analysis of carbohydrate concentrations. enhanced glucose, fructose, raffinose, and myo-inositol levels in p. euphratica leaves suggest that this species is pre-adapted to osmotic stress. an interesting feature is that the elevated carbohydrate concentrations do not necessitate further increases in osmolytes upon exposure to excess salinity. on the contrary, we have previously shown that osmotic adjustment, which is required when sodium accumulates, is achieved by decreases in carbohydrates, especially that of glucose  <cit> . furthermore, some classes of osmolytes such as sugar alcohols ameliorate the negative consequences of high ionic strength by preventing unfolding and precipitation of proteins  <cit> . further support for the importance of chaperones for salt preparedness comes from transcriptome analyses showing that transcript levels of cyclophilins , heat shock proteins and chaperones  were increased in comparison with p. × canescens . it is probably an advantage of p. euphratica that protective proteins and metabolites are already in place before the stress starts. up-regulation of these pathways is found in p. × canescens only upon salt exposure  <cit>  and, therefore, the protective effect in salt sensitive species may lag too much behind to prevent effectively salt imposed injury.

salt preparedness involves constitutively high expression of ion carriers
a striking and important finding is the overrepresentation of transport systems in p. euphratica compared to p. × canescens . a closer inspection of this category shows the presence of abc transporters, metabolite transporters, sugar transporters and transporters with known functions in salt tolerance such as aquaporins, ca2+, na+, and k+ transporters  <cit> . for instance, gating of aquaporins is important to maintain the water balance under stress  <cit> . in several species, including field grown p. euphratica, the expression of aquaporins decreased under salt stress  <cit> , whereas overexpression of aquaporins increased plant vigour only under non-stressed conditions  <cit> . the activation of water channels in non-stressed p. euphratica suggests higher water supply under normal conditions. this conclusion is corroborated by a higher ratio of transpiration to photosynthesis in p. euphratica than in p. × canescens supporting that p. euphratica is a phreatophytic species  <cit> .

maintenance of calcium and potassium supply are crucial features of salt tolerance  <cit> . in p. euphratica, k+ efflux was lower than in a salt sensitive poplar species involving na+-induced down regulation of potassium outward rectifying channels and nonselective cation channels and regulated by ca2+  <cit> . in our study, putative ca2+-activated outward rectifying k+ channels showed higher expression in p. × canescens than in p. euphratica, whereas several systems for k+-influx were increased in p. euphratica. the expression and response to salt stress of a large range of k+ channels has been screened in p. × canescens  <cit> . in leaves, none of these transport systems increased in response to salinity and some were not detectable such as the stelar k+-outward rectifying channel  that mediates the delivery of k+ from stelar cells to the xylem in the roots towards the shoot. skorc was neither expressed in leaves arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , whereas considerable activation was found in p. euphratica leaves. the most important k+-transporter with respect to salt tolerance is probably hkt <dig>  which was among the most highly upregulated genes  in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens. hkt <dig> is a high affinity k+ uptake transporter that facilitates na+ homeostasis  <cit> . in arabidopsis thaliana athkt1; <dig> controls the rate of na+ transport from root to shoot by the retrieval of na+ from the xylem in the roots  <cit>  and therefore is a key factor in determining salt tolerance in various species  <cit> . in p. euphratica sodium transport from root to shoot is also more strongly restricted than in salt sensitive species but the molecular basis of this effect is not yet known  <cit> . the strong transcriptional activation of pehkt <dig> suggests that this transporter is crucial for the control of na+ in p. euphratica leaves.

nhx-type antiporters, which are involved in na-extrusion from the cytosol back into the apoplast, or into endosomal compartments or the vacuole  <cit> , were not identified in our analysis. however, nahd <dig> was increased in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens. nahd <dig> is a sodium proton antiporter, whose heterolog expression in e. coli that was lacking its two sodium/proton antiporters naha and nahb restored salt tolerance  <cit> . the activity of penahd <dig> is ph dependent and functions only at low ph  <cit> . maintenance of its activity therefore requires a sufficiently large proton gradient. our comparative analysis revealed increased transcript levels of h+-atpases suggesting maintenance of a higher proton gradient in p. euphratica. since permanent activation of proton pumps is atp-consuming, a higher energy demand is expected for p. euphratica. it is, therefore, reasonable to assume that the observed increases in mitochondrial respiration in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens are required as driving force for a tighter control of ion compartmentalization.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that direct comparisons of the transcriptomes of different poplar species on poplar gene array are influenced by their phylogenetic distance, if the species are from different sections as applies for the salt sensitive p. × canescens  and the salt tolerant p. euphratica . this influence can be reduced by application of appropriate filters. using filtered transcriptome data, pathways for the production of secondary metabolites, and carbohydrates as well as a significant enrichment of genes in the categories 'transporters' and 'mitochondria' were identified that were activated in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens. this interpretation was corroborated by a combination of metabolomic analyses and targeted biochemical and physiological measurements suggesting that higher metabolic flux through the pathways resulted in the observed increases of phenolic end products and carbohydrates in p. euphratica compared with p. × canescens. tolerance mechanisms for excess salinity in p. euphratica are obviously relying on stronger pre-formed osmolyte and chaperone abundance and on tighter control of ion compartmentalization requiring increased energy allocation.

underrepresentation of go terms related to signaling and transcription suggest that mechanisms responsible for gene regulation and transcription were less active in p. euphratica. since previous analyses revealed only moderate transcriptomic changes in response to stress  <cit> , we propose that the underside to a high level of stress preparedness as a result of adaptation to a specific ecological niche is a loss of flexibility and adjustability of the transcriptome to environmental cues.

the results of our study may also have implications for wood production. poplars are fast fast-growing tree species that constitute an important resource for woody biomass. however, expansion of tree cultivation will only be possible on marginal or polluted soils that are not suitable for food production  <cit> . for this purpose stress tolerant tree species are required. the results of this study laid a foundation for understanding tree salt tolerance at the level of system biology. this knowledge can be used for tree improvement by biotechnological methods or conventional breeding.

