BACKGROUND
dna methylation has been found throughout the plant kingdom, typically in cytosines, forming part of symmetric  and asymmetric  sites  <cit> . the proportion of methylated cytosine in plants is variable, ranging from 6% in arabidopsis  <cit>  to 25% in maize  <cit> . dna methylation has been associated with the inactivation of transposons and silencing of genes  <cit> , and it has also been proposed that the function of dna methylation is to decrease transcriptional "noise"  <cit> .

in plants, most dna methylation is found in repetitive elements, while genes and other low copy sequences are generally hypomethylated  <cit> .

because of the large size of many plant genomes, particularly those of important crops  <cit> , gene-enriched sequencing strategies have been designed as an alternative to whole genome sequencing in an attempt to capture the so-called gene-space of such genomes. one of these gene-enrichment techniques, called methylation filtration , takes advantage of the difference in methylation between plant genes and repeats  <cit> . mf exploits the methylation-dependent restriction endonuclease mcrbc  from e. coli  <cit> . this enzyme digests dna in sequences that contain two sites, each one consisting of a purine and a cytosine methylated in carbon  <dig>  separated by 40– <dig> bp  <cit> . therefore, using an mcrbc+ e. coli strain as a host to construct a genomic shotgun library, heavily methylated repetitive dna is efficiently counter-selected, while hypomethylated low copy  sequences are substantially over-represented. mf was first tested in maize, where it yielded a 6-fold enrichment for genes relative to a whole genome shotgun  library used as a control  <cit> . subsequently, mf was applied at large scale in maize  <cit>  and in sorghum  <cit> , showing that approximately 95% of the genes in each genome were tagged  and that most genes and regulatory elements are unmethylated in these two species. these results led to the suggestion that a combination of gene-enrichment and traditional genome sequencing techniques could be combined to efficiently sequence large plant genomes  <cit> . further analyses of the large-scale mf data in maize and sorghum also provided insights into the biology of transposable element methylation and activity  <cit> . pilot mf studies of several monocot, dicot, and non-angiosperm plants  were also conducted  <cit> . these analyses determined that mf enriches for genes in all plants tested, although to different levels, and that it can be an effective approach to selectively clone and sequence genes from some large plant genomes, where the majority of the dna is composed of methylated repetitive elements.

in this study we performed a mf analysis of the lycophyte selaginella moellendorffii , representing a clade not included in previous mf studies. the lycophyte clade diverged from the fern/seed-plant lineage about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> .

the s. moellendorffii sporophyte is diploid and consists of dichotomously branching shoot and root systems. the shoot frequently terminates in arrested buds or bulbils that dehisce and allow clonal propagation. the reproductive structures are the strobili, which form toward the tip of the shoot, each one with either one micro- or megasporangium that produce micro- or megaspores, which in turn germinate and divide mitotically to form either the male or female gametophytes, respectively. the gametophyte produces either motile sperm or egg-forming archegonia. after fertilization of the egg, the new sporophyte remains dependent upon the female gametophyte for a short period of time. s. moellendorffii is an excellent model system to study some developmental processes, such as sporogenesis and gametophyte development, which are difficult to study in angiosperms because their spores and gametophytes are dependent upon and surrounded by sporophytic tissues. seedless plants provide an excellent opportunity to study the epigenetics of these processes, but little is known about dna methylation and other epigenetic marks in early vascular plants, except for the presence of heterochromatic bands identified by cytological staining  <cit> . ferns have been used in attempts to address the methylation of the haploid and diploid generations  <cit>  but their genomes are usually large and only specific sequences were analyzed. the extremely small genome of s. moellendorffii  and its available 8× coverage, high-quality draft genome assembly generated by the joint genome institute of the u.s. department of energy , will facilitate the study of s. moellendorffii's epigenome and its involvement in the alternation of generations. due to its small genome size, several transposon families, which are common targets of epigenetic modifications, may be low copy in s. moellendorffii and their sequence and epigenetics can be studied without the complications of high copy numbers, allowing the unequivocal identification of individual transposon loci.

sequences from this study have been deposited in ncbi genbank under the accession numbers .

RESULTS
sequence data and chloroplast content
we constructed mf and wgs libraries from s. moellendorffii and produced  <dig>  and  <dig>  high-quality paired sequence reads, respectively, each set representing approximately 1% of the genome. we did not expect a substantial difference in the proportion of gene-like sequences in the mf library relative to the wgs library in the small genome of s. moellendorffii because previous studies showed that in the ~ <dig> mbp genomes of rice and ceratodon purpureus  the gene enrichment factors  were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively  <cit> . as the chloroplast genome is typically non-methylated, we prepared total s. moellendorffii dna to construct the mf and wgs libraries in order to retain the chloroplast dna in both libraries and used it to verify that methylated sequences exist in s. moellendorffii and are counter-selected by mf. high-stringency alignments against the selaginella uncinata chloroplast genome  <cit>  identified  <dig> % and  <dig> % chloroplast dna sequences in the mf and wgs datasets, respectively , thus demonstrating that the s. moellendorffii genome is methylated and that mf selects for non-methylated sequences as expected.

the chloroplast reads identified in this way were not analyzed further and, therefore, a total of  <dig>  mf and  <dig>  wgs non-chloroplast reads were used in the following analyses.

overall, the c+g content is slightly higher in mf than in wgs data , probably due to the higher c+g content of gene sequences, which are predominant in the mf set .

approximately 13% of the sequences could not be aligned to the reference genome assembly at the stringency used in this study. this discrepancy may be due to the exclusion of sequence assemblies shorter than  <dig> kbp from the reference genome sequence.

repetitive sequences
in order to identify repetitive sequences we used nucleotide and amino acid databases of plant repetitive sequences  <cit> . consistent with the notion that repetitive elements are methylated in plants, only  <dig> % of the mf sequences had a match in either of the repeat databases, while matches in the wgs set reached  <dig> % . as sequences from early vascular plants are underrepresented in available databases, it is possible that many s. moellendorffii repetitive elements will not be identified by comparison with previously annotated plant repeats. to better estimate the repeat content of each dataset, we attempted to identify repeats de novo by aligning our mf and wgs reads to the draft genome assembly produced by jgi-doe. any sequence that had  <dig> or more high-stringency matches in the reference genome was considered repetitive . a 10-fold reduction in the percentage of these de novo repeats was observed in the mf vs. the wgs data set, showing that the highest-copy elements  are methylated in s. moellendorffii . taken together, the known and de novo repeats account for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the mf and wgs reads, respectively . among the repetitive mf reads, most were identified as known repeats by database searches, and nearly half were also identified de novo , although no mf repeats shows more than  <dig> copies in the s. moellendorffii reference genome sequence, and many are ribosomal rna sequences . interestingly, all mf sequences matching known transposable elements are low-copy in s. moellendorffii . in contrast, over 60% of the wgs repeats were identified de novo, and do not have a database match, while among those that have similarity to known repeats, nearly 1/ <dig> are high-copy . furthermore, known wgs repeats show a maximum of  <dig> hits in the genome, but 1/ <dig> of the wgs repeats have more than  <dig> copies, the highest having over  <dig> . the prevalence of low-copy repeats detected by mf suggests that low-copy transposons are unmethylated and, therefore, potentially active  <cit> . the observed substantial number of wgs unknown high-copy elements highlights the diversity of transposable elements throughout the plant kingdom.

sequence composition analysis of the repetitive sequences showed that mf repeats are richer in c+g than those in the wgs set, probably due to the abundance of conserved, non-methylated ribosomal rna sequences among the mf repeats .

gene sequences, expressed sequences and gene enrichment
using blastx, the mf and wgs non-repetitive sequences were compared to a partially curated, non-identical amino acid sequence database  maintained at jcvi, containing most proteins available from genbank. the percentages of blastx matches against this database were 35% and 22% in mf and wgs sequences, respectively , representing a  <dig> -fold enrichment in mf relative to wgs sequences, indicating that protein-encoding genes are frequently hypomethylated. therefore, mf enriches for genes even in the minute genome of s. moellendorffii. we also performed high stringency alignments of our sequences to the s. moellendorffii assembled ests  <cit> , which showed that mf enriches for transcribed sequences to a similar level as it does for protein sequences, suggesting hypomethylation of expressed sequences. combining the protein and transcribed sequences alignments, 49% of the mf and 31% of the wgs sequences matched either database, while sequences with no database match represented 48% of each dataset .

in order to estimate the level of gene enrichment achieved with mf in s. moellendorffii in comparison with previous studies done in other plants  <cit> , all sequences that were not identified as repeats or chloroplast were compared to the same curated database of known gene sequences used in those studies. in this way,  <dig> % of the wgs sequences and  <dig> % of the mf sequences had a match in the known gene database, resulting in a gef of  <dig>  .

we attempted to confirm that the exclusion of high-copy sequences in the mf library was due to dna methylation using an independent assay. to do this, we digested selaginella genomic dna with the methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme hpaii, whose restriction target site  includes the frequently methylated cpg motif. we then selected  <dig> of the highest-copy sequences in the wgs library with no match in the databases , as well as  <dig> low-copy mf sequences showing similarity to ests and known genes. we designed polymerase chain reaction  primer pairs so that the expected amplification product would include at least one hpaii site, and carried out pcr reactions with each primer pair using hpaii-digested and undigested dna as template. the results in figure 4a show that the amount of amplification product obtained with hpaii-digested template was substantially reduced relative to the undigested control in the  <dig> low-copy mf sequences, indicating that these sequences are not methylated in the genome, allowing digestion by hpaii and cleavage of the target template sequence. on the other hand, no difference in amplification was observed between the hpaii-digested and undigested high-copy templates. as each of these pcr products correspond to a mixture of sequences from multiple repeated loci, it is possible that some copies of these repeats show variation with respect to the presence of hpaii recognition sites, due to polymorphisms relative to the sequence used for pcr primer design. thus, the absence of digestion may reflect a lack of hpaii sites or the presence of methylated hpaii sites. to test if hpaii sites were present in the high-copy wgs pcr products amplified from hpaii-digested dna, we treated these  <dig> pcr products with hpaii. we observed digestion in all pcr products, indicating that hpaii sites were present and thus, methylated . nevertheless, we also observed the presence a low proportion of undigested pcr product in addition to the expected digestion products, as well as additional bands, suggesting that multiple polymorphic copies of each repeat were amplified in all cases.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that even in the small genome of s. moellendorffii, mf sequences display much lower repeat content than wgs sequences, and that each of the identified mf repeats has less than  <dig> copies in the genome. if the mf repeat sequences are aligned to the reference genome at higher stringency, the number of hits for each repeat decreases, indicating that polymorphisms can be found inside families of repetitive elements . therefore, by sequencing the hypomethylated fraction of the s. moellendorffii genome using mf it would be possible to identify which copies of these repetitive elements are methylated. mf of the s. moellendorffii genome can be used to obtain information on gene methylation as well, as it has been shown in arabidopsis, where a fraction of the genes do contain cytosine methylation  and this methylation is predominant in particular regions of the genes  <cit> . in consequence, a genome-wide dna methylation profile can be generated by comprehensive mf sequencing of this genome. furthermore, combining mf with ultra-high throughput next-generation sequencing techniques will facilitate this kind of analyses using the sequenced genome as a reference. as the variety of s. moellendorffii whose genome was sequenced by jgi-doe has two distinct haplotypes that differ in nucleotide sequence by ~2–5%, , it will be possible to determine if there is haplotype-specific dna methylation using mf sequencing. genome-wide epigenetic studies of early-diverging land plants will provide the foundation to broaden our understanding of the evolution of epigenetic regulation of developmental processes in plant biology.

