BACKGROUND
over the last few years, the phylogenomic approach was successful in untangling several aspects of the early evolution of eukaryotes. most eukaryotic diversity has been assigned to one of few supergroups  <cit>  and new relationships between these large assemblages have emerged. for example, the unexpected close evolutionary affinity of rhizaria to two of the "chromalveolate" groups, stramenopiles and alveolates , was recovered in several phylogenomic analyses  <cit> . even orphan lineages that have been very challenging to place within the eukaryotic tree, such as the telonemids and centrohelids, or the breviate amoebae, have recently been shown to be related to haptophytes and centrohelids or to amoebozoa, respectively  <cit> . however, several question marks remain, notably concerning the placement of the root  <cit> , the monophyly of some supergroups  <cit> , and the relationships within and between the supergroups, especially where uncultivated protists dominate.

the supergroup rhizaria, composed of several phyla that are difficult to maintain in laboratory cultures, is a good example of the persisting uncertainties for the relationships between the major members of this assemblage. although a few rhizarians can be isolated and cultivated  <cit> , the majority is known only from environmental sequences  <cit>  or single-specimens extractions  <cit> . consequently, rhizarians are represented in sequence databases almost entirely by ribosomal rdna  <cit> . a few protein sequences of actin, α-tubulin, β-tubulin, rna polymerase ii, and polyubiquitin are available for selected taxonomic groups  <cit>  but for other lineages, such as radiolarians, only the actin-coding gene has been sequenced, which is in sharp contrast to the great diversity of the group and its ecological importance. recently, five small rhizarian cdna libraries have been sequenced , partially filling the gap in comparison to other supergroups, and one genome project  is in progress .

according to the current consensus, rhizaria are composed of three highly diverse and possibly monophyletic phyla, cercozoa, foraminifera, and radiolaria . the rhizaria comprise also the parasitic phytomyxea and haplosporidia, as well as various marine filose and reticulose protists, including gromiida and filoreta, sometimes considered members of cercozoa  <cit> . the relationships between these groups are uncertain, due to the lack of resolution observed in the ssu and lsu rdna as well as the few available protein trees. the most controversial is the position of foraminifera, whose fast evolving ssu rdna sequences branch either close to haplosporidia and gromiida  <cit>  or as sister group to radiolaria  <cit> . the weakly supported grouping of foraminifera and radiolaria observed in some ssu and lsu rdna trees led to the creation of the infrakingdom retaria  <cit> . another source of information came from the insertions of one or two amino acids at the monomer junctions in the highly conserved protein polyubiquitin. these insertions have been found in cercozoa and foraminifera but not in all other eukaryotes studied to date, including radiolarians  <cit> . it has been argued that the ancestor of polycystine and acantharean radiolaria could have lost the insertion, but the lack of insertion could also be explained by contamination of dna samples by non-rhizarian protists  <cit> .

to test the retaria hypothesis and to shed light on the relationships between most of the deeply branching rhizarian groups, a protocol was developed to prepare cdna libraries suitable for  <dig> sequencing from a handful of cells collected from environmental samples. we obtained and analyzed more than  <dig>  ests from  <dig> marine acantharean radiolaria ,  <dig> parasitic phytomyxea  and gromia sphaerica, a giant marine testate protist that is capable of producing macroscopic bilaterian-like traces  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses of  <dig> genes support the retaria hypothesis and suggest that this group may be most closely related to phytomyxea and gromia. moreover, our study confirms the presence of polyubiquitin insertion in some acantharea and reveals another possible rhizarian-specific signature in one of the ribosomal proteins.

RESULTS
dataset construction
the phytomyxean p. brassicae and s. subterranea are parasites of the plant genera brassica and solanum, respectively, and the in vitro callus samples were prepared according to an unpublished protocol . consequently, an unknown amount of plant contamination was expected in the phytomyxean ests. an initial blast examination showed that many of the phytomyxid-callus contigs had high similarity to plant sequences and were thus possibly derived from the host cells. we took advantage of the large amount of data available for brassica and solanum to filter out these plant sequences and simplify data searching for constructing the single-gene alignments .

a total of  <dig> gene alignments with at least one rhizarian species represented in each were constructed for phylogenetic analyses. based on recently published results suggesting close evolutionary affinities between rhizaria, stramenopiles and alveolates, forming the so-called sar group  <cit> , representatives for these  <dig> groups were included. the full dataset comprised  <dig> rhizarians,  <dig> stramenopiles, and  <dig> alveolates. in order to reduce the risks of artifacts,  <dig> green plant taxa were chosen to root our phylogenies because 1) of the availability of complete genomes for many lineages, thus considerably reducing the amount of missing data in the outgroup; 2) they have evolved more slowly comparatively to most of the sar species; and 3) their relative evolutionary proximity to the sar group in the tree of eukaryotes  <cit> . however, an alternative outgroup, haptophytes, was also tested as it was proposed to be more closely related to the sar group   <cit> . we did not select it for the final analyses because only medium-sized est datasets are available for a limited number of species, except for one complete genome , and the intra-rhizaria relationships remained identical to the trees rooted using the green plants . each single-gene dataset was thoroughly tested by bootstrapped maximum likelihood  analyses for deep paralogy or suspicious relationships possibly indicative of lateral gene transfer  or contamination. the acanthareans are known to harbor zooxanthellae symbionts and polycystine radiolarians are hosts of prasinophytes, dinoflagellates and other alveolates  <cit> . accordingly, non-acantharean sequences were expected to be found. out of the  <dig> selected genes, we could identify  <dig> sequence related to haptophytes in astrolonche and phyllostaurus,  <dig> sequences of dinoflagellate origin in astrolonche,  <dig> and  <dig> sequences of general plant affinity in astrolonche and phyllostaurus, respectively, and, surprisingly,  <dig> sequences in astrolonche and  <dig> sequences in phyllostaurus clearly belonging to streptophytes . it is not clear to us why streptophyte sequences were present in our acantharean dataset, but one possible explanation could be that the samples were contaminated with a small amount of pollen. all these contaminant sequences were removed from our alignments. the curated protein alignments were concatenated into a supermatrix amounting to  <dig>  unambiguously aligned amino acid positions  that was subjected to phylogenetic analyses.

phylogenetic analyses of the supermatrix
we analyzed our concatenated alignment using probabilistic methods of tree reconstruction with  empirical site-homogeneous models of sequence evolution in ml  and bayesian  frameworks and  site-heterogeneous mixture model in a bayesian framework . figures  <dig> and  <dig> depict the relationships inferred from these analyses. the "lg" and "wag" trees received maximal bootstrap support proportions  and posterior probabilities , respectively, for nearly all nodes . as expected, the  <dig> major groups included in this study, i.e. rhizarians, stramenopiles and alveolates, were strongly recovered, and the relationships between and within them corresponded to previously published trees  <cit> . all  <dig> analyses robustly supported the monophyly of the four rhizarian phyla: foraminifera, acantharea, phytomyxea and cercozoa. notably, foraminifera were placed as a sister group to acantharea with 100% bp  and  <dig>  pp . the branching order within rhizaria was identical and highly supported in the "lg" and wag" trees, with the foraminifera + acantharea clade being sister to cercozoa and a group composed of phytomyxea and gromia . on the other hand, the site-heterogeneous cat model inferred a different topology that received low to high pp and bp, recovering the foraminifera + acantharea group in an internal position, sister to gromia  and more closely related to phytomyxea  to the exclusion of cercozoa . because the discrepancies between the "lg" and "cat" topologies are an indication that some relationships may be artifactual, we estimated the fit of these  <dig> models based on a cross-validation test . the "cat" model was found to much better fit the data than the "lg" model with a score averaged over  <dig> replicates of  <dig> ±  <dig> , indicating that the topology in figure  <dig> is likely the results of biases not correctly handled by the site-homogeneous models .

to better evaluate these differences, a topology comparison analysis using the approximately unbiased  test was performed  <cit> . both trees in figure  <dig>  and in figure  <dig>  were not rejected at the 5% significance level. this test was based on the comparison of trees obtained with  <dig> non-nested models, "lg"  and "cat" , using the "lg" empirical matrix. hence, if the topology in figure  <dig> had been rejected, it would not have been very informative because the "cat" model could still have inferred the true tree. in the present case, however, the lg-based au test kept the "cat" tree among the trees possibly correctly describing the relationships within rhizaria, thus strengthening the branching pattern showed in figure  <dig>  in addition, a topology with acantharea alone in a sister position to the rest of rhizaria was also tested in order to estimate the likelihood of the basal branching of radiolaria seen in some ssu trees . this topology was strongly rejected , further supporting the association of foraminifera and radiolaria.

evaluating the branching order within rhizaria
in our trees, both foraminiferans and acanthareans appeared as fast-evolving taxa. this raised a concern about their potentially erroneous grouping due to the long branch attraction  artifact  <cit>  that would affect not only the position of these diverging lineages but also the relationships among all rhizarian groups. to evaluate for the possibility of lba, we first conducted a fast-evolving taxa removal experience in which, in turn, the most diverging foraminiferan representative reticulomyxa filosa , both foraminiferan species , and the acanthareans  were discarded. the removal of r. filosa had no impact on the sister relationship of foraminiferans and acanthareans: both groups remained monophyletic with maximum support. however, this slightly different taxon sampling largely affected the branching order among the rhizarian groups. the "lg" model robustly placed gromia as the most closely related lineage to the foraminifera + acantharea group , and phytomyxea were recovered as sister to this assemblage with 87% bp . the "cat" model inferred the same topology , which also corresponded to the full tree inferred with this model  but, interestingly, the support values increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  pp and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  pp for the node joining foraminifera + acantharea + gromia and the node uniting phytomyxea to this group, respectively. similarly, when foraminifera were removed altogether, both models again recovered the "cat" topology  with high bp and pp values, exactly as in absence of reticulomyxa only . finally, discarding acantharea led in both "lg" and "cat" analyses to the basal position of foraminifera  and the sister position of gromia to phytomyxea , as observed in the complete "lg" tree .

to assess the robustness of the foraminifera-acantharea clade and to further investigate the two competing topologies for intra-rhizaria relationships , we then conducted a site removal analysis in which the fastest-evolving sites were progressively removed from the original alignment. the rationale behind this analysis is that fast-evolving sites are more likely to be saturated and not correctly interpreted as convergence by tree reconstruction methods, thus strongly influencing the potential artifactual grouping of highly diverging lineages  <cit> . specifically, we tested  <dig> shorter alignments ranging from  <dig>  aa to  <dig>  aa and reconstructed phylogenetic trees with lg and cat models at each step to determine the support value for several nodes of interest . first, the highly supported association between foraminifera and acantharea was not affected by the removal of fast-evolving sites, with almost no decrease in bootstrap values even for the smallest number of positions remaining in the alignment. this result provides additional evidence that the grouping of foraminifera and acantharea is not caused by artifacts of tree reconstruction. second, we monitored the bootstrap supports for the sister position of gromia with respect to phytomyxea, the basal position of the foraminifera-acantharea clade , as well as the alternatives: the sister grouping of gromia to the foraminifera-acantharea group, and the basal position of cercozoa . interestingly, as the fast-evolving sites were removed, the bootstrap values for the phylogenetic relationships obtained in the lg-based analysis of the complete dataset decreased  and, at the same time, the branching order supported by the cat-based reconstruction gained statistical significance . when 13' <dig> fast-evolving positions were removed, the lg-based analysis converged with high support  towards the topology that was weakly suggested by the cat-based analysis of the complete dataset for the association of phytomyxea, gromia, foraminifera and acantharea, before diverging likely due to lack of phylogenetic signal in the shortest alignments. the position of gromia remained more ambiguous throughout the removal process and, although the support for the association with phytomyxea rapidly decreased to below 50% bp, its sisterhood to the foraminifera-acantharea clade suggested by the "cat" model did not gain significance.

actin phylogeny
although our multigene analysis represents the broadest rhizarian sampling to date, three important rhizarian groups, haplosporidia, filoreta, and polycystinea, are still missing. therefore, we performed a separate phylogenetic analysis based on actin, the only protein-coding gene sequenced in all rhizarian groups. ml and bayesian analyses of our alignment , containing  <dig> rhizarians and  <dig> stramenopiles as outgroup, indicated that the acantharean astrolonche possesses  <dig> actin paralogues branching as sister groups to  <dig> of the actin paralogues present in foraminifera . the only actin sequence found in phyllostaurus grouped with astrolonche as sister to the foraminiferal paralogue  <dig>  sister to this clade were two previously obtained actin sequences of the polycystinean radiolarians thalassicolla pellucida and collozoum inerme, and their grouping with acantharea and foraminifera was strongly supported in bayesian inferences  but not supported in ml . however, the relationships between these  <dig> groups remained unresolved, leaving open the question of a possible radiolarian monophyly. for both paralogues, haplosporidia appeared as sister to the foraminifera + radiolaria clade, albeit without much support.

rhizarian signatures
in addition to the multigene and actin analyses, we screened our newly generated data for the presence of molecular signatures characteristic of rhizaria. first, polyubiquitin sequences were searched for the  <dig> or  <dig> amino acid insertion previously described at the monomer-monomer junction in all rhizaria except in radiolaria  <cit> . we found threonine  in  <dig> sequences of astrolonche and one sequence of phyllostaurus and alanine  in  <dig> sequences of phyllostaurus . the presence of  <dig> different amino acids in phyllostaurus was surprising, but this is not exceptional as it has already been observed in lotharella amoeboformis  where both a and s insertions have been found  <cit> . a serine  was also found in the gromia sphaerica sequence, which was identical to the available polyubiquitin of gromia oviformis . in addition, a new polyubiquitin sequence amplified from the phagomyxid maullinia ectocarpii was included.

interestingly, we identified a new insertion of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids in the 60s ribosomal protein l10a, a characteristic also apparently unique to rhizaria. a phenylalanine , an asparagine , and a serine  followed by a lysine  were inserted at position  <dig> in g. sphaerica, r. filosa, b. natans, and paracercomonas sp., respectively . in g. sphaerica, the sequence contained  <dig> additional inserted amino acids, i.e. a valine  and a glycine . unfortunately, this gene was not present in the acantharean dataset and several attempts to amplify it by pcr failed. blast searches against genbank-nr and dbest revealed no other known rpl10a gene containing this insertion.

discussion
this study provides the first robust evidence for a relationship between foraminifera and acantharea, a member of radiolaria. this result is rather surprising, taking into account the considerable differences in morphology, composition of the skeleton, and lifestyle between these groups. radiolarians have intracellular celestite   or siliceous  skeleton consisting of strontium sulphate and are holoplanktonic. in contrast, the foraminiferal skeleton  is extracellular, agglutinated or calcareous, and the majority of foraminiferans are benthic. pseudopodia morphology is also markedly different: radiolarians possess stiff, ray-like pseudopodia called axopodia, while foraminifers are defined by the presence of fine, anastomosing granuloreticulopodia. still, there are also common cell characteristics shared between these  <dig> groups, the importance of which must be re-evaluated in view of our data. for example, the network of fine reticulopodia observed in some radiolarians exhibits bidirectional streaming, and is used for capturing prey and locomotion in a similar manner as the foraminiferal granuloreticulopodia  <cit> . further studies of proteins involved in pseudopodial formation in both groups are needed to examine these properties at the molecular level. in that respect, it is interesting to note that our acantharean ests contained an unusual beta-tubulin strongly resembling the highly diverging type  <dig> sequences reported in foraminifera by  <cit> , as well as a less diverging isoform weakly grouping with a new foraminiferan beta-tubulin type  found in r. filosa cdna library .

the clustering of foraminifera and acantharea observed in our analyses partially confirms the retaria hypothesis  <cit> . although multigene data for the  <dig> other main groups of radiolaria, polycystinea and taxopodida, are still unavailable, we predict that they will also group with foraminifera. this relationship is suggested by the phylogenetic position of three fast-evolving sequences of polycystinean actin as sister to foraminiferan actin paralogue  <dig>  <cit>  as well as by the grouping of foraminifera with environmental clones assigned to polycystinea and sticholonche in an analysis of combined ssu and lsu rdna  <cit> . however, the branching order of these groups was uncertain and foraminifera may in fact branch within the radiolarian clade, suggesting that radiolaria  could be paraphyletic  <cit> . the next challenge will be testing whether this surprising pattern arises due to an artifact of lba, and testing the monophyly of radiolarians.

further effort is also required to resolve the relationships among the rhizarian groups. thus far, all phylogenetic studies of this supergroup have recovered radiolaria alone, or together with foraminifera as the most basal clade  <cit> . the latter topology was supported by our lg and wag-based tree reconstructions , but not by the bayesian inference with the cat model . instead, this method suggested that retaria are closely related to gromia and phytomyxea, to the exclusion of cercozoa. although this association received only low support with the full dataset, it was strengthen by the experiments with the foraminiferans or the fast-evolving sites removed, as well as by the au and cross-validation tests. the removal of r. filosa was particularly informative in indicating that this species alone could have attracted retaria at the base of rhizaria in the "lg" tree, due to its high rate of evolution. indeed, when it was not included, the topology suggested by the "cat" model was robustly recovered. acanthareans, on the other hand, seemed to be less prone to lba as they consistently branched in a derived position when both foraminiferans were removed. the fast-evolving sites removal analysis also convincingly supported the grouping of retaria, gromia, and phytomyxea, and was in agreement with the properties of the cat model; it has been shown that this model infers homoplasies better than empirical models   <cit> . therefore, it might be interpreted that for our complete dataset, the cat model detected and correctly interpreted more of the saturated positions that were misleading in the raxml analysis. within this group, the position of gromia could not be inferred with precision as it branched either as sister to retaria or phytomyxea. however, the grouping of gromia with phytomyxea was recovered only when acantharea were absent or r. filosa was included in the analyses with the "lg" model. moreover, the better fitted cat model robustly placed gromia in a sister position to retaria. interestingly, the association of foraminifera, acantharea, gromia and phytomyxea has never been described, although ssu and actin trees showed generally unsupported relationships between some but not all lineages  <cit> . in addition, other lineages, such as haplosporidia or filoreta also belong to this group and will likely be crucial for resolving the internal branching order.

finally, our study clarifies the question whether acanthareans and polycystines truly lack the rhizarian-specific polyubiquitin insertion, as previously reported  <cit> . to explain the apparent absence of the insertion in these two groups, it has been proposed that it was lost in radiolarians, or was acquired after their divergence  <cit> . in our est data, both acantharean species feature polyubiquitin sequences with the insertion, suggesting that the sequences presented in  <cit>  were not of acantharean origin, but perhaps originated from unidentified symbionts.

CONCLUSIONS
our multigene analysis elucidates the relationship between two important rhizarian phyla, foraminifera and radiolaria , which has been a matter of recent controversy. because acantharea do not fully represent the radiolarian diversity and genomic data for other important groups  is still missing, we cannot rule out the possibility that radiolaria are paraphyletic. nevertheless, our study strongly indicates that a basal position of radiolaria with respect to the rest of rhizaria is highly unlikely. instead, our analysis suggests a novel grouping including foraminifera, radiolaria, gromia and phytomyxea. within this group, gromia might be most closely related to foraminifera and radiolaria, but its specific phylogenetic position will depend on other important lineages such as haplosporidia or filoreta.

