BACKGROUND
the notch signaling pathway is one of the key signaling pathways employed during embryonic development, homeostasis and disease progression . though first discovered in drosophila, the notch pathway is evolutionary conserved across many metazoan species playing an important role in various processes including cell fate specification, differentiation, tissue patterning and homeostasis, as well as stem cell self-renewal .

the core components of the notch signaling pathway include the notch transmembrane receptors, notch1- <dig> in mammals, and their five canonical membrane-bound ligands of the delta or serrate/jagged family, jagged1- <dig>  and delta <dig>  delta <dig> and delta <dig> in mammals. notch proteins are single-pass transmembrane proteins consisting of an extracellular domain , encompassing 29– <dig> tandem epidermal growth factor like repeats, a shorter membrane-spanning region and an intracellular domain  containing a transactivation domain .

cell-cell contact and the interaction of the necd with one of the ligands expressed by a neighboring cell leads to a cascade of proteolytic events involving an s <dig> cleavage of the notch receptor, and a cleavage at the s <dig> site by γ-secretase. this series of proteolytic cleavages results in the release of the nicd from the membrane. thus, upon signaling the nicd translocates to the nucleus where it binds the transcription factor cbf <dig> ). the binding of nicd to cbf <dig> replaces co-factors of the groucho family that function to repress target genes and in doing so allows the recruitment of the co-activator mastermind-like  promoting the formation of a cbf1-nicd-maml complex that leads to transcriptional activation of target genes including members of the hes and hey families of bhlh transcription factors  <cit> .

transgenic reporters providing in vivo read-outs of notch signaling activity have been useful for investigating the complex functions of notch signaling across species. to date, several transgenic strains of mice have been established to monitor notch signaling activity, each employing slightly different construct designs, but all based on the use of notch-responsive elements driving the expression of a readily detectable genetically-encoded reporter. of these, a transgenic mouse line, named nas , used the tp <dig> minimal promoter , which is transactivated in a cbf/rbpjκ-dependent manner by the nicd and in doing so functions as a read-out of notch activity. the nas reporter comprised a modified version of the lacz gene coding for nuclear ß-galactosidase under the control of tp <dig>  faithful expression regulated by notch signaling was demonstrated by loss of reporter activity in cbf mutants  <cit> . another transgenic mouse line, cbf:egfp, used egfp as a reporter gene driven by the basal simian virus  promoter and a cbf1-responsive element containing four cbf <dig> binding sites. the cbf:egfp strain has been used to investigate notch signaling in a variety of contexts, including neural stem cells and intermediate neural progenitors during mouse neural development. faithful responsiveness of the cbf:egfp to notch signaling activity was demonstrated using an shrna mediated knock-down of cbf <dig> and the γ–secretase antagonist f <dig>  <cit> .

a recent report developed a construct based on the promoter of the notch target gene hes5- <dig>  coupled with a destabilized nuclear-localized venus fluorescent protein and the 3’ untranslated region of hes5- <dig>  using transient transgenesis by electroporation, this notch signaling reporter was used in chick embryos to investigate endogenous notch activity during neurogenesis. highlighting the importance of single-cell resolution reporters to understand cell fate and lineage decisions, this reporter revealed distinct notch signaling dynamics in different cell division modes in neural progenitors within the neuroepithelium  <cit> .

another report presented an alternative strategy to the use of transcriptional reporters as read-outs of notch signaling activity that could also be used for monitoring notch activation in real-time in living cells. in this newly described reporter notch activity was recorded in a cell culture system using a luciferase complementation-based reporter that could directly monitor interactions between a specific nicd and cbf/rbpjκ, thereby allowing the non-invasive detection of protein-protein interactions in any subcellular compartment  <cit> .

since the available notch reporter mouse strains either lack sensitivity or do not provide single-cell resolution read-outs, we sought to generate an improved reporter that would provide single-cell resolution reporter activity, as a key in understanding cell dynamics and behaviors, and greater sensitivity by incorporating a nuclear-localized bright fluorescent reporter, which could be readily detected, live imaged and quantified. to do so, we designed a construct that combined the signaling read-out efficiency of the multimerized cbf <dig> responsive elements  <cit>  with an improved nuclear-localized fusion to a bright fluorescent protein. fluorescent proteins fused to histones are bound to chromatin even during cell division, therefore allowing the tracking of single cells and their progeny, as well as providing information on cell division and cell death  <cit> . we generated an h2b-venus fusion protein, comprising human histone h2b fused to the bright yellow fluorescent protein venus, and placed it under the control of four cbf <dig> responsive elements and the simian virus  <dig>  minimal promoter in a configuration resembling the previously reported cbf:egfp notch signaling reporter  <cit> . we used this construct to generate cbf:h2b-venus transgenic mouse es cells and an equivalent strain of mice. in this way the cbf:h2b-venus transgene was designed to function as a sensitive single-cell resolution reporter of notch signaling, and would be comparable to the tcf/lef:h2b-gfp single-cell resolution reporter we previously generated as a read-out of wnt/β-catenin signaling  <cit> .

we recovered several founder transgenic lines, which recapitulated the spatio-temporal localization of notch signaling activity during mouse embryonic development, as well as in adults showing among others expression in the headfolds, neural tissue of the early embryo, the vasculature, the kidney, and brain. one was analyzed in detail and is presented here. overall, expression of cbf:h2b-venus recapitulated the previously reported cbf:egfp localization including the expression in the ventricular zone  and sub-ventricular zone  regions of the cortex of the brain  <cit> . we confirmed notch signaling specificity of the reporter, both in cells and in embryos, through notch signaling stimulation achieved by misexpression of nicd leading to reporter activation.

the cbf:h2b-venus reporter strain produced bright single-cell resolution reporter activity. notch responsiveness of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter was demonstrated through reporter activation by transfection of an nicd expression construct in mouse embryo fibroblast  cells derived from transgenic embryos, and electroporation into the visceral endoderm of early post-implantation embryos. due to its improved sensitivity, the cbf:h2b-venus reporter revealed additional sites of notch signaling activity, that have previously not been described, including expression in the epiblast  of the peri-implantation mouse embryo. collectively, these data demonstrate that we have generated a transgenic mouse strain that faithfully reports notch signaling activity and serves as a quantitative, non-invasive single-cell resolution reporter of notch signaling. the cbf:h2b-venus reporter currently represents an improved tool for imaging the in vivo processes triggered by canonical notch signaling.

RESULTS
generation of cbf:h2b-venus reporter construct
several cis-regulatory elements necessary for notch signaling activated transcription have previously been tested in characterized notch reporter lines  <cit> , however, none of these lines provides a single-cell resolution read-out of notch signaling activity. to overcome this issue, we used a previously characterized cbf <dig> responsive element to drive h2b-venus reporter expression. the cbf1-responsive element  contains four cbf1-binding sites upstream of the basal simian virus-sv40-promoter  and has been used in previous studies reporting endogenous notch signaling during mouse brain development  <cit> . the cbfre and the sv <dig> minimal promoter were cloned in front of an h2b-venus reporter cassette to generate the final construct, cbf:h2b-venus. we used this construct to generate transgenic cbf:h2b-venus es cells by electroporation. cbf:h2b-venus transgenic mice were generated by pronuclear injection of the plasmid construct according to standard protocols. three founder mice were identified and screened for bright and faithful expression of the reporter. the characterization of one of these is presented in this report.

reporter activation upon notch signaling stimulation
to test for notch responsiveness of the cbf:h2b-venus construct, and in doing so validate the reporter as a bona fide notch signaling reporter, we derived mef cells from e <dig>  hemizygous transgenic embryos and transfected them with an nicd expression construct   <cit>  to activate reporter expression. subsequent facs analysis revealed an increase in fluorescence upon transfection of pcx:nicd into cbf:h2b-venustg/+ mef cells demonstrating the notch responsiveness of the reporter construct .

to validate the reporter in vivo, we electroporated the pcx:nicd plasmid into the superficial visceral endoderm  layer of e <dig>  cbf:h2b-venustg/+ embryos . the ve does not normally express the h2b-venus reporter in wild-type embryos. an pcx:mcherry construct, providing constitutive expression of the mcherry cytoplasmic red fluorescent protein was either electroporated alone  or together with the pcx:nicd plasmid . electroporated and control non-electroporated embryos were then subject to ex utero culture  <cit> . cells receiving the pcx:mcherry would be readily visualized due to cytoplasmic mcherry red fluorescence , while cells receiving the pcx:nicd would activate the cbf:h2b-venus reporter and be visualized by their nuclear-localized venus fluorescence, and cells receiving both pcx:nicd and cbf:h2b-venus would exhibit a red fluorescent cytoplasm and yellow fluorescent nuclei. indeed, electroporation of pcx:mcherry alone did not activate the h2b-venus reporter . by contrast, electroporation of pcx:nicd did activate reporter expression in cells of the ve  thereby demonstrating the notch responsiveness of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter.

generation of cbf:h2b-venus transgenic es cells
since previous studies have reported that mouse es cells express notch receptors and ligands  <cit> , we investigated whether the cbf:h2b-venus transgene was expressed in pluripotent mouse embryonic stem  cells. the cbf:h2b-venus transgene was introduced into r <dig> es cells  <cit>  and stable transgenic lines were selected . laser scanning confocal imaging of transgenic es cells revealed that the cbf:h2b-venus reporter was nuclear-localized in individual cells and overlapped with a hoechst nuclear stain ). the reporter was present in a subpopulation of es cells expressing the pluripotency-associated factors nanog  and oct <dig> .

since it had previously been reported that notch signaling is involved in regulating the timing of the emergence of the different germ layers in es cell-derived embryoid bodies , we used eb formation to test the differentiation potential of the cbf:h2b-venus transgenic es cells and determine whether reporter localization might correlate with the timing of germ layer formation   <cit> . our results revealed that notch signaling could initially be detected in ebs cultured until day  <dig> . by day  <dig> however, fluorescence was downregulated in concordance with progressive differentiation. at this stage tube-like or cystic structures could be detected within ebs where notch signaling had been downregulated   <cit> .

collectively, these data indicate that the cbf:h2b-venus transgene is a sensitive single-cell resolution notch signaling reporter that reveals notch signaling activity in mouse es cell cultures.

the cbf:h2b-venus reporter reveals novel sites of notch signaling within the early post-implantation epiblast
the robust expression of the cbf:h2b-venus transgenic es cells prompted us to investigate whether the reporter is also active in the pluripotent epiblast lineage of the pre-implantation embryo in cbf:h2b-venus transgenic embryos. we failed to detect any fluorescent signal within the inner cell mass of e <dig> -e <dig>  transgenic blastocysts , suggesting that either the cbf:h2b-venus reporter was not sufficiently sensitive for direct visualization at these stages, or that notch signaling is not active in the epiblast lineage at pre-implantation stages.

to further characterize the localization of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter and thus the activation of notch signaling, we analyzed its distribution in early post-implantation stages . after implantation into the maternal uterus around embryonic day   <dig> , the three blastocyst cell lineages  are expanded and the axes of the embryo  are specified at early post-implantation . the visceral endoderm  encapsulates the pluripotent epiblast distally, and extra-embryonic ectoderm proximally, and close apposition of these adjacent tissues facilitates cross talk between them, resulting in the formation of the distal visceral endoderm . subsequently, translocation of the dve population to generate the anterior visceral endoderm  leads to the establishment of the a-p axis .

at the earliest post-implantation stages that we could recover , reporter expression was detected in the epiblast of the cbf:h2b-venus embryos . expression in the epiblast persisted until the onset of gastrulation . in addition, for a very brief window of time, at around ~ e <dig> , reporter expression was detected in the extra-embryonic ectoderm . this extra-embryonic expression was downregulated by ~ e <dig>  . of note, reporter expression in the epi at early post-implantation stages looks like a salt-and-pepper distribution , begging the question whether this distribution represents different cell populations or whether these could be fluctuations in notch signaling. future studies will address this question. epiblast-specific location was confirmed by co-localization with the epiblast marker, oct <dig> . localization of the pan-ve marker gata <dig> , and pan-emve marker eomes in cbf:h2b-venus embryos revealed that the reporter expression was excluded from the ve . the epiblast-specific site of notch reporter expression has not been previously reported and may presage the future requirement for notch signaling and subsequently reporter expression in neural tissue.

the cbf:h2b-venus reporter marks the neural plate and cardiogenic region at gastrulation
during gastrulation, which in the mouse takes place between e <dig>  and e <dig> , three germ layers, ectoderm, mesoderm and definitive endoderm, are formed from the pluripotent epiblast lineage. mesoderm and definitive endoderm arise when epiblast cells undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition , and in doing so lose their epithelial character, ingress through the primitive streak , which forms at the posterior end of the embryo, and migrate away as the so-called wings of mesoderm  <cit> .

to evaluate cbf:h2b-venus notch reporter expression at gastrulation stages, we examined embryos between e <dig>  and e <dig>  . at e <dig>  strong reporter expression in cbf:h2b-venus embryos was found in the anterior epiblast, in the prospective headfold region in contrast to lower level of fluorescence in the posterior part . at e <dig>  the reporter continued to be strongly expressed in cells of the forming headfolds , and in cells within the ps region. in the latter it could be detected in both, epiblast  and nascent mesoderm cells . reporter expression in cells in the headfolds persisted until later stages, ~e <dig>  . at e <dig>  single-positive cells with variable fluorescent intensities could also be detected in the ps region of the embryo . in addition, at this stage reporter expression could also be noted in the cardiogenic plate , in agreement with a previous report in the chick  <cit> . notably, the role of notch signaling in early cardiac cells in the mouse is still elusive, whereas its role in later stages of heart development, especially in valve formation, has been well documented  <cit>  . in the latter report, notch <dig> activity was analyzed using an antibody against the n1icd and could detect expression in the nascent mesoderm, however in contrast to the cbf:h2b-venus reporter, no expression could be detected in the neuroectoderm  <cit> . a possible explanation for this discrepancy could be that the cbf:h2b-venus reporter is a transcriptional not translational reporter of notch signaling activity.

in addition, robust reporter expression was detected in the blood islands , a cell population of maturing erythrocytes surrounded by developing endothelial cells that will give rise to the mesoderm layer of the yolk sac  <cit> , another site of persistent specific and strong notch reporter expression .

surprisingly, we failed to observe expression of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter in the presomitic mesoderm , a tissue of known and dynamic notch activity  <cit> . however, several previously characterized reporters have also failed to detect notch activity at this site of notch activity.

cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression at mid-gestation and to later fetal stages
by midgestation cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression was predominantly localized in the vasculature. the cbf:h2b-venus reporter was observed in endothelial cells of the dorsal aorta at e <dig>  and at e <dig> , as well as in the umbilical vessels . expression was also detected in the intersomitic vessels , the pharyngeal arch arteries , vessels of the head surrounding the neural tube and the otic vesicle , as well as in the developing vasculature of the limb bud .

we determined that this observed site of reporter expression was in endothelial cells of the vasculature, by analyzing the localization of pecam  a marker of endothelial cells in cbf:h2b-venus embryos and noting the co-localization of the pecam antibody and venus . note, the nuclear expression of the reporter and membrane expression of pecam in the same cells .

localization of cbf:h2b-venus expression at later fetal stages  revealed reporter expression in a variety of tissues. in the lens, h2b-venus could be detected in cells of the cuboidal epithelium that comprises the anterior lens , as well as in cells in the equatorial region , the region where anterior capsular epithelial cells become integrated into the lens-proper and form the lens fibers. in the retina of the eye, strong expression could be found in the retinal pigmented epithelium, rpe . reporter expression was also detected in mesenchymal cells of the lung , in cells that will form the valves of the heart , in cells of the gut  and liver , in the vasculature of the digits , as well as in cells of thymus , and in cells surrounding the nasal process likely being vascular cells .

cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression in post-natal tissues
to examine the expression and localization of this novel notch signaling reporter at postnatal tissues, we dissected organs of three-week-old animals and analyzed transgene expression . strong reporter expression was found in the interstitial mesenchymal cells of the lung , as well as in the kidney  and the adrenal gland . robust but restricted reporter expression, mainly to the vasculature, was observed in several tissues including the uterus, testis and pancreas . reporter expression was also detected in cells of the cardiac and skeletal muscle . recent studies have revealed that notch signaling is required for the establishment and maintenance of muscle satellite cells, confirmation of whether venus-positive cells are satellite cells, is outside the scope of the present study and will be addressed in the future . notch signaling has been implicated in t-cell lineage commitment and maturation in the thymus, as well as in t-cell activation and differentiation . fluorescence indicative of notch signaling activity was detected in several parts of the immune system of the animal, such as in cells of the thymus, the spleen, peyer’s patches within the intestine, and the lymph nodes . additional sites of cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression that can be noted were the intestine  and the pituitary .

cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression in the kidney
to validate the cbf:h2b-venus reporter as an improved tool for visually dissecting morphogenetic processes, we chose to look at reporter expression in the kidney in detail. the importance of the evolutionary conserved notch signaling pathway is not just illustrated by the fact that it is indispensable for kidney development across phyla  <cit> , but it is also involved in the pathophysiology of congenital diseases, such as the alagille syndrome  <cit> , glomerular diseases, in tissue repair after acute renal injuries  <cit>  <cit> , as well as in the prevention of renal epithelial cancers  <cit> .

the mammalian kidney develops from the intermediate mesoderm in three distinct phases, successively forming the pro-, meso- and metanephros. whereas the metanephros will give rise to the adult kidney, the pro- and mesonephros are vestigial embryonic structures that will eventually degenerate. the pronephros begins to develop at around e <dig>  giving rise to the ureteric bud , which will invade the metanephric mesenchyme surrounding it. bifurcation of the ub and subsequent branching and elongation will form the collecting duct system. reciprocal signaling between the metanephric mesenchyme and the ub is important to give rise to the progenitor cells of glomerular and epithelial cells. since notch signaling has been shown to play a key role in these processes, we analyzed reporter expression in the developing kidney during metanephros development at e <dig>  and e <dig>   as well as neo-   and postnatal  stages . at e <dig>  we could detect reporter expression in the metanephric mesenchyme . by e <dig>  through postnatal stages, h2b-venus expression was observed in the podocytes . notch- <dig> has previously been reported to be required for the differentiation of proximal nephron structures, such as podocytes and proximal convoluted tubules  <cit> . at neonatal  stages, h2b-venus expression was detected in the collecting duct system as well as in the podocytes . in three-week old  animals reporter expression was exclusively observed in the podocytes .

cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression in the brain
notch signaling has been intensively studied and shown to be indispensable for various aspects of neural development. notch signaling has been proposed as a master regulator of neural stem cells, as well as serving crucial functions in differentiated cells in the adult brain. we therefore analyzed the localization of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter in the developing brain . even though our analysis is not comprehensive, it identifies areas of notch signaling in the brain that are in agreement with previously published domains of notch expression  <cit> .

in general overview, from embryonic through adult stages reporter expression was observed in several parts of the brain including the telencephalon, mesencephalon, the olfactory bulbs, ganglia, as well as the cerebellum and the brain stem . the latter two exhibited very strong cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression. a more detailed histological analysis of brain sections revealed expression at e <dig>  in neurons in the cortex  and in the choroid plexus . reporter expression was noted in the spinal cord from e <dig>  to adulthood, and is depicted at e <dig>  . we also detected expression in the hippocampus and the subventricular zone , as well as in the cortex. a particular group of cells in the cortex at the border of the two hemispheres overlying the corpus callosum exhibited very strong expression . in the cerebellum, shown at p <dig>  robust reporter expression was detected in the granular layer, whereas only a few sparse cells in the cortical layer were positive for the reporter . at this stage reporter expressing cells, likely neurons, were also detected in the cortex . during early embryogenesis, at e <dig> , we also observed cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression in the ventricular zone  <dig>  of the neural tube  expression of notch and its ligands in v <dig> has been previously described  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have generated a novel single-cell resolution transgenic strain of mice that serves as a transcriptional read-out of notch signaling. the reporter comprises multimerized cbf <dig> dna binding sites that drive the expression of a subcellular-localized, genetically-encoded fluorescent fusion protein, h2b-venus. we have characterized the expression of the cbf:h2b-venus reporter in detail in mouse es cells, post-implantation embryos and adult tissues. specificity of this putative notch signaling reporter was demonstrated by its activation upon transfection with an nicd expression construct in transgenic mef cells grown in culture and in vivo in embryos, as well as by documenting regions of reporter expression that correspond to those previously reported as sites of notch signaling activity. collectively, these data suggest that cbf:h2b-venus reporter expression acts as a faithful read-out of notch signaling.

in addition to previously reported sites of expression, the sensitivity of the reporter identified new sites of notch signaling in embryos, in particular within the epiblast of the early post-implantation embryo. these novel sites of expression are supported by previous observations of notch signaling function made in mouse embryonic stem  cells.

even though the reporter described in this report provides a read-out of the transcription resulting from pathway activation, and is not a read-out of the localization of one of the core components of the notch signaling pathway, we cannot exclude some perdurance of the fluorescent protein. as such, the complete domain of reporter expression, that we have characterized, may encompass cells actively signaling as well as those that have recently been actively signaling but currently not signaling. future efforts will be aimed at generating more sensitive reporters and will include the development of dual reporters that combine short-term expression, using a destabilized fluorescent protein with a more perdurant fluorescent protein as has recently been described in zebrafish  <cit> .

even so, the cbf:h2b-venus reporter is, at present, the most sensitive reporter of notch signaling, and due to the use of the human histone h2b fusion, it allows the live visualization of individual cells in cohorts. it is presently the only reporter facilitating the analysis of cellular dynamics, including tracking of single cells in notch responsive populations. live imaging has become an essential part of understanding developmental processes; therefore this reporter should be a valuable tool to understand cellular events in development and disease regulated by canonical notch signaling.

