BACKGROUND
one of the most fundamental evolutionary questions concerning insect-bacteria symbiosis is the origin and phylogenetic relationships of various symbiotic lineages. this knowledge is necessary for understanding the dynamics and mechanisms of symbiosis establishment and maintenance within the host. for instance, close relationships between symbionts and pathogenic bacteria suggests a transition from pathogenicity to symbiosis; polyphyly of the symbionts within a single host group is evidence of their multiple independent origins and close relationships among symbionts of different biology indicate high ecological flexibility within a given symbiotic group  <cit> . these implications are particularly important within enterobacteriaceae, the group containing a broad spectrum of symbiotic lineages and forms described from various groups of insects. their biology varies from loosely associated facultative symbionts  symbionts) to obligatory mutualists of a highly derived nature, called primary  symbionts  <cit> . however, the concept of the p- and s-symbionts and the associated terminology are a major oversimplification and they become inadequate for the description of the ever increasing complexity of the symbiotic system within enterobacteriaceae. this complexity is manifested by such phenomena as the presence of multiple symbionts in a single host  <cit> , occurrence of intermediate symbiotic forms and the replacement of symbionts within a host  <cit>  or close phylogenetic relationships between typical s- and p-symbionts revealing their high ecological versatility  <cit> . a good example of such a complex system is provided by the occurrence of multiple obligate symbionts within auchenorrhyncha  <cit> , universally harboring sulcia muelleri   <cit>  with either hodgkinia cicadicola  in cicadas, zinderia insecticola  in spittlebugs or baumannia cicadellinicola  in sharpshooters. all of these latter symbionts are obligate and have been cospeciating with their hosts for millions of years  <cit> . a close phylogenetic relationship between typical s- and p-symbionts has been so far demonstrated in two well defined and often studied groups, the enterobacterial genera arsenophonus and sodalis  <cit> . the general capability of s-symbionts to supplement the metabolic functions of p-symbionts or even replace them was demonstrated experimentally by replacement of buchnera with serratia in aphids  <cit> .

it is obvious that all these fascinating processes can only be studied on a reliable phylogenetic background  <cit> . unfortunately, under current conditions, the phylogeny within enterobacteriaceae and the placement of various symbiotic lineages are very unstable. particularly, the p-symbionts present an extremely difficult challenge to phylogenetic computation due to their strongly modified genomes  <cit> . there are several root problems that are responsible for this dissatisfactory state. traditionally, 16s rdna was frequently used as an exclusive molecular marker for the description of a new symbiont. many lineages are thus represented only by this gene, which has been shown within enterobacteriaceae to be inadequate for inferring a reliable phylogeny  <cit> . in addition, it is notoriously known that the phylogenetic information of symbiotic bacteria is often seriously distorted due to the conditions associated with the symbiotic lifestyle. the effect of strong bottlenecks accompanied by reduced purifying selection and the overall degeneration of symbiotic genomes have been thoroughly discussed in many studies  <cit> . as a result of these degenerative processes, symbiotic lineages may experience parallel changes of their dnas and these convergences produce the main source of phylogenetic artifacts. among the most important features are biased nucleotide composition favoring adenine-thymine bases and rapid sequence evolution. while the compositional bias leads to the introduction of homoplasies at both nucleotide and amino acid levels, the accelerated evolution is a well known source of the long-branch attraction phenomenon  <cit> . due to these circumstances, symbionts almost always appear as long branches in phylogenetic trees and tend to cluster together  <cit> .

various methodological approaches have been tested to overcome these difficulties . they are based mainly on the concatenation of a large number of genes through the whole genome  <cit> , the supertree and the consensus approach  <cit> , exclusion of amino acids  most affected by nucleotide bias  <cit> , modifications of sequence evolution models  <cit>  and use of the genome structure as a source of phylogenetic data  <cit> . phylogenomic studies based on large concatenated sets frequently imply monophyly of the typical p-symbionts . however, due to the limited number of available genomes, these studies are usually based on inadequate taxon sampling. for example, secondary symbionts and plant pathogens that were shown to break the p-symbiont monophyly in the analysis using a nonhomogeneous model  <cit>  could not be included into these phylogenomic studies. it is important to note that p-symbionts are probably only distantly related to the escherichia/salmonella/yersinia clade. therefore, the monophyly of p-symbionts derived from such a phylogenomic dataset is logically inevitable, but does not carry any evolutionary information.

the non-monophyletic nature of p-symbionts has been recently suggested in several studies. perhaps the most inspiring is a study based on a nonhomogeneous model that separates p-symbionts into two independent lineages  <cit> . as an alternative, a paraphyletic arrangement of these symbionts in respect to several free-living taxa has been revealed from gene-order analysis based on break-point and inversion distances  <cit> . most recently, williams et al.  <cit>  performed a 'telescoping' multiprotein phylogenomic analysis of  <dig> γ-proteobacterial genomes. the phylogeny of enterobacteriaceae endosymbionts was difficult to resolve, although it appeared that there were independent origins of at least the sodalis and buchnera lineages.

thus, there is now a spectrum of hypotheses on the phylogeny of insect symbionts, ranging from complete polyphyly with multiple independent origins to complete monophyly with one common origin. in this study, we take advantage of current progress in computational methods to investigate phylogenetic relationships among the symbiotic lineages. one of the promising recent methodological advances is the introduction of a site-heterogeneous non-parametric mixture cat model that allows for site-specific features of protein evolution  <cit> . this model was shown to solve the long-branch attraction  artifacts and outperform the previous models  <cit> . similarly, the slow-fast method based on removal of the fastest evolving sites was shown to reduce phylogenetic artifacts  <cit> , as well as purine/pyrimidine  data recoding  <cit>  or amino acid data recoding  <cit> . we used these methods as the core of a complex approach and tried to investigate series of methods, models and parameters to detect common trends in changes of the topologies. to do this, we applied two parallel approaches, one based on the application of recently developed algorithms and the other on the removal or recoding of the positions most affected by rapid sequence evolution and/or compositional  bias. in addition, we paid particular attention to the sampling and used as much of a complete set of both symbiotic and free-living lineages as possible. this approach is particularly important to avoid interpretation uncertainties due to the absence of phylogenetically important lineages.

RESULTS
the complete methodological design of this study and the resulting topologies are depicted in figure  <dig>  all matrices, alignments and phylogenetic trees are available in the treebase database http://purl.org/phylo/treebase/phylows/study/tb2:s <dig>  as supplementary material, or on the webpage http://users.prf.jcu.cz/husnif <dig> 

standard maximum likelihood and bayesian inference
the single gene maximum likelihood  analyses of both nucleic and amino acid data provided an array of mutually exclusive topologies. the majority consensus based on amino acid data  groups almost all symbionts into polytomy with only two pairs of sister symbiotic species being resolved . phylogenetic trees inferred by ml and bayesian inference  from the nucleic acid concatenated data using the general time reversible model with an estimated proportion of invariable sites  and heterogeneity of evolutionary rates modeled by the four substitution rate categories of the gamma  distribution with the gamma shape parameter  estimated from the data  were apparently affected by phylogenetic artifacts, as demonstrated by placement of riesia and wigglesworthia within the buchnera cluster with high posterior probabilities in the bi tree  and the attraction of two outgroup species  in the ml tree with high bootstrap support . similar topologies were also retrieved from the amino acid concatenate by ml and bi using the lg+i+Γ, wag+i+Γ and gtr+i+Γ models . nevertheless, in contrast to the nucleotide-derived results, the monophyly of the buchnera clade was not disrupted and hamiltonella and regiella were unambiguously separated from the other symbionts and clustered with yersinia.

phylobayes, non-homogenous phyml and modified matrices
the phylogenetic trees acquired under the cat+gtr phylobayes model from  <dig> and  <dig> concatenated genes  split symbiotic bacteria into four and three independent lineages, respectively. first, arsenophonus nasoniae is a sister species to proteus mirabilis; second, hamiltonella and regiella form a sister clade to yersinia pestis; third, the sodalis, baumannia, blochmannia, wigglesworthia, riesia and buchnera clade form a sister clade to dickeya/pectobacterium. the position of ishikawaella differs between the two datasets. in the 14-gene dataset, ishikawaella forms a sister clade to pantoea  and in the 55-gene dataset, it is attracted to the p-symbiont cluster .

a topology with four independent symbiotic clades resulted from the trees derived from dayhoff <dig> and dayhoff <dig> recoded amino acid data sets analyzed by cat and cat+gtr models  and partially with the hp  recoded dataset  - which was on the other hand affected by the substantial loss of phylogenetic information. the first clade is buchnera+ishikawaella as a sister clade to the erwinia/pantoea clade, the second clade is riesia+arsenophonus as a sister clade to proteus, the third clade is hamiltonella+regiella as a sister clade to yersinia, and the last clade is composed of sodalis, baumannia, blochmannia and wigglesworthia.

the analyses testing each symbiont independently, using a cat+gtr model on the dayhoff <dig> recoded datasets, resulted in topologies supporting multiple origins of endosymbiosis . arsenophonus clusters with proteus; hamiltonella clusters with yersinia; regiella clusters with yersinia; and sodalis, blochmannia, baumannia, riesia and wigglesworthia grouped into polytomy with the basal enterobacterial clades. most importantly, the buchnera clade clusters as a sister clade to the erwinia clade and ishikawaella is placed in polytomy with the pantoea and erwinia clade.

the non-homogenous  phyml nucleotide analyses with two different starting trees resulted in two different topologies . when compared by the approximately unbiased  test, the topology with four independent origins of symbiotic bacteria prevailed  over the topology with monophyly of p-symbionts, which therefore corresponds to a local minimum due to a tree search failure . the only incongruence in topologies based on the complete matrix  and the matrix without the third positions  was the placement of the sodalis+baumannia+blochmannia+wigglesworthia clade as a sister clade to the edwardsiella or dickeya/pectobacterium clades.

matrices obtained by removing positions according to the at/gc contents produced trees covering the whole continuum illustrated in figure  <dig>  the most severe restrictions, that is, removal of all positions that contain both at and gc categories or relaxing for up to three taxa , yielded topologies compatible with the results of the cat model applied on the recoded amino acid data and of the nhphyml analysis. further relaxing the restriction rule led to a variety of trees along the figure  <dig> continuum, with a less clear relation between the used parameter and the resulting topology .

compared to the ml analysis of all nucleotide positions, the analysis of first plus second positions reduced the obvious artifact of outgroup attraction . nevertheless, it also sorted symbionts according to their branch length. analysis of the ry recoded nucleotide matrix produced a tree compatible with the results of the cat+gtr model . analysis of the ry recoded nucleotide matrix without the third positions resulted in a topology with a sodalis+baumannia+blochmannia cluster  separated from the rest of the p-symbionts, which clustered with the erwinia/pantoea clade . slow-fast analyses with gradual reduction of saturated positions did not produce the polyphyly of p-symbionts . however, this analysis shows an increasing effect of lba artifacts associated with the increasing number of remaining saturated positions, especially riesia attraction and swapping of symbiotic branches according to their length.

discussion
performance of the methods: convergence towards non-monophyly
the results obtained in this study strongly indicate that the frequently retrieved monophyly of p-symbionts is an artifact caused by their highly modified genomes. none of the most widely used methods, that is, ml and bi with different models used on nucleic  and amino acid  data, were capable of resolving deep phylogenetic relationships and correct placement of the symbiotic taxa. this conclusion is evidenced by obvious artifacts, such as the inclusion of riesia into the p-symbiotic lineage or the even more conspicuous distorted placing of wigglesworthia within the buchnera cluster. the arrangement of such trees suggests that these methods sort the symbionts according to their branch lengths and/or at contents and attach the whole symbiotic cluster to the longest branch available. while the difficulty with placement of the most aberrant taxa, such as riesia, wigglesworthia and buchnera  was also observed when using the mixture model accounting for site specific characteristics of protein evolution , these artifacts disappeared after amino acid data recoding followed by cat and cat+gtr model analysis and the application of a nonhomogeneous model.

additional support for the non-monophyly view stems from the second, parallel approach based on the restricted matrices. while our newly developed method shares the basic principles with the slow-fast and recoding methods, such as the removal of the positions that are likely to distort the phylogenetic relationships due to their aberrant evolution, it differs in the criteria of their removal and thus produces different input data. it is therefore significant that this method led independently to the same picture, the non-monophyly of the p-symbionts with clustering identical to the above analyses: ishikawaella+buchnera and sodalis+baumannia+blochmannia+wigglesworthia. the removal of the heteropecillous sites was recently shown to have similar effectiveness as our new method  <cit> , which further supports the results. moreover, this topology was obtained even under the maximum parsimony  criterion , which is known to be extremely sensitive to lba  <cit> . on the other hand, although slow-fast analysis is generally considered a powerful tool for resolving relationships among taxa with different rates of evolution, we show in our data that the mere exclusion of the fast evolving sites is not sufficient when using empirical models and should be followed by analysis using some of the complex models, such as the cat-like models. in addition, since this method usually requires an a priori definition of monophyletic groups, it should be used and interpreted with caution. similar to the slow-fast method, ry recoding and exclusion of third codon positions were not sufficient for resolving deep symbiont phylogeny. however, all these methods can remove at least some of the artifacts and provide insight for further analyses.

summarizing the topologies obtained in this study , a convergence can be detected towards a particular non-monophyletic arrangement of p-symbionts, as revealed under the most 'derived' methods. this result strongly supports the view of multiple origins of insect endosymbionts, as first revealed by the nonhomogeneous model of sequence evolution  <cit> , and is partially congruent with the analyses of gene order  <cit>  and phylogenomics of gammaproteobacteria  <cit> . it is also important to note that, apart from multiple symbiont clustering, the arrangement of the non-symbiotic taxa corresponds to most of the phylogenomic analyses using escherichia/salmonella/yersinia taxon sampling  <cit> .

biological significance of p-symbionts non-monophyly
considering that most of the 'artifact-resistant' analyses point towards the non-monophyly of enterobacterial p-symbionts, the questions of how many symbiotic lineages are represented by the known symbiotic diversity and what are their closest free-living relatives now becomes of particular importance. it is not clear whether the split of the original p-symbiotic cluster into two lineages is definite or these two groups will be further divided after yet more sensitive methods and more complete data are available. at the moment there are still several clusters composed exclusively of derived symbiotic forms. in principle, three different processes may be responsible for the occurrence of such clusters: first, horizontal transmission of established symbiotic forms among host species; second, inadequate sampling with missing free-living relatives; or third, phylogenetic artifacts. all of these factors are likely to play a role in the current topological patterns. being the main issues of this study, the role of methodological artifacts has been discussed above. horizontal transmission, as the basis of non-artificial symbiotic clusters, is likely to take part at least in some cases. perhaps the most convincing example is the wolbachia cluster  <cit> : while within enterobacteriaceae it may apply to arsenophonus, sodalis and possibly some other s-symbionts.

recognition of the third cause, the incomplete sampling, and identification of the closest free-living relatives, now becomes a crucial step in future research. it is often assumed that symbionts originate from bacteria common to the environment typical for a given insect group. for example, cicadas spend most of their life cycle underground and feed primarily on plant roots. consequently, their α-proteobacterial symbiont hodgkinia cicadicola originated within rhizobiales  <cit> . a similar ecological background can be noticed in yet different hosts, the ixodid and argasid ticks. several reports have shown that some of the tick-transmitted pathogens are related to their symbiotic fauna  <cit> . many of the insect taxa associated with symbiotic enterobacteriaceae are phytophagous, and plant pathogens thus fit well into this hypothesis as hypothetical ancestors of various insect symbionts lineages. the presence of a type iii secretion system, which is used in pathogenic bacteria for host cell invasion, in secondary symbionts  <cit>  and its remnant in the primary symbiont of sitophilus spp. weevils  <cit>  could further support the theory of pathogenic ancestors of insect symbionts. it can only be speculated that these bacteria first became s-symbiont type and were horizontally transferred to various other insect species. within some of the infected species, facultative symbionts eventually became obligatory primary symbionts. an identical situation can be observed in symbiotic clades with numerous species, such as wolbachia  <cit> , sodalis  <cit>  or arsenophonus  <cit> .

in our study, we gave particular attention to the sampling of free-living enterobacteriaceae to provide as complete a background for the symbiotic lineages as possible under the current state of knowledge . the most consistent picture derived from the presented analyses places the four main symbiotic clusters into the following positions. first, for the buchnera cluster, its previously suggested relationship to erwinia was confirmed. erwinia, as a genus of mostly plant pathogenic bacteria, has been previously suggested to represent an ancestral organism, which upon ingestion by aphids at least  <dig> million years ago  <cit>  turned into an intracellular symbiotic bacterium  <cit> . however, it is not known whether it was primarily pathogenic to aphids, similar to erwinia aphidicola  <cit> , or a gut associated symbiotic bacterium as in pentatomid stinkbugs  <cit> , thrips  <cit>  or tephritidae flies  <cit> . ishikawaella capsulata, an extracellular gut symbiont of plataspid stinkbugs  <cit> , was the only symbiotic bacterium that clustered in our 'derived' analyses with the buchnera clade. however, several single-gene studies indicate that this group contains some additional symbiotic lineages for which sequenced genome data is not currently available. these are, in particular, the extracellular symbionts of acanthosomatid stinkbugs  <cit> , parastrachid stinkbugs  <cit> , scutellerid stinkbugs  <cit>  and some of the symbionts in pentatomid stinkbugs  <cit> .

the second clade, represented in our analysis by sodalis+baumannia+blochmannia+wigglesworthia, is likely to encompass many other p- and s-symbionts  <cit> . the possible single origin of these symbionts has to be further tested, however the interspersion of both forms, together with basal position of sodalis, seem to support a transition from a secondary to primary symbiotic lifestyle  <cit> . in our analysis, the whole clade was placed between pathogenic bacteria of plants and animals, the edwardsiella and pectobacterium/dickeya clades, or as a sister to the latter group. recently, another symbiotic bacterium  was shown to be a sister species to pectobacterium  <cit> .

two additional independent origins of insect symbionts are represented by the arsenophonus/riesia clade and hamiltonella+regiella. both of these clades clustered in our analyses in the positions indicated by previous studies, that is, as related to proteus and yersinia, respectively  <cit> .

while the position of individual symbiotic lineages is remarkably consistent across our 'artifact-resistant' analyses and are well compatible with some of the previous studies, the topology can only provide a rough picture of the relationships within enterobacteriaceae. to get a more precise and phylogenetically meaningful background for an evolutionary interpretation, the sample of free-living bacteria as a possible source of symbiotic lineages has to be much improved. an illuminating example is provided by the bacterium biostraticola tofi, described from water biofilms. when analyzed using 16s rdna, this bacterium seemed to be closely related to sodalis  <cit> . its position as a sister group to the sodalis/baumannia/blochmannia/wigglesworthia clade was also retrieved in our single-gene analysis . if confirmed by more precise multigene approach, biostraticola would represent the closest bacterium to the large symbiotic cluster.

CONCLUSIONS
the topologies obtained by several independent approaches strongly support the non-monophyletic view of enterobacterial p-symbionts. particularly, they show that at least three independent origins led to highly specialized symbiotic forms, the first giving rise to sodalis, baumannia, blochmannia and wigglesworthia , the second to buchnera and ishikawella and the last to riesia and arsenophonus . this separation of symbiotic clusters poses an interesting question as to whether the presented disbandment of the p-symbiotic cluster is definite or if it will continue after yet more complete data are available and more realistic evolutionary models  <cit>  are applied. one obvious drawback of the current state is that many additional symbiotic lineages already known within enterobacteriaceae cannot be at the moment included into serious phylogenetic analyses due to the lack of sufficient molecular data and will have to be revisited once complete genomic data are available. these bacteria include symbionts of mealybugs  <cit> , psyllids  <cit> , lice  <cit> , weevils  <cit> , reed beetles  <cit> , true bugs  <cit>  and symbionts of leeches  <cit> . similarly, the importance of free-living bacteria and variety of s-symbionts as possible ancestors of p-symbionts should not be underestimated when assembling datasets for phylogenetic analyses. the shift from polymerase chain reaction-based gene-centered sequencing towards high-throughput next-generation sequencing may soon provide sufficient data for more complete analyses of the enterobacteriaceae phylogeny.

