BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions  are involved in almost all aspects of cellular processes. understanding the interactions between proteins is an important goal of systems biology, and such knowledge can provide crucial insights into protein function and molecular mechanisms. various experimental technologies, such as affinity purification mass spectrometry   <cit> , the yeast two-hybrid  system  <cit> , and protein arrays  <cit> – <cit>  have been applied to detection of genome-wide ppis in many model species, including homo sapiens <cit> , drosophila melanogaster <cit> , saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , and caenorhabditis elegans <cit> . however, technical problems limit the efficacy of some of the aforementioned high-throughput screening methods. for example, the ppis identified to date represent only a small fraction of the full ppi network in the relevant species. furthermore, the techniques used to identify ppis are labor-intensive and costly, further limiting the application of these methods. in addition, most experimental methods have condition- or method-specific features; consequently, the data obtained by various methods sometimes exhibit minimal overlap even within the same species.

to overcome the disadvantages of existing experimental methods and expand the coverage of ppis, various bioinformatics approaches have been developed, including ortholog- and domain-based methods, gene neighbor methods, and gene fusion methods  <cit> – <cit> . various types of data are used to predict ppis, including protein sequences and functions, protein structures, gene expression, etc. many public databases have been constructed to store the experimental and theoretical predicted ppis, including the database of interacting proteins   <cit> , molecular interaction database   <cit> , protein interaction database   <cit> , search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins   <cit> , biological general repository for interaction datasets   <cit> , and the human protein reference database   <cit> .

currently, the comprehensive determination of protein interactomes in plant species is lagging behind analogous efforts in model animals. using y2h, dreze and colleagues generated a highly reliable binary ppi network of arabidopsis thaliana containing about  <dig>  interactions among  <dig>  proteins  <cit> . to date, computational prediction of ppis has only focused on a few model plant species, such as a. thaliana <cit> – <cit>  and oryza sativa <cit> . research on protein interactomes in perennial woody plants is lacking, in part due to limited genetic studies in these species.

citrus is commercially cultivated in over  <dig> countries and districts, and citrus fruit holds a dominant position in the global fruit industry . although many germplasms and cultivars exist, comprehensive morphological, anatomical, and molecular evidences has confirmed that all modern cultivars  are the derived offspring of two primitive species, pummel  and mandarin   <cit> , <cit> . genomic evidence, including a large body of genetic information from citrus, has demonstrated that sweet orange is a natural hybrid of pummel and mandarin  <cit> , <cit> . sweet orange, which is consumed fresh and as juice, contains large amounts of vitamin c and other compounds beneficial to human health; this species accounts for more than 60% of world fruit production . thus, due to its economic and genetic importance, sweet orange is an important woody model plant. the draft genome of this species provides an unprecedented opportunity to investigate its genetics, biochemistry, and evolution  <cit> , and also provides a good opportunity to study protein-protein interactions in citrus.

in this analysis, we predicted the sweet orange ppi network using ortholog-based and domain-based interaction methods, based on careful preparation and selection of reliable data resources, and then applied k-nearest neighbors  method to verify and filter the predicted ppis and obtain a more confident network. the final ppi network in sweet orange, citrusnet, contains  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions. this is the first report of a genome-wide ppi network in a woody plant. the quality of this ppis network was carefully assessed. furthermore, using rna-seq data from four tissues, we analyzed important functional modules and obtained insights into the tissue-specific features of the sweet orange protein interactome.

RESULTS
topological properties of the ppi network
based on a combination of ortholog- and domain-based prediction methods, we obtained  <dig>  ppis, and then assessed and filtered all the predicted ppis by knn. the final citrusnet contained a total of  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions . knn verified  <dig> % of the predicted ppis, similar to the rate in six other model organisms , and much higher than that of random ppis , indicating that citrusnet is highly accurate. when we used cytoscape to visualize and analyze the topological properties of citrusnet  <cit> ,  <dig>  of the total  <dig>  proteins were connected into a large interconnected sub-network. the topological properties indicated that citrusnet was a scale-free network, i.e., most nodes had low degrees of connection, whereas a few hub nodes had very high degrees of connection. in total,  <dig> proteins in citrusnet had more than  <dig> connections. table  <dig> lists the top ten hub nodes, including eight heat shock-related proteins, one polyubiquitin a protein, and one dna-directed rna polymerase ii subunit protein. these data indicate that heat shock proteins play important roles in the citrus interactome. the degrees of the nodes in citrusnet follows a power-law distribution fit by the regression equation y =  <dig> *x- <dig>  , where x indicates degree and y indicates the number of nodes with a given degree.

nodes with a high betweenness centrality  are also very important for a network, because these nodes act as bottlenecks in the network even in the absence of hubs  <cit> . table  <dig> lists the ten nodes with the largest bc in citrusnet. five of these nodes are also among the ten hub nodes with the highest degrees ; four of those are heat shock-related proteins, and the other is polyubiquitin a protein. thus, all of these proteins play critical roles in the connection and communication among nodes in citrusnet. based on the combination of degree and bc analysis, we speculate that heat shock proteins are the most important proteins in the sweet orange ppi network.

the clustering coefficient  of citrusnet is  <dig> , much higher than that of a random network with the same degree distribution . this feature indicated that citrusnet is very intensive, and several sub-networks containing protein complexes or signaling pathways could be identified. the relationship between cc and degree in citrusnet is shown in figure 1d. from the distribution map, we observed that nodes with small degrees were intensively distributed, whereas nodes with large degrees were very sparse, further confirming the scale-free property of citrusnet.

quality assessment of citrusnet
because no experimental ppis are available in sweet orange, we employed gene ontology  annotation analysis to evaluate citrusnet. because interacting proteins tend to have similar or related functions, a reliable ppi network should contain many more functionally related proteins than a random network. we performed go analysis to compare the functional relationships among protein nodes in citrusnet and random networks, and then obtained go annotation from the go database  <cit> . in total,  <dig>  proteins in sweet orange had go annotations, and  <dig>  of these  were included in citrusnet. for these comparisons, we calculated the shortest distance of go terms for protein pairs in citrusnet and five random networks. the number of proteins and protein pairs in random networks were the same as in citrusnet, it is worth noting, however, that the protein pairs in random networks did not interact. figure 2a shows that the shortest distance of go terms in citrusnet was much shorter than the average distance in five random networks.

moreover, we analyzed many gene modules in citrusnet to determine whether they contained known biological pathways in sweet orange. to this end, we used mapman annotation, which represents biological functions with no redundancy between different terms  <cit> . we constructed a mapman network for citrusnet, and employed the clustering algorithm described in reference  <cit>  to extract relevant modules. figure 2b shows that the relevant mapman terms were highly correlated, whereas terms with no functional relationships had low correlation. detailed analysis of the rna transcription sub-network illustrated that ppis provide useful biological information . in the rna transcription sub-network, terms related to rna transcription and global transcription factors exhibited complicated interactions . furthermore, terms related to chromatin remodeling factors, histone deacetylase activity, and histone acetyltransferase activity had many connections with the rna transcription sub-network, suggesting that chromatin remodeling and histone acetylation/deacetylation might be closely related to the transcription process. the mapman annotation network indicated that citrusnet contained a considerable number of biological modules, and the clustering algorithm successfully grouped terms that were previously classified as multimeric complexes.

modular features of protein-interaction networks revealed by rna-seq data analysis
the relationship between gene expression and protein interactions has been comprehensively analyzed  <cit> , <cit> . in general, genes that encode interacting proteins are correlated at the level of mrna expression  <cit> ; therefore, correlations in gene expression should reflect the reliability of the predicted ppi network. based on rna-seq data from four sweet orange tissues , we proposed an index, the expression difference of interacting protein pairs . interacting genes with similar expression levels had edi values closer to zero. we employed the markov clustering -modular method  <cit>  to extract relevant modules from citrusnet. mcl is a clustering method for extracting relevant modules from the constructed interactome, and is superior to other clustering methods under most conditions  <cit> . we compared the edi distributions of four citrusnet-related networks, including citrusnet, a random network, a mcl-modular network and a network inferred from yeast protein complexes  <cit> . in total, we obtained  <dig> protein complexes in sweet orange by using the best hits from sequence alignments with the yeast complexes . figure 3a shows the edi distribution of these four types of networks. the protein complex network had the highest percentage of genes with edi around zero, suggesting that protein complexes have the highest proportions of genes with similar expression levels. the mcl-modular network had a higher percentage of similarly expressed genes than citrusnet, whereas the random network had the lowest percentage of edi around zero, indicating that the mcl algorithm was highly effective at extracting relevant modules, and that the predicted citrusnet was reliable. currently, no protein complexes have been experimentally determined in sweet orange, therefore, the predicted  <dig> protein complexes in this analysis are very helpful for related studies.

we also analyzed the edi distribution in citrusnet based on its topological properties. first, we divided all genes in the network into two groups , and then divided the high-degree genes into two subgroups . figure 3b illustrates that the percentage of low-degree genes with edi around zero was much higher than the percentage of high-degree genes, because the high-degree genes had many interacting partners with different functions and expression levels, whereas low-degree genes had far fewer interacting partners whose functions and expression levels were more likely to be similar. this phenomenon reflects the ‘economical’ principle of gene interactions, i.e., genes tend to interact with as few partners as possible to serve their biological functions. we also observed the same features for edi and bc topological parameters. the percentage of high-degree/low-bc genes with edi around zero was higher than that of high-degree/high-bc genes, suggesting that genes with low bc are likely to have similar expression levels.

in addition to studying the edi distribution in different kinds of sub-networks, we also analyzed edi variations among genes in the four tissues. we performed an in silico analysis to simulate the effect of removing specific nodes in the network. we defined different thresholds of edivariation values from  <dig> to  <dig>  with a step size of  <dig>  based on these thresholds, we removed nodes with edivariation values higher than the thresholds in citrusnet, and compared the average shortest path length after randomly removing the same number of nodes in citrusnet. the shortest path length between two nodes reflects the overall network connectivity. in total, we removed  <dig> nodes for edivariation =  <dig>  and  <dig> nodes for edivariation =  <dig>  the distributions of average shortest path lengths of these two types of interactome networks are shown in figure 3c. the average shortest paths of edivariation-removed networks were all longer than those of randomly-removed networks, indicating that nodes with high edivariation values were very important for network connectivity. figure 3c also shows that nodes with edivariation values in the range 10– <dig> were crucial for the stability of the network, and that removing these nodes resulted in the largest shortest path lengths.

finally, we analyzed the modular features of gene expression in citrusnet. figure 3d illustrates a sub-network comprising highly expressed genes in at least three tissues . genes with similar functions were clustered into modules. for example, genes related to protein degradation and ubiquitin , dna synthesis and chromatin structure , cell cycle and cell division , protein synthesis , and metabolite transport , are clustered into functional groups. the edi values of genes in these modules were smaller than those of genes with different functions. therefore, edi value reflects the function relationships between interacting gene pairs. based on this comprehensive analysis, we concluded that gene expression patterns in citrusnet have modular features.

analysis of the plant hormone-related interaction network
plant hormones such as ethylene, abscisic acid, auxins, gibberellins, cytokinins and brassinosteroids, play important roles in plant biology. to identify important hormone-signaling proteins in sweet orange, we constructed ppi sub-networks related to hormone-signaling pathways, based on information from the arabidopsis hormone database   <cit> . these sub-networks were simplified by filtering proteins involved in basic biological process. in the hormone-signaling sub-network, proteins related to ethylene, jasmonic acid, salicylic acid, auxins, brassinosteroids and cytokinins formed a highly interconnected network, with target of rapamycin  as its center . in this sub-network, tor had the highest bc, and therefore served as the hub protein. tor is a conserved protein with similar functions in yeast, human and arabidopsis <cit> , <cit> . although tor has not been extensively studied in plants, experimental evidence in arabidopsis has shown that this protein functions as a hub involved in the regulation of growth, stress resistance, and mrna translation  <cit> . proteins related to hormone signaling and hormone receptors do not interact with tor directly, but through other connecting proteins. as shown in figure  <dig>  protein phosphatase 2a  regulatory subunit and catalytic subunit both had direct interactions with tor, and the catalytic subunit also interacted with the raf-like protein kinase ctr <dig>  which is a negative regulator of the ethylene response pathway in arabidopsis <cit> . furthermore, jasmonic and salicylic acid signaling proteins had many interactions with each other, most of these interactions were mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases , and many of them also interacted with mitogen-activated protein kinase-kinase mkk <dig> and mkk <dig>  which directly interacted with tor. three different link paths connected brassinosteroid signaling proteins and tor. shaggy-related protein iota/kinase eta had similar interaction patterns, both interacted with tor through protein phosphatase pp <dig> and phosphatidylinositol 3-/4- kinase . brassinosteroid insensitive- <dig>  and the downstream protein bsu <dig> connected with tor through 14-3- <dig> protein. six auxinic compound transporters directly interacted with tor; therefore, we speculate that tor regulates auxin signal transduction.

the links among different hormone signaling proteins were very complex, because several of the interacting proteins  were connected to a considerable degree. many of the hormone-related proteins interacted with each other, indicating that various hormone-signaling pathways exchange information before affecting tor . although many plant hormone-related proteins were connected, tor is undoubtedly the hub of hormone crosstalk. the central role of tor implies that it integrates environmental information communicated by hormones, and uses this information to regulate plant growth.

discussion
in this study, we predicted the genome-wide ppi network of sweet orange, based on ortholog identification and domain-combination methods. because there is no golden-standard ppi dataset in sweet orange, we employed a highly accurate knn algorithm to filter the predicted interactions. the resultant ppi network, citrusnet, contains  <dig>  proteins with  <dig>  interactions. we then employed go and mapman annotation to assess the predicted network. the shortest distance of go terms in citrusnet was much smaller than that of random networks, and the mapman biology network demonstrated that gene modules in citrusnet reflected known biological pathways in sweet orange. we also predicted  <dig> protein complexes in sweet orange using orthologs of the yeast protein complexes and employed them to assess citrusnet; the results revealed that protein complexes had relatively tight connections. together, these analyses confirm that citrusnet is highly reliable.

we also analyzed the modular features of ppi networks based on the connections in citrusnet. we proposed the edi index to analyze the relationship between gene expression and protein interactions. the percentage of protein nodes with similar gene-expression levels in citrusnet-derived sub-networks was much higher than those of random networks, especially in protein-complex and mcl-modular networks. protein complexes are groups of two or more associated polypeptide chains, which are predicted to have tight network connections and to be encoded by genes that are expressed at similar levels. analysis of the edi distribution, based on topological properties, revealed that genes interacted with as few partners as possible . furthermore, edi values around zero were negatively correlated with topological parameters such as degree and bc. in addition to analyzing edi distributions, we also compared edi variation among four tissues and found that genes with low edivariation values were important for the stability of citrusnet.

protein interactions play central roles in many different signal-transduction processes, including protein structure transformation, protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, and hormone signal processing. many genes and biological processes regulated by hormone signals have been identified  <cit> , and a growing number of studies have focused on the crosstalk among different hormone signals  <cit> – <cit> . we constructed a ppi sub-network related to hormone-signaling proteins and observed that tor serves as the central hub for hormone crosstalk. in general, tor controls cell growth by regulating basic processes such as protein translation, rna transcription, and protein degradation  <cit> , <cit> . hormone signals pass through relay proteins, ultimately affecting tor activity. although tor has been well studied in yeast, human, and arabidopsis, its function in hormone-signaling pathways has not been previously investigated. although we identified reliable connections between tor and hormone-signaling proteins, the underlying regulatory patterns have not yet been elucidated. many of the predicted plant hormone interactions in citrusnet are supported by experimental evidence in other species  <cit> , <cit> , <cit> . for example, pp2a can down-regulate the activity of tor  <cit> , whereas the relationship between pp2a and another interacting protein ctr <dig> has not been previously reported. considering that ethylene negatively regulates plant growth, we speculate that ctr <dig> can down-regulate the activity of pp2a catalytic subunit. previous studies showed that 14-3- <dig> protein plays important roles in brassinosteroid signaling pathways  <cit> ; however, the biological significance of the interaction between 14-3- <dig> protein and bri <dig> remains unclear. furthermore, 14-3- <dig> protein exerts a positive effect on tor  <cit> ; therefore, there may be a regulatory relationship between 14-3- <dig> protein and bri <dig>  the relationships between tor and other plant hormone-related proteins have not been reported previously. our analysis of the genome-wide ppi network illustrated the central role of tor in hormone-signaling pathways. in the future, citrusnet should provide further insights into the functional genomics and systems biology of sweet orange.

CONCLUSIONS
in this analysis, we predicted the genome-wide ppi network of sweet orange using ortholog identification and domain-combination methods, and then employed a highly accurate knn algorithm to filter the predicted interactions. the resultant ppi network contains  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions. we employed go and mapman annotation to assess the predicted network. we further predicted  <dig> protein complexes in sweet orange using orthologs of the yeast protein complexes and employed them to assess citrusnet. we finally constructed a ppi sub-network related to hormone-signaling proteins, and found that tor serves as the central hub for hormone crosstalk. citrusnet provides a valuable resource for protein-protein interactions in sweet orange.

