BACKGROUND
lignocellulosic biomass conversion to simple sugars is widely studied for subsequent fermentation to bioethanol or industrial chemicals but biotechnological processes are both complex and costly  <cit> . in the biorefinery process, enzymatic hydrolysis  is one of the major bottlenecks due to the recalcitrance of plant cell wall whose main components, cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin form a tight complex with varying proportions depending on plant species  <cit> .

filamentous fungi are among the most potent degraders of lignocellulosic biomass as they produce a high number and a broad variety of enzymes that have different and complementary catalytic activities  <cit> . the degradation of lignocellulose by filamentous fungi has been studied in a range of basidiomycetes and ascomycetes. among wood-decaying basidiomycetes, the white-rot fungi phanerochaete chrysosporium  <cit>  is known to secrete a wide range of enzymes such as lignin peroxidases and glycosyl hydrolases   <cit> . many ascomycetes species have been identified as good candidates for the release of monosaccharides such as trichoderma reesei, which is used extensively in industry due to its capacity to secrete high level of cellulases. t. reesei has undergone several rounds of mutation/selection starting from the qm6a strain. as a result, the engineered t. reesei industrial strain cl <dig> is able to secrete more than  <dig> g of proteins per litre of culture, which permits a wide-range of applications in different fields of white biotechnology. additional genetic and biochemical studies have deeply improved our knowledge of t. reesei enzymes. more recently, the release of the t. reesei genome  has shown that its carbohydrate active enzyme  machinery is globally comparable to other saprophytic fungi  <cit> . however, compared to other filamentous fungi, the t. reesei genome is poor in terms of number and diversity of enzymes that are likely to be involved in biomass degradation  <cit> . the lack of key lignocellulosic enzymes in t. reesei opens opportunities to generate more competitive enzyme cocktails.

during the last decade, large efforts have been concentrated on genome sequencing of ascomycetes, and only a few basidiomycetes genomes were made available. the genomes of phytopathogenic fungi such as fusarium graminearum, a wheat pathogen  <cit> , and ustilago maydis, a maize pathogen  <cit> , have been published. saprotrophic fungi have also been targeted, e.g., the basidiomycete p. chrysosporium  <cit> , the ascomycetes neurospora crassa, nectria haematococca  <cit>  and several aspergilli, such as aspergillus nidulans, aspergillus fumigatus, aspergillus oryzae and aspergillus niger  <cit> . several other aspergillus genomes  have now also been sequenced, and the list continues to grow  <cit> .

although in silico annotations of fungal genomes provides large amounts of information about the genes that encode putative lignocellulose-degrading enzymes, experimental analyses are necessary to better understand complex mixture of enzymes that are secreted  in response to inducers. in this study, we thus characterised  <dig> fungal species for which genomic data are available for their ability to secrete cazymes targeting plant cell wall by means of high-throughput enzymatic assays and proteomic analyses.

RESULTS
genomic analysis of the fungal cazyme sets dedicated to the plant cell wall
to determine the sugar-cleaving capabilities of the fungi selected , we compared their cazyme repertoires  . clustering of the cazyme repertoires and the selected fungi resulted in the formation of clusters of fungal species that corresponded with their fungal phyla. as expected, the aspergilli and fusaria species have relatively high numbers of gh-encoding genes. in contrast, the u. maydis and the zygomycetes phycomyces blakesleeanus and rhizopus oryzae genomes had relatively few genes that encoded for gh. these results indicate different strategies to degrade plant cell wall. the only exception was a. clavatus which was grouped with n. crassa and chaetomium globosum, both members of the sordariales order. interestingly, these three species all share a common feature, as they are known to act on recalcitrant plant material .

*when available, **industrial enzymatic cocktail t. reesei cl847

saccharification efficiencies of fungal secretomes
hydrolysis of plant biomass requires the production of many different enzymes, which is regulated by the type and complexity of the plant material used as an inducer for the fungal cultures. for example, it has been shown that aspergillus secretomes are strongly tied to the culture conditions and the nutrient sources available  <cit> . in this study, maize bran was selected as an inducer because  it is a natural substrate,  it has been described as being fairly complex and recalcitrant with arabinose and ferulic acid substitutions  <cit>  and  it is a powerful inducer for the expression of a broad range of genes that encode for cazymes targeting the plant cell wall, e.g., endo-xylanase, endo-mannanase, arabinofuranosidase and carbohydrate esterases  <cit> . all the fungi tested were able to grow on maize bran with a satisfactory yield of secreted protein and were harvested at a single time point, i.e.  <dig> days of growth .

each secretome was diafiltered and concentrated and then tested for its ability to release sugars from micronised wheat straw , taking advantage of the recently developed automated saccharification method  <cit> . the release of reducing sugars and individual sugar monomers was quantified at the initial rate of hydrolysis  and at the saccharification plateau , the t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail being used as reference .

top table, initial step ; bottom table, plateau . total solubilised sugars, glucose and xylose were expressed as glucose equivalent in mg of sugars released per mg of dry matter. values at  <dig> h and  <dig> h are means of sextuplicate and triplicate measures, respectively. standard errors of the mean were < 5%.

to evaluate the contribution of each secretome to the initial rate of the reaction compared to the t. reesei cl <dig> enzyme cocktail alone, supplementation experiments were performed using the same amount of total enzyme loading . as a result, seven secretomes increased significantly the initial rate of the release of reducing sugars. among them, four secretomes  were able to increase the glucose rate compared to the t. reesei cl <dig> enzyme cocktail alone. the most striking effects were obtained with a. nidulans and a. niger, which increased the glucose rate by  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold, respectively, compared to t. reesei cl <dig> 

at the saccharification plateau, each secretome was tested alone and in combination with t. reesei cl <dig> enzyme cocktail. as expected, the improved t. reesei cl <dig> enzyme cocktail released more reducing sugars from ws than the secretome of the t. reesei qm6a strain. the glucose and xylose yields were  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold higher with the t. reesei cl <dig> cocktail than those obtained with the qm6a secretome. the most efficient secretomes, when used alone on micronised ws, were a. nidulans, talaromyces stipitatus and u. maydis secretomes, which yielded higher amounts of reducing sugars compared to t. reesei cl <dig> . this observation is in agreement with the quantification of the monomers that showed differences in sugar release, i.e., a. nidulans and u. maydis yielded primarily glucose, whereas t. stipitatus yielded mainly xylose. the supplementation of t. reesei cl <dig> with most of the fungal secretomes resulted in a significant increase in the release of soluble sugars, up to a  <dig> -fold increase when compared to t. reesei alone. a closer look at the monomers indicated that five of the secretomes  displayed a significant positive effect on both the release of glucose and xylose, while p. blakesleeanus only increased the release of xylose. the strongest effect on the release of glucose in the supplementation experiments was obtained when u. maydis and a. nidulans secretomes were used; they improved the t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail by more than 20% .

enzymatic characterisation of the fungal secretomes using activity profiling
to assess the sugar-cleaving capabilities of all of the fungal secretomes, we quantified their main glycoside-hydrolase activities using a microplate assay that contained para-nitrophenyl -sugars and complex polysaccharides as substrates . cellulose degradation was estimated by the quantification of endo-glucanase , avicelase , fpase , cellobiohydrolase  and β-glucosidase  activities. hemicellulose degradation was estimated by quantifying the xylanases and mannanases using structurally different xylans and mannans as substrates. the main exo-acting glycosidases activities were estimated by the quantification of pnp-α-l-arabinofuranoside , pnp-α-d-galactopyranoside , pnp-β-d-xylopyranoside  and pnp-β-d-mannopyranoside . pectic degradation was assessed using arabinogalactan  and arabinan  and the overall esterase activity was assessed using pnp-acetate .

comparison of the t. reesei cl <dig> industrial cocktail with the original t. reesei qm6a strain used for genome sequencing revealed  a similar cellobiohydrolase and fpase activity,  a 10-fold increase in the endo-glucanase and β-glucosidase activities and  a significant decrease in the xylanase activity . the a. niger secretome was, by far, the richest in terms of diversity of enzyme activities measured, except that a low activity towards avi  was observed. avi was better hydrolysed using the p. blakesleeanus, p. chrysosporium, f. graminearum and n. crassa secretomes. an overall comparison with the hydrolysis of cmc and fp did not show an obvious trend. for example, the a. nidulans secretome displayed an activity towards fp that was comparable with t. reesei cl <dig> and qm6a but was unable to hydrolyse cmc and avi . with regard to hemicellulose degradation, most of the secretomes were able to significantly hydrolyse all of the tested xylans. soluble wheat arabinoxylan  was better hydrolysed than birchwood xylan  and insoluble wheat arabinoxylan . the only exception was a. terreus, which preferred birchwood xylan. r. oryzae appeared to be unable to breakdown significant amount of xylan, as it was recently shown using a range of polysaccharides as carbon sources  <cit> . analysis of the correlation between specific activities data and the enzyme composition of secretomes is relatively complicated due to the presence of multi-functional enzymes and synergistic interactions between enzymes  <cit> .

in order to navigate in the data set and to evaluate the similarities and differences among its components, we performed a double hierarchical clustering  with the same bioinformatics tools used to analyse the genomes . analysis of the full data set identified clusters of strains that showed similar hydrolytic profiles and substrates clusters . a. niger was grouped in the cluster that displayed the highest level of activity towards plant cell wall polysaccharides along with four other aspergilli , t. reesei qm6a, mucor circinelloides and t. stipitatus. however, a. terreus and a. nidulans did not cluster with the other aspergilli. a. nidulans shares traits in common with c. globosum and r. oryzae, i.e., a very low activity towards xylans. it is interesting to note that three out of the four fusaria were clustered into the same group and that p. chrysosporium did not cluster with any of the other species. based on data from the literature, wood material or avi might have been more suitable inducers for p. chrysosporium than maize bran and allowed the secretion of a more complete array of plant cell wall degrading enzymes  <cit> . both basidiomycetes p. chrysosporium and u. maydis activity profiles were rather atypical as they were not correlated together, neither with the other fungi .

when we clustered the substrates on the basis of the activity profiling data, we found that the three xylans tested  clustered together. the correlations observed between the activity on pglc and pcel can be explained by the fact that both are substrates of β-glucosidases. although the activity towards cellulosic substrates  was not correlated, fp activity was associated with both xylan and ws hydrolysis. these data suggest that fp activity is a better marker than avicelase activity to estimate the cellulose hydrolysis by fungal secretomes. p. blakesleeanus, t. stipitatus, a. fischeri, a. terreus, and a. fumigatus secretomes, which all displayed higher fp activities than t. reesei cl <dig> , did not release more glucose from ws . thus, fp activity is not the only factor governing the cellulose hydrolysis efficiency of fungal secretomes. indeed, it was recently reported that proteins devoid of measurable activity  can significantly improve the activity of pcw-degrading enzymes  <cit> .

proteomic analyses of the best performing fungal secretomes
recently, there has been growing interest for the detailed analysis of fungal secretomes  <cit> . liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  proteomic analysis is a tool of great interest to attempt to make available the relative abundances of their different protein components. based on saccharification data, the best-performing secretomes, i.e. a. niger, a. nidulans and u. maydis, were selected to be analysed in depth using 1d lc-ms/ms along with the t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail. a. niger was further investigated due to its capacity to potentiate t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail activity at the initial step of hydrolysis whereas a. nidulans and u. maydis were selected for their boosting effect observed at the saccharification plateau.

proteomic analysis of the t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail allowed the identification of  <dig> proteins of which  <dig> were cazymes targetting plant cell wall, e.g., cbhi  and cbhii /egi , egii , egiii , egiv  and egvi /bgli /xynii  and xyniii /bxli /abfi , abfii  and abfiii  . these results are in agreement with the proteomic analysis of t. reesei cl <dig> secretome using 2d gel that allowed the identification of  <dig> proteins  <cit> . it is interesting to note that our proteomic analysis of t. reesei cl <dig> enzymatic cocktail also showed that the proteins displaying a family  <dig> carbohydrate binding module  were among the most abundant protein of the enzymatic cocktail .

concerning the fungal species selected for proteomic analysis, a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> proteins were detected from the concentrated secretomes of a. niger, a. nidulans and u. maydis, respectively, by mass-matching against corresponding protein databases. the a. niger secretome contained an impressive array of  <dig> cazymes out of the total  <dig> proteins . the number of exo-acting glycosidases identified in the secretome of a. niger when cultured in the presence of maize bran was disproportionally higher than the number of endo-acting cazymes . this observation corresponds with a previous proteomic analysis on the a. niger secretome under different cultured environments  <cit> . the presence of a broad array of exo-acting glycosidases might be responsible for the significant increase in the initial rate of saccharification when the a. niger secretome was added to the t. reesei cl <dig> enzyme cocktail. surprisingly, this positive effect was not observed at the saccharification plateau, indicating that the large diversity and high number of cazymes do not act in concert with the t. reesei enzymes during the saccharification of ws. compared to a. niger, the a. nidulans secretome displayed a lower enzymatic diversity towards plant cell walls. this striking difference could be due to the regulatory mechanisms of enzyme induction, which are controlled by the xylose and arabinose transcriptional activators xlnr and arar that differ between a. nidulans and a. niger  <cit> . of the  <dig> ghs identified in the a. nidulans secretome, we identified seven hemicellulases from the gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig>  gh <dig> and gh <dig> families and five β- <dig>  glucanases from the gh <dig>  gh <dig> and gh <dig> families . the absence of activity on cmc and avi correlated with the fact that no endo β- <dig>  glucanase or cellobiohydrolase was identified by proteomics. however, the high activities of the a. nidulans secretome on fp and ws are rather intriguing . this observation might suggest the presence of novel specificities among the plant cell wall degrading enzymes.

the analysis of u. maydis secretome revealed a total of  <dig> proteins . they represent more than half of the theoretically secreted proteins as u. maydis genome is supposed contains  <dig> genes that encode for secreted proteins  <cit> . the u. maydis genome contains one of the smallest sets of genes that encode for cazymes with  <dig> gh compared to the genome of necrotrophic plant pathogenic fungi   <cit> . of the  <dig> proteins identified in the u. maydis secretome, we identified  <dig> cazymes that target the plant cell wall. of the most abundant proteins, we identified one gh <dig> xylanase and two gh <dig> and gh <dig> arabinofuranosidases. interestingly, t. reesei genome has the smallest set of arabinofuranosidases of all of the plant cell wall-degrading ascomycetes. thus, u. maydis hemicellulases may act in synergy with t. reesei enzymes to efficiently depolymerise wheat arabinoxylan, thereby facilitating cellulose access for the t. reesei cellulases. another striking difference with the other fungal proteomes analysed, is the significant fraction of the u. maydis secretome  of putative oxido-reductases that are potentially involved in the depolymerisation of lignocellulose. two of the most abundant proteins identified corresponded to putative glucose-methanol-choline  oxidoreductases , which are fad flavoproteins with diverse catalytic activities and two others proteins are known as glyoxal oxidases . interestingly, u. maydis glyoxal oxidases have been experimentally shown to be essential for successful maize infection  <cit> . although the role of fungal oxido-reductases in biomass deconstruction remains unclear, their presence suggest that, via the formation of highly reactive oxidants, they could participate in the depolymerisation of lignocellulose, as previously suggested for the wood-decaying fungus postia placenta  <cit> . indeed, glyoxal and glucose oxidases are known to generate h2o <dig> that is supposed to play a role in lesion formation and lesion expansion of plant cell wall in the infection mechanism of fungal pathogens  <cit> . as t. reesei is devoid of oxido-reductases, some of the putative u. maydis oxidases identified in its secretome are likely responsible for the observed increase in saccharification efficiency. recent data from literature on the synergy between gh <dig> and oxido-reductases  <cit>  might also explain the efficiency of u. maydis secretome in combination with t. reesei that contains a gh <dig> enzyme . recently, there has been growing interest in the potential of plant-pathogenic fungi to optimise the enzymatic treatment processes for the optimal hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass  <cit> . a recent large-scale screening using  <dig> ascomycetes revealed that the plant pathogens were more active than the non-pathogens on several lignocellulosic substrates  <cit> . u. maydis is a well characterised basidiomycete fungus that parasitises maize. it belongs to the smut fungi, which share a biotrophic mode of growth, i.e., they grow on the host plant without killing it. to our knowledge, the maize pathogenic basidiomycete u. maydis has never been tested for its hydrolysis potential of lignocellulosic biomass. the use of maize bran as an inducer is likely a key factor that contributed to the induction of the specific enzymes that target the plant cell walls of monocots . the enzymes identified by the proteomic analysis of the secretome of u. maydis may facilitate access to cellulose and hemicellulose for the t. reesei cl <dig> enzymes, thereby explaining the increase in the glucose and xylose yields.

CONCLUSIONS
the discovery of fungal enzymes that display novel specificities is essential to efficiently breakdown lignocellulosic biomass for the production of biofuels and other high-value products. this post-genomic approach revealed the unexpected potential of u. maydis, which contained unique enzymatic equipment that significantly supplemented the t. reesei enzymatic cocktail. the putative u. maydis oxido-reductases could play a crucial role in improving the hydrolysis of plant cell walls. future studies of the synergies between hydrolytic enzymes and oxido-reductases are necessary to give additional insights into the filamentous fungi enzymatic machineries.

