BACKGROUND
most protein-coding genes in multicellular eukaryotes are interrupted by multiple introns that are removed by the spliceosome in a complex succession of concerted hydrolysis and ligation reactions  <cit> . obviously, high-precision recognition of introns is required for efficient splicing, and this recognition depends on an hierarchy of signals of varying specificity that are located both in the intron and in the exon and interact with different parts of the spliceosomal complex. the principal splicing signals are the donor and acceptor splice sites, the polypyrimidine tract preceding the acceptor site, and the branch point  <cit> . a consensus sequence ag|guagu in vertebrates, the first two nucleotides of the intron are underlined) at the donor splice site is complementary to the 5' end of u <dig> small nuclear rna, and the interaction between the donor site and u <dig> is thought to be the major requirement for splicing  <cit> . the cag|g consensus sequence  preceded by a polypyrimidine tract is typical of the acceptor splice site which is recognized by the splicing factor u2af  <cit> . the branch point or, more precisely, the branch site is located upstream of the polypyrimidine tract preceding the acceptor site and consists of an a residue embedded in a distinct motif; this site is recognized by the u <dig> rnp and is involved in the formation of the lariat splicing intermediate  <cit> .

however, the classical splice signals are insufficient for correct splicing, at least in vertebrates where intron lengths vary within an extremely broad range, and many introns are long. moreover, it has been estimated that, while the canonical, intronic signals are sufficient for accurate splicing by "intron definition" in nematodes and flies, these signals contain only approximately one-half of the information required for correct splicing of even short introns in mammals and plants  <cit> . additional splice signals have been identified in exons and can function by either facilitating  or suppressing  splicing. exonic splicing enhancers , in particular, appear to be present in most, if not all, mammalian exons, and have been characterized in considerable detail  <cit> . it is generally thought that the eses, which are located in the exon regions close to the donor or acceptor splice sites, promote the recognition of exons  through binding sr proteins via their rrm domains, and thus facilitating the recruitment of the spliceosome to the vicinity of exon-intron junctions  <cit> . an inverse, compensatory relationship has been shown to exist between the strength of the splice sites in an exon and the dependence of splicing on eses, i.e., exons with weak, non-canonical splice sites, are strongly dependent on eses for their splicing  <cit> . exonic splicing enhancers have been identified with a variety of experimental and computations methods, and combinations thereof  <cit> . in particular, the rescue-ese method, the results of which have been extensively validated by mutational analysis of the predicted ese motifs, has indicated that slightly more that 10% of the hexanucleotides in human exons could function as eses, reinforcing the notion that eses are very common in mammals  <cit> . the functional importance of eses has been further corroborated by the demonstration that the ese hexanucleotides tend to be subject to purifying selection, i.e., single-nucleotide polymorphisms  that disrupt eses in the vicinity of splice sites seem to be selected against  <cit> .

a variety of observations indicate that the splicing process is not indifferent to intron length. long introns might hinder the activity of the spliceosome through interference with the proper positioning of the intron-exon junctions. thus, it could be expected that additional mechanisms and/or signals might be required for splicing of long introns. indeed, it has been shown that the information content of splice sites positively correlates with intron length in the nematode  <cit> , drosophila  <cit> , and fungi  <cit> . we were interested in developing an understanding of the effect of intron length on the evolution of the neighboring exons and the interaction of different types of splicing signals. here, we describe the results of comparative analysis of vertebrate genes that reveal a complex interplay between splice sites and exonic signals depending on intron length.

RESULTS
long introns have stronger flanking splice sites than short introns
we first tested the hypothesis that long introns are associated with strong flanking splice sites in mammalian genomes. for each genome, we derived a position-specific weight matrix for both donor and acceptor splice sites. using these matrices and background base frequencies, a log-odds score for each splice site was computed. the total splice site score for each intron was calculated as the sum of the scores of its flanking donor and acceptor sites.

we found that, for human introns greater than  <dig>  kb in length , total splice site strength is positively correlated with intron length for both constitutive and alternative introns; the correlation coefficients were relatively small  but highly statistically significant  . both the donor sites and, somewhat more prominently, the acceptor sites become stronger as the intron length increases. for introns shorter than  <dig>  kb, constitutive and alternative introns displayed opposite, slight  but statistically significant  correlations between intron length and splice site strength . for almost all lengths, constitutive introns had significantly stronger splice sites than alternative introns . mouse introns exhibited the same correlations as human introns .

long introns are associated with a higher a content in flanking exons leading to a greater density of potential eses
a second set of signals believed to be involved in the correct splicing of vertebrate introns are the eses, which tend to be located in the vicinity of the splice sites  <cit> . to determine if the strength of these signals is linked to intron length, we calculated the density of nucleotides within putative ese sequences in the ends of exons flanking introns.

we searched exon ends for the hexamer ese sequences identified by fairbrother et al.  <cit> . the base composition of these putative eses is skewed relative to overall exon base frequencies, with the hexamers being composed of 48% a, 14% c, 25% g, and 13% t. therefore, we also examined the base composition and expected number  of ese sites in each flanking exon.

whereas for splice sites we observed correlations between signal strength and intron length for long introns , we found little, if any, correlation with ese density for the same intron length range . however, for relatively short introns , we observed a positive correlation between intron length and the hexamer ese density for both constitutive  and alternative  introns . as with splice site strength, ese density was significantly higher in exons flanking constitutive introns than in those flanking alternative introns over all intron lengths . since the putative ese sequences have distinctive base compositions and variation in exon end base composition with intron length was observed , it seemed possible that the trends in ese density were due entirely to the biases in base composition in exon ends. to test for this possibility, for each exon end, we calculated the difference  between the observed ese density  and the expected ese density , given the base composition of that exon end. note that eenrich is in terms of density, and is therefore normalized by exon end length. the resulting eenrich values had weaker but still significant correlations with intron length, for short constitutive  and alternative  introns. a slightly different test, in which the relative enrichment  was calculated, yielded weaker correlation values for short constitutive  and alternative  introns. the results of these tests suggest a specific increase in hexamer ese density with increasing intron length among relatively short introns, as opposed to a more general trend in base composition.

differences in the lengths of orthologous introns are associated with corresponding changes in splicing signals
having detected correlations between intron length and splicing signals for introns in a single genome, we sought to determine if differences in the lengths of orthologous introns in different species were associated with changes in splicing signals. as small changes in intron length are likely to have little effect on splicing, we examined only those pairs of orthologous introns for which the length difference was substantial . when one intron of an orthologous pair was substantially longer than the other, and the various splice signals differed in strength, we compared the strengths signals associated with these introns.

higher sequence conservation and increased ese density at exon ends
although the exact locations of eses within exons are largely unknown, increased density of ese motifs has been detected in the 25– <dig> nucleotides from exon ends, the regions of exons that have the lowest snp density in humans  <cit> . we reproduced this test and confirmed the results in that the ese density significantly increased in the vicinity of splice sites in both human  and mouse  exons.

we further employed inter-species comparisons to examine the levels of sequence conservation at exon ends. in a comparison between mouse and rat, ese sites were slightly but significantly more conserved than non-ese sites . ese sites were substituted at a mean rate of  <dig> % as compared to  <dig> % for non-ese sites. excess conservation of ese sites was found to occur over all intron lengths .

longer introns are associated with higher conservation of synonymous and non-synonymous sites in flanking exons
if intron length is correlated with splicing signal strength, one would expect that sequences flanking long introns  would be more conserved than those flanking short introns. indeed, we found that both synonymous and nonsynonymous sites were more conserved in exon ends adjacent to long introns . the effect was notably more significant for the synonymous sites, which is compatible with the hypothesis that stronger sequence conservation in regions adjacent to long exons might be due to the presence of exonic splicing signals.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here corroborate and extend previous observations on the connection between intron length and the strength of splicing signals. generally, we observed that, as expected, longer introns that might present greater problems for intron definition and, consequently, for efficient splicing than shorter introns were associated with stronger splicing signals. however, there was a notable compensatory relationship between different types of signals, namely, the splice sites and the eses. in the range of relatively short introns , the enhancement of the splicing signals in longer introns seemed to occur within the exons and was manifest in the increased concentration of eses. in contrast, for longer introns, this effect was not detectable, and what was seen instead, was an increase in the strength of the donor and acceptor splice sites. since the eses are located in protein-coding exons, it appears likely that accumulation of a-rich hexamers beyond a certain limit is incompatible with functional constraints operating at the level of protein sequence evolution. hence the compensation in the form of evolution of the splice sites themselves toward greater strength.

the threshold separating "short" and "long" introns used here was different from the boundary at ~ <dig> nucleotides that separates introns spliced via intron definition from those spliced via the exon definition  <cit> . we also repeated the analyses described in the text with an additional partition of short introns at the  <dig> nucleotide cut-off. the "intron-defined" short introns  were found to have correlations of the same sign as those that are "exon defined"  but of lower significance . thus, more complex phenomena seem to be at play than, simply, the distinction between the intron and exon definitions. apparently, even among introns that are spliced via the exon definition, the relative contributions of the splice sites and additional, exonic splicing signals depend on the length of the intron.

all of the above relationships consistently held for both constitutive and alternative exons. curiously, however, the connection between splice site strength and intron length was somewhat stronger for the alternative exons whereas the opposite was true of the dependence between ese density and intron length, which was most pronounced for constitutive exons. this suggests yet another level of compensation between different types of splicing signals.

the correlations between intron length and ese density that were readily observable for ese hexamers, were not seen when we analyzed a different class of eses that have been defined as octamer motifs  <cit>  . however, this observation is somewhat hard to interpret because the octamer eses have been identified in non-coding exons  <cit> . thus, it remains to be determined whether the octamer eses are less important in coding than in non-coding exons or they function in a manner different from that of the hexamer exons and independent of intron length.

in addition to the above dependences, we observed a correlation between intron length and sequence conservation in the exon ends, especially, in synonymous positions, throughout the entire length range of introns . this suggests that splicing signals other than the ese hexamers, which were originally defined for short exons  <cit> , or the ese octamers  <cit>  analyzed here, might exist in exon sequences, particularly, those that flank long introns; such signals that remain to be specifically characterized, might comprise a new class of eses.

the greater strength of different types of splicing signals around longer introns could evolve either via a neutral evolution route or as an adaptation. the neutral scenario would apply to a case when an intron becomes shorter as a result of deletion that is followed by splice site amelioration. in contrast, when the length of an intron increases due to an insertion, the splicing signals would evolve under positive selection, adapting to the new situation by restoring splicing efficiency.

all the trends in the relationships between the strength of splicing signals, evolutionary conservation of synonymous positions in exon ends and ese sites, and intron length that are reported here and elsewhere  <cit>  are manifest in weak correlations that are made statistically  significant by the large, genome-wide size of the analyzed samples of exons and introns. on the one hand, this illustrates the power of genome-scale analysis in detecting subtle but potentially functionally relevant signals in sequences. on the other hand, the dependence of these observations on the vast amounts of data makes the analysis susceptible to systematic biases in that data, e.g., those in nucleotide composition. we attempted to eliminate the potential effects of such biases whenever we could discern them and found the connections withstood the controls, even though some correlations were weakened. the weak correlations between intron size and splice signal strength and exonic sequence features  suggest that intron definition is governed by multiple signals, some of which remain to be recognized. in particular, it seems likely that some of the signals that are important for efficient splicing of exons flanking long introns reside within those introns. this possibility seems to be compatible with the recent findings that long introns show a greater evolutionary conservation than short introns in drosophila  <cit>  and that mammalian long introns are enriched in multispecies conserved sequence elements compared to short introns  <cit> .

on balance, despite the weakness of the observed correlations, the coherence of different types of signals uncovered in this study, some of which are limited to single-genome analysis  whereas others involve sequence conservation in different genomes, strongly suggests that these observations are functionally relevant for the splicing mechanism rather than spurious. in particular, these findings provide an incentive for an experimental search for new types of eses.

