BACKGROUND
small g-proteins are molecular switches that cycle between an inactive gdp- and active gtp-bound state. activation is dependent on helper proteins that facilitate release and exchange of bound nucleotide: gefs , while its deactivation is regulated by gaps  that stimulate the naturally low gtpase activity  <cit> . only in the active gtp bound form, the switch region of small g-proteins can interact with ras-associating  or ras binding domains  of effector proteins  <cit> . in this way small g-proteins provide tight control over the cell response to extracellular stimuli by translating the signaling cascades inside the cell  <cit> .

in dictyostelium discoideum small g-proteins are essential for a wide variety of processes, including regulation of the cytoskeleton, chemotaxis, cell division and multicellular development  <cit> . due to its genetic tractability and high conservation of many important signaling pathways dictyostelium has proven to be an excellent model for studying small g-protein signaling. during the vegative state, dictyostelium are single-celled amoeba that feed on bacteria. upon starvation, cells undergo a tightly regulated developmental process in which they secrete and chemotax toward camp, resulting in multicellular fruiting bodies  <cit> .

rap proteins belong to the ras superfamily of small g-proteins. in mammalian cells rap is important for cellular adhesion, differentiation and cell proliferation  <cit> . dictyostelium rapa is essential and is implicated in processes throughout the life cycle. in vegetative and chemotaxis competent cells rapa induces pseudopod formation by activating pi3k  <cit> , and it regulates substrate attachment and myosin ii disassembly via the serine/threonine kinase phg <dig>  <cit> . strains with a deletion of rapgap <dig> or rapgap <dig> showed defects in cell patterning and morphogenesis  <cit> , indicating that rapa is also important in late development. however so far nothing is known about downstream effectors of rapa that play a role in the progression of multicellular development.

here we show that activation of rapa results in increased level of activated rac proteins. to gain further insight into the link between these pathways, we have used a proteomic approach. recombinant rapa was used as bait in pull-down screens and interacting proteins were identified by mass-spectroscopy. one of the binding partners, gxcc provides a potential link between rap and rac activation and deletion studies reveal that this pathway is involved in regulating development of dictyostelium cells.

RESULTS
rap regulates rac activation
rap proteins are involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. in mammals rap promotes cell spreading via the racgefs vav <dig> and tiam <dig>  <cit> . in dictyostelium expression of constitutive active rapa  results in an increased actin response and f-actin polymerization is induced at the sites were rapa is activated in response to camp  <cit> . however the pathways and mechanism by which rap regulates cytoskeleton reorganization are not completely understood. the dynamics of rac activation in dictyostelium cells can be monitored using the fluorescent probe crib-gfp that consists of the crib domain of dictyostelium pakb, that specifically binds to the active form of rac  <cit> . to test if rapa can indeed activate the rac pathway we coexpressed rapaca and crib-gfp and visualised active rac using total internal reflection microscopy. in random moving wild type  cells there is a broad patch of active rac in pseudopods. in unstimulated developed cells, there is usually a single  stable patch that slowly migrates along with the pseudopod . cells expressing rapaca are flattened and unpolarized in appearance  <cit> . in these cells, active rac patches are highly motile . patches grow to unusually large size and often break up into multiple  patches, which leads to multiple simultaneous protrusions.

gxcc is a specific rapa effector
to identify rap effectors we performed a pull-down screen in dictyostelium lysate with purified rapa loaded with gppnhp as bait. by using mass-spectrometry a putative rac gef  was identified as potential binding partner. gxcc has n-terminal arm repeats, followed by a coiled-coil region, a predicted rhogef  domain and a pleckstrin homology  domain . dictyostelium cells do not have rho or cdc <dig> homologues, but rhogef domain containing proteins are thought to regulate the function of the dictyostelium rac family  <cit> .

to confirm that rapa can interact with gxcc, we co-expressed gst-fused gxcc and gfp-tagged rapaca in dictyostelium and performed pull-down experiments using gsh beads. using gst-gxcc as a prey we were able to pull-down gfp-rapaca, whereas free gfp that is present in the same sample does not bind to gxcc .

mammalian rap <dig> binds to the dh-ph tandem of the racgefs, tiam and vav <dig>  <cit> . to determine which domain of gxcc is responsible for rapa binding, we expressed truncated gxcc constructs  and performed pull down experiments. figure 1d shows that the dh-ph tandem is not binding to active rapa and that binding between rapa and gxcc is mediated by the arm domain containing n-terminal fragment. this interaction is not disrupted by the actin inhibitor lantrunculina, indicating that rapa binding to gxcc does not need an intact cytoskeleton . to determine the specificity of the rapa/gxcc interaction we tested the ability of rasc and rasg to bind to gxcc. gxcc does not bind to active rasg and only very weakly to active rasc .

rap activation in vivo can be monitored with the previously published gfp-ralgds reporter, which specifically binds to rap-gtp  <cit> . upon uniform stimulation with camp, gfp-ralgds transiently translocates uniformly to the cell boundary, maximum peaking after 3– <dig> sec after stimulation, followed by a return to the cytoplasm around  <dig> sec   <cit> . n-terminal gxcc shows a highly similar response; it is recruited from the cytoplasm to the cell boundary upon camp stimulation, with a maximum drop in the cytoplasm after  <dig> sec after stimulation and return to basal after  <dig> sec . upon application of a chemoatractant gradient to wild-type cells, both gfp-ralgds and n-terminal gxcc localize at the side of the cell facing the gradient . on the contrary, full length gxcc is uniformly distributed in the cytosol and doesn’t alter localization upon stimulation with camp , suggesting gxcc is in an auto-inhibited state and may need additional specific inputs for translocation to the membrane and/or rapa is locally activating gxcc rather than regulating its localization. these data show that the localization and kinetics of rapa activation coincides with the localization of n-terminal gxcc, indicating an interaction in vivo.

to address if the interaction between gxcc and rapa is direct and nucleotide dependent, the arm domain of gxcc  and rapa were expressed and purified from e. coli and subsequently used in a guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibition  assay. in this experiment rapa loaded with mgppnhp, a hydrolysis-resistant fluorescent gtp analogue, is incubated with an excess of unlabelled nucleotide. the resulting nucleotide exchange can be monitored as decay in fluorescence, from which the rate constant kobs is calculated. the interaction of an effector with the gtp-bound g-protein stabilizes the interaction between the g-protein and the nucleotide and this stabilization results in decreased dissociation of the nucleotide from the g-protein/ nucleotide/ effector complex  <cit> . the addition of increasing concentrations of the purified gxcc arm domain resulted in a concentration dependent decrease of kobs. using this dependency we determined an affinity  of  <dig>  μm  for the interaction of rapa and gxcc. although this affinity seems to be rather low, it is similar to the ones described for the interaction between rapa and phg <dig>  <cit> , rapa and pi3k  <cit>  and human rap with several effectors  <cit> . measurements with rapa bound to mgdp or mgppnhp loaded rasc and rasg, didn’t show any gdi effect in the presence of gxcc, indicating the interaction is nucleotide dependent and specific.

all together our results show that active rapa specifically binds to the arm repeat region of gxcc in vitro and vivo.

gxcc binds to rac proteins
the dictyostelium genome encodes for  <dig> rac proteins, whereas rho and cdc <dig> are absent  <cit> . to determine the downstream targets of gxcc, binding to dictyostelium rac proteins was determined. the rac proteins were expressed and purified from e. coli, bound to gsh beads and subsequently incubated with lystate of vegetative gfp-gxcc dictyostelium cells in the presence of edta. imunnoblotting was used to detect bait  and prey  protein. gxcc showed the highest affinity to racg, rach, race, raci and racl whereas hardly binding to rac1a, racf <dig> and racc could be detected , indicating specificity of gxcc binding in the pull-down. to get complete insight in the downstream targets of gxcc we tried to perform in vitro nucleotide exchange assays, but unfortunately we were not able to isolate a stable recombinant gxcc dh-ph fragment. we were able to isolate small quantities of full length gxcc from dictyostelium cells, but this protein didn’t show exchange activity on any of the tested rac proteins. this lack of activity could be due to the quality of the isolated protein, or consistent with the translocation data may suggest that full length gxcc is in an auto-inhibited state .

only a few of the rac proteins have been characterized in detail. racg which shows the highest binding is involved in camp chemotaxis, filopodia formation and phagocytosis  <cit> . rach which also shows high binding to gxcc has a role in vesicular trafficking  <cit> , race is known to play a role in orchestrating cell division  <cit> , and racl is a yet uncharacterized rac protein that is expressed at late stages of dictyostelium development  <cit> .

together the data shows that gxcc can bind specific rac proteins. the presence of the predicted rhogef dh-ph domain suggest that gxcc most likely is able to activate these interacting proteins, it is however also unlikely that it is the only exchange factor for these rac’s.

gxcc plays a role during development
to characterize the function of gxcc in vivo we generated cells lacking gxcc by homologous recombination. three independent knock out clones have been isolated and the integration in the proper loci was confirmed by pcr . a rescue cell line was prepared by overexpressing a full length gxcc construct in the knock out background. the role of gxcc in chemotaxis was tested using a micropipette assay. in a gradient of camp, wild type cells were very polarized and robustly moved towards the pipette with a chemotaxis index of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and speed of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min. cells lacking gxcc migrate with similar efficiency , and move slightly faster , as wild-type cells. the knock out cells did not show defects in cytokinesis, also the cell attachment and cell morphology of gxcc-null and gxcc rescue cells is similar to that of wild-type, suggesting that gxcc does not play an important regulatory role in these processes. consistently, gxcc- null cells expressing rapaca still possessed the characteristic rapoe phenotype; cells were flat, highly adhesive extended many substrate attached pseudopodia with highly mobile rac patches .

because rap activation is required for proper cell sorting and fruiting body formation  <cit> , we examined the phenotype of gxcc-null during dictyostelium development. in wild-type , aggregation centers were formed after  <dig> hours, slugs were formed after  <dig> hours, mexican hats were visible after  <dig> hours and after  <dig> hours cells culminates into fruiting bodies . cells lacking gxcc formed territories and finished streaming phase at the same time as wild-type parent. however, they were severely delayed in forming slugs and mexican hat structures, and eventually formed fruiting bodies after  <dig> hours of starvation. this developmental defect could be completely reverted by re-expressing n-terminal gfp tagged gxcc .

together the data shows that gxcc plays a role in the regulation of dictyostelium development.

CONCLUSIONS
with a mass spectrometry based screen we here identified the rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor, gxcc as rap binding partner. our biochemical data shows that the interaction between gxcc and rapa is both specific and direct, suggesting a potential link between rap and rac signalling. in mammalian cells rap promotes cell spreading by localization of the racgefs vav <dig> and tiam  <cit> . dictyostelium rap is a key regulator of adhesion, chemotaxis and development  <cit> . gxcc only regulates dictyostelium late development and is not required for adhesion or chemotaxis. starved cells expressing rapca have increased rac activation, suggesting there has to be additional modes of rap regulation of the rac pathway. a recent paper by jeon et al., suggests that dictyostelium racgef <dig> might be one of these connection between rap and rac signalling  <cit> . to get more insight in these pathways it will be important to identify further regulators and downstream effectors of small g-protein signaling; our mass-pull-down screen could be important in this enterprise.

