BACKGROUND
spermatozoa are the most morphologically diverse cells, yet they all have the same basic function: to fertilize an egg. variation in sperm shape among species can often be attributed to sexual selection mediated by sperm competition  <cit>  , but variation within species has been more difficult to explain. male-to-male variation in sperm morphology has been documented in many species spanning a wide range of mating systems  <cit> . functional studies investigating the within-species association between sperm length and fertilization success have found an advantage of larger sperm  <cit> , but sometimes the race goes to the short  <cit> . most often, though, no evidence is found for an intraspecific association of sperm morphology and sperm competition  <cit> . thus, it remains unknown if selection is acting on sperm morphology in a similar way within and between species, or if sperm are evolving under complex, possibly context-dependent selective regimes that vary among species and populations  <cit> .

most studies of sperm variation focus on organisms with internal fertilization, where sperm act in the context of an environment controlled by the female reproductive tract  <cit> . in such cases, sperm competition is dependent on multiple matings by the female and may be influenced by efforts of males to displace sperm from prior matings or to guard females against subsequent matings  <cit> . there may also be indirect effects of males on female behavior  <cit> .

some external fertilizers can likewise have complex mating systems with mate choice, male-male competition, and alternative male mating strategies  <cit> . however, fertilization dynamics of broadcast spawning organisms may face different selective rules. mating occurs when typically sessile or sedentary adults release their gametes into the environment, resulting in external fertilization, and has been best studied in marine systems. some species, particularly invertebrates, have a limited behavioral repertoire as adults and exhibit little behavioral mate choice. in dioecious species, female multiple mating is controlled largely by the density of males in her vicinity, and competition between males is relegated to the level of the gamete. sperm competition may be high when synchronous spawning occurs in dense aggregations  <cit> , but intensity of sperm competition , and therefore sexual selection, may vary over small spatial and temporal scales with changes in population density. furthermore, fertilization conditions may be additionally influenced by variation in factors including wave action  <cit> , temperature  <cit> , or egg size  <cit> , creating a selective mosaic in which no single sperm type is universally preferred. sperm variation among species of broadcast spawners is well-described  <cit>  and can be associated with egg size and developmental mode  <cit> . while little is known about evolutionary forces acting on sperm morphology within a broadcast spawning species, they are certainly more related to ecological environmental variation rather than to conditions within a female reproductive tract.

a basic question is whether sperm morphology of a broadcast spawner varies substantially among males, as has been found in both internal and other external fertilizers  <cit> . additionally, does sperm morphology vary among populations, a pattern that precedes species-level divergence? we address these questions in the green sea urchin , by examining variation in five sperm morphometrics within and among pacific, west atlantic and east atlantic populations. we also assess the stability of sperm parameters over time within an individual across multiple spawnings and within a population across two reproductive seasons.

in order to determine if selection is driving population-level divergence in sperm morphology, we compare quantitative genetic divergence in sperm traits  with a neutral expectation of differentiation under genetic drift, estimated by divergence at neutral microsatellite loci . the comparison of qst with fst is a useful tool for identifying local adaptive differentiation in fitness-related quantitative traits, because it allows us to test a hypothesis of selection against three predictions  <cit> . if sperm morphology is neutrally divergent among populations, we would expect to see comparable patterns of variation at both sperm morphometrics and neutral microsatellites . if sperm traits are under directional selection for different optima among populations, quantitative trait divergence should be higher than expected under neutrality . finally, if sperm traits are evolving under homogenizing selection, population means should be more similar than expected under neutrality , though this conclusion is much more difficult to obtain with confidence. qst-fst analysis has been applied in a wide range of taxa to address diverse questions in evolutionary biology, e.g.,  <cit> .

here, we show that sperm traits have diverged strongly among populations as well as among individuals within populations. at the same time, sperm morphology exhibits low variation within individual males across multiple spawnings. we detect directional selection on sperm traits for different population means, especially in sperm head length between the pacific and west atlantic populations. patterns of pairwise divergence among populations suggests that ecological variables may be playing a large role in sperm evolution of this broadcast spawner.

RESULTS
variation within males
we tested sperm from multiple spawnings of males held in culture in  <dig> and  <dig>  among  <dig> males measured every two weeks two to five times , head length, axoneme length and total length did not differ significantly among spawning events . however, head width and midpiece area showed significant within-individual variation over time. repeatability ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with the highest repeatabilities obtained for head length, axoneme length and total length . these repeatabilities are estimates of the upper limit of broad-sense heritability and were used in the calculation of qst for each trait.

results for trait differences between measurement events ,  <dig> and  <dig> west atlantic sperm traits , among spawnings within an individual , among individuals within populations , and among populations . for hw, individual differences within west atlantic reported for  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, and pop reflects separate accounting for the west atlantic population by year. sperm traits are head length , head width , axoneme length , total length , midpiece area .

microsatellite-based fst =  <dig> . f and p correspond to the anova from which variance components were obtained for calculating qst. px <dig> is the p-value associated with the chi-squared distribution, for the test statistic qst/fst.

within-male variability in sperm morphometry as measured by within-male cv did not differ for the three populations for any trait except head width . cv of head length among males within a population showed a clinal pattern with lowest among-male variability in the pacific and highest in the east atlantic. in all other traits, the west atlantic had the highest variability among males, with the lowest in norway. head width was an exception, with the lowest variability among males in the pacific. in general, patterns of variability within and among individuals were comparable for all traits and all populations, but midpiece area in the east atlantic was an order of magnitude more variable within males than among males. in fact, midpiece area in all populations was much more variable than the other traits, with cv's within males of  <dig>  in the pacific,  <dig>  in the west atlantic and  <dig>  in the east atlantic. among-male cv's for midpiece area were  <dig>  in the pacific,  <dig>  in the west atlantic, and  <dig>  in the east atlantic.

in our study, we found strong evidence that sperm morphology is controlled more by developmental factors during spermatogenesis than ambient environmental conditions. we examined repeatability for west atlantic males that were removed from the field and placed into a common laboratory environment. all sea urchins were spawned upon arrival from the field, so the first spawning should reflect sperm morphology under the native ecological conditions of the population. individuals were usually spawned repeatedly over a time period exceeding the expected 21-day duration of a spermatogenic cycle . the result of repeatable sperm morphology, despite a change in environmental conditions between the field and the lab, suggests that differences between males are intrinsic properties of those males and not dominated by environmental effects. furthermore, consistency in sperm morphology between  <dig> and  <dig> samples, despite differences in laboratory conditions of temperature and light regime, lend additional evidence to this conclusion. understanding how size in sperm cells is controlled between males, and how intra-individual variance is limited will require a closer look at the molecular mechanisms controlling spermatogenesis in this system.

ejaculate and sperm traits in fish have been shown to adjust in response to change in social status and therefore risk of sperm competition  <cit> . in addition, male fowl exhibit phenotypic plasticity in ejaculate size  <cit>  and sperm velocity  <cit>  under varying risk of sperm competition and depending on female number, quality and mating history. it is possible that similar plasticity exists in sea urchins, perhaps in response to population density, but because the captive environment was held constant for the duration of the study, we were unable to assess any plasticity in sperm morphology relative to sperm competition risk .

variation among males
we found highly significant variation among individuals within all three populations for all sperm traits  with the exception of midpiece area in the east atlantic population . significant correlations among males were also found between head length and width , head length and axoneme length , axoneme length and total length , and head width and midpiece area .

an evolutionary process separate from that acting among males may influence the developmental system that produces sperm within a male. significant differences in sperm morphological variation among males coupled with high repeatability provide strong support for the hypothesis that males control sperm morphology around an individually based mean. yet, there is some variation within a spawning, and the cvs of sperm size within a male are comparable to those among males within a population.

variation among populations
population means were different for all sperm traits except total length , including head length, head width, axoneme length and midpiece area . sperm heads in the pacific are long  and narrow  but in the east atlantic, they are short  and wide , with the west atlantic having an intermediate head shape . axoneme length was longest in the pacific and shortest in the east atlantic and negatively correlated with head length , resulting in an overall equality of total length in all three populations. head length was the only trait with significantly different means for all populations, according to a tukey test . head width was significantly different only in the east atlantic population, and axoneme length increased from west to east, with the west atlantic not significantly different from the pacific or east atlantic populations. midpiece area was distinct only for the west atlantic population .

significantly different groups  designated with different letters . for example, all three populations are different for hl, but none are different for total. trait abbreviations as in table  <dig> 

multivariate canonical discriminant analysis found significant among-population variation for overall sperm morphology, with two canonical variables . can <dig> accounted for  <dig> % of the variation and had highest raw canonical coefficients for head length, axoneme length, and total length . pairwise mahalanobis distances among the three populations showed pacific sperm morphology to be most divergent from the east atlantic, with the west atlantic showing approximately equal divergence from both the pacific and the east atlantic .

population trait means did not differ in the west atlantic between  <dig> and  <dig> for all traits except head width , suggesting that the population means for most sperm traits are stable over at least two reproductive seasons. further research is needed to determine longer-term persistence of measured population means for this and the other populations.

to date, investigations of variation in sperm morphology among populations are limited, but population-level variation has been found across a wide range of taxa. a study of two closely related drosophila species found significant differences in sperm length among individuals and populations in both species  <cit> . a study in drosophila subobscura found population differences in sperm head length but not total length  <cit> , and  <cit>  found significant variation among males in total length within and among four populations of a frog.

in s. droebachiensis, substantial sperm differences among populations could be derived from a number of causes. the atlantic populations probably originated from an invasion from the pacific  <dig>  million years ago with the opening of the bering strait  <cit> . since that time, the western atlantic population has received substantial influx from the pacific  <cit> , while the eastern atlantic population has remained largely separated  <cit> . this demographic history is reflected in its population genetics  <cit> , with an fst between the atlantic populations of  <dig>  and between the western atlantic and pacific of  <dig> . in contrast, the two atlantic populations are more similar to each other in overall sperm morphology than they are to the pacific . in particular, qst divergence between the pacific and west atlantic exceeds their pairwise fst by a factor of  <dig>  more than an order of magnitude higher than for the other population comparisons and traits .

ecological differences among populations do a better job than genetic relationships at explaining the pattern of variation in sperm head length. in the pacific, s. droebachiensis is embedded in a complex community that includes 2– <dig> congeners, some of which may act as competitors for resources. in these pacific habitats, s. droebachiensis is currently at lower population densities than the shallow water congeners, s. purpuratus and s. franciscanus  <cit> , and has been characterized as a species that is sperm-limited in its spawning events  <cit> . in the atlantic, on the other hand, s. droebachiensis can form dense stands of urchins that are capable of monopolizing the sea floor and stripping the habitat of macroalgae  <cit> . in such areas of high population density, sperm competition will be stronger than in most pacific areas. the ecological similarity of the two atlantic populations is more closely associated with the morphological similarity of sperm head length between these two populations relative to the pacific. increasing the sample size of the east atlantic dataset and further study of historical population sizes may provide a clearer pattern of any association between sperm head morphology and population density among the study populations. in addition, experimental fertilization trials will be needed to test for any functional significance of these differences.

evolutionary processes responsible for the observed sperm morphological variation among males may be illuminated by examining similar patterns in other male reproductive traits. in particular, the gamete recognition protein bindin shows strong differences between species as well as between some populations   <cit> , and the context-dependent nature of bindin's fitness effects may explain both its rapid evolution and high allelic diversity  <cit> . if balancing selection is also acting on sperm morphology, we might see high morphological diversity within populations . we would also expect fitness effects of sperm traits to be context dependent. these different contexts may be characterized by variation in population density , egg morphology and/or turbulence due to wave action, but further experimental evidence is needed.

alternatively, sperm morphological traits may be evolving neutrally among males within populations of s. droebachiensis. determination that intraspecific variation is under selection will require further comparisons with other species that occur at higher abundances  and an understanding of the dynamics of sperm precedence in males with different sperm head sizes.

inferring selection by comparing qst and fst
heterozygosities and tests of hardy-weinberg equilibrium for the east atlantic and pacific populations are as reported in  <cit>  for the vestfjorden, norway and san juan channel, washington populations, respectively. the west atlantic population had a heterozygote deficit at two loci  and between  <dig> and  <dig> alleles per locus with an average of  <dig> . global fst was  <dig> , with pairwise fst's of  <dig>  between the pacific and west atlantic,  <dig>  between the pacific and east atlantic, and  <dig>  between the two atlantic populations.

quantitative genetic divergence among populations exceeded microsatellite divergence for most sperm traits. average qst for the sperm traits was  <dig> , with a standard error of  <dig> , as compared with fst of  <dig> . anovas of trait divergence from which variance components were obtained for calculating qst were significant for all traits except total length. qst's for head length , head width , and midpiece area  were significantly higher than fst, based on tail probabilities of qst on a chi-squared fst distribution , although these results are not significant after bonferroni correction.

calculation of population pairwise qst and fst shows that marginal signatures of selection at the global level are driven entirely by highly significant quantitative trait divergence between the pacific and west atlantic. sperm head length , axoneme length  and midpiece area , are most divergent, in comparison with a pairwise fst of  <dig>  .

we used repeatability of sperm traits as an estimate of the upper limit of broad-sense heritability in our calculations of qst; the actual narrow-sense heritability for the sperm traits may be substantially lower. however, heritability of sperm morphometrics has been measured directly in a number of other species and has been found to be generally high. for example, heritability of sperm head length has been estimated to be  <dig>  in zebra finches  <cit>  and  <dig>  in rabbits  <cit> , comparable to our upper limit estimate of  <dig> .

nevertheless, the use of repeatability in the calculation of qst requires discussion of two key points. first, because repeatability is an upper limit on heritability, these qst estimates represent their lower limit given the observed phenotypic population differentiation and are therefore not expected to further approach fst. our estimates of qst are thus very conservative, because heritability appears in the denominator of the qst calculation and therefore has an inverse relationship with qst . using repeatability as an upper limit on heritability means that our qst estimates represent a lower bound. over all possible values of h <dig>  qst remains above fst for all sperm traits except total length, though both axoneme length and midpiece area approach fst as h <dig> reaches  <dig> .

second, fst and qst normally follow a chi-squared distribution , but qst as estimated using repeatability, which estimates broad-sense heritability, no longer follows the same theoretical rules as a qst estimated with an estimate of narrow-sense heritability. we can still calculate the tail probability of a point estimate of qst on our chi-squared distribution of fst, but we are unable to make any more rigorous statistical tests that take the distribution of qst into account. this limitation also applies to the analysis of pairwise qst and fst.

as a more general precautionary note, our results, and those of many qst-fst comparisons, should be interpreted with a degree of caution. first, the chi-squared approximation of the fst distribution holds best when fst is less than  <dig>   <cit> . while our observed global fst of  <dig>  may still reasonably follow a chi-squared distribution, the predictive capability of this model is diminished. furthermore, an excess of qst over fst may be obtained from selection acting not on the traits under study but on genetically correlated traits  <cit> . finally, both fst and qst are historical signatures of genetic divergence accumulated over time and are therefore unable to identify contemporary selection. indeed, a result of qst > fst may result from selection or a response to past selection; these two possibilities cannot be differentiated by this analysis. estimates of contemporary selection in this system may be especially useful, if evolution of sperm morphology is influenced by conditions controlling sperm competition that change on an ecological timescale. in short, the comparison of qst and fst is a relatively blunt tool in evolutionary biology that can allow us to rule out genetic drift as a mechanism for quantitative trait differentiation and identify interesting traits for further study. the implications of directional selection derived here are preliminary at best and require more in-depth and rigorous analyses of selection for validation and detailed characterization.

head length and total length
of all sperm traits examined, head length was the only measurement to show stability over time within an individual as well as within a population, strong variation among males within all populations, and strong differentiation among all populations. head length also had a strong signature of directional selection both at the global and population pairwise levels. patterns of head elongation among sea urchin species are associated with the evolution of large eggs and direct development  <cit>  , suggesting a mechanical role for sperm head shape in penetrating the egg's thick jelly coat. in other externally fertilizing taxa, phylogenetic comparisons show more ambiguity in an association between sperm morphology and egg morphology, with a positive relationship found in frogs  <cit> , but not in fish  <cit> . in addition, sperm head shape, along with relative flagellum length, is positively correlated with risk of sperm competition across frog species  <cit> . the only evidence for a direct correlation between function and morphology within a species with flagellated sperm has been found in an internal fertilizer, the red deer  <cit> . velocity is known to predict fertilization success in a wide variety of taxa  <cit> , including sea urchins  <cit> , and head shape in broadcast spawners could play a role in swimming speed under different biomechanical conditions .

total sperm length, on the other hand, showed no significant divergence or directional selection among populations. other studies using phylogenetic contrasts and direct experiments also fail to find a significant relationship between indices of selection, such as sperm competition, with sperm total length  <cit> . this lack of selective signal, may be due to opposing evolutionary forces acting on different subcomponents of sperm, such as head length and axomenal length that comprise total length. the negative correlation that we found between these two measurements  underscores the importance of measuring subcomponents of sperm in addition to total length.

CONCLUSIONS
we found highly significant differences in sperm morphology among individuals within all populations for almost all traits, as well as strong population-level differentiation for head length, axoneme length, and midpiece area. at the same time, most traits showed low variation among multiple spawnings within a male. these results suggest that sperm morphology tends to be developmentally stable over time, while evolutionary forces are maintaining high levels of variation among individuals and populations of s. droebachiensis. comparison of qst with fst suggests that directional selection may be acting among populations for overall sperm morphology, especially between the pacific and west atlantic populations, in which sperm evolution has greatly outpaced neutral genetic divergence.

directional selection for different means between populations of broadcast spawners could be driven by a wide variety of ecological differences, such as population density as a result of community structure. individual males also differ in sperm size within populations, suggesting that selection on sperm traits is not only directional but may also involve balancing selection for traits that are most successful in different environments. males from many species show this pattern in reproductive traits, suggesting that balancing selection, if acting, is not mating system-specific. it is also possible that variance between populations and species is under selection but that variance between males is drifting neutrally. the underlying genetic and developmental architecture that leads to variance between males in sperm morphology are largely unknown but represent a key area of research in elucidating the evolution of complex morphological phenotypes.

