BACKGROUND
tissue hypoxia is an essential feature of chronic inflammatory diseases. in the cardiovascular system, for example, when arterial wall thickens and blood-diffusion capacity is low in atherosclerotic lesions, hypoxia plays a key role in the development of atherosclerosis  <cit> . the cellular effects of hypoxia are primarily mediated by the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor- <dig> . it is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of α and β subunits. hif-1β is constitutively expressed in many cell types. hif-1α, the active subunit of hif- <dig>  is undetectable under normoxia because of rapid proteasomal degradation. but it is stabilized under hypoxia conditions  <cit> . hif- <dig> specifically binds hypoxic response element -driven promoters on a number of genes such as vascular endothelial growth factor , heme oxygenase and erythropoietin. in human atherosclerosis, hif-1α protein co-localizes with macrophages  <cit> . hif-1α may play a role in foam cell formation  <cit> . evidences suggest that the hif- <dig> pathway is associated with the progression and angiogenesis of human atherosclerosis  <cit> . recent studies have shown that in normal oxygen conditions, g-protein-coupled receptor agonists including angiotensin ii  <cit>  and thrombin  <cit> , potently induce and activate hif-1α in vascular smooth muscle cells. these results suggest a more general role of this transcription factor in the vascular response to injury. however, the role of hypoxia and hif- <dig> in atherosclerosis remains largely unknown.

recently, macrophage migration inhibitory factor  has emerged as a key factor in vascular remodeling and in the development and progression of atherosclerosis  <cit> . mif is an essential, upstream component of the inflammatory cascade and has a critical role in several inflammatory conditions  <cit> . it can be expressed by vascular endothelial cells, vsmcs and macrophages. increased expression of vascular mif is associated with foam cell transformation during atherogenesis. mif is expressed in atherosclerotic lesions, and has been suggested to be involved in atherosclerotic plaque development  <cit> . several pro-atherosclerotic mediators such as oxidized ldl  <cit> , cd40-l and angiotensin ii are able to stimulate mif expression  <cit> . however, the regulation of mif expression in vascular cells, and its mechanisms of action have received little attention in atherosclerosis research.

mif has recently been shown to be up-regulated by hypoxia in several tumor cell types in vitro including breast carcinoma cells  <cit> . however, there are few data about the direct effects of hypoxia on the expression of mif in vsmcs. vsmcs are one of the major constituents of blood vessels. vsmcs are also essential to atherosclerotic lesions. in the view of the increased expression of mif in the atherosclerosis, we hypothesized that mif might be up-regulated by hypoxia in vsmcs, and the up-regulation of mif could be mediated via hif- <dig> dependent pathway. in order to test our hypothesis, we examined the influence of hypoxia on the mif expression in human vsmcs. primary human umbilical artery smooth muscle cells  were used as a model to study the effects of hypoxia on the expression of mif modulated by rna interference in this study.

RESULTS
hypoxia increases mif expression in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells
it was reported that hypoxia  stimulation could induce mif expression in breast cancer cell line  <cit> . however, exposure to hypoxia  reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptotic cell death in vsmc  <cit> . therefore, in our present study, in order to test the effect of hypoxia on the mif expression, different degrees of hypoxia  were used.

mif mrna expression was evaluated by quantitative rt-pcr in huasmcs exposed to different oxygen level for different time. as shown in figure 1a, hypoxia at 3% oxygen for  <dig> h significantly induced mif mrna expression, whereas hypoxia at  <dig> and 10% oxygen had no effect on mif gene expression. the induction was peaked at  <dig> h after exposure to hypoxia . we then used 3% oxygen treatment for  <dig> h as hypoxia stimulation in the following experiments.

we next examined whether mif protein production was regulated in response to hypoxia by western blot and elisa. the cells were exposed to hypoxia for indicated times. subsequently, the secretion of mif in the culture media was measured by elisa. under normoxia condition, growth-arrested huasmcs expressed low level of mif protein. our data showed that 3% oxygen induced maximum mif protein expression at  <dig> h . similarly, under normoxia condition, huasmcs only expressed low level mif protein as detected by western blot. total cellular mif protein levels began to increase  <dig> h after exposure to 3% o <dig>  and peaked at  <dig> h . these data suggest that hypoxia induces both mif mrna and protein production in huasmcs.

hypoxia stimulation  induces expression and activation of hif-1α in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells
hif-1α is the key master regulator to hypoxic response  <cit> , so we observed the possible role of hif-1α in our experimental model. hif-1α mrna and protein levels were highly induced in huasmcs exposed to hypoxia  for  <dig> h, coincident with the expression of mif .

in order to further validate that hif-1α could be activated by the hypoxia stimulation , we next performed electrophoretic mobility shift assay  experiments aimed at assessing whether hif-1α dna binding activity can be induced under 3% o <dig> hypoxia conditions. emsa assay was performed using primers encompassing the hypoxia response element  and adjacent flanking regions in the promoter of human mif gene  <cit> . our data showed that hif-1α binding activity could be increased by exposure to hypoxia  for  <dig> h .

the hypoxia-induced mif expression in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells is dependent on hif-1α pathway
next, we investigated whether hif-1α was involved in hypoxia-induced mif upregulation in huasmcs. to block hif-1α actions, we used a hif-1α-specific small inhibitory rna construct  to knock-down hif-1α expression. the specific hif-1α-sirna expressing plasmid was constructed and used to knock-down hif-1α expression in the lung cancer cell line a <dig> cells in our previous report  <cit> . in order to confirm the inhibition effect of hif-1α-sirna expressing plasmid, we determined the gene and protein expression of hif-1α in huasmcs after transfection. as shown in figure 3a, the hypoxia-induced expression of hif-1α mrna was significantly suppressed in huasmcs transfected with hif-1α-sirna vector. accordingly, hif-1α protein level was decreased in cells receiving hif-1α-sirna . transfection of huasmcs with a wild-type hif-1α expression vector led to up-regulation hif-1α at both the mrna and protein level under normoxic and hypoxic conditions .

silencing hif-1α expression by hif-1α-sirna significantly inhibited hypoxia-induced mif gene and protein expression in huasmc, as evaluated by quantitative pcr, western blot and elisa . as a negative control, the scrambled-sirna had no effect on mif expression in huasmcs. furthermore, in order to confirm that hif-1α specifically induced mif expression, we utilized a wild type hif-1α expression vector to over-express hif- <dig> during normoxic culture. over-expression of hif- <dig> stimulated mif expression in huasmcs under normoxia condition. thus, we conclude that: 1) hif-1α is both necessary and sufficient to upregulate mif expression in huasmcs, and 2) the hypoxia-induced mif expression in huasmcs is most likely mediated by hif-1α.

molecular mechanisms of hypoxia-induced hif-1α and mif expression in huasmcs
hypoxia activates several intracellular mediators, such as intracellular reactive oxygen species   <cit>  and extracellular signal-regulated kinase <cit> . hypoxia-induced hif-1α expression and activation was blocked by treatment with antioxidant tiron , and pd <dig> , indicating that activation of erk signaling and reactive oxygen species generated in response to hypoxia are essential in this process.

exogenous hydrogen peroxide , a reactive oxygen species , has been reported to increase mif expression in normal rat neurons  <cit> . in our study, we observed that the hypoxia-induced mif gene expression and protein production was markedly abrogated when the o2- scavenger tiron was incubated with huasmcs exposed to hypoxia stimulation. moreover, inhibition of erk by its specific inhibitor pd <dig> significantly decreased hypoxia-induced mif expression at both gene and protein levels . these findings suggest that hypoxia-induced mif expression in huasmcs is mediated by reactive oxygen species and extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling.

role of mif in the hypoxia-induced proliferation of huasmcs
in order to examine if mif plays a role in hypoxia-induced cell proliferation, we used bromodeoxyuridine  incorporation assay <cit>  to study the proliferation of growth-arrested huasmcs followed by co-treatment with specific mif-sirna  and hypoxia  for  <dig> h. the specific mif-sirna could significantly inhibit mif expression in huvsmcs under both normoxia and hypoxia conditions .

role of mif in hypoxia-induced migration in huvsmcs
to examine the effect of mif in vsmc migration in response to hypoxia, huasmcs were incubated in a boyden chamber under normoxic or hypoxic conditions, in the absence or presence of specific sirna to mif . as shown in figure 6b, huasmcs migrated significantly through the filter membrane under hypoxia  for  <dig> h. the mif-sirna partly prevented this increase in cell migration both under hypoxia  and in normoxia . over-expression of hif-1α could enhance the huasmc migration under normoxia, whereas knockdown of hif-1α expression in huasmcs abolished hypoxia-induced migration in these cells. our data demonstrate that mif not only involves in controlling the baseline migration in normoxia condition, but also mediates migration of vsmc in response to hypoxia.

discussion
in the present study, the potential correlation between hypoxia and mif expression was investigated in cultured huasmcs. the major findings of this study are:  hypoxia at 3% o <dig>  but not  <dig> or 10% oxygen, up-regulates mif expression in vsmcs;  transcription factor hif-1α is necessary and sufficient in the signaling pathway of mif induction under hypoxia;  enhanced generation of reactive oxygen species  and activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase  might be important in mediating the hypoxia-induced expression of hif-1α and mif;  blockade of mif results in the inhibition of hypoxia-induced proliferation and migration in the huasmc cells. our data clearly indicate that moderate hypoxia plays a crucial role in the modulation of mif expression in vsmcs. these observations also establish a role of mif in mediating hypoxia-induced proliferation and migration in vascular smooth muscle cells. in addition, our results suggest that inhibition of mif might be useful for preventing abnormal vsmc proliferation and migration evoked by hypoxia.

both mif and hypoxia play critical roles in inflammation and atherosclerosis. mif has been identified as a hypoxia-induced gene in cancer cells. recent evidences show that mif is up-regulated by hypoxia  in human cancer cells, such as colon tumor cells  <cit> and breast carcinoma cells  <cit> . moreover, mif mrna expression is induced in a hif-dependent manner in hela cells  <cit> . however, by using sirna approach, larsen et al  <cit>  reported that mif regulation in mcf- <dig> breast cancer cells is due to other hypoxia-induced regulatory mechanisms, independent of hif- <dig> and hif- <dig> activation. consistent with previous report  <cit> , we observed that hif-1α mrna and protein expression and dna binding activity could be induced in huasmcs exposed to hypoxia stimulation . in our experimental model, over-expression of hif-1α, the key transcription factor activated during hypoxia, was able to up-regulate mif gene and protein expression under normoxia, whereas knockdown of hif-1α expression in huasmcs inhibited hypoxia-induced mif expression. our data demonstrate that, in cultured huasmcs, hypoxia  increased mif expression and synthesis via the hif-1α pathway, suggesting that the mechanism involved in up-regulation of mif expression is dependent on cell type.

hif- <dig> regulation by non-hypoxic stimuli has gained considerable interest  <cit> . in addition to angiotensin ii and thrombin  <cit> , studies have showed that hif-1α stabilization and activation is also induced by several pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as il- <dig> and tnfα  <cit> . as a regulator of mif expression, hif-1α might be of potential importance during inflammatory diseases. it is reported that mif regulates hif- <dig> activity in a p53-dependent manner in human cancer cells <cit> . therefore, whether mif could activate hif-1α transcriptional activity in vsmcs needs further studies.

activation of several signaling pathways such as erk might mediate hif-1α activation  <cit>  and mif expression  <cit> . by using a specific inhibitor, the present observations demonstrate that hypoxia upregulates mif via activation of erk in huvsmcs. another pathway implicated in the hypoxia induced response is the generation of intercellular ros  <cit> . our results showed that the antioxidant tiron, a cell permeable scavenger of ros, partially blocks mif production elicited by hypoxia, suggesting that ros acts as intermediates of hypoxia-induced mif expression.

vsmcs proliferation and migration that respond to vascular injury contribute to vessel narrowing and play an important role in the atherosclerotic process. it has been recognized that hypoxia is a stimulus to vsmcs proliferation and migration, a process known as the vascular remodeling  <cit> . hypoxia plays an important role in vascular remodeling and directly affects vsmcs functions. some growth factors, such as pdgf  <cit>  and vegf  <cit> , are involved in the hypoxia-induced proliferation of vsmcs. consistent with previous reports  <cit> , we observed that hif-1α is essential to vsmc proliferation exposed to hypoxia. moreover, our results show that the specific mif-sirna partially blocks huasmcs proliferation elicited by hypoxia, suggesting that mif acts as one of the mediators of hypoxia-induced vsmc proliferation.

in addition to proliferation of vsmcs within the vessel wall, the migration of vsmcs from the media into the neointima is another important feature in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis  <cit> . this process is regulated by multiple factors, and mif is one of the multiple factors that could increase vsmcs migration <cit> . mif is an important mediator of vessel wall remodeling and acts on the migration of vsmcs in an autocrine and paracrine manner <cit> . previous report shows that hypoxia induces the migration of human coronary artery smooth muscle cells, and the migration is elicited by thrombospondin- <dig> <cit> . in the present study, treatment of huasmcs with the specific mif-sirna abolished hypoxia-induced migration, suggesting a role for mif in the migration of vsmcs in response to hypoxia. altogether, our data demonstrate that hif-1α and mif are both important mediators of vascular cell proliferation and migration.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we showed that hypoxia, and specifically hif-1α, might be a potent and rapid inducer of mif expression in human vsmcs. the specific mif-sirna could suppress both basal and hypoxia-induced proliferation and migration of vsmcs. in view of the important role of mif and hypoxia to atherosclerosis, our findings might contribute to the understanding of the pathogenesis of progressive atherosclerosis.

