BACKGROUND
expansion and retraction are the most basic and important behaviors of cnidarian polyps. anthozoans expand their columns and tentacles for prey capture and handling , sediment removal  <cit> , fending-off predators  <cit>  and competitors  <cit> , exposure of photosynthetic symbionts  to light , and to increase oxygen and waste product diffusion  across an increased surface area  <cit> . anthozoans retract their columns and tentacles to avoid detection by predators  <cit> , escape predation , prevent desiccation  <cit> , protect photosynthetic symbionts from intense irradiance or ultraviolet radiation  <cit> , reduce metabolic rates  <cit>  and generate low internal oxygen tension  <cit> , and reduce oxygen and waste product diffusion  across a reduced surface area  <cit> .

expansion is achieved through the action of cilia lining the siphonoglyph of the actinopharynx that pump water into the coelenteron and contiguous tentacles to create hydrostatic pressure  <cit> . expansion is maintained by closing the opening to the actinopharynx and additional ciliary action to sustain hydrostatic pressure  <cit> . retraction is achieved by release of pressure  and contraction of circular muscles lining the column walls and longitudinal muscles of the mesenteries  <cit> . both behaviors require energetic expenditure ; however, because retraction simultaneously creates demand for  and reduces the source of  oxygen, the energetic cost to retraction is thought to be greater  <cit>  and unsustainable  <cit> . as structures are generally retracted when their primary functions  are impeded, their expansion must involve some additional cost  that makes retraction energetically justifiable  <cit> .

the retraction mechanisms of anthozoa includes circular columnar  and marginal muscles, longitudinal mesenteric retractor and parietal muscles, and oblique mesenteric parietobasilar muscles  <cit> . these muscles are differentially developed among anthozoa taxa ranging from apparent absences to massive hypertorphies. because the forces that muscles are able to generate are proportional to their cross-sectional area, the extent of muscle development is an indication of the capabilities and necessities of each taxon. when present, the marginal muscles work  in conjunction with the retractor muscles  to cover the retracted oral disk and tentacles with the margin of the column and provide an important defense from predators and desiccation  <cit> . species with highly developed marginal muscles are often intertidal or live in exposed, wave-swept habitats  <cit> ; those with underdeveloped or absent marginal muscles are often greatly reduced in size or have shifted to an infaunal habitat  <cit> .

the marginal musculature of hexacorallia  arises through hypertrophy of columnar circular muscles at the margin of the polyp  <cit> . the columnar circular muscles, which line the length of the column, are often anchored to miniscule mesogleal pleats . to support the hypertrophied marginal musculature, these pleats become enlarged, merge together to partially enclose the muscle within the mesoglea, or completely envelope the muscle within the mesoglea  <cit> . in some species where hypertrophied marginal muscles are absent, the disk and tentacles remain exposed during contraction; suggesting that the structure of the marginal musculature can determine the extent of retraction ability for the polyp  <cit> .

the evolutionary history of the marginal musculature of hexacorallia is complex, with multiple independent origins of the hypertrophy and reversals to the unenlarged state  <cit> . the marginal musculature is best studied in the actiniaria, but is well known in zoanthidea and less so in corallimorpharia and scleractinia ; it is apparently absent in antipatharia and ceriantharia  <cit> . extant taxa exhibit marginal muscles that are generally characterized as absent , endodermal , transitional  or mesogleal . endodermal and mesogleal marginal musculatures are synapomorphic in actiniaria  <cit> , and were  thought be the same in zoanthidea  <cit> . because of the origin and development of the marginal musculature, zoanthidea exhibiting the endodermal form were considered most basal and those exhibiting the double mesogleal form considered most derived  <cit> , while transitional forms were considered to be a demonstration of the “transference” from endodermal to mesogloeal form within a single species  <cit> . a recent molecular analysis  <cit>  recovered two independent origins of the marginal musculature of actiniaria  and a third in zoanthidea .

given the functional importance of the marginal musculature and long-standing hypotheses of its evolution, it is a logical extension that these structures should be important to systematists. even a cursory review of the zoanthidea  taxonomic literature reveals particular interest in the mesogleal structures that support the marginal musculature; although impossible to visualize without the application of hydrofluoric acid and preparation-intensive histological sectioning  <cit> , a drawing or photograph of the marginal mesoglea is often the only image included in species descriptions. these historical images and illustrations provide a record of rich diversity of form, however this diversity was generally partitioned in systematics as a simple binary character  with few variants  or qualifiers . ectodermal and mesogleal marginal musculature states have defined zoanthidea families and genera for more than 100 years, however this binary character is now known to be homoplasious  <cit>  and its application  to systematics is untenable.

here we provide an assessment of the diversity and evolution of zoanthidea contraction mechanisms by reconstructing the functional morphology of the marginal musculature across the most comprehensive molecular phylogeny available. the results indicate that there are at least ten recognizable forms of extant marginal musculature, whose evolutionary history are much more complex  than previously recognized. throughout the evolutionary history of zoanthidea marginal musculature, size of the muscles vary over two orders of magnitude and shape of the mesogleal support structures mirror that variation allometrically. despite this complexity, the arrangement of the mesogleal structures supporting the marginal muscles display low levels of homoplasy and appear to be synapomorphic for multiple clades of species recognizable through molecular and ecological characters; restoring the relevance of the marginal musculature as a defining character in zoanthidea systematics.

RESULTS
diversity and descriptions of extant marginal muscle forms
a review of histological sections and compiled literature on taxa represented in the composite phylogeny, revealed a minimum of ten distinct marginal musculature arrangements . the two main historical character states, endodermal and mesogleal, are divided into seven arrangements : branchiform endodermal, cteniform endodermal, spindly-cteniform endodermal, discontiguous endodermal, linear mesogleal, reticulate mesogleal, and orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal. the two primary historical variations, divided  mesogleal and transitional, are directly translated to discontiguous mesogleal and divided into cyclically transitional , and meso-endo transitional forms, respectively.fig.  <dig> marginal musculature arrangements. photographs of histological section of marginal musculature  with accompanying drawing of isolated mesogleal structures supporting the marginal musculature for branchiform endodermal , cteniform endodermal , spindly-cteniform endodermal , discontiguous endodermal , meso-endo transitional , cyclically transitional , discontiguous mesogleal , linear mesogleal , reticulate mesogleal , orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal 



branchiform endodermal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have long gill-like mesogleal pleats supporting the distal 5–20 % of the length of the marginal musculature, transitioning abruptly to a cteniform-like morphology with relatively short and uniform mesogleal pleats through the remaining length . the branchiform section is composed of 28– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> mesogleal pleats distally, dramatically reducing in pleat-length proximally, with the cteniform section composed of 117– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> mesogleal pleats .table  <dig> summary of marginal musculature dimensions within each character state



cteniform endodermal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have uniformly short comb-like mesogleal pleats supporting the entire length of the marginal musculature on a lunate mesogleal base .

spindly-cteniform endodermal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have diminishingly short comb-like mesogleal pleats concentrated at the distal end of the marginal musculature on a sigmate mesogleal base . the spindly-cteniform endodermal form differs from the cteniform endodermal form in that mesoglea supporting the marginal musculature is only known to be thin, sigmate, and sparsely populated by widely spaced pleats which become shorter proximally, with an overall appearance that suggests frailness. only a single specimen from a single species was available for this form, therefore the form and its dimensions should be considered preliminary.

discontiguous endodermal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have a distal aggregation of pleats, transitioning through a distinct sigmate region containing undifferentiated mesoglea , ending in a proximal aggregation of pleats attached to a lunate mesogleal base . the two aggregations of pleats are asymmetrical, with the distal aggregation composed of notably fewer pleats  than the proximal aggregation . the discontiguous endodermal form differs from the cteniform endodermal form in that mesoglea supporting the marginal musculature is distinctly sigmate, with separate distal and proximal aggregations of pleats divided by a region containing undifferentiated mesoglea. only a single histological section  of this form is available, therefore the form and its dimensions should be considered preliminary.

meso-endo transitional arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have elliptical or lachrymiform lacunae organized in a stack  distally and transition, through a distinct constriction and sigmate-curve, to mesogleal pleats proximally . approximately half the length of marginal muscle is enclosed within 25– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> lacunae that occupy the full diameter of mesoglea distally, reducing in diameter prior to shifting toward endoderm proximally, with half of muscle attachment sites opening to the endoderm and forming 9– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> mesogleal pleats . the meso-endo transitional form differs from the reticulate mesogleal form in the organization  and shape  of the lacunae and the consistent transition in attachment sites between lacunae to pleats through a sigmate curve in the mesoglea.

cyclically transitional arrangements , as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have muscle attachment sites that transition between sections from mesogleal pleats to mesogleal lacunae , with a period of 20–220 μm x¯= <dig> ncycles= <dig> per transition . muscle fibers contained within 0– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> subtly angular lacunae that occupy entire mesoglea distally; lacunae confined toward endoderm proximally, with proximal-most lacunae opening to endoderm and forming 0– <dig> x¯= <dig> nsections= <dig> mesogleal pleats . in savalia savaglia, the transition of attachment sites transverses the mesoglea such that the most distal muscle attachment sites are pleats arising from the ectodermal surface of the mesoglea and the muscle transits the entire width of the mesoglea within a single section . the second row of lacunae  in sections where muscle appears to be mesogleal are the result of dissolved encrustations .fig.  <dig> patterns in the muscle attachment sites of cyclically transitional marginal muscle arrangements. number, position, and type of marginal muscle attachment sites as they appear within serial longitudinal sections of corallizoanthus aff. tsukaharai  , corallizoanthus tsukaharai , corallizoanthus aff. tsukaharai  , and savalia savaglia . each bar represents a 10 μm longitudinal section with the number and type of muscle attachment points; gray bars indicate ectoderm-facing mesogleal pleats, black bars indicate endoderm-facing mesogleal pleats, open bars indicate mesogleal lacunae. empty positions indicate data missing due to sectioning artifact. inlay diagram demonstrates plane of microtome blade  against the diameter of the polyp  and marginal muscle 



discontiguous mesogleal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have a distal aggregation of circular or elliptical lacunae, transitioning through a distinct sigmate region containing unperforated mesoglea , ending in a proximal aggregation of lacunae embedded within the lunate mesogleal base . the two aggregations of lacunae are usually asymmetrical, with the distal aggregation composed of notably fewer lacunae  then the proximal aggregation , and approximate a linear  arrangement along the length of the marginal musculature . the discontiguous mesogleal form  is differentiated from all other mesogleal forms by the presence of distal and proximal concentrations of lacunae separated by unperforated mesoglea.

linear mesogleal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have circular or elliptical lacunae that approximate a single, continuous, linear arrangement along the length of the marginal musculature .

reticulate mesogleal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have irregularly-shaped lacunae haphazardly arranged along the length of the marginal musculature such that the supporting mesoglea appears to be a reticulate mesh . mesogleal muscle occupies full diameter of mesoglea distally and often narrows near the proximal terminus . in some species the muscle may shift toward endoderm proximally, prior to transitioning to an endodermal tail, that ranges from half the length of the muscle to non-existent. although a few species exhibiting the reticulate mesogleal form may have an endodermal tail , none are known to also have elliptical lacunae organized in a stack.

orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal arrangements, as seen in longitudinal section of the polyp, have rectangular-shaped lacunae arranged in contoured grids along the length of the marginal musculature such that the supporting mesoglea appears to be an orthogonal mesh . mesogleal muscle occupies full diameter of mesoglea distally and often narrows and shifts toward endoderm near the proximal terminus .

two additional arrangements, provisionally identified as simplified mesogleal and endo-meso transitional arrangements, are known only from published drawings or photographs, and may represent misinterpretations of other forms and require further examination to confirm if they represent true character states. the simplified mesogleal arrangement, as seen in published drawings of the longitudinal section of the polyp, have 7– <dig> circular or elliptical lacuna, arranged linearly, and may be an oversimplification of a known mesogleal or endodermal marginal muscle forms. endo-meso transitional arrangements, as seen in the longitudinal section of the polyp, have ~ <dig> linearly arranged attachment points that transition from endodermal  to mesogleal , and may be a misinterpretation of the cyclically transitional  or cteniform endodermal arrangements. due to the uncertainty surrounding the simplified mesogleal arrangement and its subsequent use in assignment of species to genera, we propose that epizoanthus cutressi west is hereby reassigned to the genus parazoanthus with the new binomen parazoanthus cutressi , as indicated by molecular and ecological characters that demonstrate its affiliation with parazoanthus  <cit> .

evolutionary relationships among extant forms
the composite phylogeny , an expansion of the topology of swain  <cit> , is the basis of all phylogenetic analyses presented here. mapping the extant marginal muscle forms on the composite phylogeny, revealed similar forms among closely related taxa . of the ten primary forms, eight are exclusively identified from single genera  and two are identified exclusively among closely related genera . the two provisional forms, endo-meso transitional and simplified mesogleal arrangements, are known respectively from a single species  or three distantly related genera .fig.  <dig> composite evolutionary tree based on the topology of the molecular phylogeny of swain  <cit>  with additional taxa amended following the molecular analyses of swain & swain  <cit> , fujii & reimer  <cit> , and reimer et al.  <cit> . boxed regions show the area of the phylogeny detailed in fig.  <dig> , fig.  <dig> , fig.  <dig> , and fig.  <dig> 

fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood ancestral state reconstruction of marginal musculature form for the basal region of the composite evolutionary tree  populated by isozoanthus, microzoanthus, and epizoanthus taxa. drawings to the right of tree represent extant forms of the isolated mesogleal structures supporting the marginal musculature. pie chart sections represent the relative likelihood of each character state  at the node and are enlarged at ancestral nodes to increase clarity

fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood ancestral state reconstruction of marginal musculature form for the central region of the composite evolutionary tree  populated by corralizoanthus, savalia, antipathozoanthus, and parazoanthus taxa. drawings to the right of tree represent extant forms of the isolated mesogleal structures supporting the marginal musculature. pie chart sections represent the relative likelihood of each character state  at the node and are enlarged at ancestral nodes to increase clarity

fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood ancestral state reconstruction of marginal musculature form for the hydrozoanthidae portion of the composite evolutionary tree  populated by hydrozoanthus and terrazoanthus taxa. drawings to the right of tree represent extant forms of the isolated mesogleal structures supporting the marginal musculature. pie chart sections represent the relative likelihood of each character state  at the node and are enlarged at ancestral nodes to increase clarity

fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood ancestral state reconstruction of marginal musculature form for the brachycnemina portion of the composite evolutionary tree  populated by neozoanthus, isaurus, acrozoanthus, zoanthus, palythoa, protopalythoa, and sphenopus taxa. drawings to the right of tree represent extant forms of the isolated mesogleal structures supporting the marginal musculature. pie chart sections represent the relative likelihood of each character state  at the node and are enlarged at ancestral nodes to increase clarity



a similar pattern is seen among the shape and size parameters of the marginal musculature: similar shapes and sizes among closely related taxa, but great diversity across the entire phylogeny . the genera that have the largest polyps, have the largest marginal muscle cross-sectional areas , also have the most numerous  and robust support structures .fig.  <dig> marginal musculature arrangements and the dimensions of their structural components mapped to the composite phylogeny. boxes indicate muscle arrangement character state ; bar graphs indicate the mean maximum number of attachment sites, mesogleal base length , mesogleal base and attachment site width , marginal muscle cross-sectional area , and polyp diameter 



evolutionary history of the marginal musculature
the maximum likelihood  ancestral state reconstructions recovered 9– <dig> transitions in the arrangement of the marginal musculature. the common ancestor of zoanthidea  most likely  had a reticulate mesogleal marginal musculature , which remained unchanged  prior to the more recent shift to the branchiform endodermal arrangement , followed by the transition to the autapomorphic spindly-cteniform endodermal  arrangement. it is unclear if the marginal musculature of epizoanthus illoricatus represents a state change or if the arrangement  is an oversimplification of its true form.

an ancient transition from reticulate mesogleal to cteniform endodermal marginal musculature  remained unchanged in the common ancestor of the hydrozoanthidae + brachycnemina clade , the common ancestor of parazoanthidae , and the common ancestor of hydrozoanthidae . two apparently independent transitions to the cyclically transitional arrangement are reconstructed at nodes  <dig> and  <dig>  but a single transition to this state could be inferred earlier in evolutionary history  if the specimen representing savalia lucifica in the molecular phylogeny has been misidentified and is actually a species with a cyclically transitional marginal musculature . similarly, it is unclear if the marginal musculature of antipathozoanthus macaronesicus  represents a state change  or if the arrangement  represents a misinterpretation of its true form. it is also unclear if the marginal musculature of parazoanthus cutressi  represents a state change or if the arrangement  represents an oversimplification of its true form. a transition to the meso-endo transitional arrangement is reconstructed at node  <dig> , but would be inferred to have occurred earlier in evolutionary history in the common ancestor of terrazoanthus  if either of the unnamed terrazoanthus species included in the phylogeny has this character state. as with e. illoricatus and p. cutressi, it is unclear if the simplified mesogleal arrangement of terrazoanthus minutus  represents a state change or if the arrangement  represents an oversimplification of its true form.

a transition from cteniform endodermal to linear mesogleal marginal musculature, similar to extant palythoa, occurred at the common ancestor of brachycnemina  and remained unchanged in the common ancestor of sphenopidae . a transition to orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal arrangement, similar to extant isaurus, occurred at node  <dig>  and preceded separate transitions to discontinuous mesogleal arrangement in the common ancestor of zoanthus and acrozoanthus  and the autapomorphic discontinuous endodermal arrangement of neozoanthus caleyi .

functional morphology evolution
the best-fit for each of the pair-wise size and shape character regression-residual sets mapped onto the composite phylogeny is the punctuated average with branch lengths model  <cit> ; indicating that the data are phylogenetically structured  and conserved  with phenotypic divergence consistent with the evolutionary rates of the molecular phylogeny . because the regression-residuals of the phenotypic data are phylogenetically structured, phylogenetic regression is an appropriate test to assess covariance between characters. using phylogenetic independent contrasts , we detected a significant pattern of associated variation between polyp and muscle size, and between functional components of the marginal musculature across the evolution of zoanthidea . as the size of polyps  increases, so does the  size-corrected cross-sectional area of the marginal musculature . as the log-transformed cross-sectional area of the muscle increases, so do the  size-corrected number of muscle attachment sites , length of the mesogleal base , width of the mesogleal base , and width of the attachment sites . using the nodal contrast values from the pic analysis in a simultaneous multivariate regression and permutation test indicates significant positive evolutionary allometry between the size of polyps  and the cross-sectional area of the marginal musculature , and the marginal musculature  and the number of muscle attachment sites , length of the mesogleal base , width of the mesogleal base , and width of the attachment sites .fig.  <dig> multivariate regressions of size-corrected shape dimensions on size. significant positive evolutionary allometry was detected between the size of polyps  and the cross-sectional area of the marginal musculature  , and the marginal musculature  and the number of muscle attachment sites  , length of the mesogleal base  , width of the mesogleal base  , and width of the attachment sites  



discussion
diversity of marginal muscle form
within the diversity of zoanthidea taxa that we examined, we can report with considerable certainty that there are at least ten distinguishable categories of marginal musculature form , and with skepticism that there are two additional forms . that this study represents the minimal diversity of form is evident in the taxon sampling; although this phylogeny is by far the most comprehensive available , it is limited to ~40 % of the known diversity of zoanthidea species and the true diversity is likely to be much greater . certainty in these analyses arises from direct examination of histological sections and comparisons with closely related taxa; skepticism arises from reliance on published drawings of histological sections  and confusion surrounding the publication of original species identifications  and their similarity to known forms as they would be interpreted from a single histological section .

the diversity of form identified here represents a significant  expansion in our understanding of the diversity of marginal muscle forms in zoanthidea. the traditional interpretations are partitioned and the breadth of possible arrangements expanded. the historical endodermal character state encompassed known variation that is designated here as branchiform endodermal, cteniform endodermal, and discontiguous endodermal forms ; the spindly-cteniform endodermal arrangement was first described as transitional  <cit> , however further examination of sections in series revealed a pattern of attachment sites inconsistent with that interpretation  <cit> . the historical mesogleal character state encompassed known variation that is designated here as linear mesogleal, reticulate mesogleal, orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal, and  meso-endo transitional forms . the distinction between mesogleal and transitional forms were often blurred, as a proximal tail of mesogleal pleats following muscle fibers enclosed in lacunae was alternatively considered mesogleal or transitional. the newly designated meso-endo transitional form has a proximal tail of mesogleal pleats that accounts for approximately half the length of the muscle and lacunae organizations that are reminiscent of a section through the stacks of cisterna in all specimens examined . the divided  mesogleal form was historically considered a variation of the mesogleal form, but here is designated as a separate character state: discontiguous mesogleal . the transitional form was historically considered a variation on the mesogleal  form that demonstrated the evolutionary development of the marginal musculature  <cit>  and encompassed cyclically transitional,  meso-endo transitional, and  mesogleal forms.

evolutionary relationships among extant forms
the data underlying the phylogenetic analyses originates from diverse sources , ranging from histology prepared from the same specimen as the dna used to infer phylogeny , to drawings and written descriptions culled from published species definitions paired with different specimens as the dna source ; therefore the results must be interpreted within recognition of its limitations. although imperfect, this is the extent of our current knowledge.

the major clades of zoanthidea taxa that are identifiable through molecular  or ecological characters  <cit>  are also largely circumscribed by marginal muscle form . for some genera, the marginal musculature appears to be unambiguously definitive , for others the differences in form are more subtle  or seem to span multiple genera . the spindly-cteniform endodermal arrangement of microzoanthus could be confused with the cteniform endodermal arrangement , save that the former has a sigmate mesogleal base and is generally more diminutive and sparsely populated by attachment sites . the reticulate mesogleal arrangement of epizoanthus could be confused with the meso-endo transitional arrangement of terrazoanthus , as the former may include forms with a proximal tail of mesogleal pleats following muscle fibers enclosed in lacunae; however they are distinguishable by the shape and organization of the lacuna . the presence of a proximal tail of mesogleal pleats appears to be a homoplasious feature of a few epizoanthus species , while it is a definitive feature of terrazoanthus. while these two pairs of forms  are morphologically similar , their similarity is derived through convergence  and are evolutionarily distinct .fig.  <dig> summary of reconstructed transitions for marginal musculature form in the zoanthidea. the marginal muscle forms are reticulate mesogleal , branchiform endodermal , spindly-cteniform endodermal , cteniform endodermal , cyclically transitional , meso-endo transitional , linear mesogleal , orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal , discontiguous endodermal , discontiguous mesogleal 



the cyclically transitional arrangement of corallizoanthus and savalia may actually be two distinct forms that are definitive for each genus: in corallizoanthus the attachment sites transition in cycles between endoderm-facing pleats and mesogleal lacunae, and in savalia the attachment sites transition in cycles between endoderm-facing pleats, ectoderm-facing pleats, and mesogleal lacunae . the ectoderm-facing pleats and the complete transition through the mesoglea of savalia appear to be unique among the zoanthidea , and may be useful as a definitive feature of savalia once additional species in this genus are thoroughly examined in serial section. the cteniform endodermal arrangement seems to span three genera  and two families , however these taxa are distinguishable by other characters  <cit> .

evolution of marginal muscle form
the ancestral state reconstruction recovered at least nine , and as many as  <dig> transitions between muscle arrangement states. all of the transitions above the necessary minimum involve morphologies known only from drawings  or histological sections that did not originate from the same specimen as the molecular data . the extreme simplicity of form reported for the marginal musculature of e. illoricatus, p. cutressi, and t. minutus  may be due to oversimplified interpretations by the original authors, an artifact of histology performed on species that are among the smallest known, or misidentified specimens. the morphology of savalia lucifica  is quite certain as it was assessed using the holotype specimen ; however the molecular characters originated from a different specimen  <cit>  which was not publically described nor vouchered and could therefore be misidentified  <cit> . the identity and attributes of antipathozoanthus macaronesicus  have been confused since the original description  where specimens were misidentified  <cit> . if further research is able to show that these five taxa are actually more similar to their closest relatives than is currently demonstrable, the form of the marginal musculature may be largely synapomorphic and sufficiently reflective of evolution that its status as a key character in zoanthidea systematics will be more fully restored.

the evolutionary origin and progression of the zoanthidea marginal musculature has long been thought to mirror its embryonic development  <cit> . the first modern assessment of this hypothesis identified at least five transitions to the mesogleal form, but was not able to discern the ancestral state of the order using a reconstruction based on two character states  and nearly the same phylogeny that is employed here  <cit> . here we use much more detailed characterizations of the marginal musculature  and recover a reticulate mesogleal arrangement at the origin of zoanthidea and a complex series of state transitions  that are not consistent with the historical hypotheses. the reticulate mesogleal form is symplesiomorphic and ancestral to all other states, and is reconstructed to have transitioned directly to the branchiform endodermal and cteniform endodermal arrangements . the spindly-cteniform endodermal arrangement may be derived from the branchiform endodermal form , however inclusion of additional microzoanthus and isozoanthus species in the analysis would help to clarify the sequence of transitions in this region of the phylogeny. the cyclically transitional, meso-endo transitional, and linear mesogleal arrangements are all derived from the cteniform endodermal form ; transitions that would simply require partial or complete circumscription of the existing broadly-anchored endodermal muscles through expansion of the mesoglea. the orthogonally-reticulate mesogleal arrangement is derived from linear mesogleal, which is subsequently reconstructed to give rise to the discontiguous endodermal and discontiguous mesogleal forms ; however, data for the taxa in this region of the phylogeny are sufficiently sparse  that additional taxa and data may alter this interpretation.

these conclusions generally agree with the analysis of rodriguez et al.  <cit>  about the earliest form of the zoanthidea marginal musculature  and mirrors the progression of evolutionary transitions in actiniaria; in both anthozoan orders, mesogleal forms of the marginal musculature are ancestral and endodermal forms are derived through convergent evolution.

functional morphology evolution
the evolution of polyp size requires compensatory phenotypic change in the marginal musculature to produce sufficient force to curl the margin of the column over the retracting oral disk and tentacles. disparity between polyp diameter and muscle cross-sectional area  is both phylogenetically structured and conserved, indicating that closely related species require similar retraction mechanics. the muscle cross-sectional area is influenced by variation in polyp size, independent of phylogeny, where increasing polyp diameter has an allometric association with more robust muscles; suggesting that the largest muscles are required to deform the biggest polyps and create additional force than is necessary for minimal retraction.

as with other anthozoa, the largest marginal muscles are often seen in shallow-water species  that can inhabit either intertidal or wave-swept areas  <cit>  and the smallest marginal muscles are often seen in species that are infaunal  or can partially or entirely retract within host structures . disproportionally enlarged marginal muscles allow more forceful and complete retraction of the oral disk and tentacles to protect these structures from desiccation, abrasion, and predation inherent to near-surface habitats. however, there are notable exceptions that do not conform to this general hypothesis. acrozoanthus have marginal muscles that rank among the smallest in cs-area  and are known from intertidal mudflats  and shallow habitats symbiotically associated with tube-worms of the genus eunice  <cit> . similarly, epizoanthus illoricatus  has among the smallest marginal muscle cs-areas known  and is unusually diminutive for an epizoanthus species. symbionts of anthozoa, hydrozoa, and demospongiae  <cit>  all have among the smallest marginal muscle cs-areas  and may have limited retraction abilities that could be mitigated by their symbiotic associations . on the opposing extreme are isozoanthus, which have some of the largest marginal muscle cs-areas  and live unassociated at 20–100 m depth  <cit> . the retraction mechanisms of these isozoanthus species are curiously extravagant; not only are the marginal muscles exceptionally enlarged, but the longitudinal mesenteric retractor muscles of the directive mesenteries are so powerful that they allow the retracted column to be further inverted, completely covering the capitulum and resulting in a visible seam  along the directional axis at the distal apex . these isozoanthus species may face severe selection for protection of the oral disk and tentacles  to have evolved such a powerful retraction mechanism that so dramatically contorts the column. similarly, many of the free-living taxa  <cit> , and those that are symbionts of crustacea  <cit> , have among the largest marginal muscle cs-areas known . perhaps living independent of potentially protective symbiotic hosts, or living on the shells of actively mobile hosts, present greater requirements for retraction.

the evolution of marginal muscle size, and therefore force generating potential , requires compensatory phenotypic change in the mesogleal support structures to accommodate sufficient surface-area for attachment and support to transfer forces for distorting the mesoglea and contracting the polyp. disparity between muscle size and scaffold shape is both phylogenetically structured and conserved, indicating that closely related species employ similarly composed retraction mechanisms. the morphology of the mesogleal support structures are highly influenced by variation in muscle size, independent of phylogeney, where increasing muscle size is allometrically associated with more robust and complex scaffolding; suggesting that robust support structures are required to resist the additional stress generated by the largest muscles.

although it is intuitive that increased muscle size requires increased support structure robustness, it was not clear from the diversity of forms observed that this should be true of all shape parameters. in the elongated and broadly attached arrangements of the endodermal forms , similar support for increased muscle size could be accomplished through elongation alone, expansion of the basal mesoglea and attachment sites, or both. in the concentrated and circumscribed arrangements of the mesogleal forms , elongation of the proximal tail would result in minuscule gains in cs-area, but increased muscle size could be accommodated through expansion of all support structures of the concentrated distal head of the muscle. in the diffuse and circumscribed arrangements of the mesogleal forms , increased muscle size could only be accommodated through elongation of the base and expansion of the lacunae. it remains to be seen if a similar pattern exists in other anthozoan orders where the marginal musculature is independently derived, particularly the actiniaria where some forms of the marginal musculature  are not observed in the zoanthidea and could accommodate increased muscle cs-area with very different compensatory changes in the mesogleal support structures .

CONCLUSIONS
retraction mechanisms of extant zoanthidea are more diverse, and their evolutionary histories more complex, than previously recognized. historical dual-state characterization is both insufficient and homoplasious, with similar forms derived through convergent evolution; in an evolutionary pattern that is reminiscent of the actiniaria. multi-state characterization described here is largely reflective of evolution and may offer a key feature for integrative systematics within an order whose higher taxa lack definitive features because they have been described through molecular parataxonomy. evolution of the marginal musculature and its support structures are not strictly scaled according to variation in size, but vary through evolutionary allometry in response to requirements for additional force and resistance.

