BACKGROUND
the dentate gyrus  may be known best for its input from the entorhinal cortex and its mossy fiber projection to the ca <dig>  <cit> . in addition, the dt has extensive associational and commissural connections  <cit>  considered crucial for the generation of gamma frequency oscillations and learning . most attention among the dentate interneurons may recently have received the cells in the hilus region  due to their vulnerability to various injuries  <cit>  as well as their remarkable structural, histochemical and electrophysiological diversity  <cit> . a few hilar neurons also project to the cornu ammonis  and the subiculum   <cit> . extrahippocampal projections from the dentate gyrus, however, are not known with the exception from some septal projecting neurons in the dthi  <cit>  usually considered displaced cells of ca <dig>  <cit> .

continuing our attempts to elucidate the hippocampal and parahippocampal circuits in mammals with a poorly differentiated brain  <cit>  the present study in the lesser hedgehog tenrec  will demonstrate some true dentate hilar cells projecting to a circumscribed region in the olfactory tubercle. the projection may represent an additional parallel pathway transferring cortico-limbic information to the ventral striatum  <cit> .

RESULTS
axo-terminal labeling in the striatum following tracer injections into the dentate gyrus
among the experiments with tracer injections into the hippocampus  two cases were injected with biotinylated dextran amine  into the dentate area exclusively. these tracer injections mainly involved the dentate molecular layer  but there was some tracer uptake by the granule cells as seen from the weak to moderate mossy fiber projection to ca <dig> . the sparse  to moderate  number of labeled cells in the dentate hilar region subjacent to the main injection site might be due to a retrogarde transport and/or a direct uptake of tracer substance. in et00-11b and et98-49w  all layers of dt as well as the adjacent portions of ca <dig> were labeled directly with bda and wheat germ agglutinin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase , respectively . the dt and portions of ca <dig> were injected with bda in et00-08b, while in the remaining experiments the injection involved the subiculum  with  or without  an involvement of the dt and ca <dig> 

the latter two cases revealed the well-known hippocampo-striatal projection pattern to the nucleus accumbens  and the olfactory tubercle   <cit> . no hippocampo-striatal projection, on the other hand, was found in et01-36b  injected with tracer almost exclusively into the dtmo. the remaining cases consistently showed some fiber labeling in the tu  but did not reveal any projections to the acb . the labeling in tu involved especially the molecular layer in the medial quarter of tu at levels rostral to the insula magna. in all cases but et01-21b the hippocampo-tubercular projection was represented on both sides with a slight ipsilateral predominance .

in et01-21b the course of fibers towards tu appeared to pass exclusively within the molecular layer of the hippocampal continuation . in the other cases labeled fibers were seen in the hct as well as the fornix. a fiber course across the fornix appeared most likely for the contralateral projection as far as the contralateral hct was almost unlabeled and a fiber crossing was never observed for the hct-fibers unlike the fornix fibers.

for the subsequent experiments carried out in order to identify more accurately the origin of the hippocampo-tubercular projections, it should be mentioned that similar to other reports  <cit>  there were also hippocampal projections to the diagonal band-medial septum complex . evidence for these projections was obtained from the bda experiments which revealed an extensive terminal-like fiber pattern across the dgms, but only few, if any labeled perikarya unlike the wga-hrp experiments .

perikaryal labeling in the dentate gyrus following tracer injections into the striatum and septum
there were two cases with wga-hrp injections involving the rostromedial tu including its molecular layer . the tracer injection in et03-58w showed a relatively circumscribed injection site ; a direct labeling of the dgms, however, could not be excluded. in et01-47w there was some loss of tracer along the electrode tract leading to a contamination of the third layer of the hct. a control injection into the ventral septum including the dgms  was available too as well as two tracer injections involving the acb .

consistent with previous studies in subprimate species  <cit>  the tracer injections into the acb led to retrograde labeling of exclusively the sbi and ca <dig> . the septal injection, in addition, labeled numerous neurons in ca <dig>  as well as a substantial number of cells in the dthi adjacent to the heavily labeled ca <dig>  particularly at caudal levels . in the cases injected with tracer into the tu labeled cells were found in the hct , the sbi  and the dthi . these cases, however, consistently failed to show any retrograde labeling in the ca <dig> . in et03-58w the labeled neurons in the dthi were restricted to its rostral third, while in et01-47w they involved rostral as well as caudal portions of the hilus. the latter case also showed a very few labeled cells on the contralateral side. a particular distribution of the labeled cells within the dthi was not obvious, and their poor dendritic labeling did not allow a further characterization of the cells.

discussion
unlike the dentate projection to the hct the projection to the olfactory tubercle cannot be explained by a retrograde-anterograde collateral transport of tracer  <cit> . tubercular terminations are not seen in the case with a bda injection largely confined to the dentate molecular layer , and tubercular projections are noted in the cases with dentate injections of wga-hrp , a tracer substance not known to be transported in a retrograde-anterograde collateral fashion  <cit> . moreover, the dentate-hilar neurons are also filled by the retrograde axonal flow from the tracer deposits in the tu.

the projection to the olfactory tubercle differs from previously reported extrahippocampal projections from the dentate area as far as its cells of origin are confined to the dthi while the septal  <cit>  and hypothalamic  <cit>  projections arise predominantly from the ca and the sbi, only sparsely from the dthi. unlike the latter cells, therefore, the dentato-tubercular neurons can not be considered displaced cells of ca <dig>  we have not characterized yet the particular morphology and histochemistry of these neurons  <cit>  and do not know whether their projections are distinct ones or arise as collaterals  <cit> . nevertheless, it is a projection which involves a circumscribed region in the olfactory tubercle and avoids the nucleus accumbens, the main striatal target area of the hippocampus  <cit> .

these findings are in line with previous suggestions considering the medial tu as a separate striopallidal subdivision  <cit>  and fit with the concept of the parallel processing of cortico-striatal information  <cit> . the question remains as to why a dentato-tubercular projection has not been demonstrated so far in other species. the projection may be unique to tenrecs or mammals with little differentiated brain but its apparent absence in other mammals may as well be explained by the low strength of its projection and/or its circumscribed field of termination. such a projection may easily be overlooked in anterograde tracer studies, especially in species with a large brain. retrograde tracer studies, on the other hand, have only been done in the rat and the hamster  <cit>  and it is questionable, whether their small circumscribed dentato-tubercular target area, if present, has been injected with tracer. rodent species, in addition, are not representative for studying the hippocampo-tubercular projections. in the rat, the tu receives considerably less hippocampal afferents from the ca1/sbi fields  <cit>  than in the tenrec  <cit> , cat  <cit>  and monkey  <cit> . similarly, the relative strength of the entorhinal projections to the tu as compared to the acb is much less in rodents  <cit>  than in non-rodent species  <cit> . it may also be noted that the hippocampal continuation, the only other striatal input region projecting exclusively to the tenrec's rostromedial tu  <cit> , is poorly represented in the rat compared to other mammals  <cit> . one may speculate that the dentato-tubercular neurons in the dthi represent an extension of the hct into the dentate gyrus and are only present in species showing a well differentiated hct as e.g. in tenrecs and primates  <cit> .

unfortunately we still know little about the precise connectivity of the circumscribed dentato-tubercular target area. it receives few if any direct projections from the olfactory bulb  but gets a distinct input from the anteromedial frontal cortex  <cit> . the dentato-tubercular target area is likely to be part of a cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop involving the mediodorsal nucleus  <cit>  and the prefrontal cortex, at least in subprimate species . notably, while the prefrontal and hippocampal afferents to the acb terminate in a predominantly non-overlapping fashion  <cit> , the cortico-striatal fibers appear to overlap considerably with the hippocampal afferents in the tu.

CONCLUSIONS
the present data show for the first time a projection from the dentate gyrus to the rostromedial olfactory tubercle. its cells of orgin, located in the dentate hilus, cannot be considered displaced neurons of ca <dig> but represent true dentato-tubercular projection neurons. the projection is assumed to be present in other mammals, too. in the tenrec the dentato-tubercular projection overlaps with the subiculo-tubercular projection and the fiber terminations arising in the anteromedial frontal cortex. the circumscribed ventral striatal target area appears worth investigating in studies of the parallel processing of cortico-limbic information in tenrec as well as in cat and monkey.

