BACKGROUND
peripheral axotomy can activate several signaling pathways in neurons and associated glial cells leading to two opposing consequences: cell death or adaptation to regenerate neurites. the principal signaling pathways that have been demonstrated to be involved in axonal regeneration are pi3k-akt  <cit>  and jak/stat  <cit> .

accumulated evidence has shown the participation of mitogen-activated protein kinases  during axonal injuries. mapks are a family of serine/threonine specific kinases that transduce extracellular stimuli to altered gene expression and have been shown to play a role in diverse cellular events ranging from proliferation, differentiation to apoptosis. so far, three subfamilies of mapks have been identified, namely: extracellular signal-regulated kinase , c-jun nh2-terminal kinase  and p <dig> kinase . jnk along with its main transcription factor, c-jun, are activated in the dorsal root ganglia  after sciatic nerve transection  <cit> . similarly, it has been reported that p <dig> was activated in axotomized neurons and, in case of spinal root ligation, this activation has been linked to the development of mechanical allodynia  <cit> . moreover, inhibition of p <dig> leads to enhanced axonal regeneration, suggesting that p <dig> is likely involved in this process  <cit> .

as for erk, its role in neurite extension in response to growth factors is well-recognized. following axotomy, erk activation has been observed in transected sciatic nerve and ipsilateral drg  <cit> . evidence suggests that this increased activity of erk is mediated by endogenous neurotrophic factors known to stimulate axonal regeneration. nerve growth factor  which is known to be up-regulated shortly after nerve injury, requires erk to promote neurite outgrowth in vitro  <cit> . moreover, other regeneration-promoting molecules, such as glial-derived neurotrophic factor  and fk <dig> also mediate their effects via the erk pathway  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that activation of erk is essential for axons to regenerate in response either to endogenous growth factors or exogenous molecules. although the erk activation has been linked to mechanical allodynia in the models of neuropathic pain  <cit> , the precise function of activated erk after nerve injury in vivo, especially in term of axonal regeneration, is still unclear. in fact, spatial and temporal changes of erk activity in the peripheral nerve in response to injuries have not yet been studied. hence, the objective of this work was to investigate the time-dependent changes in the activation of erk in crushed sciatic nerve with correlation to the cell types.

RESULTS
activation of erk in sciatic nerve after crush
levels of phosphorylated erk  relative to those of total erk  were elevated in the proximal nerve segment compared to the intact nerve in all time-points with statistically significant changes observed at week <dig> after crush . in the distal stump, erk phosphorylation was even higher relative to the proximal nerve, especially at post-crush  <dig> week and  <dig> month. no differences in the expression of erk  were found among various nerve segments from any time point .

erk activation in axons and schwann cells
no positive immunoreactivity was observed when primary antibodies were omitted in the presence of either secondary antibodies conjugated with fitc or rhodamine . in the intact nerve, the erk-p immunoreactivity was found in the axons identified by its co-localization with the pan-neurofilament immunoreactivity . in addition, erk-p was also located in schwann cell cytoplasm which appeared as crescent structures encapsulating the axons . however, erk-p was present mainly in the axons in the proximal nerve stump from all time points . in the distal nerve stump at day  <dig> after crush, erk-p immunoreactivity was found in axons and with higher frequency in schwann cells compared to the intact nerve . in contrast, from week  <dig> until month  <dig>  erk-p was predominantly located between clumps of degenerated axons whose unremoved neurofilament proteins were stained red at week  <dig>  and between the regenerated axons at  <dig> weeks and  <dig> month post-crush . this location of erk-p was likely the bungner's band, the tube forming by schwann cells, since the co-locatization of erk-p and s- <dig>  immunoreactivities was demonstrated .

discussion
this study has demonstrated the activation of erk in the proximal and distal nerve stumps from one day to one month after crush. immunohistochemistry has shown that this activation occurred mainly in the axons of the proximal nerve, whereas the activation was more prominent in schwann cells forming bungner's bands in the distal nerve. increased phosphorylation of erk in the injured sciatic nerve has been previously reported by sheu and co-workers  <cit> . they found that erk-p levels were increased in the proximal nerve segment adjacent to the transection site as well as in the distal segment starting from one day until at least  <dig> days after operation. however, they have not demonstrated in which cell types this activation occurred. in accordance with that study, we found the prolonged activation of erk from one day to one month after crush with slightly higher degree in the distal stumps compared to the proximal stumps. the expression of erk as determined by the levels of erk-t appears to be unaffected by the injury although the high variations can be observed. these high variations of erk-t along with those of erk-p may explain the insignificant increase in the phosphorylation ratio of erk in the crushed nerve compared to the intact nerve at week  <dig>  in addition, for the first time, this study showed that this erk activation occurred mainly in the axons of proximal nerve. early in the distal nerve at post-crush  <dig> day, the active erk was observed both in the axons and schwann cells. furthermore, from week  <dig> to month  <dig>  erk-p was almost exclusively expressed in the bungner's bands of schwann cells.

the erk activation in the axons of the proximal stump might be related to its activation in the neuronal cell bodies. the previous study has shown that erk was activated in spinal ganglion neurons and satellite cells  <dig> and  <dig> days after sciatic nerve injury  <cit> . interrupted anterograde axonal transport at the crush site resulting in the accumulation of erk-p in the proximal nerve segment may account for the earlier increase in the expression of erk-p in this part at post-crush day  <dig> than in the drg . this possibility is supported by the previous report of erk axonal transport in drg neurons  <cit> . at later time points,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> weeks post-lesion, elevated erk-p in the proximal stump may be due to the upregulated erk phosphorylation in the cell bodies. whether anterograde transport of erk-p is involved in the up-regulation of erk-p in the proximal stump remains to be clarified. it is also worth noting that the erk-p immunoreactivity was observed in many schwann cells in the intact nerve, whereas most positive signals in the proximal stump were localized to the axons. this may suggest the down-regulation of erk-p in schwann cells in the proximal segment after injury. nevertheless, the significance of this change needs to be clarified.

the underlying mechanisms that stimulate the erk pathway are unknown. it is unlikely that erk was activated by the upregulated cytokines, such as, interleukin- <dig> beta , interleukin- <dig>  since the patterns of upregulation of these cytokines were not correlated with that of erk-p  <cit> . some evidence shows that the upregulated growth factors after nerve injury may be responsible for this erk activation in drg. obata and colleagues have administered ngf either intrathecally or intraneurally and found an increase in the erk phosphorylation in l4/ <dig> drg  <cit> . furthermore, gdnf, another growth factor whose expression is also upregulated after nerve injury can activate erk in cultured drg neurons  <cit> . it is also noteworthy that erk-p was observed in satellite cells around neuronal cell bodies. the importance of this finding is not known but may emphasize the role of glial cells or the glial-neuronal interaction in the drg after nerve injury.

although the downstream events in the process of axonal regeneration stimulated by the active erk remain unknown, the importance of erk activation in nerve regeneration is increasingly evident. in the neuronal cell bodies, at least one study has demonstrated that erk was required for an upregulated expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor  following axotomy  <cit>  and bdnf can accelerate axonal regeneration  <cit> . moreover, erk is likely to mediate the regeneration-promoting effects of ngf in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo  <cit> . similarly, erk was required for the neurite outgrowth stimulated by gdnf  <cit> . therefore, it appears that the erk pathway is essential for nerve regeneration.

in the distal nerve stump, schwann cells proliferate to form bungner's bands following wallerian degeneration. this activity may need the erk activation as one study has found that erk was required for schwann cell proliferation induced by ascorbate in the co-culture of drg neurons and schwann cells  <cit> . erk has also been shown to be involved in schwann cell proliferation triggered by leprosy bacilli  <cit> . furthermore, erk has been shown to play a role in maintaining schwann cells in an immature state which can still proliferate by counteracting the effect of pi3k  <cit> . the main localization of erk-p in bungner's bands observed in this study is in accordance with these findings. the responsible mechanisms that stimulate the erk pathway in these proliferating schwann cells are not clarified. nevertheless, sheu and colleagues have reported that the sustained pattern of erk-p up-regulation in the distal stump was correlated with three sequential peaks of increased expression of growth factors: ngf, gdnf and bdnf, in chronological order  <cit> . whether there is a relationship between these growth factors and erk phosphorylation during schwann cell proliferation remains to be studied. besides the possible role of erk in schwann cell proliferation, it has been proposed that erk may be also involved in the elimination of supernumerary schwann cells through up-regulated p75ntr in the advanced stage of regeneration  <cit> . taken together, the above evidence may explain the sustained and more pronounced activation of erk in the distal nerve.

CONCLUSIONS
the higher phosphorylation of erk was found in the proximal and distal stumps of sciatic nerve from one day until one month after crush. in the proximal segments, active erk was mainly localized to the axons, whereas it was exclusively expressed in schwann cells forming the bungner's bands in the distal segment. these findings indicate that erk is also activated in the injured peripheral nerve in addition to in the drg. to elucidate the precise role of erk in peripheral nerve regeneration, strategies to inhibit the erk pathway must be employed and various components participating in the regeneration should be carefully examined.

