BACKGROUND
chromatographic fatty acid methyl ester  profiling is used in many laboratories for bacterial identification. the fatty acid composition of bacterial species is genetically conserved and the measured composition is stable, when highly standardized culture, extraction and analytical conditions are used. more than  <dig> fatty acids have already been found in bacteria. differences in chain length, positions of double bonds and the binding of functional groups make them very useful taxonomic markers  <cit> . in the last decades, fame profiling has become a routine method since it is cheap, fast, automated and high-throughput. as a result, many institutes have set up private fame databases to store the massively generated numbers of fame profiles and, recently, a publicly accessible fame database has been realized by some of the present authors  <cit> . such databases are an ideal target for data mining and knowledge discovery. where bacterial species identification is usually performed by comparing fame profiles against identification libraries with fixed peak percentages, fame-based bacterial species identification can be improved by the application of machine learning techniques  <cit> . however, different numerical studies on the resolution of fame analysis for species discrimination have underscored that fame profiling cannot be used to discriminate all species from one another  <cit> . nevertheless, machine learning techniques for multi-class classification are able to maximally exploit the pattern information in the fame data to delineate the different species that constitute the different classes in this multi-class classification problem  <cit> .

at present, the gold standard for bacterial species discrimination is a dna-dna hybridization  percentage of 70%. nonetheless, ddh should be performed in a polyphasic study of the species because phenotypic characteristics should agree with this definition  <cit> . importantly, with the advent of 16s rrna gene sequence analysis, stackebrandt and goebel  <cit>  showed that species having 70% or greater dna similarity usually correspond to a 16s rrna gene sequence identity greater than 97%. furthermore, konstantinidis and co-workers evaluated the species definition in the perspective of whole-genome sequence analysis and showed that the 70% ddh standard correlates with a 95% average nucleotide identity  <cit> . even though dna reassociation is the gold standard for circumscribing the taxonomic rank of species and genome studies flourish, 16s rrna gene sequence analysis is still widely preferred for species delineation for two important reasons: 16s rrna gene sequence identity greater than 97% may indicate a specific species and sequencing the 16s rrna gene has become much cheaper and faster due to technological advances. for these reasons, we also focus on the 16s rrna gene in this work. it is, however, important to remark that, as a consequence of this explosive trend of gene sequencing, deposits in the public nucleotide sequence databases have witnessed an exponential growth. nonetheless, sequence analysis and phylogenetic reconstruction studies should rely on high quality nucleotide sequences. with the exponential growth of the sequence databases, the number of poor quality sequences also grows extensively and sequence curation becomes indispensable. to circumvent manual curation, the silva database project allows users to retrieve quality controlled and aligned rrna sequences as stored in the embl sequence database  <cit> . in relation to this work, we tackle the bacterial species classification problem by combining the information represented by aligned 16s rrna gene silva sequences and fame profiles. due to technological advances, both these types of data can be easily obtained at very low cost. however, when used alone, fame data has a limited ability to discriminate among species. combining the knowledge contained in fame profiles and 16s rrna gene sequences could overcome some of these limitations.

at present, machine learning papers describing multi-class classification with classes structured in a taxonomy, or thus a tree topology, mainly focus on the area of web-, document-, text- and ontology-based classification. many research problems involve multi-furcating tree nodes, and most papers deal with data instances primarily corresponding to multiple classes structured in this kind of hierarchical setting. classification problems related to this issue are better known as multi-label classification. in machine learning terms, learning by exploiting hierarchical structure information is called hierarchical classification  <cit> , learning with taxonomies  <cit>  and structured label learning  <cit> . however, these studies do not explicitly involve hierarchical classification for single-label multi-class classification, meaning that each data instance is classified at leaf level. from another perspective, hierarchical classification has also been proposed for standard multi-class classification tasks. in this setting, the idea consists of improving multi-class classification methods by constructing a tree of binary classifiers  <cit> . the tree architecture is defined by the considered data and tree inference is based on different algorithms for distance calculation between the considered classes.

in contrast to previous work, where typically a single type of data was used for bacterial species identification, we evaluate the integration of taxonomic and phylogenetic knowledge into fame-based classification models. to this end, species of the genus bacillus are considered. we design supervised machine learning techniques to automatically discriminate fame profiles of bacteria at species level, in a hierarchical classification setting where the labels correspond to the different species. in particular, clustering methods define the taxonomic or phylogenic tree in a first stage and random forest  classifiers are trained on fame profiles in these trees in a second stage. two different strategies for the integration of taxonomic and phylogenetic knowledge are investigated. as a proof-of-concept, we consider the integration of relationships between species solely based on fame data. herein, a fame tree is constructed by divisive clustering and evaluated for hierarchical multi-class classification. in the core part of this paper, we consider knowledge integration from the perspective of bacterial phylogeny. using 16s rrna gene sequence analysis, phylogenetic trees are constructed and subsequently used for hierarchical single-label multi-class classification, in which fame data serve as input. this last strategy is further referred to as phylogenetic learning, an approach that combines two types of data: 16s rrna gene data is considered to incorporate phylogenetic knowledge in the form of a hierarchy or tree and the hierarchically ordered classifiers are constructed based on fame data. our tests indicate that this new approach resolves some of the classification tasks that classifiers only based on fame data could not achieve. in relation to other work, the use of phylogenetic tree information has already been considered for classification of protein-protein interaction  <cit>  and multi-class classification in a taxonomic context has already been performed based on genomic sequence data  <cit> . however, the incorporation of phylogenetic information in hierarchical classification models for bacterial species has not been investigated so far.

RESULTS
because fame data does not allow for a global discrimination of bacterial species, we tackle the bacterial species classification problem by combining fame data with taxonomic or phylogenetic knowledge. therefore, within the framework of bacterial taxonomy, an interesting direction for subsequent machine learning research is that of integrating this knowledge. this is easily achieved by learning in a hierarchical scheme or an inferred tree. two approaches are considered: tree inference by fame data and inference of phylogenetic trees based on 16s rrna gene sequences. in this paper, we evaluate the integration of these two particular types of knowledge into the fame-based bacterial species classification problem.

learning taxonomies
as a first step, we investigated the possibility of reconstructing a small part of the phylogenetic structure of the genus bacillus by fame data and rfs. divisive clustering with classifier performance as splitting criterion gives rise to a particular tree. in this tree, the different species are hierarchically ordered by similarities in the fame data. in the resulting top-down approach, all possible splits between species or classes are initially considered in the root node and, subsequently, the split corresponding to the highest rf accuracy is chosen. recursively, the same splitting procedure is performed on the corresponding subsets of the initial data set. since the data set consists of a small number of fame profiles for the majority of species, we preferred to use a divisive clustering algorithm over an agglomerative clustering algorithm. the latter approach has as disadvantage that it builds a tree in a bottom-up manner, so that, in our setting, the clustering at leaf level could be obtained from the results of unreliable classifiers . conversely, we chose to work top-down with a divisive clustering algorithm, because we wanted to avoid this type of instability in the tree construction phase. initially, we performed a proof-of-concept experiment based on a small data set of  <dig> species, as selected from the original data set. only species corresponding to a large number  of fame profiles were selected. about half of the selected species belong to the two known bacillus species groups, the bacillus cereus group and the bacillus subtilis group. hierarchical divisive clustering starts in the root node with the training and evaluation of  <dig> rf classifiers. in subsequent steps of the clustering algorithm, classifier training becomes less time-consuming, because the number of trained classifiers decreases exponentially for the remaining subtrees. in the end, a total number of  <dig> classifiers were trained. the computing time to build and evaluate the complete species hierarchy was  <dig> h  <dig> m  <dig> s. by this initial experiment, we evaluated whether a fame tree constructed with divisive clustering indeed reveals the relations between the species of the different species groups. figure  <dig> shows the resulting tree, in which no branch lengths are specified and auc values of the rf classifiers are given at each internal node. the species representing the bacillus cereus group or the bacillus subtilis group are clearly clustered together under the same parent nodes. the two groups are coloured in blue and green, respectively.

consequently, one can conclude that fame data allows to discriminate between both species groups. we did not expect such a result because of the large number of combinations and the high similarities between the fame profiles. however, this experiment clearly shows that rfs take advantage of the relatedness between species and/or groups of species. consequently, building a fame tree using classification techniques as treeing method could be a good base for further knowledge integration. therefore, we evaluated the tree constructed from the different rf models also as a hierarchical classification scheme. this classification task follows the main strategy as reported by  <cit> . subsequent to the construction of the tree, a rf classifier is retrained at each node of the tree, so that now the different classifier parameters are optimized by a grid search, as mentioned in the subsection divisive clustering. to this end, we considered both 3-fold and 11-fold stratified cross-validation.

the corresponding results are reported in the upper part of table  <dig>  these results show that hierarchical single-label multi-class classification with 3-fold stratified cross-validation performs slightly worse than flat multi-class classification . performing 11-fold stratified cross-validation, however, results in a slightly better performance than flat multi-class classification. in summary, for the  <dig> species data set, we can conclude that hierarchical single-label multi-class classification results in a performance comparable to that obtained with flat multi-class classification. nonetheless, we are mainly interested in the classification of the  <dig> bacillus species present in our data set. upscaling this experiment from  <dig> classes to  <dig> is, however, computationally infeasible, because the number of classifiers to be trained increases exponentially with the number of classes. when considering these  <dig> classes in our fame data set,  <dig> -  <dig> classifiers must be trained in the root node. this cannot be realized in a reasonable computing time, even when multiple processors are used in parallel. furthermore, to obtain a good classification performance in the proof-of-concept experiment, we only selected species represented by a reasonable amount of data. nonetheless, in the full data set, a lot of classes are present with a small number of fame profiles  which may result in an unreliable fame tree. even though the results of this experiment with  <dig> species are promising, for the reasons above, we did not further consider knowledge integration by divisive clustering of fame profiles.

in this table, the three strategies are abbreviated as 'hsmc', 'phylearn' and 'multi-class', respectively. the results of these three strategies are reported in the upper, middle and bottom part of the table, respectively. the results of hierarchical single-label multi-class classification are based on the fame tree resulting from the divisive clustering experiment. only the  <dig> species data set was considered and 3-fold and 11-fold stratified cross-validation  was performed. in the case of phylogenetic learning, two 16s rrna gene trees were used as template: neighbor-joining  and unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean . for phylearn, both the  <dig> and the  <dig> species data set were considered and all phylearn experiments were performed using 3-fold stratified cv. also the flat multi-class experiments were validated by this cv strategy. in the three strategies, classification performance was evaluated based on the pooled test set. metrics reported are the area under the roc curve , sensitivity, precision and f-score. based on a multi-class confusion matrix, statistics were calculated in a one-versus-other setting with averaging of the corresponding statistic over the different classes. standard deviations are also reported. nan denotes the number of classes that have resulted in a value ∞ .

phylogenetic learning
an alternative to the construction of a fame tree is to infer a tree on data with a good resolution for species discrimination. in this perspective, the best possibilities are ddh, whole-genome sequence analysis and multi-locus sequence analysis . the lack of a sufficient amount of high-quality data, however, makes these techniques not very attractive. therefore, yet another alternative is to focus on 16s rrna gene sequencing. this technique is widely preferred for species delineation because of improved sequencing technology and the availability of public sequence databases. nonetheless, the 16s rrna gene may not allow for a delineation of every species  <cit> . currently, 16s rrna gene sequence analysis is one of the techniques widely used in microbiology for phylogenetic analysis. we integrated this knowledge in fame-based bacterial species classification models to evaluate species identification as well as the resolution of fame analysis for species discrimination within a phylogenetic framework.

when using this technique as a starting point for knowledge integration, high quality 16s rrna gene sequences can be exported from the silva database. this database subjects embl 16s rrna gene sequences to different control procedures and annotates the corresponding sequences with quality scores  <cit> . in this way, we selected exactly one 16s rrna gene sequence for each type strain of each bacillus species present in the original fame data set. note that the type strain of a bacterial species is the fixed name bearer of the species  and its phylogenetic position is hence determinative in the taxonomic framework.

after sequence selection, distance matrices were calculated using the jukes-cantor nucleotide evolution model and two phylogenetic trees were constructed accordingly, respectively with the neighbor joining method  and the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean   <cit> . the respective trees are shown in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  subsequently, we used these binary trees as templates for hierarchical fame-based species classification. as this hierarchical classification relies on a phylogenetic tree, we call this approach phylogenetic learning. as the binary tree classifier is based on a rooted tree structure, we initially selected the nj and upgma methods as these basically infer rooted trees, even though several other tree inference methods exist   <cit> . two different methods were considered in order to allow for a comparison of binary tree classifiers based on different trees.

the constructed rf classifiers were evaluated for distinguishing between the fame patterns of the two underlying groups of species in every node of the tree. the collection of binary classifiers should be regarded as one classifier wrapping the multiple hierarchically structured classifiers. three-fold stratified cross-validation for error estimation was performed during the training process of each classifier with pooling of the test results of all folds  <cit> , i.e. the predictions on test data are pooled together in one big set, and the performance measures are calculated on this set. the results of phylogenetic learning based on the nj and upgma trees are reported in the middle part of table  <dig>  these results are compared with those obtained from a fame-based flat multi-class classification , where only one multi-class classifier is trained by the same cross-validation strategy. first of all, we also evaluated phylogenetic learning and flat multi-class classification for the  <dig> species data set . the corresponding results are reported in table  <dig>  note that the flat multi-class classification with 3-fold stratified cross-validation in this study differs from the flat multi-class classification strategy performed in  <cit> . in the latter study,  <dig> repeated experiments were carried out with averaging of the classifier performance on a randomly sampled test set. average auc, sensitivity and precision were then given by  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. these metric values are approximately equal to the values obtained in the present study. as a result, the cross-validation with pooled metric calculation in a flat multi-class setting does not lead to very different estimates of classification performance, when compared to the random test set selection carried out in  <cit> .

even though flat multi-class classification of the  <dig> species data set results in a very high auc value of  <dig> , it is also interesting to see that higher sensitivity and f-score values are obtained by phylogenetic learning on this data set . conversely, phylogenetic learning based on a upgma tree performs slightly worse than flat multi-class classification. when the study is scaled up to  <dig> species, flat multi-class classification performs better than phylogenetic learning on both trees. for the nj and upgma trees, the difference in sensitivity between both techniques and flat multi-class classification is 11% and  <dig> %, respectively, while the difference in f-score is, respectively,  <dig> % and  <dig> %. the contrast between the two data sets is, logically, based on the larger number of relations between the different species and the more complex hierarchical structure of the data. the main reason for the lower prediction performance of phylogenetic learning can be attributed to the 16s rrna gene phylogenetic trees that define the multiple learning tasks. these could become quite hard to solve when classifying the species based on fame data. flat multi-class classification is not confronted with these restrictions at all and allows for more flexible solutions. moreover, in a  <dig> species hierarchical learning system, the probability of a misclassification along the identification path in the tree is much larger than the misclassification probability in a  <dig> species hierarchy. also, in the  <dig> species data set, some species are known to be very closely related to each other, increasing the probability of misclassification in the hierarchy. despite a lower classification performance compared to flat multi-class classification, phylogenetic learning allows to evaluate the classification scheme at node level. in this way, it is possible to analyze the resolution of fame data at different tree levels. ultimately, the goal of this approach will be to investigate how a particular pruning strategy could be applied by which those species will be grouped that are hard to classify by the machine learning method of interest. as a consequence, it will also become possible to report identification scores for groups of species that are very related in their fame content.

further investigation could also be done on the improvement of classification performance. for instance, a variable misclassification cost could be defined along the classification path. as an example, nodes splitting groups of classes could be evaluated differently than nodes splitting one species from a group of classes and splitting two leaves. in the latter case, a more severe misclassification cost can be assigned. another approach could account for the different branch lengths of the phylogenetic tree.

as the multi-class classification problem is tackled by hierarchically structured binary classifiers, it is also interesting to look at the individual classes. as mentioned in the section methods, a multi-class confusion matrix is generated by classification of each test profile and counting the different types of errors that are made. as such, this matrix is constructed from several two-class confusion matrices in a one-versus-all manner, in which, for each class, the positive class is the class under consideration, while the negative class corresponds to all other classes. using the itol webtool  <cit> , we have plotted a bar diagram of sensitivity and f-score values along the tree and have aligned the corresponding bars with the corresponding leaf or class of the tree. when an f-score resulted in a value of ∞ , no bar is visualized. in this way, rapid inspection is possible to detect those classes that are hard to identify by the phylogenetic learning model and the flat multi-class classifier.

the results of phylogenetic learning with nj and upgma trees and those of flat multi-class classification are displayed in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  in case of flat multi-class classification, the metric values are displayed along the 16s rrna gene nj tree. when comparing the sensitivity values of each species obtained by phylogenetic learning based on the two considered 16s rrna gene trees to those obtained by multi-class classification, only 15% of the species have a higher sensitivity value. 57% and 61% of the species have a lower sensitivity value, for the nj and the upgma tree, respectively. in case of the f-score, 22% and 19% of the species have a higher f-score value, while 69% and 70% of the species have a lower sensitivity value, for both trees respectively. nonetheless, when looking more deeply into the results, those classes that are hard to distinguish from the other classes in a multi-class classification setting are better identified in the hiearchical classification setting. this is clearly illustrated by the cumulative plot in figure  <dig>  in this figure, identification by phylogenetic learning is compared to flat multi-class identification at class level. even though phylogenetic learning performs globally worse than flat multi-class classification, it is clear that, when considering a threshold of  <dig> - <dig> , phylogenetic learning has an added value due to better identification of classes that are not well identified by multi-class classification.

as mentioned above, a hierarchical classification structure allows to analyze where misclassification occurs in the tree. this offers new possibilities to further analyze the resolution of fame data for species discrimination. furthermore, it is also interesting to calculate an average misclassification path length. the results for phylogenetic learning based on the nj tree are visualized in figure  <dig>  the results for phylogenetic learning based on the upgma tree are similar and are visualized in additional file  <dig>  herein, importantly, we only considered misclassified test profiles. it becomes clear from both figures that misclassification mostly occurs at nodes near the correct leaf. this is not very surprising as, based on fame data, a lot of species cannot be distinguished from each other. this again shows that the resolution of fame analysis is restricted to distantly related species and species groups.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we combined fame data and 16s rrna gene sequences in bacterial species classification models. supervised machine learning techniques have shown their value in the past for distinguishing fame profiles of different bacillus species. however, bacterial species can be closely related in terms of fame content, making it hard to achieve a high classification performance. with this study, we approached the classification problem from a taxonomic perspective, in which a hierarchical classification scheme with binary tree classifiers was adopted. this machine learning technique is a perfect method for the integration of taxonomic relationships between the different classes or species.

two strategies were followed with regard to tree inference. first, a fame tree was constructed by divisive clustering, in which classifier performance was considered as splitting criterion. in this setting, one can see knowledge integration as the inclusion of similarities in the fame profiles of the considered species. due to a computational bottleneck, this approach was restricted to a proof-of-concept experiment with a data set of  <dig> species. relatively good results were obtained, as closely related species could be retained out of the massive amount of computed clusters. furthermore, for these  <dig> species, we observed a good classification performance that is comparable to flat multi-class classification.

as a second strategy, we considered knowledge integration based on 16s rrna gene data. using quality controlled 16s rrna gene sequences, two rooted phylogenetic trees were constructed for the type strains of  <dig> bacillus species. the two trees, respectively constructed with the nj and upgma treeing methods, subsequently served as taxonomies for a hierarchical classification scheme with base classifiers trained on fame data at each node. due to the integration of 16s rrna gene as a phylogenetic marker, we called this approach phylogenetic learning. the main advantage of phylogenetic learning, when compared to flat multi-class classification, lies in the exploitation of the taxonomic relationships, so that the results can be easily visualized. moreover, the results can be better interpreted in a post-processing phase, for example by pruning the classification tree based on the classifier performance along the tree. given the limitations of fame data for species discrimination, pruning allows to restrict identification to internal nodes and put the identification results in a taxonomic context. and, herein, a hierarchical classification scheme is a perfect choice, contrary to flat multi-class classification models, which cannot easily exploit taxonomic relationships, and do not produce a score of separability or identification of a certain species, as compared to  related species.

furthermore, when evaluating the identification performance of phylogenetic learning at leaf level, another clear advantage is seen. due to the hierarchical class structure, the phylogenetic learning approach improves the identification for species that are incorrectly classified by flat multi-class classification. so, in some sense, the method also results in a better performance, although we have to admit that phylogenetic learning with the nj and upgma trees shows to be less accurate than flat multi-class classification, when evaluating the method as a global classification scheme. yet, as explained above, this was not the goal of this study.

