BACKGROUND
parasites negatively influence host fitness, and subsequently hosts develop their anti-parasite defence, i.e. a performing immune system, in order to reduce fitness cost induced by parasitism  <cit> . however, an increased investment in immune defence should give rise to a trade-off with life-history traits such as growth, survival and reproduction  <cit> . several studies supporting this prediction have been performed, predominantly in birds  <cit> . fewer studies have been conducted in fish  <cit> , which differ from birds and mammals in several aspects of their life history traits  <cit> .

investment in immune defence is commonly measured by spleen size, density of blood cells or as t-cell mediated immune response  <cit> . several comparative studies use the relative spleen size as a potential measure of immune investment in birds against parasites  <cit> , in which it was predicted that host species encountering more parasites possess larger spleens because they have more invested in immune defence  <cit> . moreover, the use of spleen size is also recommended in ecotoxicological studies as a standard measure of immunocompetence  <cit> . spleen plays a highly important role in hemopoiesis and immune reactivity of teleost fish producing antibodies and participating in clearance of pathogens and foreign particles from the blood stream  <cit> . spleen size is widely applied as an estimator of immunocompetence in recent published studies on fish and used as a measure of investment in immunity in intra-specific analyses  <cit> .

the impacts of parasites on host survival, reproduction and mating success are well documented in fish  <cit> . fish males and females invest differently in reproduction with females investing more in gamete production, and males investing more in mate attraction through the display of sexual ornamentation, which are exacerbated during the spawning period  <cit> .

two hypotheses were formulated for explaining the differential investment in reproduction and immune response in link with parasite pressure. the first hypothesis postulates the existence of an energetic trade-off between the investment in reproduction and the investment in immune responses  <cit> , with the assumption that immune response is costly and reduces the energy for other tasks such as reproduction. if this energetic hypothesis is correct, a trade-off between gonad development and spleen size in females should be observed.

the second one, the immunohandicap hypothesis  <cit>  emphasizes the potential role of immunosuppression induced by steroid sexual hormones . these hormones and some of their precursors directly affect the production of immune cells in fish  <cit> . the increasing level of steroid hormones at the very beginning of reproduction stimulates the expression of sexual ornamentation, but negatively influences the immune function ability . as a consequence, a negative effect of testosterone on the relative spleen weight is observed in fish  <cit> . the immunosuppression by steroid hormones could result in higher parasites intensities in breeding individuals or in individuals with high expression of sexual ornamentation  <cit> . as a consequence, a trade-off between gonad development and spleen size in males was predicted and observed  <cit> . from this point of view, the immunohandicap hypothesis could be also seen as a part of larger concept of energetic trade-offs between investment in reproduction and immune defence in males. in addition, a relationship between parasites and well-developed ornamentation was predicted  <cit> . this has been observed or partially confirmed in fish males  <cit> .

the aims of this study are to investigate in a comparative way:

- how parasitism is related to fish life history traits,

- whether there is a trade-off between reproduction and immune investments in fish females  and in males ,

- whether parasitism influences host immunity  and reproduction  in females and males.

RESULTS
fish life history traits: allometry and trade-off
k-value, a parameter of the von bertalanffy growth function, considered as a good predictor of natural mortality was not correlated with fish body size, whilst female fecundity was positively correlated with maximal fish size . maximal fish longevity was also positively correlated with maximal fish size . a negative relationship between female fecundity and maximal longevity was found after correcting both variables for maximal fish body size . we used residuals of fecundity and longevity obtained from these regressions for the next analyses.

parasitism and fish life history traits
data from the literature that were used are given in table  <dig>  life history traits  were tested as potential determinants of parasite species richness.

first, we found that:

- total parasite species richness was positively correlated with host sample size  and fish body size  using multiple regression .

- ectoparasite species richness was positively correlated with host sample size  and fish body size  using multiple regression .

- endoparasite species richness was positively correlated with host sample size  and fish body size  using multiple regression .

total parasite species richness, ecto- and endoparasite species richness were corrected for both host sample size and fish body size using residuals obtained from these multiple regression.

we used the residuals of parasite species richness  of these regressions for the next analyses.

second, we tested the existence of correlation between fish life traits and parasitism. multiple regression revealed a negative relationship between mortality estimated by k-value and residuals of ectoparasite species richness . this result is still significant using bonferroni correction . a negative but not significant relationship was also found between mortality and residuals of total parasite species richness . no relationship was found between life-history traits and residuals of endoparasite species richness .

parasitism, immunity and reproduction: intra-specific analysis
we performed a variance component analysis on the spleen weight  of males of  <dig> fish species  and found that 82% of the variance is due to fish species. the variance component analysis of the gonad weight  on males of  <dig> fish species showed that only 71% of the variance is due to fish species.

the anova performed on males of  <dig> fish species  showed a significant effect of parasite abundance, fish weight and fish species on the gonad weight . a marginal effect of individual parasite species richness on the gonad weight was also observed . no effects of parasite abundance or parasite species richness were detected on spleen weight in males .

parasitism, reproduction and immunity: inter-specific analyses
data from the field study are shown in table  <dig>  kruskal-wallis  test revealed significant inter-specific differences for gonad weight, spleen weight, parasite abundance and parasite species richness for both males and females using raw data .

using independent contrasts, we found;

- positive relationships between spleen weight and fish body weight for both females  and males ;

- positive relationships between gonad weight and fish body weight for both females  and males .

residuals of spleen weight  was negatively correlated with residuals of gonad weight  in females  but not in males .

we found the same results when fish species with less than  <dig> individuals were removed. moreover, the results using raw data were similar to those obtained using the independent contrasts analyses, i.e. a negative relationship was found between spleen weight and gonad weight  in females but not in males .

fish males
parasite abundance was positively correlated with fish body weight  in males. however, no relationship was found between residuals of parasite abundance and residuals of spleen weight or residuals of gonad weight . the same results were observed when excluding fish species with less than  <dig> individuals. the same results were obtained using raw data  excluding or not fish species with less than  <dig> individuals.

fish females
total parasite abundance was positively correlated with fish body weight  in females. a positive relationship was observed between residuals of total parasite abundance and residuals of spleen weight , whereas a negative relationship was found between residuals of total parasite abundance and residuals of gonad weight .

a positive significant relationship was found between residuals of ectoparasite abundance and residuals of spleen weight , whereas a negative relationship was found between residuals of ectoparasite abundance and residuals of gonad weight .

no relationship was observed for endoparasites  and for average parasite species richness .

the comparative analyses were also performed using only fish species with at least  <dig> individuals, and revealed a positive trend although not significant between total parasite abundance and spleen weight  and a negative trend between parasite abundance and gonad weight  in females. a positive but not significant relationship between ectoparasite abundance and spleen weight  and a negative relationship between ectoparasite abundance and gonad weight corrected for fish body weight was found .

finally, the same results were obtained using raw data without correcting for phylogeny, with positive relationships between residuals of spleen weight and residuals of total parasite abundance  or residuals of ectoparasite abundance . these positive relationships were observed, although not significant , when excluding fish species with low sample size.

discussion
evolution of life-history traits is predicted to be a consequence of how resources are allocated to competing functions such as reproduction, growth and maintenance. therefore, the potential relationships between different fish life traits investigated in the present study, taking into account the potential influence of parasitism should be discussed in terms of trade-off. for instance high investment in reproduction might decrease energy for investment in immune functions, facilitating parasite infection  <cit> .

fish life traits
in the present study we have shown several relationships among fish life-history traits previously predicted by reznick et al.  <cit> . allometric relationships with fish body size were found for maximal longevity and female fecundity. the negative relationship found between female fecundity and longevity supports the hypothesis that cyprinid fish pay for an increased investment in reproduction in term of adult survival  <cit> . this study represents the first comparative analysis demonstrating this pattern in cyprinid fish species.

because of the lack of significant relationship between fecundity and k-value, it seems that fish with high growth rate do not invest in high output reproduction . however, the fecundity used in our comparative study represents an average number of eggs per female in one breeding season, and only such evaluation of fecundity data are available for cyprinids. the measure of fecundity is not an absolute measure of the fish investment in reproductive cells, and it will be useful to obtain the fecundity in relation to average egg size for future comparative studies. k-value from the von bertalanffy growth model is considered as a good predictor of mortality  <cit> . following reznick et al.  <cit>  the extrinsic mortality  is generally considered to be the most important factor shaping the evolution of senescence.

fish life traits and parasitism
the impact of parasitism is predicted to increase with the diversity of parasites to which a given host must face, and therefore parasite species richness may be considered as a good predictor for evaluating how the evolution of host life history traits is shaped by parasitism  <cit> . host natural mortality, estimated by k-value of the von bertalanffy growth model, was recognized as a factor contributing to the variability of parasite species richness. moreover, parasite species benefit from long-lived fish as showed by previous studies .

parasitism, immunity and reproduction: intra-specific analyses
trade-off between investment in immune function and cost of parasites during fish spawning has been predominantly investigated following hamilton and zuk's  <cit>  hypothesis  <cit> . in the case of the arctic charr, salvelinus alpinus   <cit> , the cost due to parasitism was predominantly confirmed in fish males. spawning males  were more susceptible to parasite infection than resting males   <cit> . this finding is in accordance with the immunohandicap hypothesis  <cit> .

in the present study, the relative investment between immune function and reproduction has been investigated mainly on fish males at intra-specific level. here, we found a significant effect of parasitism on gonad weight in the males of four fish species, but no effect on spleen weight. at the intra-specific level taskinen and kortet  <cit>  did not find any relationship between immunocompetence  and sexual ornamentation in roach, rutilus rutilus, but found that host resistance against the most prevalent and abundant parasite species  was positively correlated with ornamentation in males. the observed relationship between level of steroid hormones and sexual ornamentation in roach is consistent with the predictions of the immunohandicap hypothesis  <cit> . however, studies comparing levels of steroid hormones and immune variables are still scarce  <cit> . nevertheless, a lack of association between spleen size and either sexual ornamentation  or parasite infection did not seem to support the immunohandicap hypothesis  <cit> . the relative spleen size in fish is recently used as an organ reflecting an immune investment against parasites or pathogens  <cit> . the negative relationship between spleen size  and condition factor was recorded and interpreted as a trade-off between investment in immune response and somatic condition  <cit> . this observation suggests that the spleen size is a reliable measure of investment in immune response  <cit> . skarstein et al.  <cit>  suggested that a large spleen in fish can be interpreted either as an improving ability to respond to parasite exposure or an indication of high immunological activity from already established infection.

parasitism, immunity and reproduction: inter-specific analyses in males
our results based on inter-specific comparative analyses are not in accordance with the immunohandicap hypothesis  <cit> . our field investigation was performed only on reproductive males during the breeding period. if we consider that the expression of secondary sexual traits initiated by the production of testosterone is related to higher investment in gonad size, then high parasite infection should stimulate immune function related with decreased investment in gonad size. a trade-off between investment in reproduction and immune defence should be more evidenced in breeding period with increasing effort in reproduction. however, our results showed a lack of relationship between gonad size and spleen size in fish males, which does not seem to be biased by sampling size as the same results were obtained including the whole fish sample or excluding fish with low sampling size. moreover, we should note that several comparative analyses using spleen size measurements in birds gave consistent results even if based on low sample size. for instance, half of the bird species in the recent study of møller et al.  <cit>  are represented by only  <dig> or  <dig> individuals.

however, until now no study has provided good evidence that spleen size is related to humoral immune function in fish. future comparative studies are needed including other immune variables such as plasma igm concentration, cell-mediated immune response, migratory and phagocytotic activity of head kidney granulocytes representing their functional activity, which have been applied in the recent intra-specific studies of fish immunocompetence  <cit> .

a relationship between parasitism and sexual dichromatism was observed in fish at the inter-family level, but cyprinid species seem to deviate from this pattern  <cit> . this should by explained by the fact that many cyprinid species did not express secondary sexual characters, i.e. in our study only a few cyprinid species show measurable sexual traits that could be evaluated at the inter-specific level, and with one exception there is no parental care in the sampled cyprinid species.

parasitism, immunity and reproduction: inter-specific analyses in females
we found a negative relationship between spleen weight and gonad weight in females during the breeding period using comparative analyses, supporting the energetic trade-off hypothesis, i.e. a cost in reproduction associated with an investment in immune function. as this result was confirmed from all analyses, i.e. also from the analysis excluding the effect of low sample size and from both phylogenetically corrected or non-corrected analyses, we suggest that this could reflect the evolutionary life-history allocation of energetic resources in cyprinid females. however, the relationship between parasite abundance and spleen weight could suggest that the increasing in spleen weight, i.e. high investment in immune function, represents a response to high exposition of ectoparasites . this suggests that highly parasitized females develop larger spleen as a higher investment in immune defence.

brown and brown  <cit>  investigated in birds whether larger spleens reflect the evolution of greater immune investment as life-history strategy or whether represent a proximal response to current exposure to parasites. we observed that parasite abundance or parasite species richness obtained from field data are correlated with data on parasite species richness  obtained from the regional data analysis of Šimková et al.  <cit> . it means that parasite abundance could be considered as a reliable measure of parasite pressure, integrating the information on both species richness  and number of individuals per species. moreover, such an integrative variable based on a composite sampling, here abundances of several parasite species, is more statistically effective when variance is greater than the mean in each variable, which is the case as fish parasites are over-dispersed . therefore, our results suggest that spleen weight is not a simple reflection of a current parasite level, i.e. a proximal effect. moreover, there was a trend of difference in spleen weight corrected for fish weight  when comparing females and males with the males having the larger spleen. the similar observation was demonstrated in roach, rutilus rutilus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we interpret our results in the context of life-history theory, with host species encountering more parasites should invest more extensively in immune defence, i.e. ultimate or evolutionary effect, as it was already found in birds and their ectoparasites  <cit>  or endoparasites  <cit> . our study shows for the first time that this kind of relationship could occur in cyprinid female fish, but not in cyprinid fish males. moreover, we show a parasite impact on female reproductive potential suggesting fitness costs due to parasitism. this effect was previously demonstrated in several studies on birds  <cit>  and represents a traditional explanation for negative fitness consequences of parasitism. on the other hand, our prediction related to the immunohandicap hypothesis was not confirmed for fish males.

