BACKGROUND
mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis  causes one of the most well documented chronic diseases of ruminants worldwide ) and yet the cues leading to its intracellular survival live in obscurity <cit> . major hindrances involved in examining gene regulation during map infection are the low amounts of bacterial rna isolated from an infected host and the lack of an appropriate animal model  <cit> . in order to overcome the limited quantity of rna, previous transcriptomic studies interrogating genes used in pathogenic mycobacterial infection were conducted utilizing mimetic conditions of infection in an in vitro environment  stresses, etc.)  <cit> .

while these studies provided insight into a limited number of genes regulated by specific cues, it is not representative of natural infection since mycobacteria will encounter more than one stress at a time. multiple stressors may change which genes are utilized as well as potential for gene:gene or protein:protein interactions that influence survival and dissemination in the host. therefore, current investigations into the intracellular fate of map and host responses rely on in vitro macrophage models, specifically bovine and murine cells <cit> . studies from our laboratory using an in vitro bovine macrophage infection model in conjugation with selective capture of transcribed sequences  revealed upregulation of map genes involved in combating oxidative stress, metabolic and nutritional starvation and cell survival at  <dig> and  <dig> hrs post infection <cit> . these results indicate that common sets of genes are required for map to persist within a multifaceted host environment. furthermore, consistent with another study using scots analysis with mycobacterium avium, map expresses several genes involved in fatty acid degradation, which has been suggested as a universal theme used by pathogenic mycobacteria to successfully efface and invade macrophages and other cell types  <cit> .

the utility of results from in vitro macrophage infections, as well as small animal models, is controversial as it is currently unknown if these applications faithfully reflect natural infection in map's preferred host. a recent study by meyer-barber et al. shows discrepant requirements for toll expression between isolated murine bone marrow derived macrophages from in vitro and in vivo m. tuberculosis infection <cit> . since pathogens initiate and inhibit host signaling , there is also a potential for map regulatory networks to differ during in vivo infection. additionally, a number of articles investigating host-map interactions use bomac  cells due to the advantage of having a cell line <cit> . however, bomac cells are inherently dysfunctional; lacking several receptors and possessing an insufficient capability to phagocytose map <cit> . therefore, macrophage studies to date may 1) underestimate the speed of map responses and/or 2) may be serving as an apparition of rather than being an accurate representation of infection. more importantly, in vitro macrophage studies do not address the initial events that set the venue for map's transition into the macrophage. prior to residing inside gut macrophages, map must first encounter the intestinal epithelium  <cit> . the intestinal epithelium represents a formidable fortress that actively secretes iga and antimicrobial peptides, which is shielded by the glycocalyx and a thick layer of mucus, produced by intestinal goblet cells  <cit> . therefore, it is of little surprise that most of the disease signs associated with jd  are inflicted upon the intestinal tissue. despite map's successful siege against the intestinal barrier as evidence of its infiltration into lamina propria macrophages, the exact genes and pathways map employs within the intestinal epithelium remains a black hole in our understanding of overall pathogenesis <cit> . furthermore, it has been suggested that map processing by the epithelium may aid in efficiency of invasion in macrophages by pre-exposure to a hyperosmolar environment or expression of a map oxidoreductase   <cit> . thus, it seems short sighted to assume that no disparate mechanisms are used to survive in the intestinal tissue and macrophage given two different cell types with varying function. furthermore, data compiled by the immune epitope database and analysis  suggest that specific mycobacterial epitopes are present only within a given host. studies using small animal models, such as the mouse, may not capture a comprehensive map epitope profile as well as transcriptome representative of the cow. the elucidation of host-specific epitopes and map genes required for survival during natural infection are expected to aid in the rational design of jd vaccines.

the aim of this study was to characterize the functional map transcriptional profiles in the ileum and mesenteric lymph node  of naturally infected cattle as well as an in vitro bovine monocyte derived macrophages  infection model. we have employed advanced molecular techniques, computational and bioinformatic analyses to identify and characterize map gene expression during the natural infection process.

RESULTS
isolation and identification of map
postmortem examination of two subclinical jd cattle revealed gross lesions and corrugation throughout the intestine indicative of chronic inflammation, especially within the ileum . histopathological sections of the ileum identified map by modified ziehl-neelson staining for acid-fast organisms , which was later confirmed by standard culture and pcr methods . map was successfully isolated from intestinal lesion, mesenteric lymph nodes, liver and spleen of both subclinically infected animals. all isolates were genotyped by ssr analysis as > 13g and 5ggt repeats, which was identical to map k- <dig> culture  used for macrophage infection.

map organisms were grown in herrold's egg yolk medium for  <dig> weeks at 37°c. the colonies were counted.

gene expression of map during natural infection
analysis of map from infected tissues showed differential expression of  <dig> genes compared to broth cultures. after multiple test corrections,  <dig> genes were significantly different at q ≤  <dig>  by unpaired t-test. amongst these,  <dig> genes were altered at ≥  <dig>  fold change and  <dig> genes at fold change ≥  <dig>  compared with corresponding map isolates in broth culture. table  <dig> shows a list of operons and additional file  <dig> tables s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> show complete lists of genes differentially regulated during natural infection.

shared and variable genes between the ileum and mln are represented in additional files  <dig>  tables s <dig> and s <dig>  genes were classified into various functional groups based on clusters of orthologous genes  classification and the percent gene expression of each group was calculated. functional groups enriched in both ileum and mln belonged to virulence , unknown function or poorly described cellular pathways . genes belonging to transcription  and lipid metabolism and transport  were specifically enriched in the ileum, while energy production and conversion  and inorganic ion transport and metabolism  were enriched in mln .

gene expression of map in an in vitro macrophage infection assay
a total of  <dig> map genes were differentially expressed during macrophage infection compared with broth culture. amongst them,  <dig> genes had a ≥ <dig>  fold change and  <dig> genes had ≥  <dig>  fold change . at  <dig> hr post infection , upregulated genes of significant interest included serine/threonine protein kinase, pknb , atpase, aaa family protein  and ppe family protein . at  <dig> hour pi map upregulated pe family proteins , transcriptional regulators  and fadd <dig> protein . finally, at  <dig> hr pi map displayed higher induction of genes concerning major membrane protein, mmpl <dig> , mce-family proteins , pe-family proteins , oxidoreductase , lipase, lipe  and abc transporters . a total of  <dig> genes were shared across different time points in the macrophage infection assay using map k- <dig> strain. fig.  <dig> shows the distribution of the differentially expressed genes across three time points and additional file  <dig>  tables s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> shows the detailed list of genes.

comparisons of gene expression profiles of naturally infected tissues and in vitro macrophage infection
while a total of  <dig> genes were commonly expressed between infected tissues and macrophages,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were specifically represented in tissues or macrophages, respectively . functional categories belonging to transcription  and inorganic ion transport and metabolism  were represented both in tissues and macrophages . macrophage specific gene expression represented functional categories belonging to cell cycle control , cell wall biogenesis , cell motility  and secretion . tissue specific gene expression included genes categorized into virulence mechanisms and those that were not represented in any of the cog groups. furthermore, map regulates expression of persistence related genes such as map0033c , map <dig> , and map <dig>  during natural infection.

expression of map lineage specific genes during natural infection
approximately  <dig> genes distributed in six loci  were recently described as map lineage specific genomic insertions; majority of these genes were consistently upregulated  in the in vitro infected macrophages whereas downregulated in the tissues of both the animals   <cit> . loci of interest include lsp  <dig> and  <dig>  which carry putative prophages, transposons and unique sequences with no hits in ncbi. map <dig>  located within lsp  <dig>  has conserved domains resembling those of a virulence factor  belonging to leishmania. lsp <dig> contains map2149c, which has conserved domains to that of sarp  family transcriptional factor. located within lsp  <dig> includes a mammalian cell entry  operon  which was downregulated in the tissues whereas map <dig>  and map2180c  were upregulated in the macrophages. downregulated genes located within lsp  <dig> belong to abc transporter operon , siderophore biosynthesis operon  and oxidoreductase . however, an oxidoreductase , and abc type transporter  and a polyketides synthase  belonging to lsp <dig> were all upregulated in macrophage infections. an abc transporter operon , which is located on lsp  <dig>  was downregulated in infected tissues. interestingly, map3773c, a probable ferric uptake regulator protein on lsp  <dig>  was downregulated in the tissues and upregulated in experimentally infected macrophages. lastly, located within the lsp specific for cattle map strains is an enzyme involved in xenobiotic biodegradation and metabolism  was downregulated in the tissues whereas upregulated in the in vitro infected macrophages.

real-time validation of microarray data
we selected seven genes for real-time pcr to validate microarray results. these genes were chosen based on their roles in diverse pathways. selected genes included membrane protein , inorganic ion transport , iron acquisition , energy production and metabolism  and finally an lsp specific for cattle strains of map . rna extracts used for microarray analysis  were also analyzed for their level of expression by real-time pcr assay with primers designed using universal probe library . the expression of these genes in the tissues of jd cows shows the same trend in microarray and the real-time analyses. map k- <dig> broth culture was used as a control to determine fold change. fig.  <dig> demonstrates the fold change ratios of selected map genes in the microarrays as compared to their gene expression in real-time after normalization with a housekeeping gene seca.

discussion
the hallmark of map infection is the subclinical manifestation of a persistent intestinal infection. yet, surprisingly, there remains a paucity of studies investigating the intracellular lifestyle of map in the intestinal epithelium in comparison to research involving macrophage and/or lymphocyte models  <cit> . we sought to fill this critical knowledge gap by reporting the first transcriptome analysis of map in infected tissues and macrophages. both the ileum and mesenteric lymph node have been suggested to act as potential map reservoirs within the host; therefore, it is critical to understand the map pathways that function to govern this persistence  <cit> . the current trend in map research is to isolate and analyze regulated gene sets given defined, in vitro stress related cues or during a particular infection stage using surgical methods and various animal species  <cit> . however, we have taken a more directed approach to uncover common and unique pathways utilized by map in intestinal tissues using the natural host under natural infection. elucidation of the transcriptome active in local infection sites is expected to not only augment our knowledge of map pathogenesis, which will lend itself to the establishment of a host-pathogen interactome, as well as rational design of vaccines and/or antimycobacterial therapeutic modalities.

map residing within the ileum is primed for persistence in subclinical infection
pathogenic mycobacteria have the uncanny ability to persist within the host for an indefinite period of time that can last several years <cit> . although the genes and signals that induce persistence remain unclear, mycobacteria entering this phase are characterized by a state of chronic or prolonged non-replication  <cit> . one cue that primes the cell to enter into the non-replication stage is the stringent response, which is characterized by the rela controlled production of hyperphosphorylated guanosine ppgpp) activated upon nutrient deprivation, hypoxia and oxidative stress  <cit> . together rela and ppgpp are able to combat hostile environments by negatively regulating bacterial "life" signals such as dna and protein machinery. interestingly, we have identified a unifying theme from naturally infected host tissue as the downregulation of several energy, carbohydrate, amino acid and lipid metabolism as well as transcriptional and dna replication related genes. similar attributes of the stringent response were found to be selectively upregulated within the ileum. for example, the rela/spot domain-containing protein has a three-fold upregulation in the ileum. recently geiger and colleagues have shown that the rela/spot domain-containing protein, rsh synthetase/hydrolase enzyme, in staphylococcus aureus is responsible for maintained production of ppgpp and concomitant repression of genes regulating translational machinery  <cit> . furthermore, a single metabolism gene regulating menaquinone biosynthesis and consequent production of vitamin k  was uniquely upregulated in the ileum <cit> . in addition to initiating the synthesis of mycobactins, menaquinone biosynthesis genes have been shown to be a critical factor in maintaining non-replicating mycobacterial cell viability <cit> .

stringent response priming of map cells is most likely due to host inflicted stresses, particularly nitric oxide resultant in dna damage <cit> . previous studies examining map "scrapings" from the intestinal wall of jd clinical cattle show significant upregulation of katg, a bacterial catalase gene used to combat oxidative stress <cit> . furthermore, granulomatous lesions within the ileum or lymph node isolated from cattle naturally infected with either map or m. bovis, respectively, have enhanced immune-staining for natural resistance-associated macrophage protein  <dig>  and inducible nitric oxide synthase , which together synthesize nitric oxide  <cit> . although we did not identify enrichment of katg in the ileum, we show upregulation of map <dig>  a lexa repressor, which is stimulated upon dna damage and stress and results in the arrest of cell division and induction of dna repair <cit> . similarly, increase in a lysr transcriptional regulator  within the ileum is indicative of an oxidative stress response <cit> . these data suggest that during the early stages of infection, map is primed for persistence by the stringent response in order to avoid oxidative stress and dna damage. this appears to be a "watershed moment" in the intracellular lifecycle of map as persistence during subclinical infection will ensure its survival and future dissemination into other organs.

map evades immune detection in the mln
similar to map pathways found in the ileum, the majority of map genes involved in energy, carbohydrate, inorganic ion, dna repair, transcription and translation pathways are downregulated. however, there is a lack of stringent response as well as persistence-associated expression. the mln contains populations of circulating effector cells, such as t and b cells; therefore, map may downregulate the aforementioned pathways to avoid detection by the host immune system <cit> . furthermore, common to both ileum and mln, map upregulates several genes associated with cell envelope and outer member biogenesis . it is well established that mycobacterial cell wall components have immunomodulatory functions that enable pathogenic mycobacteria to escape immune surveillance by suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, phagosome-lysosome fusion and mhc class ii presentation <cit> . thus, map may surround itself with complex cell wall associated glycolipids to prevent recognition and continue t unabated by the host immune system.

expression of lineage specific large sequence polymorphisms  during natural and in vitro macrophage infection
comparative genomics of the m. avium complex  revealed that map evolved as a pathogen by acquiring large segments of dna  via horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . our study is the first to directly show that some of these putative pathogenicity islands are associated with virulence. contrary to expression found within the tissues, genes belonging to the lsps were upregulated in macrophage infection. qt-rt-pcr analysis also demonstrated that map1728c , a gene involved in xenobiotic biodegradation and metabolism located within the lsp  specific for cattle map strains was downregulated in the tissues  <cit> . this is consistent with the regulation of other map genes, which suggests that map transcriptional machinery remains silent in the tissues. several iron related genes were downregulated in tissues including lsp <dig>  a map unique pathogenicity island that encodes a ferric uptake regulator , as well as the abc transporter , and a possible siderophore biosynthesis operon  that contains a fur binding box within the intergenic region  <cit> . this is of significant interest as part of this region  has previously been shown to be immunogenic and preliminary studies indicate its use as a potential vaccine candidate <cit> . furthermore, our genome analysis revealed that a type vii secretory system  was located immediately downstream of lsp <dig>  esx <dig> has recently been shown to be essential for mycobactin synthesis and we have identified its repression by the map iron dependent regulator  in the presence of iron  <cit> . taken together, transcriptional analysis suggests that lsp <dig>   <dig> and esx- <dig> form a major pathogenicity island that may play a potential role in maintaining iron homeostasis and hence survival within the macrophage.

CONCLUSIONS
map is an extremely resilient pathogen that employs a number of regulatory pathways to ensure its survival. regulatory pathways that govern the lifecycle of map appear to be specified by tissue and cell type. while tissues show a "shut-down" of major map metabolic genes, infected macrophages upregulate several map specific genes along with a putative pathogenicity island responsible for iron acquisition. despite differences in gene programs found within tissues and cell types, the overriding rule of map is to progress by deception either by entering a persistent state, shielding by complex cell wall components or hiding in the macrophage. many of these programs rely on the advanced interplay of host and pathogen and in order to decipher their message, an interactome must be established using a systems biology approach  <cit> . preliminary interactomes for the current study are reminiscent of those being developed for s. pyogenes and h. pylori and show promising networks that may aid in our understanding of overall pathogenesis as well as potential targets for novel vaccines and therapeutics  <cit> . the findings presented in this study will lend themselves in meeting this future challenge of creating a map-host interactome.

