BACKGROUND
dna microarrays are a useful tool for the study of complex systems and have applications in a wide variety of biological sciences. despite their usefulness, however, systematic biases caused by different handling procedures present a challenge. microarray experiments are often performed over many months, and samples are often collected and processed at different institutions. further, the samples may be assayed using different microarray print batches or platforms, or using different array hybridization protocols. when two microarray data sets are directly compared, systematic biases arising from variability in experimental conditions can be erroneously detected as differences in gene expression patterns. such systemic biases present a substantial obstacle in the analysis of microarray data. however, due to the limited numbers of available microarray experiments, the motivation to use an entire data set regardless of platforms or experimental procedure is increasing. therefore, it is necessary to investigate new methods that can effectively combine microarray data sets which were derived from different experimental environments, while simultaneously minimizing systematic bias.

a commonly utilized method to integrate microarray data sets is to focus on the differential expression, i.e. comparing significantly expressed genes selected separately from each data set  <cit> . another type of comparison examines the variability in gene expressions between human and mouse data sets combining the different microarray platforms  <cit> . these studies exploit multiple data sets, rather than a single data set, in order to obtain more robust result. some studies overcome the limitations of a single microarray data set using integration technique, since integration of separate data sets has the similar effect as increasing sample size  <cit> . however, a suitable integration method has not yet been established. indeed, some studies suggest that microarray data sets derived from different experimental processes cannot be combined directly, as they are poorly correlated with each other  <cit> .

recently, the practice of integrating data sets prior to selecting significant genes was introduced and standardization has been used for this as the simplest method  <cit> . singular value decomposition  corrects systematic bias of data sets and has been used in yeast cell cycle experiments  <cit>  and in data sets containing samples from many soft tissue tumors  <cit> . although svd is a useful method for determining the direction of large variations so that systematic effects can be removed, it has been suggested that svd is inappropriate for cases where the magnitude of the systematic variation is similar to the components of other variations  <cit> . alternatively, distance weighted discrimination , which is a modified form of svm that adjusts for systematic effects, performed well and could eliminate source effects  <cit> . however, dwd could not regulate the dispersion of different data sets.

a method that transforms the distributions of gene expressions of two data sets similarly was proposed  <cit> . however, this method did not consider biological differences between the two different experimental groups, such as normal and tumor, because they used the average expression value of these two groups to define a reference sample. a recent study introduced an anova, analysis of variance, model to select discriminative genes from several datasets derived from different experimental environments  <cit> . this method can be flexible to consider any clinical variables as well as genetic information including several effect factors, which represent experimental conditions. but, with this method, we can not evaluate how well datasets are intermixed, and explore expression patterns of any interesting genes in combined data set. therefore, we suggested a method to effectively integrate different experimental environments and evaluated its efficiency using mixture score.

RESULTS
seventy-eight experiments  from data set a and  <dig> experiments  from data set b were used in this study. the whole data set included missing entries in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> genes for each experiment. a total of  <dig> genes without missing entries were used for further analysis.

exploration of expression patterns of two data sets before transformation
we confirmed rna source effect in more than  <dig> genes by anova using adjusted p-value of  <dig>  by bonferroni correction . the numbers of genes which were significantly differentially expressed between two experimental groups were  <dig> and  <dig> in data set a and data set b, respectively. this showed that there was some difference in sensitivity between two data sets. even in same experimental group, there were many genes that expressed differently between two data sets,  <dig> genes in normal group and  <dig> in tumor group. the significant difference between different experimental groups, normal and tumor groups, was not detected by rna source effect in these genes. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of p-values for differently expressed genes based on two data sets.

as shown in figure  <dig>  there were considerable differences in the scales and locations of expression ratios of five randomly selected genes from two data sets, even in the same group, prior to transformation of gene expression. data set b seemed to have larger variation than data set a in expression ratios in both tumor and normal groups, and tumor groups had large dispersions in two data sets.

in analyzing the five randomly selected genes with density plots, we found significant differences in locations of the first four genes, and in dispersions of gene <dig> and gene <dig> between the two data sets . if the data sets are analyzed without transformation, gene <dig> and gene <dig> in data set b, whose variations of expression ratios were larger in data set b compared with data set a, is relatively more influential than the same genes of data set a in further analysis. likewise, because of the large differences in locations of gene <dig> and gene <dig> between the two data sets, these genes might not be selected as discriminative genes classifying the two different experimental groups.

as the normality assumption is necessary for applying t-test, q-q plot was evaluated. the two separate data sets did not satisfy the normality assumption in normal and tumor groups before combining two data sets as shown in figure  <dig>  this figure also indicates that data set b had larger variation than data set a for both tumor and normal groups. however, the normality in the combined data set was improved even though no transformation was applied to two data sets. it can be interpreted that the combined data set slightly follows a normal distribution due to the increased sample size resulting from the combining of the two data sets. it indicates that the integration of two data sets is essential for reliable result.

exploration of expression patterns of combined data sets after transformation
as explained in the "methods", a'b transforms data set a referring to data set b and ab' transforms data set b referring to data set a. a'b' transforms data set a and data set b using pooled standard deviation and combines them. the variations observed in data sets transformed by the a'b and ab' methods changed depending on the variations of the reference data set . the a'b' method transformed expression patterns of the two data sets using a pooled standard deviation and corrected the difference in variations of them. we observed that the differences in location and variation between the two data sets were adjusted by the proposed methods preserving the respective expression patterns.

data set a had higher within-group correlation than data set b prior to integration, indicating that experiments in data set a had more homogeneous expression pattern than data set b . the tumor groups had lower correlations than the normal groups in both data sets, indicating that there were larger variations within the tumor groups than the normal groups. within-group correlations of the combined data sets after transformation were increased comparing to the result shown in figure  <dig> . the homogeneity of the combined data set a'b was similar to that of data set b, because data set a'b was resulted from the transformation of data set a into the expression pattern of data set b with low homogeneity within group. similarly, data set ab' preserved relatively strong homogeneity, by transforming into expression patterns of data set a with higher correlation than data set b. data set a'b', which was transformed by the weighted average of the dispersions of the two data sets, had an average degree of homogeneity of a'b and ab', but still had a low correlation in the tumor group. the data sets integrated by the proposed transformation methods had higher correlations within groups than the integrated data set without transformation, indicating that the proposed transformation methods effectively preserved homogeneity within groups of separate data sets.

hierarchical cluster analysis  clustered the samples into two distinct groups according to the data sources rather than different experimental groups . however, figure 8a'b, ab' and 8a'b' showed that the experimental groups  of the two data sets were more distinctly separated regardless of the transformation methods. hca also showed that the two data sets were in fact well intermingled, indicating that the experimental bias had been minimized. intermingling of different data sets indicates that data sets derived from different experimental conditions are combined well for further analysis.

the degree of mixture was measured by the mixture score. euclidean distance and pearson correlation coefficient were used as similarity measures to calculate the mixture score, and k was considered from  <dig> to  <dig> as a number of nearest neighbors . from the mixture scores before transformation, we found that the normal groups of data sets a and data set b were hardly intermixed . on the other hand, the tumor groups from the two data sets tended to be slightly intermixed, as the number of nns increased before transformation. after transformation, the mixture scores were increased up to  <dig> % in the tumor group as the number of nns increased, suggesting that two data sets were well intermixed. in addition, these values were similar in euclidean distance  and pearson correlation coefficient. dataset ab' had the highest within-group correlation indicating that strong homogeneity exists in combined data set as shown in figure  <dig>  and its mixture score also was the largest as shown in figure  <dig>  dataset a'b and a'b' were well intermixed although ab' had the highest mixture score and there were not considerable differences among them. also, all of the proposed transformation methods were more effective in the tumor group than in the normal group, showing tumor groups were intermixed better than normal groups even before transformation. this can be interpreted that the characteristics of the original data set were preserved in the integrated data set after transformation.

comparison of significant gene sets selected by transformation methods
as shown in table  <dig>  a larger number of significant genes were identified in data set ab' compared to other data sets. with the adjusted p-value of  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were identified by the ab' and ab method, respectively. this can be interpreted that data set ab' had large t-statistics due to the large mean differences and small variations in expression levels between two experimental groups with strong homogeneity. in anova model excluding interaction term,  <dig> significant genes were detected and it showed that the performance of anova model is better than the use of combined data set prior to transformation, ab. however, its performance was lower than data sets transformed by our method, a'b, ab' and a'b', in comparison of the number of significant genes.

α: significant level by bonferroni correction

the number in the parenthesis is the number of significant genes when anova model included the interaction term.

we compared the degree of concurrency in top  <dig> significant genes which are selected from combined data sets. two hundred fifty genes out of top  <dig> genes selected from data set a were consistent with gene set selected from data set b. among  <dig> genes, which is union gene set of top  <dig> genes of data set a and data set b,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes were consistent with top  <dig> genes of a'b, ab' and a'b', respectively. and  <dig> genes were consistent with top  <dig> genes of ab, indicating that our transformation methods preserved the original biology of the data sets.

eight genes were detected which belonged to ab' but a or b. we investigated the relationship of these genes with colorectal cancer and summarized the annotations of these genes in table  <dig>  chromosomal location 3q21-q <dig> was known as colorectal cancer  susceptible area  <cit>  and 4q33-q <dig> was identified as common genomic alteration in crc and genomic regions with altered dna copy numbers  <cit> . it is reported that biallelic germline mutations in myh are associated with colorectal neoplasm  <cit> , myh <dig>  an isoform of myh, could be suggested as also related with colorectal cancer. some genes among  <dig> genes were colon cancer related genes or located on close to a gene which is a colon cancer susceptible gene. therefore, we confirmed that the proposed method could detect informative genes which might be lost by using separated data sets.

we performed the simulation study using the arbitrary data sets with various sample size, from  <dig> to  <dig>  were sampled from original data set. it was processed as following.

 take random subsamples from data set a and data set b  without replacement. this process was repeated  <dig> times with same sample size for reducing sampling bias.

 find the  <dig> significant genes list from the subsample of a.

 find the  <dig> significant genes list from  ', which is a combined data set with subsample of a and transformed data set of subsample of b.  compare  and  with  <dig> significant genes list selected from data set a.

the gene sets with a similar oob  error rate were compared , and none of the gene sets had 0% oob error regardless of the transformation methods. only two significant genes of data set ab' had  <dig> % oob error. even if the number of significant genes was increased to  <dig>  the oob error rate did not decrease. the prediction accuracies of top  <dig> significant genes were compared, and the prediction accuracies were 100% for all of transformation methods . in this case, integrated data sets by each transformation method were used as training data sets to create classifiers, and separated data sets were used for testing these classifiers.

discussion
an inescapable problem with combining several microarray data sets is the variation of expressions between data sets. in cases where the microarray analyses are from different experimental conditions, integration without transformation may skew the expression ratios of the same genes from different data sets. when the experimental bias exceeds biological variation, the use of microarray data sets without adjustments for this bias may make biological variation unidentifiable, meaning that reliable results cannot be obtained. in addition, due to the limited numbers of available microarray experiments, the motivation to use the whole data set, regardless of platforms or experimental procedure, is increasing.

we attempted to minimize experimental bias by transforming the expression ratios of the data sets such that they have similar expression patterns in the corresponding experimental groups of different data sets. compared with previous studies, the proposed transformation method is a relatively simple algorithm  <cit> , furthermore that showed good performance in various evaluation methods. while a previous study used a reference sample with average expression of whole experiments including normal and tumor groups  <cit> , the proposed method considers biological differences that can be existed between different experimental groups by transforming expression ratios for each experimental group separately.

our method transforms expression ratios by three approaches. in a'b, data set b was used as a reference data set, data set a in ab'. a'b' is a combined data set after transforming both of two data sets using pooled standard deviation. in selecting the reference data set, we did not consider biological meaning and we rather compared the effects of transformation with diverse references. when a method used a data set with strong homogeneity as a reference data set, its performance was slightly better than other transformation methods as shown in figure  <dig>  but there were no significant differences in efficiencies among them, thus allowing a biological evaluation of the significant genes of data sets integrated by each transformation method.

using a data set with homogeneity as a reference data set, we observed that such characteristics are preserved in the combined data set more strongly. further, two separated data sets can be well intermixed in a combined data set because there are more chances that k nns of a experiment in one data set includes experiments of the other data set . also, the mean difference of expressions between two experimental groups can be larger as the homogeneity increases within the group. therefore, larger number of significant genes can be selected from ab' as shown in table  <dig> 

rna source effect in gene expression ratios was detected in more than  <dig> genes before transformation and such effect was adjusted by the proposed methods.

integration of datasets increases the sample size and improves the analytical accuracy and statistical power of the test. when focusing on significant gene selection, anova can be a flexible model to consider any clinical information as well as genetic information with several effect factors representing experimental conditions  <cit> . however, this method is applied to each gene and does not create a combined data set for applying various statistical methods to be able to identify additionally useful biological information, such as gene expression patterns through whole gene set. therefore, for a given experimental question, i.e. complex genetic information including expression patterns, it is useful to integrate data sets by transformation prior to specific analysis.

the proposed integration method preserves the expression patterns of two data sets similar in corresponding experimental groups, transforming the location and the scale of the expression ratios and this method is available to any data set with more than two groups. we confirmed that the transformed data sets obtained from different experimental environments were well intermixed, meaning that the experimental bias was reduced. and most genes among top  <dig> genes, which were selected from combined data sets after transformation, were consistent with top  <dig> genes selected from two original data sets. this means that our method preserves original biology of two data sets. in addition, we detected colorectal cancer related genes which might be dropped in separated data sets by using a combined data set. by simulation study, we confirmed that the proposed method can detect more reliable information from a combined data and it is more effective in small data sets derived from different experimental conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
this method may not be appropriate when the different experimental features in data sets include biological variations  because the expression values of a specific experimental group are transformed into the form of the corresponding experimental group of a reference data set. thus, we suggest that the proposed integration method is useful when each data set includes phenotypically or biologically homogenous experimental groups.

in conclusion, our method is simple and useful to combine several datasets experimented under different experimental conditions and available to any data set including more than two groups. with this method, biologically useful information can be detectable by applying various analytic methods to combined data set with increased sample size.

