BACKGROUND
in recent years, the development of novel embryo production technologies including somatic cell nuclear transfer  has created the potential for the restoration and propagation of valuable genetic lines, and the preservation of endangered species/breeds. although numerous procedural parameters remain to be streamlined to increase the success of this technique for the production of live and normal offspring, one of the important prerequisites of scnt is the availability of healthy donor cells, which need to be reprogrammed to support proper embryo and fetal development after nuclear transplantation.

the last decade has seen a dramatic increase in the cryopreservation of biomaterials. genome resource banks have been established for the collection and storage of somatic/gonadal tissues, cells, gametes and embryos from genetically valuable individuals and lineages. it is intended that these banks will be instrumental in the genetic management of captive and wild populations. wildt  <cit>  stated that genome resource banks will not only facilitate the dispersal of genetic material among populations, but will provide insurance against the sudden loss of diversity or a population. however, lack of standardized techniques for sample collection and storage has resulted in an abundance of poor-quality banked material. thus, a better understanding of the effects of tissue collection and culture establishment techniques on cell viability is required. to ensure that cells are of the utmost quality for possible use as donors for scnt, a need exists for the identification of quantifiable markers with a direct relationship to developmental potential.

it is well known that most somatic cells grown in vitro have a limited proliferative lifespan  <cit> , at which point they enter a phase of growth arrest termed replicative senescence. this irreversible state is distinguishable from the quiescence achieved by serum-starvation or density-dependent growth inhibition  <cit>  that is necessary to synchronize donor cells in the go phase for scnt. senescent cells remain metabolically active, arrested at the g1/s boundary and lacking the ability to divide . a senescent phenotype, whereby the cells change in form and function, has been described. the characteristics include alterations in morphology , function  and gene expression patterns, resistance to apoptosis and shortened telomere length . in vitro lifespan is affected by genetic and environmental factors, such as donor age, physiological state, culture conditions and seeding density  <cit> .

prolonged serial cultivation of cells in vitro results in the accumulation of numerous aberrations. genomic instability and telomere shortening have both been correlated with increased time in culture  <cit> , and shown to be prevalent at replicative senescence. a dramatic increase in chromosomally abnormal cells in late passage cultures has been demonstrated by various investigators  <cit> . benn  <cit>  observed that the chromosome content of cell lines progressed from approximately 30% abnormal to greater than 60% abnormal cells in later passages. similarly, strelchenko  <cit>  and giraldo et al.  <cit>  reported 81% and 98% abnormal cells in late passage cultures, respectively. both structural and numerical abnormalities have been documented, including end-to-end fusions, translocations, aneuploidy and polyploidy.

an important role in genomic stability is carried out by the telomeres  <cit> . telomeres are known to maintain chromosome structure and function by preventing end-to-end fusions and degradation of the chromosome ends  <cit> . as telomeres shorten with each cell cycle, the "sticky" ends are prone to fusions and translocations leading to structural chromosome alterations and subsequent chromosomal instability  <cit> . numerical chromosome alterations, on the other hand, are thought to result from the missegregation of chromosomes due to the loss of p <dig> and rb, regulators of the mitotic spindle apparatus  <cit> . both chromosome abnormalities and critically short telomeres are thought to be able to signal the irreversible damaged dna response that causes the cells to enter the phase of growth arrest leading to senescence  <cit> .

in vitro production of embryos, particularly by scnt, is associated with compromised pre- and post-implantation development. cytogenetic studies on embryos indicate that chromosome abnormalities are associated with poor embryo quality and increased embryonic and fetal wastage  <cit> . chromosome abnormalities are thought to be a major cause of embryonic loss during early development  <cit> . among in vitro fertilized  and scnt embryos, a higher percentage of chromosomally abnormal blastomeres were observed in slower developing embryos, embryos with lower cell numbers and poorer grade embryos  <cit> . studies have correlated the occurrence of chromosome abnormalities in scnt embryos with the frequency of abnormalities in the donor cell line  <cit> . not surprisingly, donor cell lines with a higher percentage of abnormal cells generated a higher rate of chromosomally abnormal blastomeres in the scnt embryos.

in order to improve scnt success, careful attention must be given to the establishment of viable, normal cell lines since good quality embryos depend upon the chromosomal integrity of the donor cell. due to the numerous environmental factors influencing the long-term growth of a cell line, standardization of techniques for tissue collection, processing and culture must be implemented to ensure that banked cultures are a viable source of genetic material. proper cell banking techniques are of critical importance in non-domestic species, specifically endangered wildlife, where access to the animals is minimal and, in some cases, precludes the collection of good quality tissue samples.

the objectives of this study were to investigate the effects of tissue sample collection and cell culture initiation techniques on cell culture dynamics and their effects on the developmental potential of cloned embryos following scnt. our aim was to identify cell culture parameters that would serve as predictors of the developmental potential of a cell line in the initial stages of in vitro culture, for selecting and banking samples that would provide the best outcome as donor cells for scnt. in addition, to determine the feasibility of cell banking in a non-domestic species requiring specialized handling techniques the experiments were performed on an endangered cattle species, the gaur , using domestic cattle  as controls.

RESULTS
culture characteristics were examined for dart, punch and ear/skin samples established using expl and coll techniques. the time to primary confluence varied according to the sample collection technique used . small initial samples, as in dart, required > <dig> days to achieve confluence compared to larger samples, as in ear, which required only 5– <dig> days  and 11– <dig> days . in all cases, expl treatments required more time than coll to achieve confluence.

cultures were passaged routinely until they reached senescence and differences were observed in the number of pdl to senescence among the treatments . the cattle controls  and gaur ear produced long-lived cultures with > <dig> pdl. in these cases, no significant effect of cell dissociation technique was evident after long-term culture. both dart and punch produced short-lived cultures . in these cases, cell dissociation technique did have an effect, with coll cultures undergoing more pdl than expl cultures.

to examine phenotypic changes during serial cultivation, culture morphology was assessed. long-lived cultures  exhibited a typical trend from the tightly compact spindle-shaped cells in early culture  to a gradual enlarging of cells until the spread out, star-shaped phenotype of senescence was observed . in contrast, within the first few passages, short-lived cultures  displayed the phenotypic changes  characteristic of the late passage cells of long-lived cultures approaching senescence.

to examine changes in genomic stability during serial cultivation, chromosome content of the cultures was assessed. analysis of metaphase spreads at p- <dig> was not successful due to the low numbers of actively dividing cells in the late passage cultures. a decrease in the percentage of chromosomally normal cells was evident in all cultures during serial cultivation . abnormalities included primarily aneuploidy and polyploidy. the initial percent normal cells, final percent normal cells, and rate of change  varied between cultures, indicating differences due to both sample collection and cell dissociation techniques. long-lived cultures  showed a gradual decrease  in chromosomally normal cells from 82–90% normal down to 42–70% normal by passage  <dig> . short-lived cultures  initially consisted of a lower percentage of chromosomally normal cells and dropped dramatically  within the first few passages to <40% normal cells. in general, expl cultures resulted in a lower percentage of normal cells compared to coll cultures. the dart expl cell line failed to establish and was not analyzed beyond p- <dig>  which already consisted of only 42% normal cells.

slopes were obtained following linear regression analysis of the data in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  effects of sample collection and cell dissociation techniques on cc slopes, but not rtl slopes, were detected in the gaur cell cultures. cc = chromosome content; rtl = relative telomere length.

to examine the changes in telomere length during serial cultivation, relative telomere length of the cultures was assessed. a decrease in rtl was evident in all cultures during serial cultivation . definitive differences due to sample collection or cell dissociation techniques were not clearly evident, however some trends were observed. the initial and final rtls varied between cattle and gaur. with one exception, rtls of cattle cultures were greater than those of gaur cultures. more importantly, initial and final rtls of long-lived cultures were approximately twice that of short-lived cultures, with the exception of cattle ear expl and gaur ear expl which were both lower than other long-lived cultures. in most cases, the rate of telomere shortening  was similar . the dart expl cell line failed to establish and was not analyzed beyond the initial rtl at passage  <dig> 

chromosome stability was tested for dependence on the initial rtl, final rtl, and rtl rate of change to determine if a significant relationship exists. furthermore, differences between the animals, sample collection techniques and cell dissociation techniques were tested. the chromosome content rate of change was not found to be dependent on any one telomere length factor alone, but was highly dependent on both the initial rtl of the culture  and the rtl rate of change  together. inclusion of the animal, sample collection technique and cell dissociation technique class variables revealed that while cell dissociation technique was not significant, animal and sample collection technique were both significant  factors.

the effects of cell culture quality on the production of embryos by scnt were examined . only coll cultures were used as expl cultures from dart and punch samples did not produce enough cells for the scnt experiments. in the cattle controls, skin and ear gave similar results, with approximately 35% blastocyst development on day  <dig> of embryo culture. when near-senescent cattle cells  were used for scnt, significantly  lower development was observed, with <11% blastocyst development for both cultures. interestingly, when cells were trypsinized and prepared for scnt, morphological differences were evident between the early and late passage cells . early passage cell preparations consisted of small, spherical, smooth-membraned cells, with a small percentage of the cells appearing abnormal . in the late passage cell preparations, a higher proportion of cells displayed an abnormal appearance. blastocyst rates for gaur ear cells averaged  <dig> %. since the gaur embryos being produced were the result of interspecies scnt, gaur embryo development was expected to be lower than cattle. however, a comparison among the gaur cell lines used for scnt showed that the short-lived dart and punch cultures produced significantly  lower development and these cell preparations were similar in appearance to the late passage cell preparations .

a significant decrease in blastocyst development was observed in reconstructed embryos from short-lived and near-senescent cell lines. these data indicate that cell culture parameters influence embryo developmental competence following scnt. n = total number of reconstructed embryos  placed in culture. all cultures for scnt were prepared at p- <dig> to p- <dig> unless otherwise stated. a, b superscripts within columns denote a significant difference between treatments .

following the determination that chromosome stability was highly dependent on a combination of initial rtl and rtl rate of change, we examined the possibility that the blastocyst development rate of cell lines used for scnt was dependent on the chromosome stability of the donor cell line. indeed, chromosome content rate of change and sample collection technique were significant  factors in determining blastocyst development outcome.

discussion
this study demonstrated that the methods of tissue sample collection and cell culture initiation influence the viability, longevity and normality of cells grown in vitro, and their subsequent potential for embryo development following scnt. furthermore, chromosome stability was identified as a quantifiable parameter on which developmental potential of scnt embryos is highly dependent. the strong relationship between chromosome stability and somatic/embryonic cell viability makes this cell characteristic a valuable parameter for predicting scnt success, and provides a means by which cell culture conditions can be monitored and improved.

effects on culture characteristics
culture-specific factors exert significant effects on the proliferative lifespan of cell cultures, with seeding density being proportionately related to lifespan  <cit> . similarly, in our study differences resulting from the sample collection techniques showed that the initial sample size, that is, the number of cells potentially available to initiate the culture , had an effect on the amount of time necessary for achieving primary confluence and the number of pdl produced. rapidly dividing, long-lived cultures were only obtained from skin and ear samples collected post-mortem. in the smaller samples from biopsies obtained by dart or manual punch establishment of the cell lines was also affected by the cell dissociation technique. the longer time to primary confluence and the significantly reduced lifespans of the explanted cell lines may be the result of a smaller number of cells migrating out of the explants compared to those released by enzyme digestion. thus, these lower-density cultures may exhaust more of their replicative potential in the initial phase of culture. although small biopsies are routinely used in humans to produce cultures of > <dig> pdl  <cit> , the thickness and toughness of skin in large animals like cattle may be a factor for consideration when attempting to obtain the full thickness of the epidermal and dermal layers.

although an age discrepancy existed between the cattle and gaur samples as slaughterhouse animals are usually less than  <dig> years old, whereas the gaur was  <dig> years old, it did not have an effect on the observed results. gaur ear samples obtained primary confluence within the same time frame as cattle ear and, similarly, produced long-lived cell lines with  <dig> or more pdl. cristofalo et al.  <cit>  observed that although fetal and adult fibroblasts had different growth characteristics, no effect of donor age on replicative lifespan was evident. the data reported here were generated from samples obtained from one gaur individual due to the difficulty in obtaining both biopsy and post-mortem samples from this endangered species. however, similar outcomes were obtained from dart biopsies from  <dig> other gaur and from punch biopsy and ear from one other gaur .

a relationship between the amount of time to primary confluence and the number of pdl was observed, with cultures being successfully established only from cell preparations that achieved confluence within the standard time-frame for that technique . cultures requiring > <dig> days to form a confluent monolayer following enzyme digestion were indicative of cell lines that underwent replicative senescence prematurely. this shows that monitoring the initial phase of culture establishment provides important information for determining the reproductive capabilities of a cell line and deciding whether to proceed with the culture. bartels et al.  <cit>  banked cell cultures from african lions  whose mean time to confluence in  <dig> ml flasks following enzyme digestion was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  days. although no information is available on the viability of these cultures, our data suggest that these slow-growing cultures will not produce healthy, highly proliferative cell lines.

replicative senescence is accompanied by a change in the phenotype of the culture  <cit> . alterations in morphology are described as an increase in cell surface and volume  and a flattening of the cell, both evident by light microscopy. cell morphology was affected by the growth rate and lifespan of the culture and, therefore, influenced by the sample collection and cell dissociation techniques as described above. long-lived cultures exhibited a gradual change in morphology with increased passage number as observed in skin and ear samples collected post-mortem. major changes were only evident within the last  <dig> pdl. cultures that failed to establish successfully displayed the senescence phenotype initially or within the first few pdl. this overt change in morphology suggests that visual observation of a culture's phenotype can be an effective indicator of the replicative potential of a cell line.

senescent cells have been reportedly characterized by high levels of chromosome abnormalities  <cit> . increased proportions of aneuploid, polyploid and dicentric chromosomes have been documented with increasing passage number  <cit> . in one study the percentage of aneuploid cells ranged from  <dig> % to 100% in late passage cells  <cit> . our results similarly demonstrate that chromosome abnormalities become increasingly prevalent in cells approaching the end of their replicative lifespan. rapidly dividing, morphologically normal cells had a high percentage of chromosomally normal cells, in most cases >80% normal. after a prolonged time in culture, the number of chromosome abnormalities gradually increased, becoming more prevalent in late passage cells with up to 58% abnormal cells as the cultures approached senescence. however, in the poorly established cultures resulting from small initial samples a high percentage of chromosome abnormalities were observed initially or within  <dig> pdl. consequently, short-lived cultures were characterized by a low number of chromosomally normal cells in the primary culture  or by a rapid decline in chromosomally normal cells within the first 5– <dig> passages . decreased seeding density may play a role in hastening senescence as the numerous cell divisions required for primary confluence may result in first passage cells being at a later stage of replicative potential. other studies have shown that cultures with initially high levels of chromosomally abnormal cells  had almost 100% abnormal metaphase spreads within  <dig>  <cit>  and  <dig> passages  <cit> . since it is highly unlikely for the donor to have high levels of chromosomally abnormal cells with a range of aneuploidies, evidence of this in early passages, suggests a problem with the collection and/or culture method. changes in chromosome content occurred in all cultures over time and the data indicate that sample collection and cell dissociation techniques have some effect on both the initial level of chromosome abnormalities and the rate of decline of chromosomally normal cells. these observations along with evidence from previous studies suggest that the chromosome content of a cell culture is directly related to its quality and longevity.

schwartz et al.  <cit>  had shown that chromosome instability was caused by telomere shortening. the "sticky" ends of shortened telomeres predispose the chromosomes to fusions and translocations known as telomeric associations  <cit> , one of the major types of anomalies in chromosomally abnormal cells approaching senescence  <cit> . as critically short telomeres trigger the irreversible cell cycle arrest that typifies replicative senescence, allsopp et al.  <cit>  proposed that telomere length is a good indicator of the in vitro lifespan of cells. our data confirm that telomere erosion occurs during serial cultivation of cells. however, a correlation between initial telomere length, its rate of decline and the type of culture established  was not clearly evident. consequently, sample collection and cell dissociation techniques did not appear to have a major effect on telomere length. although rtl alone was not indicative of the culture's replicative capabilities, it would appear that further information could be gained if the rate of shortening of telomere length during serial cultivation was assessed as well. this was supported by the fact that modeling chromosome stability against telomere length showed that chromosome stability was not dependent on any one telomere length factor alone but that it was highly dependent on both initial relative telomere length and its rate of change. these observations concur with previous findings where a direct relationship was noted between chromosome instability, telomere length and proliferative lifespan  <cit> . assessing both chromosome and telomere dynamics of cultures would provide the necessary predictive parameters on the long-term in vitro capabilities of a cell culture.

effects on embryo production by scnt
the genetic make-up of the donor cell is a crucial component for the success of novel embryo technologies such as scnt. embryo development is dependent upon proper reprogramming of the donor genome so that embryonic genes are appropriately expressed. a normal chromosome complement is an important prerequisite for proper gene expression to occur in the early cleavage stage embryo. it has been documented that chromosome abnormalities are detrimental to continued embryo development and are the major source of early embryonic loss  <cit> . in cattle, poor quality embryos have been shown to have higher numbers of chromosomally abnormal cells  <cit>  and aneuploidy combined with increased levels of dna fragmentation, suggestive of apoptosis, were associated with slow growing human embryos  <cit> . schwartz et al.  <cit>  had stated that chromosome instability in cells grown in vitro leads to cell cycle arrest, which triggers apoptosis, and that these chromosome abnormalities arise as a result of shortened telomere lengths. thus, it naturally follows that shortened telomere lengths would also result in poor quality embryos. several studies have shown that decreased telomere lengths in gametes cause a higher incidence of cytoplasmic fragmentation, which contributes to apoptosis and abnormal cleavage in early embryos  <cit> . our data indicate that the characteristics of the donor cell cultures were directly related to the developmental potential of scnt embryos. since only cells obtained by collagenase digestion were used for scnt, the effect of cell dissociation technique could not be tested. however, sample collection technique significantly affected embryo development to the blastocyst stage. donor cells taken from passages  <dig> to  <dig> of long-lived cultures produced adequate blastocyst rates of approximately 35% and 12% for cattle and gaur, respectively. these rates are comparable to those produced by cattle and gaur scnt in other studies  <cit> , and we have demonstrated that the decreased blastocyst yield following gaur scnt was due to the use of interspecies scnt in which an exotic cattle donor nucleus  is directing the domestic cattle recipient cytoplasm   <cit> . in this case, although the two species are closely related, sufficient differences exist between cattle and gaur at the genetic and molecular level to account for differences in embryo growth dynamics  <cit> .

in the present study, cattle donor cells approaching replicative senescence  used for scnt produced significantly lower blastocyst development. similar results were reported by lanza et al.  <cit>  who noted only 5% blastocyst development following scnt using bovine fibroblasts passaged to greater than 95% of their lifespan and showing morphological signs consistent with senescence. at passage  <dig>  the cattle donor cells in this study exhibited changes in morphology indicative of the impending growth arrest, an increase in chromosome abnormalities and a decrease in telomere length. the use of gaur donor cells from short-lived cultures obtained by dart and manual punch biopsies for scnt also produced significantly lower blastocyst development compared to the long-lived culture from the gaur ear sample. these donor cells had similar characteristics to the cattle passage  <dig> cells, with morphological changes and increased chromosome abnormalities. a direct correlation can be made between the alterations in cell characteristics and poor embryo development. statistical analysis of our data indicated that blastocyst development rates of cell cultures used for scnt were dependent on sample collection techniques and chromosome stability of the donor cell line. studies by slimane bureau et al.  <cit>  and giraldo et al.  <cit>  have demonstrated that the frequency of chromosome abnormalities in the donor cell line corresponds to the frequency of chromosome abnormalities in the scnt embryos produced. thus, a high percentage of chromosome abnormalities  <cit>  or decreased telomere lengths  <cit>  in the blastomeres of scnt embryos, may result in increased levels of apoptosis or cell cycle arrest, which may be a contributing factor to their early demise.

CONCLUSIONS
a dramatic increase in the loss of natural habitats, high rates of inbreeding, and reduced reproductive performance in both wild and domestic animals have created the necessity for genome resource banking of valuable individuals, breeds or species as a whole. tissue samples for the establishment of cell lines are being collected, the cells grown in vitro and cryopreserved using numerous sample collection and culture establishment techniques. although viable for use in molecular studies, these samples may prove to be inadequate for use with technologies such as scnt. this study was performed to gain a better understanding of the effects of culture initiation techniques on culture characteristics and the subsequent developmental potential of scnt embryos. furthermore, we hoped to establish markers of cell viability to assist with the selection of good quality cell lines for scnt. we have shown that sample collection and cell dissociation techniques influence the in vitro growth characteristics and lifespan, morphology, chromosome content and telomere dynamics of cell lines. the relationship between the parameters examined here and the replicative lifespan of cells in vitro, most importantly, time to primary confluence, cell morphology and chromosome content, demonstrate that various markers can be assessed in the initial phases of culture to evaluate the proliferative potential of a cell line. the significant correlation between chromosome stability and scnt embryo development provides the researcher with a means for assessing the developmental potential of a donor cell line and thereby allowing the selection of a culture establishment protocol that produces the most genetically stable cultures. this study provides evidence that the implementation of standardized techniques for the preparation and assessment of cell lines is vital to the success of genome banking. using proper selection criteria, cell lines with the potential for successful development can be considered for further study and banking.

