BACKGROUND
the pacific oyster crassostrea gigas, is one of the world's most economically important bivalves   <cit> . it is also one of the best characterized models for biochemical, molecular and genetics studies among the lophotrochozoa. crassostrea gigas, and other oyster species, play an important role in estuarine and marine coastal habitats, where increasing human activity is causing environmental degradation  <cit> . in these ecosystems, pacific oysters suffer summer mortalities due to increased stresses and disease outbreaks  <cit> . at the other extreme, c. gigas can become invasive in new habitats   <cit> . the scientific rationale of obtaining a wide variety of sequences and developing genomic tools for c. gigas is to take advantage of its membership of the lophotrochozoa, an understudied clade of bilateria. its study will contribute to knowledge in the fields of functional, comparative and evolutionary genomics by throwing new light on genome function and diversity  <cit> , the evolution of sexuality  <cit>  or immunity  <cit> . in the context of environmental genomics, oysters might also prove to be an attractive model organism for understanding population responses to environmental stresses and adaptation through genetic change, as well as for deciphering the physiological bases of complex traits   <cit> .

in july  <dig>   <dig>  est sequences were compiled in the publicly accessible gigasdatabase version  <dig> housed at sigenae   <cit> . this genomic resource allows the development of genome wide microarrays for screening physiological traits and responses to the environment. dna microarray technology is a high-throughput method for measuring the expression levels of thousands of genes simultaneously. this approach has been applied extensively to establish gene expression patterns in many organisms, including yeast, worm, human, fruit fly and rice  <cit> . investigators have already analyzed gene expression in crassostrea virginica and crassostrea gigas using cdna microarrays constructed from  <dig>   <cit>  and  <dig>   <cit>  genes. these microarrays were used to describe gene expression patterns in response to heat stress  <cit>  and hypoxia  <cit> , and to compare oysters that were resistant or susceptible to summer mortalities  <cit> . since these studies were done, a large database of ests has become available, providing the information necessary to design a more comprehensive microarray suitable for characterizing genome-wide transcriptome profiles in crassostrea gigas.

here, for the first time, we describe the design of an oligo-microarray covering a total of  <dig>  contig sequences, and its application to monitoring gene expression profiles in multiple tissues of adult oysters. in addition to the first obvious advantage offered by this new microarray, which is the significant increase in the number of contigs per array, this agilent oligonucleotide microarray uses shorter probes , resulting in higher density arrays and cheaper manufacture. in addition, with respect to cdna arrays, oligonucleotide microarrays are reported to provide higher sensitivity and reproducibility  <cit> . this work aims to survey variation in gene expression across multiple oyster tissue types, to provide experimental evidence for gene function assignments, and to identify gene clusters related to tissue-specific processes. knowledge of tissue-specific expression is a prerequisite to any studies of organism development, normal functioning and response to injury and disease. furthermore, the comparison of significantly different transcriptomes allowed the identification of genes with stable expression across tissues. quantification of gene expression has become a crucial step to investigating any molecular mechanism or physiological process in oysters. however, the quality of normalized quantitative rt-pcr data is dependent on the accuracy of the normalizer itself. to avoid misinterpretation of the differential expression profile of a target gene, it is therefore necessary to identify reliable reference genes and test their stable expression across the different experimental conditions tested. because microarray screening simultaneously unravels the expression of a huge number of genes, it offers the opportunity to discover genes with transcriptional stability that can serve as pertinent internal reference standards for future quantitative rt-pcr studies on oysters.

the present genome-wide analysis of gene expression in c. gigas tissues does not only establish lists of genes expressed in the surveyed tissues, but also provides evidence for the level of expression of these genes in different tissues. importantly, this approach may provide clues for elucidating the functions of genes underlying specific processes and identify candidate genes predicted to regulate traits of interest. this argument is particularly relevant for the unannotated ests, for which such a survey can provide clues to resolving the orphan status.

RESULTS
robustness of c. gigas microarray data
we designed a microarray using  <dig>  oligonucleotide 60-mer probes representing the presently known genes in the pacific oyster crassostrea gigas . of the  <dig>  probes printed onto the array,  <dig>   corresponded to annotated contigs in the gigasdatabase. this microarray is intended for use in studies of oyster transcriptomes at the whole-genome level. in our study, the microarray was used to analyze the transcriptome of  <dig> tissues using one-channel hybridization . the custom microarray design and the raw and normalized data is available from the gene expression omnibus .

the homogeneous hybridization of the arrays was first estimated by comparing the expression profiles of duplicated probes. thirty-four probe pairs were printed onto the arrays . expression values were highly reproducible with a mean r <dig> of  <dig> % . an r <dig> of  <dig> % was obtained by removing data points with expression values below background levels.

next, to estimate the robustness of the microarray data, we compared the expression data obtained from different probes with identical annotation. indeed, the oyster transcriptome is currently not completely sequenced and assembled and, therefore, some non full-length mrnas are represented by numerous oligonucleotide probes printed on the array. this redundancy was used to confirm inter- and intra-array reproducibility. the consistency of the expression profiles obtained from different probes expected to come from the same mrna confirmed the reproducibility of the data. for instance, among the  <dig> contigs originally annotated as similar to the myosin heavy chain of striated muscle from aequipecten irradians   ,  <dig> showed extremely similar expression profiles  . the two contigs with different expression profiles showed very low gene expression values, close to or below background level, suggesting a low probe efficiency or a low expression in the different tissues. the most recent assembly of the c. gigas sequences  constituted three contigs and one singleton from these  <dig> contigs . two contigs  encode two different myosin heavy chain isoforms . contig cu <dig> and singleton am <dig> encode two different isoforms of catchin transcript . catchin is a protein present in molluscan catch muscles, which is produced by alternative splicing of myosin heavy chain  <cit> . in our dataset, myosin heavy chain and catchin present very similar expression profiles across tissues and a higher expression in catch muscle .

such strong profile consistency was frequently observed in our dataset such as the  <dig> sequences that matched the uncharacterized protein zk <dig>   . thus, our microarray data may prove useful in providing additional clues suggesting which contigs could constitute a single gene. the genes represented by multiple contigs can also be used to assess the reproducibility of the data and the homogeneity of the hybridization in future analysis. in additional file  <dig> we provide a list of  <dig> putative genes significantly differentially expressed among tissues  and represented by  <dig> to  <dig> probes on the array. over all contig pairs, we obtained a strong correlation of expression profiles .

quantitative rt-pcr was performed for four selected candidate reference genes and six tissue-enriched genes . the patterns of transcript abundance detected for these genes in the array and in quantitative rt-pcr showed extremely similar profiles  . the correlation increased to 93% when we removed the hemocyte-enriched gene , which presented the lowest measured correlation between microarray and quantitative rt-pcr data . quantitative rt-pcr is commonly used as a validation tool for confirming gene expression results obtained from microarray analysis; however, microarray and quantitative rt-pcr data often disagree  <cit> . using multiple probes corresponding to the same contig and comparing their resulting expression profiles may thus be a more accurate way of individually assessing microarray results and oligonucleotide specificity. a strong correlation between multiple probes corresponding to the same gene, as obtained in the present work, reflects high microarray quality.

prevalent gene expression patterns
we applied principal component analysis  to the whole dataset. the pca of all genes in the surveyed tissues showed that datasets acquired from the same tissue type grouped together, indicating that there is a strong homogeneity in the gene expression pattern in each tissue type . furthermore, tissues with similar functions had a lower scattering, as observed for the transcriptomes of gills and labial palps. indeed, gills and labial palps are two pallial organs, both secreting mucus and possessing similar structures involved in particle selection, which is an essential part of bivalve filter-feeding.

it was not possible to extract a sufficient amount of total rna for microarray hybridization from a single visceral ganglion or from hemolymph of a single individual. therefore, we randomly pooled samples from  <dig> individuals. pooling results in biological averaging for most genes. consequently, the variation among samples in these two tissue categories is much lower than the variation among individuals for other tissues . however, kendziorski et al.  <cit>  demonstated that the construction of a large number of pools enables the biological variation to be properly assessed and comparative studies to be made.

to further explore relationships among tissue samples, we performed a hierarchical clustering analysis on all the genes printed on the array. the results were extremely similar to those of the pca analysis . gonads grouped together on a single branch, separated from all other tissues with 100% bootstrap support, demonstrating that the transcriptome of gonads  is significantly different from the transcriptome of somatic tissues. hierarchical clustering then further separated individual gonad samples according to their gender. the data also showed that the digestive gland and adductor muscle clearly had different transcriptomes, with 100% bootstrap support. mantle tissue clustered apart from visceral ganglion and hemocyte samples with 60% bootstrap support. however, the hierarchical cluster analysis could not differentiate between labial palps and gills. interestingly, labial palps and gills from the same individual always clustered together  on the hierarchical clustering tree, once again demonstrating the strong similarities between these two tissues . further analysis revealed that these organs co-expressed genes in relation with their common biological functions .

tissue-enriched gene expression
in the absence of a functional assay, tissue-specific gene expression features have often been viewed as indicators of tissue-specific function. in order to identify genes with differential tissue-enriched expression patterns, we initially performed a one-way anova with a p-value threshold <  <dig> , adjusted with bonferroni's correction. a total of  <dig>  contigs were differentially expressed between tissues . these differentially expressed contigs were further filtered to determine whether they were overexpressed in a particular tissue. we required that the mean of the log <dig> normalized expression level of the replicates in a given tissue was at least  <dig>  fold higher than the means in each of the other tissues . a  <dig>  fold increase of log <dig> values is equivalent to a  <dig>  fold increase of the raw data. by this process, tissue-enriched contigs were identified for all tissues analyzed .

the number of tissue-enriched contigs varied substantially, ranging from  <dig> contigs in labial palps to  <dig> in the digestive gland. the number of tissue-enriched contigs and the proportion of contigs annotated in the gigasdatabase are shown in table  <dig>  figure 3b shows the heat map of the tissue-enriched contigs, and the complete list with their descriptions are given in additional file  <dig>  the highest percentage of contigs with annotation was obtained for genes specifically expressed in the digestive gland . this is almost certainly because digestive processes are ancient and highly conserved. in digestive glands, many enzymes are widely distributed and conserved over a large range of species. for example, alpha-amylase, a key carbohydrase enzyme for starch digestion has been characterized from bacteria, fungi, plants and animals  <cit>  and high sequence identity was observed for the domains responsible for its enzymatic activity  <cit> . it is also possible that there were qualitative differences in the original sequencing of mrnas from the different tissues, which would result in poor blast matches. the constant updating of gigasdatabase will allow improvement of the sequence descriptions.

the annotated tissue-enriched contigs showed a strong relationship with the physiological functions of the corresponding tissues . for example, numerous genes involved in digestion were highly expressed in the digestive gland , whereas genes involved in tissue growth and development of hard tissues were highly expressed in the mantle . similarly, the visceral ganglia expressed numerous genes related to its function in the regulation of neurotransmitter release and hormone secretion . interestingly, in addition to well-characterized neuropeptide encoding genes , some of the non-annotated ganglia-specific contigs were found to encode the precursors of putative novel neuropeptides  that the blast tool did not identify, probably due to limited sequence conservation between peptides or their precursors  <cit> . these putative novel neuropeptides displayed the conventional dibasic  cleavage sites for prohormone convertases and potentially downstream gkr sequencing serving as combined amidation and proteolytic signals.

the annotation of a high proportion of the genes printed onto this array facilitates the exploration of specific biological processes and the identification of genes potentially involved in the same pathways. for example, of the genes specifically expressed in the visceral ganglia, we found that neuropeptide y  and insulin  clustered closely . npy and insulin are involved in the processes of the food intake regulation, allocation of energy to growth, reproduction and basal metabolism in both vertebrates and invertebrates  <cit> . such regulatory molecules deserve particular attention, especially in the context of the summer mortality syndrome in which reproductive effort plays a crucial role through its effects on the capacity of oysters to survive  <cit> . overall, genes without significant annotation were specifically attributed to a tissue based on their expression pattern, which can provide valuable help towards the assignment of gene function. indeed, even if gene function is primarily assessed on the basis of altered phenotypes associated with gene disruption, knowledge of spatio-temporal expression patterns of a given gene represents valuable information for assigning a putative function.

some functional clusters also showed similarities between tissues, such as male and female gonads, both of which expressed significantly higher levels of  <dig> genes than all other tissues, or labial palps and gills, which showed significantly higher expression of a common set of  <dig> genes. hemocytes and visceral ganglia shared  <dig> overexpressed genes . the complete list of dual tissue-enriched contigs and their descriptions are provided in additional file  <dig>  as expected, male and female gonads showed the highest expression levels of all cell cycle, mitosis and meiosis regulation genes, including cell cycle checkpoint , control of replication  and dna repair genes . gills and labial palps, the main feeding organs of oysters, expressed  <dig> genes potentially involved in epithelia morphogenesis , cilia movement  and in detoxification and defense mechanisms . the visceral ganglia and hemocytes mainly shared a high expression in topoisomerase i , two g protein-coupled receptors  whose vertebrate orthologues bind neuropeptides mediating blood pressure regulation and stress response  <cit> , and a set of defense-related genes  whose expression in the central nervous system suggests a concerted activity with hemocytes in defense and stress response  <cit> .

reference genes
the term "housekeeping gene" is generally applied to genes ubiquitously expressed at the same level in all tissues. these constitute the basal transcriptome for the maintenance of basic cellular functions. their uniform expression means they can be used as reference genes for quantitative rt-pcr  <cit> . thus, we investigated the stability of gene expression levels to identify appropriate reference genes. to allow for comparisons of means and standard deviations, logarithmic normalized data were centered on their mean . a candidate reference gene was defined as a gene that was not differentially expressed when tested by anova  and which had a coefficient of variation  of < 5%, a maximum fold change  of <  <dig> , and a mean expression level higher than the average expression on the array, i.e., >  <dig>  one hundred and twenty-five unique genes were selected as reference candidate genes and ranked in order of increasing cvarray . among these, the  <dig> annotated reference gene candidates are shown in table  <dig> 

cv indicates the coefficient of variation and equals the standard deviation divided by the mean. mfc indicates the maximum fold change, i.e., the ratio of the maximum and minimum values observed within the dataset.

remarkably, none of the  <dig> most commonly used reference genes in oyster  ranked within the top  <dig> identified candidate reference genes. actin and g3apdh had p-values <  <dig>  when tested by anova and were not ranked . ef1α did not show any significant variation when tested by anova but, similarly to actin and g3apdh, it had an mfc >  <dig> . even if the mfc had not been taken into account, ef1α would still have ranked only 256st among the candidate genes .

cv indicates the coefficient of variation and equals the standard deviation divided by the mean. mfc indicates the maximum fold change, i.e., the ratio of the maximum and minimum values observed within the dataset.

to demonstrate the importance of identifying appropriate reference genes, we designed primers for four of the  <dig> top-ranked novel reference genes  and compared their mrna levels estimated by quantitative rt-pcr with those of the three commonly used reference genes  in all tissue samples. to normalize data across samples, the mean of ct values across all genes was calculated for each sample. the log values  were then compared for each gene. box plots showing the minimum, maximum and mean value of ct and log value  for each gene are shown in figure 4a and 4b. in both datasets, hkg <dig>  annotated as an adp-ribosylation factor  <dig>  in gigasdatabase, and g3apdh were the most stable genes, with coefficients of variation  of  <dig>  for hkg <dig> and  <dig>  for g3apdh. they also had the lowest cvs among all genes tested . applied to the raw data, normfinder identified g3apdh as the best reference gene over the ensemble of the tissues, whereas it identified hkg <dig> as the best reference gene when considering normalized data. using genorm analysis on non-normalized expression levels, we determined the gene-stability expression measures  for the seven candidate reference genes. again, hkg <dig> and g3apdh were the most stable reference genes, with an average expression stability value of  <dig>  . arf <dig> has also been identified as a housekeeping gene in humans  <cit> . adp-ribosylation factors are highly conserved  <dig> kda gtpases involved in vesicular trafficking in all eukaryotes  <cit> . glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  is one of the most commonly used housekeeping genes for comparisons of gene expression data, though variability of gapdh expression between human tissue types was recently shown  <cit> . in c. gigas, g3apdh was found to be significantly more expressed in the adductor muscle  and should, thus, be avoided when studying gene expression across different tissues. however, its expression appeared stable within tissues suggesting that it may be suitable for other experimental designs. we therefore identified adp ribosylation factor  <dig>  as being a more relevant reference gene for use in normalization of real time pcr for tissue-expression studies than those typically used. in addition, the list of the  <dig> potential reference genes will clearly help in the choice of references genes in further gene expression studies, but we still emphasize the need to experimentally validate reference genes for specific experimental designs  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
research on gene function and oyster physiology using real time pcr and microarray is becoming increasingly important and widespread. because of their economic importance, evolutionary position and use as a model organism in environmental genomics, more research is now being conducted on oyster species. a large est project lead by french and us teams generated a genome-wide est database, gigasdatabase, that is now freely available and housed on the sigenae website. in the present study, the gigasdatabase was used to generate oligo-microarrays, providing the genomic tools necessary to undertake high-throughput studies of significantly important phenomena, such as summer mortalities in bivalves, host-pathogen interactions, reproduction and the effect of polyploidy on physiology of pacific oysters. however, in order to make sense of gene expression data, we developed a  <dig> k microarray containing all known available contigs of c. gigas, thus aiming to represent the whole transcriptome. this study fulfilled  <dig> main goals.  it designed and presented a genome-wide oyster microarray that can now be employed in different gene expression studies in pacific oysters . the microarray is publicly available, following a request to the agilent company and an authorization given by our team to share and use the oyster design.  it described the basic transcriptome of nine different tissues, providing important information for gene annotation and function prediction for genome sequencing.  it identified a large array of genes that can be used as reference genes to normalize gene expression data.

