BACKGROUND
african swine fever , a highly contagious fatal acute haemorrhagic viral disease of pigs results in major economic losses and has substantial food security implications. the disease continues to devastate animal resources  in parts of sub-saharan africa and other infected regions of the world  <cit> . though studies are on-going with regards to the preventative actions and immunology of asf virus , to date, little success has been made with regards to the development of preventive vaccine targeting the asf virus or an effective treatment  <cit> . this is due to the complex nature of the virus, the acute fatality associated with it and the lack of deep understanding of the immune response in asf infection  <cit> .

currently, in the event of an outbreak and its possible spread within pig herds, the standard practice remains the zoning, culling of the herd  and payment of compensation to prevent epizootics  <cit> , however, in most african countries, the lack of subsidies for animal agriculture and poor implementation of compensation policy has negatively impacted prompt reporting and weakened transboundary animal disease control. alternative and complementary therapies have instead been explored by resource-poor small-scale pig farmers in west africa, in an attempt to save their stock in an outbreak situation. this has included unorthodox methods, including the use of plants and other ethnoveterinary preparations, with widely ranging claims of effectiveness.

medicinal plants have been used as remedies for centuries and numerous ethnoveterinary assessments of nigerian/west african plants have been undertaken to evaluate their effectiveness  <cit> . the potency of plant products used as antiviral agents are well-described  <cit> , and many plants have been used by farmers to ‘manage’ asf. however, there are limited peer-reviewed records of plants in general, and none specifically from west africa with evaluated activity against the asf virus  <cit> . one such plant fed to pigs has had unconfirmed reports of reducing morbidity and mortality is ancistrocladus uncinatus; and there have even been claims of complete freedom from illness following oral administration of ancistrocladus uncinatus preparations. this liana plant species was previously described by hutch and dalziel in south-eastern nigeria as reported by cheek  <cit>  and a related plant has recently been described by thomas and gereau  <cit> . while the geographical extent of a. uncinatus has been broadly described, a. korupensis is specifically found in the tropical swamp of the korup national park in cameroun and adjoining cross river national park in nigeria. it has a low population density, with approximately  <dig> plants per hectare  <cit> .

anti-malarial and anti-hiv properties of the ancistrocladus liana plant have been reported  <cit> . in particular, certain naphthylisoquinoline alkaloids  activated or not. the tk activated antivirals are categorised as purine analogues  or pyrimidine analogue . the non-tk activated antivirals include the foscarnet and others. in addition, there are other antivirals that are not classified in this group including the tromantadine, docosanol and early protein affecting drug like fomivirsen  <cit> .

• viral assembly disruption for example rifampicin or by inhibiting mrna and protein synthesis, e.g. methisazone  <cit> .

• nucleoside analogue , nucleotide analogues , nucleic acid inhibitors , interferon-cytokine stimulation  or with unknown effect   <cit> .

specifically, with regards to the asfv, certain antivirals have been assessed against the virus including chloroquine, which produced a time-dependent, fully-reversible inhibition of both cytopathic effects and the production of african swine fever virus  in vero cells, but does not have any direct effect on the virus nor on viral adsorption and internalization  <cit> . cholesterol reducing/removing drugs like nystatin and methyl-β-cyclodextrin have been proved to affect asfv fusion and subsequent replication since cholesterol in the target membrane is needed for these functions to be completed  <cit> . these drugs directly impact on asfv entry and infection of cells.

other drugs include fluoroquinones a group of drugs that has severely reduced the cytopathic effect of asfv infected vero cells from early phase of infection and prevented the detection of asfv genome 7-days post treatment. the drug also caused altered viral protein possibly because of the putative asfv-topoisomerase ii enzyme which was targeted and had its activity modified  <cit> . lauryl gallate has been tested and confirmed to strongly inhibit african swine fever virus at non-toxic concentration. asfv production in vero cells was completely prevented by the addition of the drug 1 hour before virus adsorption; however in cells that were 5–8 hours post infection, the drug had no effect. this same drug has been shown to prevent both cellular and viral dna synthesis and viral transcription amongst other effect  <cit> .

a dose-dependent viral-inhibition of african swine fever virus has been reported in in-vitro assessment of aqueous extracts of pophyridium cruentum, chlorella autotrophica and ellipsoidon sp. possibly due to sulphated polysaccharides  <cit> ; and both resveratrol and oxyresveratrol also worked in dose-dependent manners in an in-vitro experiment causing a 98-100% reduction in virus multiplication and viral titres; and inhibited viral dna replication. though early viral protein synthesis was observed in this experiment, late viral protein synthesis and viral factory formation were blocked  <cit> .

in addition, valproic acid has been reported to cause a significant reduction in the yield of asfv and other enveloped viruses possibly through its effect on viral maturation and envelope formation in enveloped viruses  <cit>  and other such drugs that have been tested against asfv include but not limited to chlorpromazine, dynamin, clathrin and cholera toxin  <cit> .

in this study, we used a molecular biology approach to evaluate the antiviral potentials of the plant a. uncinatus in an in-vitro model of infection. primary bone marrow cells were infected with asfv, treated with crude extracts and fractions of a. uncinatus and their effect on the virus were evaluated by real-time and conventional pcr.

RESULTS
phytochemical screening of leaves, stem and roots of ancistrocladus uncinatus
leaf, root and stem portions of the pulverised plant revealed the presence of alkaloids, cardiac glycosides and steroids; saponins and flavonoids were only recovered from the leaves while tannins were recovered from the stem . none of the plant portion contained anthraquinones.

determination of chemical compounds from a. uncinatus
the chemical compounds present in the different portions of the plants identified by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry  are summarised in table  <dig>  a total of  <dig> chemical compounds were identified with n-formylkorupensamin b being the most abundant in the plant but concentrated more in the stem and leaves. certain compounds or their derivatives were present in all parts of the plant while other compounds were recovered only from certain parts of the plant .

*source of chemical compound as determined by gas chromatograph-mass spectrometry. s = stem, l = leaves and r = combination of residual leaves, stem and root. a total of  <dig> compound and its derivatives were clearly isolated from the a. uncinatus stem, leaves and root.

see additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for details of the identified compounds.

phytochemical constituents expressed on silica gel
thin-layer-chromatography of fractions of acetone extracts in ethyl acetate-methanol–water , benzene-ethanol-ammonia , and chloroform-ethyl acetate-formic acid  revealed that several active principles exist in a. uncinatus and that these were best expressed using bea followed by cef and then emw. it appears that the dominant principles in the plant were non-polar/basic compounds but other chemicals with varying polarities were also observed. the retention factors  of the  <dig> clearly identified compounds in bea were:  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig>  and  <dig>  .

cell viability and cytotoxicity assays
pbmc were confirmed viable since the cell culture media gradually used up the phenol red in the medium and changed the colour from orange to pale yellow over a period of 7 days. the plates inoculated with asf nig/ <dig> virus showed distinct rosette formations around the macrophages, an indication that the macrophages were infected and haemadsorped with the pig red blood cells in the medium. there was no visible reduction in cell population when compared with cells inoculated for diagnostic purposes and no rosette formations were visible in the plates inoculated with placebo . complete or partial cpe was observed with concentrations of extract ≥5 mg/ml and for the pure extract diluent , however a 1: <dig> dilution of the diluent was non cytotoxic to the pbmc; there was no apparent reduction in the macrophages population and rosette formations developed normally compared to the cells without the diluent .

antiviral assay of extract of a. uncinatus and its fractions on african swine fever virus
cells in the pbmc grew normally until approximately 96 hours post-infection following which some reductions in rosette formations were observed. however, after 120 hours, marked reduction in the population of macrophages and cpe were observed indicating cell deaths. cell culture plates were read approximately 108–109 hours post-treatment. noticeable reductions in the quantity of rosette formations were observed in wells treated with acetone, dichloromethane and methanol extracts and also in wells treated with hexane, methanol and ethyl acetate fractions of acetone extract . hexane and chloroform extracts and chloroform fraction of acetone extract showed minimal reduction in the number of rosettes observed and counted, indicating weak activities against asfv . the ic <dig> of the acetone extract was determined to be 17 μg.

+++ = ≥ <dig> rosettes were observed and counted in the well; ++ = 10– <dig> rosettes were observed and counted; + = ≤ <dig> rosettes were observed and counted. - = no rosette was observed. c = crude extract and f = fraction of extract. n.b. rosette formation is an indication of virus infection of the macrophage cells in the pbmc medium.

conventional pcr and real-time pcr  assays
the pcr results confirmed the observed reduction in rosette formation associated with reduced activities of asfv in-vitro in the presence of a. uncinatus extracts or fractions. it will appear that acetone, dichloromethane, methanol extracts and hexane, methanol and ethyl acetate fractions of acetone extract were effective against the asfv as no 478 bp product was observed . however, hexane extract and chloroform fraction displayed partial activities while chloroform extract showed no activity against asfv. the ficus lutea plant control showed no activity against asfv . both the positive and negative controls passed the internal quality control test required to accept the results .

no detectable level of asf viral genome was observed and quantitated from the qpcr since the fluorescent measurement was not above the background signal for any of the tested samples and no sigmoid-shaped curve was observed.

re-infectivity assay of extract of a. uncinatus
none of the cultures containing plant extracts  and its fractions  showed rosette formation  <dig> and 120 hours post-inoculation indicating the lack of infectious virus in the inoculum. however, the positive control wells  displayed characteristic growth patterns and rosette formations that were comparable to the expected standards. no growth was observed in the negative controls . observed cytotoxicity was also similar to what was previously reported in the cytotoxicity assay.

discussion
certain important plant metabolites were found in abundance in the analysed plant including the cardiac glycosides, alkaloids and steroids. cardiac glycoside has been employed in the treatment of congestive heart failure and cardiac arrhythmia. the asf virus affects many visceral organs including the heart and it has been suggested previously that death following infection like asfv may be due to heart failure  <cit> . it is possible that this plant positively influences cardiac outputs by increasing the force of contraction through its effect on the sodium-potassium pumps in the cell membrane  <cit> . in addition, alkaloids and steroids from this plant may have various pharmacological effects and may minimize the effect of the virus on the pig cells during in-vivo infection. additional research is required to determine the particular metabolites or combinations of metabolites that are responsible for the therapeutic claims ascribed to this plant by the farmers. galindo and colleagues  <cit>  and fabregas et al.,  <cit>  has confirmed that chemical compounds from natural plants performed as effectively as those from synthetic sources.

gas chromatography has been known to separate large numbers of compounds in a single analysis and in combination with mass spectrometry  usually results in a highly selective and sensitive method of chemical compound analysis in plants  <cit> . in this analysis, we used the method of gc-ms to identify at least  <dig> compounds from the plant a. uncinatus. these compounds are consistent with those presented in previous reports  <cit> . the range of activities of these compounds extends from anti-tumour, febrifugal, virucidal, anti-insulin, antibacterial, prostate treatment, vaccine constituents to anti-hypercholesterolemic  <cit> .

while activities of this plant against hiv and certain other human viruses have been evaluated  <cit> , this is the first report of its use against animal viruses specifically. though, the particular compound or interaction of compounds that was responsible for this anti-asf activity in the crude extracts and fractions used in this study are not yet known, the in-vitro results support the claim made by farmers of effectiveness of this plant in the management of asfv. based on the re-infectivity assay, some extracts and certain fractions of the plant have good virucidal activities which can be positively explored further. the cell culture system results were further supported by conventional pcr and qpcr. further testing of each identified compound for individual and combined ranges of biological activity against asfv is imperative.

it will also be important to carefully examine the cause of cytotoxicity in this plant and devise ways of eliminating or reducing this effect in view of the substantial therapeutic potential of this plant. though the extracts and fractions significantly reduced asfv titres, they also did significant damage and caused major reduction in pbmc populations in the culture. laird and lisinge  <cit>  and laird  <cit>  have previously reported on the toxicity associated with the a korupensis and this effect appeared to be cumulative in this study using a. uncinatus. similar report has been associated with increasing dose of other drugs tested against the virus  <cit> . the antiviral activities of this plant are comparable to those of lauryl gallate and mulberry twigs which caused significantly reduced viral titres and inhibition of viral dna replication at non-toxic doses  <cit> .

it is possible that there is continuous intra-cytoplasmic absorption of a. uncinatus by the pbmc and the post-96 hour levels of absorption were incompatible with the survival of the macrophages due to this increasing toxicity  <cit> . thus, since the toxic dose level appears to be quite close to the anticipated effective antiviral dose against asfv, the plant likely has a narrow therapeutic index in the field. it is possible that some of the pigs that initially recovered following treatment with a. uncinatus but later died may have succumbed to the toxic effect of the plant. while this plant holds potential for the treatment of certain viral infections in pigs, including asf, its cytotoxicity remains a concern that will require extensive in-vivo assessment of acute and chronic toxicity in live animals in order to validate the effectiveness and therapeutic index of a. uncinatus in the management of asf in pigs.

the water extraction method poorly expressed the active plant compounds and most of the expressed compounds are basic to neutral. however, since water is an important medium for drug administration, it will be important to conduct additional studies to validate methods by which water may be used in the administration of compounds and extracts from a. uncinatus.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the farmers’ claims of the effectiveness of the use of ancistrocladus uncinatus in the management of african swine fever seem to have a degree of empirical support. our experiment has provided evidence and confirmed that the extracts and fractions of extract from the plant have antiviral/virucidal activities against asf virus. it significantly reduced the viral titres in the pcr assay and prevented virus replication to undetectable level in the qpcr experiment as well as terminated the infectiousness of the virus in-vitro. however, the cytotoxic effect of the plant will need to be overcome in order to reduce the negative effect of the plant while still harnessing its therapeutic potential. further research on the antiviral compounds and effect of the plant holds potential for uncovering a novel antiviral compound and should be explored further for this and other animal viruses for which treatment options are either limited or non-existent.

