BACKGROUND
the computational analysis of dna sequences represents a major endeavor in the post-genomic era. the increasing number of whole-genome sequencing projects has provided an enormous amount of information which leads to the need of new tools and string processing algorithms to analyze and classify the obtained sequences  <cit> .

in this regard, the study of short functional dna segments, such as transcriptional factor binding sites, has emerged as an important effort to understand key control mechanisms. for example, it is now known that the presence of certain sequences of motifs in promoter regions determines the effective regulation of gene transcription, a central feature of gene regulatory networks.

dna motifs can be represented in a number of different ways. position specific scoring matrices  and consensi  are amongst the most commonly used. however, several other more sophisticated methods have been proposed to represent motifs, some of them able to take into account statistical or deterministic dependencies between positions  <cit> . our approach is independent of the way motifs are modeled, since it requires only the list of occurrences of motifs, something that can be obtained from any motif representation.

motif finding is the problem of discovering motifs, that may correspond to transcription factor binding sites, without any prior knowledge of their characteristics. these motifs can be found by analyzing regulatory regions taken from genes of the same organism or from related genes of different organisms. many approaches have been proposed and one can find an impressive collection of published articles describing algorithms to address the problem.

currently available methods can roughly be classified in two main classes: probabilistic  <cit>  and combinatorial  <cit> . this classification covers most, although not all, popular motif finders currently available.

the major drawback with these algorithms is their inability to discriminate the biologically relevant extracted motifs from the potentially numerous false hits. probabilistic motif finders also have problems when the motifs are highly degenerated. the problem of determining what portion of the output corresponds to a biologically significant result has been addressed mostly through the use of statistical techniques and biological reasoning, and it is a challenge in its own right. in this regard, the correct assessment of which of those observations may have occurred just by chance is a mandatory step in the process of identifying biologically meaningful features.

this is the main rationale for the construction of stochastic models that can provide estimates for the expected number of occurrences of a given sequence. these models are based on some assumed distribution for the sequence of bases, such as the one defined by a markov chain  <cit> , and are then used to compute the expected number of occurrences, under the null hypothesis, h <dig>  that assumes that the sequence is randomly generated in accordance with the assumed distribution. sequences that are over-represented, in a statistically significant way, are considered as potentially significant, as they are highly unlikely to have been generated by chance. this is usually done by determining a p-value for each extracted motif that assesses its relative expectedness/randomness under the specific pre-defined model, based on the expected vs. observed number of occurrences. this step makes for an efficient filtering of the output without loosing a significant amount of information and to the correct assessment of the motifs that are under or over-expressed. however, this approach is not very selective, and it is hard to apply to small motifs  or to other motifs that are not over-represented, but that, nonetheless, are biologically significant.

one possible way around this limitation is to look at other characteristics of the motifs, such as the positional distribution in the regions under analysis. the idea of analyzing the positional distribution of motif occurrences was developed recently  <cit> , suggesting that several motifs occurring in natural sequences have strong positional preferences. for example, it is well known that in prokaryote promoter regions, the tata-box occurs near position - <dig>  and the ttgaca motif usually occurs near position - <dig>  in eukaryotes, the best-characterized core promoter elements consist of a tata-box located approximately  <dig> nucleotides upstream from the start site, an initiator element located at the transcription start site, and a downstream promoter element  located approximately  <dig> nucleotides downstream from the transcription start.

the functionality of genome regions is intrinsically related with their ability to fold in tri-dimensional structures, which clearly indicates that positional bias should be incorporated in the models and analyzed from a statistical point of view. a number of recent studies have focused on this property, both in terms of absolute  <cit>  and relative  <cit>  positioning of the different motifs. these studies, however, address the positioning of specific, well identified, motifs, but none of them, to our knowledge, presented complete quantitative results and a comprehensive analysis of this feature, that can be used to actually distinguish between relevant and non-relevant motifs. in particular, there is no clear proposal of which is the best test to identify and classify the motifs in terms of their positional distribution along the genome.

in this article we propose to integrate position uniformity tests and over-representation tests based on markov models to improve the posterior classification of the motifs and better assess their biological significance.

for the position uniformity tests, the input data corresponds to vectors of motif positions in the input sequences where the motif appears. specifically, we compute the position of each occurrence of each motif, relative to the translation start site, and build a list of these positions. this list will be analyzed for uniformity using a statistical test. we started this analysis by first comparing different statistical methodologies commonly used to test uniformity, namely the chi-square goodness-of-fit test and the kolmogorov-smirnov  test  <cit> . since the motifs may appear in a small number of positions, a bootstrap  <cit>  version of the chi-square test, that can cope with small sample sizes, was also evaluated. these tests were first validated on artificially generated data to better analyze the results, assessing their sensitivity and specificity as well as the receiver operating characteristic  curves. based on these results, the bootstrap chi-square test was chosen as it proved to be the most powerful test for small sample sizes.

the bootstrap chi-square test was then used in the study of the positional distribution of motifs in the promoter sequences of different organisms, namely bakers yeast , human , fruit fly , escherichia coli and several dicotyledons plants. motifs that appeared at least in a given fraction of the sequences  were extracted, from these data sets, using a motif finder. for each extracted motif, a p-value was calculated, under the null hypothesis, that assumes a uniform distribution for the motif positions.

the combination of over-representation tests, that take into account the specific sequence of bases, and position uniformity tests, that consider the positional distribution of the motifs, has the potential to represent a more powerful technique for motif classification, than the ones currently used. this methodology is easily adapted to other computational biology applications where position is thought to be biologically relevant and where the non-uniformity of observed motifs may provide strong indication of biological relevance .

RESULTS
in this section we present the results of applying the proposed methodology to both artificially generated  and real data sets.

the artificial data sets were first used to compare the three analyzed uniformity tests, the chi-square goodness-of-fit test, the kolmogorov-smirnov test and the chi-square bootstrap test. the uniformity test that obtained the best results was then applied to classify the motifs extracted, by a motif finder, from a number of real data sets, from different organisms. in this section we present only the results obtained for the saccharomyces cerevisiae data sets, but results for other organisms are also available .

comparison of position uniformity tests
artificial data sets generated from uniform and beta distributions were used in this comparison . specifically, we generated a number of positions, normalized to the unit interval, that emulate, what, in the real data, corresponds to the positions of motif occurrences. for each of these distributions, the sensitivity and the specificity of the three uniformity tests was assessed. specifically, we used these tests to evaluate the probability that h <dig> is true, i.e., that the given samples originated in a uniform distribution.

the results obtained are presented in figures  <dig> and . figure  illustrate the obtained roc curves, as described in the methods section, for distinct beta distribution functions, beta, beta and beta, respectively. these curves were calculated using a sample size of  <dig> observations and  <dig> bins to guarantee five expected counts per class.

the results show that all tests present the expected sensitivity, as imposed by the level of significance . they correctly identified the majority, around 95%, of the uniform instances of different lengths when a level of α = 5% is chosen.

instances drawn from beta distributions were in general also correctly identified by the three tests. the more asymmetric the distribution is, the more powerful the ks test becomes. for distributions with lower variance and higher symmetry the bootstrap version of chi-square becomes the more powerful test, as shown in figure  <dig> 

the power of the tests increases as the samples become larger, as would be expected. from these results it is possible to see that the kolmogorov-smirnov test is less powerful than the other two tests. both chi-square goodness-of-fit and the chi-square bootstrap tests present a similar behavior.

for small sample sizes, the determination of the optimal number of bins in the chi-square test was achieved by testing different rules. one of the most common is to guarantee a minimum number of five expected counts per bin, which leads to nbins = ⌊x/5⌋, where x is the sample size. however, when this value is between  <dig> and  <dig> it is advisable to use three classes. in effect, it would be virtually impossible to distinguish a symmetric distribution using two bins defined by the edges . when using three bins there is a significant increase of specificity values, which strengthens the application of chi-square with a modified rule for the number of bins. furthermore, this assessment and further testing on simulated data led to the application of a modified rule for determining the number of bins, described by nbins = ⌊x/5⌋ +  <dig>  for sample sizes up to  <dig>  this was shown to increase the specificity. the graphs of figure  <dig> show the specificity of the test for different beta distribution functions as a function of sample size, using a combination of both rules: from  <dig> to  <dig> one extra bin was applied to improve the classification, from  <dig> to  <dig> the usual 5-per-bin formula was employed.

these results also show that there is a real advantage in using bootstrap methodologies. when the size of the sample is small, , the results show that the chi-square bootstrap test exhibits the best ability to detect non-uniformity. although the difference between the bootstrap version and the standard test appears to be marginal, one should use the simulation results to fix the desired sensitivity. in fact, only by using the empirical distribution of the test statistic, is it possible to correctly adjust the level of significance for small samples. this is because the distribution in this case markedly deviates from the chi-square standard distribution.

these results therefore indicate that the chi-square test with bootstrap achieves the best performance and should therefore be used to assess the uniformity of motif positions in real data, specially when the number of occurrences is small.

analysis of the saccharomyces cerevisiae data sets
in this section we present the results obtained with the chi-square bootstrap test in the analysis of the positional distribution of dna motifs in the promoter regions of saccharomyces cerevisiae. for this analysis, six data sets of promoter sequences were considered . for each data set the following procedure was used:

 <dig>  a motif finder algorithm, riso  <cit> , was used to identify motifs that occurred in a given fraction  of the sequences.

 <dig>  motifs were ordered in accordance to the computed statistical significance of the deviation of the number of occurrences observed vs. expected. motifs were considered over-represented in a statistically significant way if the p-value was smaller than 10- <dig> 

 <dig>  a p-value for the likelihood of a uniform distribution of each motif was obtained, using the chi-square bootstrap test, using a significance level, α, equal to  <dig> .

with this analysis, it is possible to define four motif classes, according to their classification in the over-representation and uniformity tests. motifs that are both over-represented and non-uniformly distributed are very likely to have some biological function. our analysis will be centered on these motifs, although, at times, we will also look at motifs that are not seen as strongly over-represented but are distributed in a non-uniform way in the promoter regions.

core promoter elements
for the analysis of the positional distribution of several core promoter elements, a data set containing  <dig> promoter sequences from saccharomyces cerevisiae was considered. this data set includes a significant fraction of the gene promoters for this organism. for eukaryotic species there exists a set of well characterized core promoter elements, that include the tata-box and the gc-box. the documented consensi for these sites are:

• tata-box  <cit> :

 tataa 

• gc-box:  <cit> 

 ggggcgggtatataaat 

following the procedure described, the riso algorithm was instructed to extract simple motifs, with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig>  and a minimum quorum of 20%. table  <dig> shows the results obtained. it is possible to see that almost all the motifs extracted  were classified as being non-uniformly distributed.

from the non-uniform group,  <dig> were classified as over-represented in a statistically significant way. the first ranked motifs in this sub-group correspond to motifs that match previously described consensi. for example, motifs like tataaa, tatata, tatataa, tatatat, and tataaaa match with the tata-box; gggta, and gggcg fit the gc-box profile.

in figure  <dig> it is also possible to observe the positional distribution of a set of motifs that corresponds to the gc-box. the p-values obtained for the uniformity test for these elements are much lower than  <dig> , suggesting non-uniformity and stressing that these motifs have a positional preference.

however, only the tata-box has been classified as over-represented in a statistically significant way. this is a case where the application of a non-uniformity test would identify biologically significant motifs that would go unnoticed by the over-representation tests.

the results obtained for this data set show that most of the extracted motifs are classified as non-uniformly distributed. this result was somehow expected since the motif finder was instructed to extract motifs with a minimum quorum of 20% in a large data set of  <dig> promoter sequences. this means that each motif must be present in at least  <dig> sequences. some of the motifs extracted correspond to known transcription factors binding sites and a large number corresponds to motifs that are important in the context of the chromatin regulation. most of these motifs are known to have a positional preference. in this example, we did not perform a detailed analysis of all the motifs extracted, since they are too numerous. the objective was to identify well characterized motifs that have positional preference and that may not be over-represented in a statistically significant way.

aft2p
this data set contains the promoter regions of  <dig> genes that are documented to be regulated by the transcription factor aft2p. the documented consensus for this tf are the motifs: cgcaccc, ggcaccc, tgcaccc and ykcacccr.

for this data set, riso was instructed to extract simple conserved motifs, with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig>  and a minimum quorum of 50%. table  <dig> presents the number of motifs classified in each of the four classes defined by the combination of the uniformity and over-representation statistical tests.

from a total of  <dig> motifs extracted, only  <dig> are considered to be non-uniform. a set of  <dig> out of these  <dig> are classified as over-represented. this small group includes the motif caccc, which corresponds to the core conserved motif described for this tf binding site. the p-value for the uniformity test for this motif was  <dig> e -  <dig>  the complete consensus that corresponds to this tf binding site was not reported, since this it is only present in a small number of sequences in this data set.

dal80p
this data set includes  <dig> promoter sequences of genes documented to be regulated by the transcription factor dal80p. the biological consensus described consists of two identical motifs, gataag, separated by  <dig> to  <dig> base pairs.

for this data set the motif finder was instructed to extract simple conserved motifs, with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig>  and a minimum quorum of 50%. table  <dig> presents the number of motifs included in each of the four classes.

from a total of  <dig> motifs, only  <dig> are distributed non-uniformly, and only  <dig> of these are over-represented in a statistically significant way. in this group of  <dig> motifs, it is possible to find the gataag motif, which is precisely the motif that corresponds to the biological consensus described. the three other motifs that complete this group are the motifs cttatc, tatata and aagaaa. the first one is the complement of the gataag motif, the second one is a tata-box that, as discussed before, has a positional preference and the last one is a motif already identified in yeast promoters as being one of the pre-mrna 3'-end-processing signals.

gln3p
this data set consists of  <dig> promoter sequences of genes regulated by the transcription factor gln3p. the reported consensi for this tf binding site are the motifs gataag and gattag.

motifs with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig> bases and a minimum quorum of 50% were extracted by the motif finder. table  <dig> presents the number of motifs included in each of the four classes. a total of  <dig> motifs was extracted and classified. from these, only  <dig> show positional preference. in this group,  <dig> were classified as over-represented. in this last group it is possible to find the motif gataag, that corresponds to one of the consensi described as a binding site for this tf. the group also includes motifs that correspond to the general transcription factor tata-box: tatata, atataa and atatat and also the complement of the motif of interest. the second consensus, gattag, was not found in any of the groups. however, in the group of the  <dig> motifs that are not over-represented but are non-uniformly distributed, it is possible to find the motif ctaatc, that corresponds to the complement of this motif. in this case the non-uniformity test may play a key role, if used to distinguish this motif from background noise.

met4p
this data set contains  <dig> promoter sequences of genes that are documented to be regulated by the transcription factor met4p. the documented consensus for this tf binding site is the motif tcacgtg. the motif finder was instructed to extract motifs with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig> bases and a minimum quorum of 50%. table  <dig> presents the results. a total of  <dig> motifs was extracted with these characteristics. from these, only  <dig> were classified as over-represented and non-uniformly distributed. this set of motifs includes the motif cacgtg, the only one that matches the described consensus. the p-value obtained with the uniformity test for this motif was  <dig> e -  <dig>  as expected, motifs related to the tata-box, like the atataa, atatat and tatata, were also among this set of relevant motifs.

gat1p
this data set consists of  <dig> promoter regions of genes that are regulated by the transcription factor gat1p. the consensus sequence of interest is the motif gataag. motifs with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides and with a minimum quorum of 50% were extracted. table  <dig> shows the results. a total of  <dig> motifs were identified, with only  <dig> being classified as over-represented and non-uniformly distributed. the motif gataag is included in the group of motifs that were classified as non over-represented and uniformly distributed . however, the motif that has been classified as the most over-represented and also non-uniformly distributed was the motif cttatc, that is the complement of the motif of interest. although, the motif gataag is reported as the binding site for the gat1p transcription factor, its reverse can also be considered  <cit> . this reverse motif is particularly relevant if present between positions - <dig> and - <dig>  this position preference is exactly what is observed in this data set. the two other motifs in this category are the motifs tatata and aagaaa, whose biological relevance was already reported in the analysis of the data set dal80p.

datasets for other organisms have also been analyzed, and confirm the obtained results are consisten with the ones presented in this section .

CONCLUSIONS
given these results, we propose that the integration of position uniformity tests and over-representation tests can be used to improve the accuracy of the classification of motifs found by combinatorial motif finders.

the study we performed on the positional distribution of several well known cis-regulatory elements, in the promoter sequences of different organisms, has shown that position conservation is a significant characteristic of many biologically significant motifs. in particular, the results show that many biologically relevant motifs appear heterogeneously distributed in the promoter region of genes, and therefore, that non-uniformity is a good indicator of biological relevance.

in a number of instances where over-representation tests do not provide conclusive results, non-uniformity tests can be used to flag the relevant motifs. this effect is most evident for small motifs, that are expected to appear a large number of times, and for small datasets, where the over-representation tests are not powerful enough to single out motifs that are biologically significant, but are only somewhat over-represented.

in particular, it is clear from the results that motifs that pass both tests are very strong candidates for further analysis. this is an important point, specially for users of combinatorial motif finders, because it is sometimes hard to filter the relevant motifs from the large number of sequences identified by these methods. in fact, currently used over-representation tests are likely either to miss important motifs that are not long enough, or to flag as significant motifs that are over-represented only by chance.

