BACKGROUND
pertussis or whooping cough is an acute respiratory disease caused by bordetella pertussis  <cit> . despite high vaccination coverage, pertussis is a re-emerging disease causing mortality in infants worldwide, mainly in developing countries, but also at increasing incidence in many developed countries  <cit> . while pertussis resurgence is likely caused by multiple factors , it is becoming increasingly evident that currently licensed acellular pertussis  vaccines are suboptimal in inducing long lasting protection and in preventing colonization. this presumably has an impact on increased risk of transmission and consequent bacterial spread throughout the population. recent studies in a nonhuman primate model support this hypothesis, demonstrating that ap vaccines efficiently protect against the hallmark symptoms of pertussis disease but fail to prevent colonization  <cit> .

improvement of current pertussis vaccines or development of novel vaccines should take these findings into consideration  <cit>  and be effective in shortening bacterial colonization besides preventing the disease.

hurdles for the development of improved vaccines addressing these issues are the lack of pre-clinical tools, such as serological bioassays and adequate animal models, suitable to evaluate bacterial adherence and clearance. the mouse aerosol challenge model, as well as other small animal models, has been useful in dissecting the mechanisms of pathogenesis of b. pertussis  <cit> . however, being b. pertussis an obligate human pathogen, these animal models are unable to reproduce the full spectrum of disease in humans. the recently developed baboon model  <cit>  provides an excellent tool to improve our knowledge on b. pertussis transmission and to explore the effect of the vaccine-induced immunity on colonization and disease manifestations. however, ethical concerns and high costs limit the use of baboon model for vaccine antigen screening, although it is the model of choice for evaluation of advanced vaccine formulation. accordingly, new in vitro bioassays mimicking the natural site of infection of b. pertussis could represent a valid screening method to test the functionality of vaccine-induced antibodies in inhibiting the bacterial adhesion.

one of the mechanisms to control the bacterial burden is the presence of functional antibodies at the epithelial barrier which could inhibit the attachment of bacteria to the respiratory epithelium and the initiation of colonization. adhesion assays employing cell models representing the human respiratory tract have been extensively used to study the mechanisms of b. pertussis adhesion . these studies allowed the identification of the key adhesins involved in the colonization process by the use of mutant strains or by inhibition with antibodies targeting individual virulence factors. however, the adhesion assays employed so far were generally based on bacterial colony counting or microscopic examinations which are time-consuming and inadequate for extensive comparative analysis of the kinetics of bacterial adhesion. to overcome the limitations of conventional adhesion assays and compare the adhesion inhibitory properties of vaccine-induced antibodies, a quantitative assay compatible with high-throughput methodologies is then needed.

we report here the development of a new assay to quantify the adhesion of b. pertussis to airway epithelial cells and show the efficiency of this method in evaluating the ability of the antibodies induced by different pertussis vaccine formulations to inhibit bacterial adhesion.

RESULTS
analysis of fluorescent bacteria
b. pertussis bacteria were labeled with a fluorescent dye , which conjugates to the primary amines  of amine-containing molecules on bacterial surface. after incubation with the alexa fluor®  <dig>  bacteria were washed to remove unbound dye. to assess whether the conjugation affected bacterial viability, bacteria were plated after the conjugation, and the colonies were compared to unconjugated bacteria as control. colony forming unit  counting demonstrated that viability of labeled and unlabeled bacteria was comparable and that the survival is maintained after two hours incubation in cell medium . moreover, all bacteria were efficiently labeled as shown by fluorescent microscopy examination .fig.  <dig> effect of fluorescent labeling on b. pertussis viability. a conjugation of b. pertussis tohama i with alexa fluor®  <dig> was performed as described in materials and methods. after washes, bacteria were suspended in pbs. bacterial suspension was serially diluted and plated on bg agar plates immediately after labeling , and 2 h  after incubation at 37 °c. results represent mean ± sd from a representative experiment performed in triplicates. b labeled bacteria were fixed  and stained with dapi  for confocal microscopy analysis



fluorescent bacteria can be quantified by a multi-plate fluorescent reader, overcoming the limitations of conventional colony counting. to test the sensitivity of the method and to determine the minimum number of bacteria that could be detected by the fluorescence reader, bacteria were serially diluted and each bacterial suspension was measured for fluorescence emission and plated for colony counting.

figure  <dig> shows a linear relationship between the number of bacteria and fluorescence and establishes that the minimum number of bacteria that could be detected by the reader is in the range of 103 cfu.fig.  <dig> standard curve showing the relationship between bacteria-associated fluorescence and number of bacteria. labeling of b. pertussis tohama i with alexa fluor®  <dig> was performed as described in materials and methods. fluorescent bacteria were suspended in pbs to reach od <dig>  <dig>  and then 2-fold serially diluted. for each dilution, 100 μl of bacterial suspension were transferred in triplicates in a 96-well plate and fluorescence was assessed at 485/535 nm by a multi-well fluorescent reader, while 100 μl were serially diluted and plated on bg agar plates in triplicates for cfu counting. results represent mean ± sd from one out of the two representative experiments performed in triplicates



development of a high-throughput adhesion assay for b. pertussis
we set up a high-throughput b. pertussis adhesion assay to determine the level of adhesion of b. pertussis to the human alveolar epithelial cell line a <dig>  we infected cells for 1 h with serially diluted b. pertussis tohama i strain and after washes we measured the fluorescence of cell-adherent bacteria . infected cells were subsequently treated with a detergent to release bound bacteria, and the number of cell-associated bacteria was determined by cfu counting and compared to the bacterial suspension at time zero . the results show that the measurement of bacteria-associated fluorescence was as sensitive as the conventional cfu counting in detecting the number of adherent bacteria.fig.  <dig> adhesion of labeled b. pertussis tohama i on a <dig> cells. a a <dig> cells were infected for 1 h with serially diluted labeled bacteria starting from an optical density  of  <dig> . after washes, cell-associated bacteria were quantified by fluorescence reading at ex/em 485/535 nm. b after fluorescence reading, infected cells were treated with 1 % saponin, and lysates were serially diluted and plated for cfu counting of adhering bacteria (). aliquots of serially diluted bacterial suspensions used for infection were also plated () c a <dig> cells were infected with unlabeled and labeled b. pertussis tohama i at od <dig>  <dig>  for 1 h. adhering bacteria were quantified by cfu counting as described before. results represent mean ± sd from one out of the three representative experiments performed in triplicates



importantly, the presence of the fluorescent dye on the bacterial surface did not alter the adhesive properties of b. pertussis as demonstrated by comparing the level of adhesion of both labeled and unlabeled bacteria .

to evaluate the sensitivity of the assay in measuring the adhesiveness of bacteria to epithelial cells, we analyzed the contribution of the major adhesins of b. pertussis: filamentous hemagglutinin  and pertactin . we measured the adhesion of bp536-derivative mutant strains bp <dig> and bbc <dig>  defective in fha and prn respectively. as expected these mutants were significantly less adhesive than the wild-type parental strain. the lack of fha protein determined  <dig>  % reduction in bacterial adhesion after 1 h infection on a <dig> cells, while the lack of prn caused a 46 % decrease . these results were confirmed by confocal microscopy .fig.  <dig> contribution of fha and prn in b. pertussis adhesion to a <dig> cells. a a <dig> cells were infected with labeled b. pertussis strains bp <dig> , bp <dig>  and bbc <dig>  at od <dig>  <dig>  for 1 h. after washes, cell-associated bacteria were quantified by fluorescence reading at ex/em 485/535 nm. experiments were done in triplicates and data represent mean ± sd. b adhesion assay was performed as described in a. infected cells were fixed and actin  and nuclei  were stained for confocal microscopy analysis. images are 3d view of z-stack acquisition. results represent mean ± sd from a representative experiment performed in triplicates



these data suggest that this assay represents a sensitive and automated quantification of adherent bacteria, and that it can be applied to compare the adhesive properties of different strains or evaluate the contribution of individual adhesins through the analysis of the relative knock-out strains.

we further extended the method to a physiological 2d airway cell model by the use of calu- <dig> cells grown on membrane supports at air-liquid interface. this cell model is characterized by distinctive columnar polarized cells and tight junctions , reproducing the features of functional human airway epithelium  <cit> . we infected polarized calu- <dig> cells with b. pertussis tohama i strain and verified the association of bacteria on the apical cell surface by confocal microscopy . after growing the cells on microplate membrane supports, we measured the level of adhesion by the previously described high-throughput method, determining the kinetic of association of fluorescent bacteria to this airway cell model .fig.  <dig> adhesion of labeled b. pertussis tohama i on polarized calu- <dig> cells at air-liquid interface. a polarized calu- <dig> cells were infected with labeled b. pertussis tohama i at od <dig>  <dig>  for 1 h. after extensive washes, infected cells were fixed and tight junctions  and nuclei  were stained for confocal microscopy analysis. images are 3d view of z-stack acquisition. b polarized calu- <dig> cells were infected for 1 h with serially diluted labeled bacteria starting from an od <dig> of  <dig> . after washes, cell-associated bacteria were quantified by fluorescence reading at ex/em 485/535 nm. results represent mean ± sd from a representative experiment performed in triplicates



inhibition of  b. pertussis adhesion by vaccine-induced antibodies
a relevant application of this high-throughput adhesion assay is the evaluation of the ability of vaccine-induced antibodies to inhibit b. pertussis adhesion in vitro. indeed, functional antibodies induced by vaccination may provide protection by several mechanisms, one of which is preventing bacterial adhesion to airway epithelial cells.

we considered in this study the ability of mouse antibodies induced by acellular  and whole cell  vaccines to inhibit adhesion of tohama i strain to a <dig> cells. fluorescent bacteria were pre-incubated with mouse pooled sera in a range of eight dilutions and a <dig> cells were infected as described before . we found that even though both ap and wp-induced antibodies interfere with bacterial attachment to epithelial cells, they showed different kinetics of inhibition : anti-wp serum showed a substantial reduction of adhering bacteria even at low serum concentrations, while anti-ap serum was effective in inhibiting only at the highest concentrations. pre-immune serum and serum from unvaccinated animals were included in the experiments as negative control. we also measured the inhibitory effect of sera from individual mice , showing the consistency of the functional immune response in all animals vaccinated with ap and wp vaccines .fig.  <dig> impact of vaccine-induced antibodies on b. pertussis adhesion to a <dig> cells. a schematic representation of the assay. b sera from mice vaccinated with an acellular pertussis vaccine  and a whole cell pertussis vaccine   were pooled, serially diluted in infection medium and incubated with labeled wild-type b. pertussis tohama i for 1 h. pre-immune sera and sera from unvaccinated mice were used as negative control. a <dig> cells were then infected with the bacteria/sera mixtures for 1 h and, after extensive washes to remove unbound bacteria, cell-associated bacteria were quantified by fluorescence reading at ex/em 485/535 nm. results represent mean ± sd from there independent experiments each performed in triplicates. c sera from individual mice vaccinated with ap and wp vaccines  were diluted  <dig> to  <dig> and adhesion assay was performed as described in b. sera from unvaccinated individual mice were used as negative control. results represent mean ± sd from a single experiment performed in triplicates; ****p <  <dig> , **p <  <dig> 



overall, this assay allowed to determine the range of serum dilutions effective in inhibiting b. pertussis adhesion to epithelial cells and underlined the contribution of antigens included in ap vaccines in comparison to the entire membrane repertoire targeted by wp vaccines.

CONCLUSIONS
this novel quantitative adhesion assay offers the possibility to analyze the functionality of vaccine-induced antibodies in inhibiting the bacterial adhesion to the host cells.

considering the human-restricted host range of b. pertussis, the use of human cells resembling the airway mucosa is a valuable in vitro system to complement the studies in animal models. moreover, in the perspective of limiting the use of animal testing, it is opportune to encourage and implement the development of methods in compliance with the 3rs guidelines.

this assay is a sensitive, rapid and reproducible method to evaluate the capability of vaccine-induced antibodies to prevent bacterial adhesion and answer to the need of new pre-clinical tools to predict the impact of different vaccines on b. pertussis colonization.

