BACKGROUND
the systematic reconstruction of molecular phylogenies based on the diversity of genes found in complete genomes reveals an unforeseen degree of incongruence among gene trees. different reasons, either biological or methodological, explain this diversity of patterns. first, evolutionary mechanisms such as gene duplication and loss, lateral gene transfer  and incomplete lineage sorting generate gene histories that deviate from that of species  <cit> . in unicellular organisms, and particularly bacteria and archaea, most of the real phylogenetic conflict is likely the result of lgt  <cit> . on the other hand, the reconstruction of gene histories based on sequence alignments is not trivial, and many artifacts are known which produce aberrant phylogenies due to stochastic effects or inadequate models of sequence evolution  <cit> . a challenge in the understanding of the patterns and processes of genome evolution is therefore to sort out these different sources of conflict.

the question of identifying lgts based on phylogenies typically applies to the following data: first, a gene phylogeny, characterized by an unrooted tree topology, with branch lengths and statistical support for internal branches; and second, some knowledge of the evolutionary relationships among the organisms represented in this tree, ideally a rooted species phylogeny. events of lgt can then be invoked to explain the topological discrepancies between the two trees. among the various approaches that have been proposed to resolve the problem of tree reconciliation, the maf , and the closely related spr  arguably represent the most appropriate models for the replacement of genes by lgt. the maf problem consists in finding the smallest number of edges to cut in both trees in order to obtain two identical "forests" of rooted subtrees  <cit> . the spr problem also corresponds to minimizing the number of subtrees to cut in a tree, but adds extra complexity by searching for the optimal place to regraft them. in the case of a rooted species tree, both approaches are equivalent to minimizing the number of lgts that occurred in the gene family. these problems are known to be computationally difficult, but several algorithms have been proposed, notably to efficiently address the spr problem. for instance, than and nakhleh have proposed a decomposition approach, implemented in the riata-hgt program  <cit> , which identifies regions of the tree where the conflict can be resolved independently, and thus significantly reduces the complexity of the spr reconciliation in many cases. eeep also implements such a decomposition  <cit> , and adds the possibility to restrict the type of spr moves to those that immediately reduce the discordance among trees.

obviously, an incorrectly reconstructed gene tree will lead to the inference of erroneous lgts. it is therefore essential to take into account all information at hand on the reliability of the observed topological conflict, such as the length and support of all branches. methods of lgt detection based on topological comparisons sometimes propose ways to incorporate the statistical information of the gene tree  <cit> . riata-hgt  <cit>  first performs a purely topological reconciliation that proposes a collection of lgt scenarios. each transfer is associated with a value which depends on the statistical support of the conflict it resolves in the gene tree, and the user can choose to ignore lgts under a given threshold. eeep  <cit>  uses a different approach in which internal branches of the gene tree having a statistical support below a given threshold are collapsed a priori, before the trees are reconciled.

the two approaches described above have been implemented and tested on simulated datasets  <cit> . the main concern in both simulation setups was to evaluate time performance and the ability of the methods to recover the number of simulated lgts in a gene tree. however, biologists are usually interested not only in the number of lgts but more importantly in identifying the actual events of gene transfer, i.e. the exact set of species that are "misplaced" in the gene tree. both approaches generally propose a number of evolutionary scenarios, but their accuracy has not been evaluated so far.

here, we use simulations to explore the ability of different methods to detect events of transfers based on gene trees reconstructed from sequences. we introduce a greedy algorithm called "prunier"  <cit> , which uses information on topology, statistical support and branch lengths to quickly identify a maximum statistical agreement forest  that corresponds to a most parsimonious scenario of transfer. prunier uses a customizable statistical agreement function. two implementations of this function were tested: a fast one based on branch support, and a more advanced one which uses the expected likelihood weights  test  <cit> . we show that working on reconstructed trees strongly affects the ability of different methods to identify transfer events. although all methods can roughly estimate the number of lgts that occurred in a gene history, the accuracy of proposed scenarios varies largely. in comparison with other methods, prunier has lower false positive rate, which makes it a more accurate approach to detect lgts in almost all simulated situations, especially for complicated gene histories. when tested on biological data of  <dig> universal proteins with hypothetical reference trees, prunier revealed high rates of lgt, in particular in genes that are known to be prone to transfer. however, the degree of conflict in these genes raises concern on the approach used to reconstruct universal trees.

RESULTS
prunier algorithm
objectives
the phylogenetic detection of lateral gene transfers relies on differences between a gene tree tg, with branch lengths and support values, and a reference species tree ts on the same set of species s. our method takes both trees as input. for clarity, we will suppose that the species tree is rooted, though the method offers the possibility of using an unrooted reference tree as input, with a reasonable increase in complexity . the input gene tree is always unrooted, and a byproduct of the procedure is to output a restrained set of root locations on the gene tree. here we consider that topological differences between ts and tg can result either from lgt or from stochastic effects in the process of gene tree reconstruction. therefore, an agreement function is needed to decide whether observed topological differences among trees are significant or not. examples of such functions are maximum-likelihood tests comparing trees given a sequence alignment: kh . we also propose a faster alternative which simply considers the statistical support of internal branches. two trees are said to disagree if they fail the agreement function.

if a species tree and a gene tree disagree , the objective is to decompose them into a statistically agreeing forest. for a subset si of the set of species s, we note t the subtree of t containing exactly si where internal nodes of degree  <dig> are contracted. we aim at partitioning the set of species sinto a minimum number of subsets s <dig> ,...,sk such that for each subset si, the two subtrees ts and tg agree, and all ts as well as all tg are disjoint. we call this partition a maximal statistical agreement forest , in reference to the maximal agreement forest  <cit> , which is the particular case where the agreement function gives a positive answer only if the two compared trees are homomorphic .

among s <dig> ,...,sk , only one subset contains the root of the species tree. this is the non-transferred "backbone" of the tree as the root is its most ancient node and cannot acquire a gene from one of its descendants. the other ts of the forest are interpreted as lgts that occurred in the last common ancestor of si,. their number  is the minimum number of transfer events that have to be invoked to explain the significant differences between the two trees.

greedy algorithm
we use a greedy procedure to approach the maximum statistical agreement forest of two trees . conflicting edges of the gene tree are those inducing bipartitions that are not in the species tree. a transfer event is characterized by a subtree tg that is in agreement with the corresponding ts but whose position is conflicting. in other words, an lgt results in a non conflicting edge whose removal decreases the conflict among trees. a non conflicting edge e cuts ts in two subtrees, one containing the root, the other defining a common clade si. if tg and ts agree, the "conflict score" of e is a function  of the number and support of the conflicting edges that are eliminated if e is removed from the tree. we consider the non conflicting edge with the highest conflict score as defining the most likely transfer. the procedure  can be briefly described as follows:


• while the gene tree and species tree disagree:

▪ remove the edge defining a statistically agreeing common clade with maximal conflict score

often, several edges have the same conflict score. in this case, a different criterion is used to choose what edge to cut among top rating edges. we first use the alignment of the gene family to estimate branch lengths on both the gene and reference trees using treefinder  <cit> . then, for each candidate edge, we compute the difference between its lengths in both trees and cut the one with the highest difference. we hence remove the branch that is most affected when constrained to its reference position. in practice, branch lengths are estimated only once. this step appears to be necessary in most gene families and it accounts for most of the computing time in the "fast" implementation of prunier.

because only non conflicting edges are removed, the procedure always produces two subtrees, one of which is in agreement by construction, and the other  can be used recursively as an input of the function. eventually, a statistical agreement forest is reached and each component of this forest which does not contain the root of tg is interpreted as originating from a transfer event. a scenario of transfer can readily be constructed from the comparison of tg with the forest.

the algorithm and its implementation are fully detailed in the material and methods section. in particular, the definition of the agreement function, conflict score and the position of the root are discussed.

accuracy on simulated lgts
we used the procedure described in  <cit>   to generate  <dig> gene trees and corresponding sequence alignments with increasing number  of lgts. gene trees were simulated with subtree pruning and regrafting  operations from a 40-taxa rooted reference tree. gene sequences were simulated along gene trees with variable rates of evolution among branches and sites . maximum-likelihood  trees were reconstructed using the resulting alignments. we used a different model of substitution than that used for sequence simulations to increase the chance of topological conflict resulting from reconstruction artifacts. all results of the simulation procedure are available as supplemental information .

we compared the performances of riata-hgt  <cit>   one. among the proposed lgt events, we counted the number of true and false positives  for each method. in subsequent comparisons, all three methods used the same threshold for branch support: for eeep, branches under this threshold are collapsed a priori; for riata-hgt, among all inferred transfers only those crossing a branch above this threshold were retained; and for prunier, two trees were in agreement if they had no conflicting edges above this threshold. fig.  <dig> shows the number of tp  and fp  as a function of the true number of lgt events, with a threshold of  <dig>  . for clarity, the results of another agreement function based on the elw test  <cit>   which gave results very close to prunier-fast are not presented. while prunier gives a single scenario, both riata-hgt and eeep generally propose several solutions that are equivalent in terms of number of events. we chose to show the performance of these programs by recording both the worst  and best  scenarios.

to obtain an idea of the best possible estimate of the number of detectable lgts in our simulations, we ran riata-hgt on the true gene trees , and kept as a reference the best scenario proposed . for this reference, the estimated number of transfers is quite accurate but the number of fp increases with the number of transfers, remaining under  <dig> . the three methods have different behaviors with increasing number of transfers. riata-hgt performs relatively well at identifying true transfer events , but consistently infers false positives, even when no transfers have been simulated . surprisingly, this number of fp does not increase significantly with the number of transfers. eeep is very good at detecting zero or one transfer, but then increasingly fails at producing any transfer scenario, with more than 50% of failure for the 10-transfer category. prunier is comparable to riata-hgt for the detection of tp , but has lower rates of fp . the rate of fp increases with the number of simulated transfers to reach the same level as riata-hgt with  <dig> transfers.

accuracy of transfer scenarios
many studies trying to resolve controversial phylogenetic relationships among species have used lgt detection as a first step to retrieve sets of orthologous genes  . for prunier and eeep, the percentage of exact scenarios is high for low numbers of transfers, but drops relatively quickly to zero. for gene families with three transfers, these methods predict the correct scenario in about 50% of the cases. for riata-hgt, the proportion of correctly predicted scenarios is low even with few transfers, owing to its high rate of false positives.

transferred sequences
the positive predictive value  is the proportion of transferred sequences among those predicted to be transferred. the negative predictive value  is the proportion of non-transferred sequences among those predicted to be non-transferred. in this evaluation, we do not present the results for eeep as its rate of failure with high rates of transfers precludes fair comparisons among approaches. we measured the predictive power of riata-hgt, selecting the best among all inferred scenarios, and prunier for a set of simple agreement functions, defined by thresholds ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . we also tested for prunier another agreement function which uses comparisons of the likelihood of entire tree topologies by the elw test  <cit>  . all values were computed on the  <dig> simulated gene trees.

the npv is very similar among both methods , and variations of the agreement function have only little effect on this value, although for all parameters, riata-hgt is slightly better than prunier. in contrast, the ppv varies greatly with the threshold, especially for prunier, but with consistently higher ppv than riata-hgt. these results can be summarized by computing the accuracy of the two methods, which is the proportion of correctly classified sequences . the accuracy ranges between 73% and 77%  for riata-hgt, and lies between 77% and 79%  for prunier.

impact of the root of the species tree on reconstructed scenarios
prunier proposes by default a scenario for every possible root of the species tree . different rootings of the species tree are expected to give different lgt scenarios, because the choice of a root constrains the clades that can be transferred. especially, the number of transfer events is expected to be different. we examined the possibility that lgts could inform on the true position of the root. for each of the  <dig> possible roots of our  <dig> leaves species tree, we counted the number of inferred lgts in the  <dig> simulated gene families. for instance, the total number of lgts ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> with a threshold of  <dig> . the true root was among the two locations with the minimal number of lgt, the other one being on a neighboring edge. however, a wilcoxon paired test showed that only  <dig> among the  <dig> possible roots were significantly different from the best root. this establishes lgt as a potential tool for rooting species trees but suggests that many gene families and relatively high rates of transfer are necessary to discern the true root.

application to a biological dataset
we used the dataset of brown and colleagues  <cit>  which contains  <dig> universal proteins distributed in  <dig> species from the three domains of life. this study pioneered a number of more recent analyses in which lgts are searched in order to obtain a set of orthologous genes that can be concatenated to resolve a specific question  <cit> . in their article, brown et al. focused on the elimination of gene transfers among domains, by manually removing those gene families that supported a non-monophyletic bacterial domain. nine gene families were removed on this criterion, which reduced the dataset to  <dig> genes. two different species trees were reconstructed: a first one based on the whole dataset , which was deemed artifactual due to lgt and a second one based on the cleansed dataset . the two trees mainly disagreed on the position of the early diverging bacterial phyla, respectively spirochaetes and hyperthermophiles.

although detecting transferred genes with a certain reference tree and using the remaining sequences to infer a tree would be a circular reasoning, it is possible to use our algorithm to test the hypothesis that a dataset is devoid of lgt. we ran prunier  using both trees as a reference, and looked at the number of transfers inferred in the  <dig> genes. the simulation results showed very similar results for the slow and fast version of prunier . with real data, we also observed a high correlation among different agreement methods  but with marked differences for some gene families. for instance the initiation factor  <dig>  gene tree is found to be completely congruent with the 23-gene reference tree using the slow test, while the fast version infers  <dig> transfers. reciprocally, some other genes showed higher transfer rates with the slow test, for instance ribosomal protein s <dig> where  <dig>  or  <dig>  lgts were detected with the slow version versus one with the fast version, for both reference trees. the mean number of transfers invoked in the two sets of genes identified by brown et al. is significantly different, for the fast version, regardless of the reference tree . this suggests that the manual criterion originally used by brown et al.  <cit>  for gene exclusion correctly identified genes with high transfer rates. nevertheless, many among the  <dig> genes retained in the second dataset show a significant amount of transfers with our method. this raises the question of whether the combination of such a limited amount of genes with such a strong degree of conflict can really yield a reliable species tree.

discussion
detecting lgts using phylogenetic approaches is a challenge for several reasons. first, the reconstruction of optimal scenarios explaining the discrepancies between two trees is a complex algorithmic problem. second, in practice, not all of these discrepancies require a biological explanation, because reconstructed gene trees are imperfect representations of a true gene history. we aimed at testing approaches that propose reconciliation scenarios in the typical situation faced by biologists, i.e., the comparison of an unrooted gene tree reconstructed from sequences with a rooted reference. two published methods, eeep and riata-hgt corresponded to these criteria. we propose here a new algorithm that applies to this situation, along with an evaluation of its performance in comparison to eeep and riata-hgt on a simulated dataset.

simulating lgt
it is difficult to simulate datasets that compare to real ones, in particular in terms of the phylogenetic artifacts they produce. we used a procedure  <cit>  that creates spr movements on a rooted reference tree and then simulates different evolutionary rates among branches of the tree and sequence sites, attempting to produce as realistic as possible gene alignments. we then reconstructed ml trees with a model of sequence evolution different from the one used for sequence simulation.

the results of our simulations show that working on reconstructed gene trees poses a substantial problem to lgt detection methods. this is evident from the comparison of the result of riata-hgt when used on simulated vs. reconstructed gene trees . the best scenario among those provided by riata-hgt on the simulated gene trees  was used as a measure of the best scenario inferable. according to this reference, most transfers  are detectable and the expected amount of false positives is relatively low .

all methods were able to correctly identify simulated lgt events to a certain extent. eeep appeared quite accurate when proposing a solution, but its frequency of failure  makes it difficult to use with high levels of transfers. in contrast, the two other programs almost always gave a result and generally produced reasonably good solutions, even with complex transfer scenarios. however, riata-hgt is characterized by high rates of false positives which explain a consistently low proportion of exact riata-hgt scenarios even with few lgt events .

a new approach for transfer detection driven by statistical criterion
our new approach, prunier, sequentially cuts branches that are found to generate significant conflict among trees. we reasoned that a fast way to reach agreement between trees is to first cut those branches that are responsible for the highest part of the conflict. accordingly, prunier relies on a ranking of branches that are common to the two trees based on the amount of conflict that is removed when the branch is cut. in the current implementation, this amount of conflict is a function that depends on the statistical support of internal branches in the gene tree  and the branch with the highest rank is cut first. the algorithm is thus directed by statistical information provided by branch support in the gene tree and estimating the statistical support of branches is a prerequisite of the application of prunier. this contrasts with eeep and riata-hgt, where branch support is only used to discard some irrelevant groupings. these approaches rely on combinatorial algorithms that search to enumerate all topological solutions. in contrast, prunier uses statistical information in the gene tree to guide its search and avoid non significant transfer events to be invoked. as a result, riata-hgt and eeep usually propose a set of scenarios that are equivalent in terms of number of transfers, when prunier always proposes a unique scenario. although providing a single solution is not necessarily an advantage, the scenarios found by prunier are always better than the best among those proposed by riata-hgt, as prunier consistently infers fewer false positives for equivalent number of true positives. in comparison with eeep, the algorithmic shortcut used by prunier does not seem to alter the performance in terms of quality of the results but appears as a gain in efficiency as prunier always terminates. we can presume that the type of statistics used by prunier for branch support is critical for its performance. the lr-elw values computed by the treefinder program  <cit>  seem to give good results, at least with simulated datasets, but others like bootstrap could also be tested.

program parameters: threshold and agreement function
concerning the choice of a support threshold in the fast version, it is important to tune this parameter according to user needs. higher support value thresholds should be favored when seeking transfer events with high confidence. in contrast, lower thresholds should be preferred when trying to identify orthologous sequence sets. however, the negative predictive value  does not vary a lot when decreasing the threshold, whereas the positive predictive value  drops quickly . this suggests that higher threshold values are a relatively good choice in all situations. when comparing prunier in its fast and slow versions on simulated data, it appeared that using the maximum-likelihood test elw as an agreement function instead of a function based on branch support values did not improve the quality of transfer detection , and that the resulting lgt scenarios are strongly correlated. in this case, it does not seem beneficial to use such a computationally intensive method in prunier. however, in contrast with simulated results, the fast and slow implementations of prunier gave correlated but sometimes contrasting estimates of lgt numbers on a real dataset . it is difficult to argue for the use of "slow" vs. "fast" agreement functions on such data. however, all methods detected a large number of transfers in most gene families, including those conserved for concatenation. this means that there remains a strong phylogenetic conflict among concatenated genes. interestingly, trna synthetases, which have been reported as prone to transfer, yield particularly high numbers of lgts.

rooting the species tree
one particular feature of prunier is its ability to search efficiently for scenarios of lgt using an unrooted reference tree, thereby proposing different solutions for different possible roots. interestingly, different roots in the species tree yield different lgt scenarios, and an overall score could be computed on all  <dig> gene trees. we showed that the best rooted tree  is the true root of the reference tree. this suggests that non-optimal roots tend to produce more lgts than the true one. this echoes with previous reports that lgt events, when seen as a shared character, could sometimes provide phylogenetic information  <cit> . we demonstrate here that prunier provides information for rooting the reference tree, since the true root position was the best  or among the best  in terms of lgt number. although the number of gene trees necessary to unambiguously root a reference tree is probably high, the lgt criterion could be used to exclude potential roots.

CONCLUSIONS
we propose a new method, prunier, based on the statistical reconciliation of a gene tree and a reference tree by searching for the maximum statistical agreement forest. we compared prunier and two other programs, eeep  <cit>  and riata-hgt  <cit>  on a simulated dataset attempting to reflect realistic conditions of gene families analyses. prunier performance and robustness demonstrates its appeal over other tested methods. it proposes a unique scenario of lgts that compares to the best selected scenarios of the two other methods, produces fewer false positives, in particular compared to riata-hgt, and is able to infer true transfer events even for the most complex gene histories, what eeep fails to do. being fast and accurate, prunier can be used to study phylogenomic datasets.

