BACKGROUND
the genome of several microorganisms has been completely sequenced and annotated in the past decade  <cit> . this information has aided the metabolic reconstructions of several microbial and eukaryotic organisms using experimental evidence and bioinformatics based techniques providing single compartment  and multi-compartment models . all of these reconstructions are inherently incomplete with some functionalities missing due to the lack of experimental and/or homology information. these missing reaction steps may lead to the prediction of erroneous genetic interventions for a targeted overproduction or the elucidation of misleading organizational principles and properties of the metabolic network. a key challenge in the automated generation of genome-scale reconstructions is the elucidation of these gaps and the subsequent generation of hypotheses to bridge them. this challenge has already been recognized and a number of computational approaches have been under development to resolve these discrepancies  <cit> .

most of the aforementioned efforts are based on the use of sequence homology to uncover missing genes. specifically, sequence homology is used to pinpoint genes in related species that have significant similarity with an unassigned orf of the curated microorganism  <cit> . green et al formalized and further extended this concept by introducing a method that identified missing enzymes in a metabolic network using sequence homology related metrics within a bayesian framework  <cit> . alternatively, non-homology based reconstructions have been implemented by identifying candidate genes by measuring the similarity with metrics such as mrna co expression data  <cit>  and phylogenetic profiles  <cit>  while also taking into account the local structure of the existing partially reconstructed metabolic networks. a recent advancement in this direction uses multiple types of association evidence including clustering of genes on the chromosome and protein fusion events in addition to phylogenetic profiles  <cit> . all methods described above postulate a set of candidate genes and then evaluate the likelihood that any of these candidate genes is present in the microorganism's metabolic network of interest using a variety of scoring metrics. in addition to these approaches, various genomic context analyses have also been used to identify missing metabolic genes  <cit> . specifically, a recent study exploits the availability of highly curated metabolic networks to hypothesize gene reaction interactions in less characterized organisms  <cit> . these aforementioned methods predict missing enzymes in the metabolic network by conducting sequence based comparisons of entire genomes and inferring possible metabolic functions across different microorganisms.

alternatively, a recent systems based computational approach identifies the location of missing metabolic functions in the e. coli ijr <dig> model by pinpointing discrepancies between in silico model predictions and known in vivo growth phenotypes  <cit> . subsequently, an optimization based algorithm is used to resolve these discrepancies by searching for missing metabolic functions from a candidate database of reactions. in this paper instead, we pinpoint metabolites that cannot carry any flux through them and subsequently generate hypotheses to restore connectivity. to this end, we introduce an optimization based procedure  to first identify such gaps in both single and multi-compartment metabolic networks and subsequently using an optimization based procedure  restore their connectivity using separate pathology resolving hypotheses. in contrast to the previous methods which fill gaps only by identifying missing enzymes  <cit>  or adding transport reactions  <cit> , we also explore whether these gaps can be filled by making intra model modifications. figure  <dig> pictorially illustrates how such gaps arise in metabolic reconstructions and introduces the definitions proposed in this paper to precisely describe these pathologies.

gaps in metabolic reconstructions are manifested as  metabolites which cannot be produced by any of the reactions or imported through any of the available uptake pathways in the model; or  metabolites that are not consumed by any of the reactions in the network or exported based on any existing secretion pathways. we refer to these metabolites as root no-production  and root no-consumption metabolites  respectively. at steady-state conditions no flow can pass through them due to the incomplete connectivity with the rest of the network. clearly, such pathologies are not physiologically relevant and thus must be caused by omission and/or errors in the model reconstruction process. notably, the lack of flow in root no-production metabolites and root no-consumption metabolites is propagated downstream/upstream respectively giving rise to additional metabolites that cannot carry any flow. we refer to these metabolites that are indirectly prevented from carrying flow as downstream no-production  metabolites and upstream no-consumption metabolites  respectively. it is important to note that by restoring connectivity for the root problem metabolites all upstream/downstream metabolites are also automatically fixed. we concentrate on resolving only no-production metabolites in the case of cytosolic metabolites. in the case of non-cytosolic  metabolites, we identify mechanisms to resolve both no-production and no-consumption metabolites.

for single compartment metabolic networks , we postulate three separate mechanisms for fixing no-production metabolites . we explore whether  reversing the directionality of existing reactions in the model ,  adding new reactions from a multi-species database   or finally  allowing for the direct importation of the problem metabolite restores flow into the no-production metabolite . for multi-compartment models,   we treat gaps in the cytosol differently than gaps in compartments . for cytosolic no-production metabolites, in addition to the three connectivity restoration mechanisms proposed for single compartment models, we additionally explore whether they can be fixed by adding intracellular transport reactions between compartments and the cytosol . for non-cytosolic problem metabolites, present in internal compartments, direct importation from the extracellular space is not possible. thus, their connectivity to the network is attempted to be restored based solely on reversing directionalities, adding external reactions or adding transport reactions with the cytosol. in both single and multi-compartment models, downstream/upstream no-production/consumption metabolites are automatically fixed by restoring connectivity to their corresponding root no-production/consumption metabolite. alternatively, we identify connectivity restoration mechanisms for downstream problem metabolites in addition to the indirect mechanisms through the fixing of root problem metabolites.

the proposed procedures are demonstrated on two widely used genome-scale metabolic models: e. coli  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae <cit> . the resultant connectivity resolving modifications in these models then serve as hypotheses. specifically, we test if reactions can be reversed in the e. coli model  using two independent methods. first, we query the ecocyc database  <cit>  about the reversibility of the tested reaction and subsequently we examine the reaction free energy change Δg values as approximated by henry et al  <cit> . values of Δg close to zero are indicative of a reversible reaction because the sign of Δg will be sensitive to small concentration changes in the participating metabolites. given the limited information  available to thermodynamically characterize reactions in s. cerevisiae, we only employ the first method of testing for the latter model. we test if reactions are reversible by querying the metacyc database for corresponding information; if no such information is available, we check if the same reaction is reversible in other organisms.

evidence for the presence of newly added reactions in the model is identified by checking for sequence similarity based on bidirectional blast scores searches  <cit> . next, we determine whether a particular metabolite has an external uptake/secretion route  by searching for evidence in the open literature. finally, in the case of multi-compartment models, we validate added intracellular transport reactions by examining whether metabolites with similar structures have known transport reactions in the metabolic network. the developed mathematical frameworks for identifying and filling gaps are discussed in the methods section. the next two sections describe in detail the results obtained by applying the above procedures to the two most highly cited genome-scale models of e. coli  <cit>  and saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> .

RESULTS
e. coli
in this study, we first identify all no-production metabolites  using the  formulation using the most recent e. coli genome-scale model  <cit> . all metabolites in the ijr <dig> model  <cit>  that are identified as transport metabolites are allowed to enter and leave the cell. all metabolite and reaction abbreviations used in this section are taken from the ijr <dig> model  <cit> . figure  <dig> summarizes the results obtained by using the  formulation on the ijr <dig> model. as shown in figure  <dig>  there are  <dig> no-production metabolites;  <dig> of these metabolites are root and  <dig> are downstream no-production metabolites. of the  <dig> identified no-production metabolites,  <dig> % belong to cofactor and prosthetic group biosynthesis, 25% belong to alternate carbon metabolism, 14% belong to oxidative phosphorylation,  <dig> % belong to cell envelope biosynthesis,  <dig> % belong to nucleotide salvage and the remaining  <dig> % are not assigned to any pathway. the presence of so many unbalanced metabolites is quite surprising given how extensively this model has been curated and how widely it is used.

we next proceed with the gap-filling procedure using the  formulation. we first identify the metabolites for which production mechanisms are established by reversing directionalities of existing reactions in e. coli. as shown in figure  <dig>  for  <dig> out of  <dig> no-production metabolites, production pathways are established by reversing directionality of existing reactions in e. coli. also,  <dig> out of these  <dig> require a single reaction directionality reversal while three  require the reversal of directionality of two reactions while four metabolites  require the reversal of three reactions respectively. to ensure that all  <dig> metabolites are produced in the network,  identifies that the directionalities of at least twenty eight reactions have to be reversed. it is important to note that the identified reaction directionality reversals leading to the establishment of production routes for the problematic metabolites are to a large extent unique. specifically, only two additional reaction reversal are identified when the  model is re-solved  to exhaustively identify all possible reaction reversals capable of resolving all no-production metabolites . these results indicate that the production of most of the no-production metabolites can be enabled by expanding the directionality of existing reactions in e. coli rather than adding new ones.

the reactions in bold have support in the ecocyc database. the pathways in which these reactions are present and the metabolites whose production they enable are as shown. the metabolites shown in bold are fixed by a combination of mechanisms  <dig> and  <dig> 

the validity of the identified reaction directionality reversals is examined by employing two independent procedures as stated above. first we queried the identified reaction directionalities in the ecocyc  <cit>  database. we found that eleven out of the identified  <dig> reactions are listed as reversible in ecocyc even though they are treated as irreversible in the ijr <dig>  <cit>  model . this provides independent verification for allowing reversing the directionality of these eleven reactions to be reversed when they are used in the context of the e. coli genome-scale model. as shown in table  <dig> seven out of the eleven reactions belong to cofactor and prosthetic group biosynthesis, while two belong to alternate carbon metabolism, one to cell envelope biosynthesis and one is not assigned to any specific pathway. notably, four of these eleven reactions which are treated as reversible in ecocyc  <cit>   are involved in enabling the production of more than one no-production metabolite. of the remaining nineteen reactions for which the ecocyc database does not provide positive evidence, the directionality of two reactions is unspecified whereas nine reactions take place in the direction specified in the ijr <dig> model. there is no information regarding the remaining eight reactions in the ecocyc database.

as a second method of testing, we used the free energy change values Δg of the identified reactions as approximated by henry et al  <cit> . it should be noted here that Δg values are available for only seventeen out of the  <dig> candidate reactions. it is likely that reactions that have calculated Δg values closer to zero are reversible. these Δg values are contrasted against the Δg of all the reactions present in the e. coli ijr <dig> model according to the procedure of henry et al  <cit>  . upon quantifying the uncertainty in the approximated Δg values based on the procedure by henry and coworkers most of the identified reactions  involve free energy ranges that span both negative and positive values . this indicates that there is a reasonable likelihood that these fourteen reactions are reversible. interestingly, five out of these fourteen reactions are also independently deemed as reversible based on the ecocyc data . using these two separate tracks of validation we find  <dig> % unanimity in the prediction between the two methods.

the second mechanism restores production routes by adding reactions from the database described in the previous section. as shown in figure  <dig>  eleven out of the  <dig> no-production metabolites are reconnected by adding reactions from the customized external database. the reactions and the corresponding metabolites are shown in figure  <dig>   identifies that at minimum nine reactions from the external database must be added. as seen from figure  <dig>  metabolites tcynt and cyan require the addition of the same set of five reactions from metacyc. interestingly, two of these reactions l-carnitine dehydratase and putative cyanide hydratase are e. coli reactions that are present in the metacyc database but absent in the ijr <dig> model. notably, the reaction putative cyanide hydratase is mentioned in  <cit>  as a possible annotation for a conserved protein which is transcribed by the gene ygiu. for the remaining added reactions, we determine e-values obtained by checking for sequence similarity using the blast  <cit>  algorithm between the candidate enzymes and the orfs in the e. coli genome are shown in table  <dig>  the enzyme with the best bidirectional blast score of  phenylpyruvate decarboxylase, is involved in enabling the production of four no-production metabolites . an e-value of 1e- <dig> indicates that only an expected number of 1e-21alignments with equivalent or better bit scores can occur in the database search by chance. the obtained low e-value four enzymes  are indicative that these functions may indeed be present in e. coli. since the focus of this study is to provide testable hypotheses and not to conduct a thorough bioinformatics based analysis of missing enzymes, we believe that blast scores are sufficient. alternatively, more elaborate scoring matrices based on bayesian analysis and blast searches have been published by green et al  <cit> .

candidate reactions from the metacyc database  added to enable production of no-production metabolites in e. coli.

the connectivity restoration for five out of the sixty no-production metabolites requires the combination of mechanisms  <dig> and  <dig> . specifically, for two of these metabolites , in addition to requiring the reversal of directionality of existing reactions in the ijr <dig> model  additional reactions need to be added from metacyc to enable their production. interestingly for metabolite 3dhguln the added reaction l-xylulose kinase is present in ecocyc but absent in the ijr <dig> model  <cit> .

the production of the remaining twenty two no-production metabolites  is possible only by the uptake of the corresponding metabolite from outside the cell. four of these twenty four metabolites  even though they have an extracellular component in the ijr <dig> model, there are no corresponding reactions which explicitly allow transport into the cell . due to their presence as extracellular components, it is reasonable to assume that the corresponding transport reactions may also be present. for the remaining twenty metabolites, the validity of adding uptake routes is tested by searching for corresponding evidence in literature. while no direct evidence was retrieved for the existence of uptake reactions for any of these sixteen metabolites, there exists evidence that trans-acontitate is formed spontaneously from cis-acontitate which is an intermediate in the citric acid cycle  <cit> . note that all the hypotheses generated to fill gaps are available in an additional file . in the next section we describe the results obtained by applying the  and the  procedures to the genome-scale model of saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> .

s. cerevisiae
in this study, we first identify the no-production metabolites using the modified form of  for multi-compartment models in the saccharomyces cerevisiae ind <dig> model  <cit> . all metabolite and reaction abbreviations used in this section are taken from the ind <dig> model  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of no-production metabolites across the different compartments in the saccharomyces cerevisiae ind <dig> model. as shown in figure  <dig>  a majority of the problem metabolites are in the cytosol, the mitochondria and the peroxisome. surprisingly, figure  <dig> reveals that none of the metabolites in either the peroxisome or the golgi apparatus are accessible. on the other hand, all the metabolites in the endoplasmic reticulum are connected. also, as shown in figure  <dig>  there are a number of common problem metabolites between the cytosol and the inner compartments. notably, as shown in the figure, more than 25% of the problem metabolites in the mitochondria also cannot be produced in the cytosol. this suggests that identifying production pathways for cytosolic no-production metabolites may automatically fix some of the corresponding downstream problem metabolites in the inner compartments. taking this into account, we restore flow through problem metabolites in two steps: first we identify production mechanisms for cytosolic no-production metabolites. subsequently, the identified additions/modifications that fix cytosolic no-production metabolites are appended to the original network and the problem metabolites in the remaining compartments are identified using  for each compartment separately.

connectivity restoration mechanisms for the remaining problem metabolites in the inner compartments are next identified using . figure  <dig> shows in detail the generated hypotheses to enable production of the remaining problem metabolites in non-cytosolic compartments. as shown a majority of the metabolites are fixed by reversing directionalities of existing reactions in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model. also, as shown in figure  <dig>  a large number of metabolites are fixed adding missing reactions from the metacyc database. however, it should also be noted that  cannot identify production mechanisms for about  <dig> % of all metabolites in the inner compartments. this means that none of these metabolites can be fixed by adding missing reactions from the metacyc database, reversing the directionalities of existing reactions in the model or adding intracellular transport reactions between the cytosol and the other compartments. resolving these remaining inconsistencies would require currently absent functionalities and/or metabolites in the multi-species reaction database.

as an example, we examine in detail the results obtained for the golgi apparatus. as shown in figure  <dig>   identifies that the lack of flow in the root no-production metabolite, macchitppdol, results in fifteen downstream problem metabolites.  does not identify a production mechanism for macchitppdol which would automatically enable production of the remaining fifteen metabolites. instead, it fixes ten of the sixteen no-production metabolites by adding a reaction which is downstream of macchitppdol as shown in figure  <dig>  interestingly, the enzyme guanylate kinase that catalyzes the added reaction is present in the cytosol where it catalyzes the same reaction. this information alludes to the possible presence of this activity in the golgi apparatus.

as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig>   of the problem metabolites across all compartments are fixed by reversing the directionalities of  <dig> reactions in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model. ten out of the  <dig> reactions are reversible in other organisms according to information in the metacyc  <cit>  database, four of them are always irreversible, seven have unspecified directionality in other organisms and twelve do not even have any information about the presence or absence of the corresponding enzyme in metacyc. interestingly reversing the directionalies of fao80p, a reaction that oxidizes octanoyl-coa as part of the fatty acid degradation pathway in the peroxisome, and fa80tp, a reaction that transports octanoate into the peroxisome from the cytosol, fixes 83% of all problem metabolites in the peroxisome. notably, fao80p is treated as reversible in other organisms in metacyc. a detailed list of hypotheses generated through  are provided in the supplementary material .

fifteen reactions are added to the existing saccharomyces cerevisiae model to enable the production of  <dig> problem metabolites . of these,  <dig> are cytosolic metabolites  and  <dig> are non-cytosolic metabolites ) metabolites the model. table  <dig> shows the e-values obtained by checking for sequence similarity between the candidate enzymes and the orf's in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome by performing the bidirectional blast analysis. as shown, eight of these enzymes have e-values less than 10- <dig> in both the forward and reverse directions. this is indicative that these candidate enzymes and the corresponding best hits in saccharomyces cerevisiae genome are orthologs and not paralogs  <cit> . notably, four of these eight enzymes that fix non cytosolic metabolites are already present in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome as cytosolic reactions. this means that, in addition to identifying missing reactions in the metabolic network,  predicts potential activities of existing enzymes across compartments in the model and hence, it could be used effectively to aid in deciphering additional potential locations for activities of existing enzymes in a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction.

candidate reactions from the metacyc database  added to enable production of no-production metabolites in s. cerevisiae.

the production of the  <dig>  problem metabolites in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model is enabled by adding  <dig> intracellular transport reactions between the cytosol and the remaining compartments . the  <dig> cytosolic problem metabolites are fixed atleast partially  by adding  <dig> transport reactions from the other compartments; specifically three transport reactions between mitochondria and the cytosol  and two transport reaction between the peroxisome and the cytosol . examination of the prevalent transport mechanisms in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model reveals that eight different fatty-acyl carrier protein groups can be transported between the cytosol and the mitochondria. taking into consideration the structural similarity between different acyl carrier proteins, we can hypothesize that the three added intracellular transport reactions between the cytosol and the mitochondria transporting acp, malacp and acacp are likely to be present in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model. also, because there are seven reactions that transport metabolites with coenzyme a groups from the cytosol to the peroxisome, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the transport reactions transporting ttccoa and hexccoa between the peroxisome and the cytosol may indeed be present. moving to the mitochondria, fifteen transport reactions added between the cytosol and the mitochondria serve to atleast partially  fix  <dig> problem mitochondrial metabolites. two of these transport reactions serve to transport gdp and gtp between the cytosol and the mitochondria. also, the three problem metabolites in the vacuole are fixed by adding transport reactions to transport adp and atp from the cytosol and the vacuole. finally the production of fifteen cytosolic metabolites is enabled by uptaking them directly from the extracellular space. we found no evidence in the literature to support or contradict these uptake mechanisms.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we introduced two optimization based procedures,  and , to identify and fill gaps in genome-scale metabolic reconstructions. this was achieved by pinpointing metabolites can cannot be produced or consumed in the network using  and then using  to generate hypotheses that restored flow through these metabolites. these procedures were demonstrated on the single compartment model of e. coli and the multi-compartment model of saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> . when applied to the single compartment model of e. coli, the  procedure identified that about  <dig> % of all metabolites were disjoint from the rest of metabolism. flow through a majority of these metabolites was restored by reversing directionalities of existing reactions in the e. coli model. as many as 40% of them could not be fixed by any of the postulated mechanisms instead requiring their free uptake from the extracellular space. flow through the remaining metabolites was restored by either exclusively adding missing reactions from metacyc or a combination of reversing directionalities of existing reactions in the model and adding missing reactions. interestingly, for almost 50% of the reactions identified as reversible by  had supporting evidence in the information obtained from the ecocyc database. in the case of the multi-compartment model of saccharomyces cerevisiae,  identified that approximately 30% of all metabolites in the model were disconnected. flow through 22% of them was restored by adding intracellular transport reactions in the model. connectivity in the remaining 78% of the metabolites was restored by a combination of the mechanisms discussed in the case of e. coli. this left approximately  <dig> % of all metabolites in the saccharomyces cerevisiae model whose connectivity restoration cannot be accomplished though the postulated mechanisms.

for both models we found that a substantial percentage of the metabolites are disconnected from metabolism and cannot carry any flux. despite these gaps in silico growth predictions using models of e. coli and s. cerevisiae are typically in good agreement with in vivo results  <cit> . this is primarily due to the fact that none of the identified gaps are in the well characterized central metabolism pathways and thus have no effect on growth prediction results. however, we anticipate that in de novo metabolic reconstructions of less well curated microorganisms using software applications such as the hole filler algorithm in the pathway tools software  <cit>  gaps in central parts of metabolism are likely to be present leading to erroneous in silico predictions. we believe that for such automated reconstructions of less well studied microorganisms the utility of  and  will be even more pronounced. we have already applied some of these concepts in the reconstruction of the metabolic model of mycoplasma genitalium currently underway in our group.

clearly, the role of  is to simply pinpoint a number of hypotheses which need to subsequently be tested. using the basic set of our validation test we were able to relatively confidently validate or invalidate approximately 53% of the reversal of directionality of reactions that were predicted by . an increase in experimental data, such as more information regarding Δg values of reactions, which would help determine more accurately the thermodynamic feasibilities of transformations, will help increase this percentage. also, use of recently developed computational procedures which combines available Δg values with heuristic rules to elucidate thermodynamic constraints in genome-scale models  <cit>  may also further sharpen the elucidation of correctness of the generated hypotheses. furthermore, moving beyond the bidirectional blast hits that we used to validate newly added reactions in this study, the likelihood of the presence of the added enzymes can be more accurately assessed by using previously developed cost functions  <cit> . also, by adopting concepts first proposed by reed and co-workers  <cit> , the gap-filled model can further be refined by contrasting in silico predictions of growth phenotypes with experimental observations. an inherent limitation of  is the reliance on a candidate database of reactions. one could envision extending  to consider hypothetical reactions in the spirit of the methods proposed by hatzimanikatis and coworkers  <cit> . in conclusion, here, we introduced a systematic procedure to identify and fill gaps in metabolic reconstructions. as seen by the results obtained, these procedures can be used to curate existing metabolic reconstructions. in the future, we plan to deploy these methods during the generation phase of metabolic reconstructions of less curated microorganisms.

