BACKGROUND
most of the world's biodiversity occurs in the oceans, but understanding the processes that drive speciation in marine ecosystems remains a challenge particularly due to the perceived scarcity of geographical barriers to gene flow  <cit> . although much marine diversity stems from climate-driven vicariant and colonization events  <cit> , the accumulation of phylogenetic information is revealing that a considerable amount of diversity arises during adaptive radiations  <cit> , these periods of rapid speciation associated with diversification into multiple ecological niches , have also been shown to occur in marine systems where barriers to dispersal are not obvious  <cit> .

ecotypic divergence in response to strong environmental gradients or novel habitats  is a form of ecology-driven divergent selection that can cause population substructuring and differentiation  <cit> . reproductive isolation occurs later, favouring assortative mating and facilitating speciation  <cit> . mating system and reproductive ecology can also play an important role in marine speciation , although they remain under-studied in this environment. a major question is whether the evolution of hermaphroditic selfing entities from outcrossing lineages is a major trend in the sea, in common with terrestrial plant mating system evolution  <cit> . the evolutionary shift toward selfing increases colonization potential and reproductive assurance, while also serving to maintain local adaptations in stressful environments at the cost of genetic diversity and evolvability  <cit> .

geographical events driving speciation by vicariance or colonization have raised most interest in marine systems, and one of the most significant in the northern hemisphere was the opening of the bering strait. the formation of a marine connection between the north pacific and the arctic and north atlantic oceans  <cit>  allowed trans-oceanic dispersal and divergence between pacific and atlantic sister taxa . although the pliocene opening of the bering strait has been placed at ca.  <dig>  -  <dig>  ma  <cit> , geomorphological and biological data  <cit>  indicated that earlier openings possibly occurred in the late miocene. after the pliocene opening, current patterns initially favoured atlantic to pacific exchanges  <cit>  until ca.  <dig>  ma, after the closure of the isthmus of panama. the period of global cooling leading to the quaternary ice ages  began a series of oscillations in sea level and arctic ocean ice coverage, during which the bering strait closed and reopened at least six times  <cit> . warmer periods coincided with higher trans-arctic water flow, favouring inter-ocean dispersal events  <cit> .

the brown algal family fucaceae constitutes an important ecosystem-structuring component of cold to temperate intertidal communities in the north pacific and north atlantic oceans. the wide northern hemisphere distribution of fucaceae contrasts with their australasian endemic sister families. this is thought to result from a trans-equatorial crossing with subsequent radiation in the northern hemisphere, a pattern paralleled in other families  <cit> . ancestors of the atlantic fucaceae genera ascophyllum, pelvetia and fucus, are hypothesized to have invaded the atlantic through the arctic during the last opening of the bering strait  <cit> . fucus is the only fucaceae genus that radiated extensively in the north atlantic  <cit> . the cause of this process remains a challenging question that is only beginning to be understood  <cit> . most extant genera within fucaceae are, in strong contrast with fucus, species-poor or monospecific. this allowed us to investigate which processes and events are associated with marine species radiations.

speciation in fucus may be associated with habitat-specificity  and variation in mating system and reproductive mode , with a biogeographic history shaped by glacial cycle-induced range shifts and secondary contact  <cit> . although the phylogenetic history of the genus has never been fully reconstructed despite several attempts, two major clades were identified previously using nuclear  <cit>  and mitochondrial dna markers  <cit> . the first clade is northern, cold-water and relatively stress-susceptible , and contains f. serratus and f. distichus . the second clade  has a more southern extension with generally greater stress-tolerance, and contains f. ceranoides, f. vesiculosus, f. spiralis, f. guiryi, f. virsoides and f. radicans.

our aim is to provide insight into marine speciation processes by inferring the phylogeny of the fucaceae family. the study is particularly focused on unravelling the evolutionary history of radiative speciation within the genus fucus, particularly the very speciose clade  <dig> . in order to do this, we developed phylogenetic markers and used explicit biogeographic sampling of distinct populations and potentially novel species/entities suspected in clade  <dig>  <cit> . we also provide a temporal evolutionary hypothesis by calibrating the obtained phylogenies in geological time using the fossil record from extinct members of brown algae  <cit>  and information from a dated brown algal multilocus phylogeny  <cit> . the phylogenetic framework is integrated with paleo-reconstructions from the earth's climatic history  <cit>  and landmass trends from plate tectonic movements  <cit> , to provide a hypothesis explaining the major historical events in the evolutionary history of fucaceae.

RESULTS
sequences and trees
the dataset for the multi-gene phylogenetic analysis comprised  <dig> aligned bp  stored in  <dig> partitions, each representing a different protein coding region , based on the cdna synthesized from isolated rna from  <dig> individuals representing all genera in the fucaceae.

the analyses yielded a well-defined phylogenetic hypothesis for the fucaceae. replicate runs of the bayesian approach  converged onto similar posterior distributions after less than 5% of the  <dig> generations. phylogenetic reconstructions provided high confidence except for the branching of taxa f. radicans and f. gardneri. relationships among fucus species, with the exception of the most recently diverged entity f. radicans were resolved using this cdna dataset.

genomic divergence at protein-coding loci
analysis of the  <dig> partial coding sequences provided  <dig> variable sites,  <dig> of which were identified as singletons . intra-specific nucleotide  variability in the genomic data set was low, ranging from zero to  <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the most diverse species, pelvetiopsis limitata . intra-specific diversity, measured as the average number of nucleotide differences between pairwise sequences across all loci , revealed two significantly more diverse species: p. limitata  and hesperophycus californicus . all the other species showed average values below  <dig> nucleotide differences.

number of base substitutions per site and standard error  calculated using the maximum composite likelihood method  and percentage of divergence based on average number of differences  between species. divergence levels lower than 1% as well as zero substitutions are emphasized. diagonal elements: number of pairwise differences within species.

the highest inter-species differentiation was seen between the genus fucus and all the other fucaceae, ranging from  <dig> % to a maximum of  <dig> % . the lowest differentiation between genera was that between h. californicus and p. limitata , which is close to values found between species of the two major fucus clades . the heat shock  <dig> family protein-coding gene had a 3-codon insertion in silvetia compressa that clearly differentiated this species, despite it displaying low genetic differentiation from a sister genus, here a. nodosum .

multi-gene phylogeny of the family fucaceae
both maximum likelihood and bayesian-based reconstruction algorithms yielded similar topologies , differing mostly in the branch lengths and support values. all current species were resolved except the recent baltic species f. radicans, and all nodes that split different species showed high support for both algorithms. phylogenies built using cdna nucleotide sequences therefore resulted in much improved resolution over previously used markers, despite lower genetic distances than earlier described with its. re-analysis of its data  <cit>  confidently inferred the ascophyllum - silvetia clade to root the remaining divergence events in the fucaceae using the  <dig> cdna loci.

the  <dig> protein-coding genes identified the same two major clades within fucus as its  and mitochondrial dna  <cit> . in fucus clade  <dig>  two subclades were again recovered. dioecious f. serratus and the hermaphroditic group corresponding to f. distichus sensu lato, in which our sampling of the geographic extremes revealed low intra-specific divergence.

in contrast with the polytomy found previously  <cit> , species relationships within clade  <dig> were resolved , with the exception of f. radicans . the earliest diverging lineage leads to the estuarine species f. ceranoides. this is followed by the discovery that f. vesiculosus is not monophyletic, but is split according to geographical location of the samples into a northern , and a southern clade. the latter shares a common ancestor with the hermaphroditic species in this lineage. the southern f. vesiculosus samples appear to form two distinct clades of geographically similar individuals  but they are grouped in a single clade in the bayesian inferences based on the coalescent and yule speciation models . the recently derived species f. radicans was not resolved and grouped with sympatric northern f. vesiculosus. all of these dioecious species/entities were basal to the clade containing the three hermaphroditic species, the mediterranean endemic f. virsoides branching first, followed by the clade containing f. spiralis and the recently described southern species f. guiryi  <cit> , that was clearly differentiated from f. spiralis with high node values for both algorithms. phylogenetic trees in figure  <dig> were built after excluding f. guiryi individuals from the introgressed contact range . the resulting trees including those individuals  show the effects of introgressed individuals in confounding the inference of vertical lineage splitting  <cit> .

evolutionary rates and molecular dating
bayesian mcmc inference resulted in an estimate of the mean evolutionary rate across fucaceae of  <dig>  substitutions per thousand years . we emphasize that, taking into account the confidence intervals, the evolutionary rates for the separate coding genes largely overlapped and the coefficient of variation across the tree was  <dig> . the nucleotide substitutions per site range from values close to zero for comparisons within fucus spp. up to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for the whole family .

coalescent theory and the yule speciation model were used to evaluate the history of fucaceae . trees agree well with bayesian and ml phylogenetic reconstructions . both demographic models broadly coincided when used to infer dates for the nodes placed near the origin of all fucaceae genera, but differed considerably in dating recent speciation events, particularly within fucus. the time intervals reported are maximally conservative and correspond to the range for both demographic models together. our molecular dating leads to an estimate for the origin of the diversification of fucaceae around  <dig> - <dig>  million years ago  . the origin of the lineage leading to pelvetia canaliculata, eventually resulting in an atlantic invasion, was dated at  <dig>  to  <dig>  ma. divergence between the lineages leading to ascophyllum nodosum and to the genus silvetia  was coincident in time with the split of the lineage leading to h. californicus and p. limitata from the fucus genus lineage . both of these splits correspond to a pacific-atlantic crossing by members of the lineages now represented by the genera ascophyllum and fucus in the atlantic. the diversification of the genus fucus into two clades was estimated at  <dig>  to  <dig>  ma. all the predicted speciation events within each fucus clade were placed within the last  <dig>  million years .

tests of mating system evolutionary hypotheses
the best fitting model for the different diversification hypotheses related to the evolution of mating systems  was the one-parameter markov k-state model . this model indicates that speciation  and extinction  rates were state-independent λdioecious = λhermaphroditic =  <dig> ; μdioecious = λhermaphroditic =  <dig> ) and that the transition between character states was also bidirectional and state-independent . ancestral state reconstruction from the scaled likelihood of every state of the character  resulted in poor resolution of deeper nodes, showing equal likelihood for either character state . the node describing the state of the mrca of all fucus species showed higher scaled likelihood for the state of dioecy , as well as the other nodes involved in the evolution of the genus . however the two more recent ancestors of f. virsoides, f. spiralis and f. guiryi were estimated to have been hermaphroditic . the common ancestor of hesperophycus and pelvetiopsis was also estimated as having been hermaphroditic .

speciation , extinction  and transition  rates between the two states of the mating system character . complete asymmetric model and different scenarios of state-independent and state-dependent diversification , and unidirectional and bidirectional transitions were tested: 1) asymmetric model; 2) asymmetric speciation or state-independent extinction and transition rates; 3) asymmetric extinction or state-independent speciation and transition rates; 4) source - sink system or state-independent diversification rates and transition from hermaphroditic to dioecious state constrained to 0; 5) source - sink system or state-independent diversification rates and transition from dioecious to hermaphroditic state constrained to 0; 6) symmetric parameters or mk <dig> model; 7) sink-sink system or mk <dig> model  <cit> . log-likelihood, akaike information criteria  and log-likelihood ratio test  are also provided for comparison between models.

tests of geographic hypotheses related to the bering strait oceanic boundary
the testing of hypotheses related to geographic  origin and diversification  showed the geosse model as having the best fit . the model indicates that diversification rates were state-dependent , and that the dispersal rates between the two geographic regions  were almost unidirectional from the pacific . the dec model also reported low dispersal  and extinction  rates . ancestral state reconstruction was also performed for the sink-sink geosse model  and dec models . deeper nodes were poorly resolved by the sink-sink model, showing similar scaled likelihoods for either character state , but dec provided better estimates for the alternative scenarios . estimates of the geographic origin of the family were similar for pacific and atlantic oceans using the geosse model , while the dec model placed the origin in the pacific  or in both biogeographic areas across the bering strait . this last observation agrees with the rate of between-region mode of speciation obtained by the geosse model  that was higher than within-region speciation rates. alternatively, these results also agree with hypothetical divergence along the boundary between both regions in the arctic ocean. the most recent common ancestor to fucus was estimated as atlantic . finally, both models predicted an atlantic ancestor of f. serratus and f. distichus .

speciation , extinction  and dispersal  rates between the two biogeographical regions on either side of the bering strait . complete asymmetric model and different scenarios of state-independent and state-dependent diversification , and unidirectional and bidirectional dispersal were tested: 1) asymmetric model; 2) asymmetric speciation, state-independent extinction and dispersal rates; 3) asymmetric extinction, state-independent speciation and dispersal rates; 4) symmetric parameters; 7) sink-sink system  <cit> . log-likelihood, akaike information criteria  and log-likelihood ratio test  are also provided for comparison between models. dispersal and local extinction parameters estimated by dec models are also shown  <cit> .

discussion
a multi-gene phylogenetic approach resulted in a much finer resolution of relationships at the tips of the tree compared with previous phylogenies. this framework allowed the estimation of dates of divergence and patterns of speciation across the family and within the recently radiated genus fucus.

dating inter-ocean divergence events in fucaceae
the models used returned similar dated intervals on deeper nodes corresponding to the splitting events of ancestral fucaceae lineages, but were less congruent in dating recent speciation events. this is likely due to the constraints of the priors used  <cit> . although we remain conservative by reporting the range for both models, the narrower and more recent coalescent-based intervals at the tips of the tree are more in agreement with the biological processes associated with speciation in these taxa  <cit> .

the most likely origin of the fucaceae is in the pacific ocean during the mid to late miocene , when an ancestor of the fucaceae might have been able to colonize the north pacific, splitting from the australasian sister lineages xiphophoraceae and hormosiraceae  <cit> . despite support for both alternative hypotheses for the fucaceae geographic origin, a pacific origin involves a more direct route from the southern  to the northern pacific , whereas the alternative hypothesis of an atlantic origin requires a more complex dispersal path. a pacific origin is also consistent with the northward drift of the australasian landmass towards eurasia in the miocene and a gradual decrease in global temperatures , which would have favored crossing of the equatorial fringe. the origin of the fucaceae would then be due to subsequent divergence in the north pacific.

our data indicate that four independent fucaceae lineages crossed the bering strait. the first crossing, estimated at  <dig> - <dig>  ma , involved the splitting of the atlantic lineage leading to pelvetia canaliculata, and could only have taken place during the earliest openings of the bering strait suggested for the late miocene . pacific diatoms found in atlantic marine sediments indicate the existence of a strait at that time  <cit> , supporting such early pacific-atlantic colonizations. the alternatives to this scenario, other than methodological bias in dating, require either accelerated lineage divergence following the trans-arctic crossing, or the start of divergence before the trans-arctic crossing. the latter is unlikely because pelvetia is currently monotypic with no extant pacific representatives. while the extreme upper intertidal distribution and stress tolerance of atlantic p. canaliculata, makes accelerated selective ecological divergence a plausible explanation, it is unnecessary to invoke it if earlier openings of the bering strait occurred  <cit> . a second  trans-arctic crossing led to the atlantic genus ascophyllum, following a split from its pacific sister genus silvetia, coincident with the bering strait opening at  <dig> - <dig>  ma  <cit> . these results contradict the previous its phylogeny of  <cit>  but agree with these data after their re-analysis with better fit models . it revealed ascophyllum as sister to the pacific genus silvetia and placed the ascophyllum-silvetia in a basal clade to the fucaceae, a hypothesis also raised by  <cit> .

the third  trans-arctic crossing, and the most successful in terms of subsequent speciation, was the split between the current hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis in the pacific and the lineage leading to fucus, of which all current species are atlantic except the circum-arctic f. distichus complex. this divergence, estimated at  <dig> - <dig>  ma, coincides both in time and reproductive mode  with the ascophyllum lineage split from the silvetia clade. the timing of both lineage splitting events leading to ascophyllum and fucus centers around the opening of the bering strait  <dig> - <dig>  ma when, despite moving against the predominant atlantic-pacific flow, the warmer climate  might have facilitated stepping stone colonization and migration across the arctic. ancestral state reconstructions  place the most recent common ancestor of fucus in the atlantic/arctic ocean basin, suggesting that it was here that subsequent diversification took place. the alternative hypothesis, deserving further study, is that the opening of the bering strait led to a vicariant split between clade  <dig> in the pacific and clade  <dig> in the atlantic. an additional interesting question remains as to why, following similar colonization conditions by ecologically similar lineages, ascophyllum is currently a monotypic genus whereas fucus underwent relatively extensive speciation.

the fourth trans-arctic crossing involved the evolutionary history of arctic vicariance in fucus clade  <dig>  the ancestor to clade  <dig> was estimated as atlantic , and the atlantic-pacific dichotomy might be more accurately described as arctic to agree with the geographical and ecological range of current representatives. the ancestral state reconstruction implies that f. serratus/f. distichus diverged in the atlantic and/or within the arctic basin, which represent the same side of the bering strait, with subsequent invasion of the pacific by the f. distichus lineage. although atlantic  and pacific  samples of f. distichus used in this phylogeny correspond to the geographical extremes of the ranges found within the f. distichus complex  <cit> , estimated pacific-atlantic divergence times based on coalescence are very recent  . thus our data do not contradict the current designation of these lineages as a single species, f. distichus , but do not rule out low levels of vicariant divergence , also in agreement with coyer et al.  <cit> .

driving south: a biogeographical hypothesis for the evolution of fucus clade 2
the earliest branching member of the clade is the dioecious lineage f. ceranoides. the contemporary cold-temperate distribution of f. ceranoides from norway to north portugal is similar to the present day range of f. serratus in clade  <dig>  <cit> , which has a coincident speciation time . nuclear and organelle phylogenies for f. ceranoides are congruent in the southern part of the range, while to the north of the english channel populations harbour exclusively introgressed organellar genomes captured from f. vesiculosus that have spread by genetic surfing during postglacial range expansion  <cit> . this is not the only case of organellar introgression in this clade  <cit> , emphasizing that organellar sequences can be equivocal for phylogenetic inferences in taxa prone to introgression. f. vesiculosus was shown here to be polyphyletic. two clades were well separated within f. vesiculosus according to their range distributions from: i) iberia to the south versus, ii) the english channel to the north. these are also differentiated at microsatellite loci  <cit> , both in allelic frequencies and in the presence of private alleles, but were not recovered previously with mitochondrial markers  <cit> , possibly due to masking by extensive organellar introgression-expansion dynamics that can take place in fucus species  <cit> . importantly, the southern f. vesiculosus share a common ancestor with the remaining members of the same lineage, all of which are hermaphroditic. the two divergent lineages in what is currently named f. vesiculosus coincide in present distribution with two marine glacial refugia . a split of southern f. vesiculosus into two clades suggested by certain analyses  deserves further investigation, but could result from introgressive signatures with f. guiryi, which may be found in sympatry in some regions  <cit> , but not in the southernmost sites where the two species are allopatric  <cit>  .

divergence of the hermaphroditic lineage in clade  <dig>  from their dioecious sister lineage may have been driven or at least maintained by reproductive isolation derived from a selfing reproductive mode. once a hermaphroditic lineage arises, selfing may follow rapidly, reinforcing genetic isolation and favouring subsequent differentiation  <cit> . selfing can be advantageous in marginal and/or stressful habitats to conserve local adaptation and for reproductive assurance, both key selective pressures for intertidal broadcast spawners such as fucus  <cit> .

the earliest divergence within the hermaphroditic clade is f. virsoides, currently restricted to the northern adriatic sea, a possible remnant from a more extensive distribution during a cooler glacial period. more recently, the lineage split between f. guiryi and f. spiralis coincides with southern vs. northern ranges. along the southern range, fucus species are segregated by habitat, i.e., open coast  versus estuaries and coastal lagoons , whereas further north, where they co-occur, f. guiryi undergoes introgression  <cit> , which was hypothesized to reflect the absence of reinforcement during allopatric evolution  <cit> . the phylogenetic position of the high intertidal f. spiralis reported here is incongruent with mitochondrial data  <cit> , possibly another case of extensive organellar introgression in this genus.

our data, like previous its and mitochondrial data  <cit> , do not resolve the relationship between the recently described f. radicans and f. vesiculosus. this is unsurprising given the suggested timescale of divergence , since the opening of the baltic sea , possibly facilitated by high adaptive potential of the common ancestor with f. vesiculosus  <cit> .

mating system evolution
the evolution of reproductive mode in the fucaceae has followed a reticulate pattern of alternating dioecious and hermaphroditic lineages that challenges current understanding of mating system evolutionary trends . methods to estimate the influence of species' traits on lineage diversification establish hermaphroditic lineages as ancestral in the family, evolving into dioecious lineages, folowed by switches from dioecy to hermaphroditism in the genus fucus, contradicting earlier suggestions  <cit> . there is considerable support for hermaphroditism  as the ancestral state in plants  <cit> , and simple genetic mechanisms of dioecious sex determination and sex chromosome evolution have been proposed . it is intriguing that two of the three novel atlantic lineages presumably coincided with a switch to dioecy . the evolution of dioecy and increased evolutionary potential  <cit>  may therefore have facilitated long-term establishment in the atlantic, driven in part by the availability of extensive and novel habitats favouring large and dense populations. in contrast, hermaphroditic lineages are better colonizers of marginal habitats via increased reproductive assurance and the maintenance of locally adaptive traits.

the recent evolutionary trajectory of reproductive mode has been a switch towards hermaphroditism, and highly selfing mating systems, at least within fucus lineage  <dig>  <cit> . the transition from outcrossing to selfing is common in plants  <cit> , but with little evidence for reversion, suggesting an evolutionary dead-end  <cit> . this in turn suggests that the hermaphroditic ancestors of the dioecious lineages leading to ascophyllum and fucus were not highly selfing.

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of concatenated cdna sequences from  <dig> partial coding regions resolved the evolutionary history of the fucaceae, and allowed the dating of splitting events and tests of hypotheses concerning recent drivers of speciation. diversification of the family could be placed in the late-mid miocene. four independent trans-arctic colonisations were inferred, coincident with the split of the lineages leading to 1) pelvetia canaliculata, 2) ascophyllum nodosum, 3) the genus fucus, and more recently 4) in the f. distichus species complex. two dioecious lineages  evolved in the atlantic/arctic from hermaphroditic ancestors. despite an earlier origin of the genus fucus, most current species have evolved within a relatively short time frame starting 4- <dig> ma in the pleistocene. both fucus clades contain dioecious and hermaphroditic lineages, and recent speciation trends in clade  <dig> have given rise to hermaphroditic lineages from dioecious ancestors. recent radiation in fucus clade  <dig> coincides with divergence in physiological tolerance to environmental stresses and colonization of novel habitats at range edges, suggesting ecological speciation. in this clade, selfing lineages occur in the most extreme habitats, likely linked with reproductive assurance and the maintenance of local adaptation.

