BACKGROUND
competition within and between species shapes populations, governs community dynamics, and determines biodiversity  <cit> . competition occurs in two forms: individuals compete indirectly by consuming resources and thus depriving others of those ; and can compete directly by harming others through antagonistic interactions   <cit> . direct antagonistic interactions through the production and release of antibiotics have been recognized as key drivers of microbial community dynamics  <cit> . antibiotic-mediated competition is ubiquitous among bacteria and has various eco-evolutionary roles: antibiotics can kill competitors to enable the colonization of crowded habitats , enhance virulence  <cit> , and facilitate infection  <cit> . in a broader ecological context, antibiotic-mediated competition has been suggested to drive diversification  <cit>  and promote biodiversity . it is becoming increasingly clear that stress responses to dna damage or nutrient limitation are major inducers of antibiotic production in many species  <cit> . however, it remains unclear how the regulation of antibiotic-mediated antagonistic traits shapes competition in bacterial communities. we therefore lack understanding of how environmental cues, through such regulatory processes, influence the biodiversity of bacterial communities.

we investigate colicin-mediated chemical warfare by escherichia coli in spatially structured habitats. e. coli actively compete with fellow members of the same  species by producing narrow-spectrum proteinaceous antibiotics—colicins—and releasing those into the environment  <cit> . colicinogeny is widespread in natural e. coli populations: approximately half of all naturally occurring e. coli is capable of producing at least one type of colicin, while more than half is resistant to at least one colicin, a small fraction of naturally occurring e. coli is sensitive to all existing colicins . despite the killing potential that colicin production provides, colicin producer strains often coexist with sensitive and resistant non-producing strains in natural communities  <cit> . this apparent paradox is often explained by means of a cyclical competitive hierarchy—akin to the game of rock-paper-scissors—that may arise from the interaction of a colicin-producer, a resistant non-producer, and a colicin-sensitive strain  <cit> . theoretical studies indicate that in a spatially structured habitat, a cyclical competitive hierarchy can stabilize community dynamics and thus support biodiversity . in a laboratory implementation of such a system, an e. coli strain producing colicin e <dig> , a resistant non-producer strain, and a strain sensitive to colicin e <dig> have been shown to coexist in a dynamic equilibrium: on solid agar plates colicin producers killed and displaced sensitive cells, sensitive cells outgrew and displaced resistant cells that in turn displaced producers. by contrast, in a well-mixed flask lacking spatial structure, biodiversity was rapidly lost because of eradication of the sensitive strain and subsequent outcompetition of the producer by the resistant strain  <cit> .

coexistence , however, critically depends on the relative competitiveness of the three strains and is sensitive to factors as community size, habitat structure, killing range of the producer, and expression of the colicin operon . additional file 1: figure s <dig> presents a spatially explicit model that illustrates the community dynamics for various interaction scenarios. our model shows that asymmetric competition  indeed jeopardizes biodiversity and often leads to the extinction of two strains. as experimental studies indicate that strong asymmetries indeed exist in the colicin-mediated community  <cit> , it is relevant to ask if rock-paper-scissors mediated coexistence of the three strains is robust, or whether it is confined to a small region of parameter-space. regulation of the colicin operon is likely to be essential in determining the outcome of colicin-mediated competition, as the conditions under which colicin is produced and released govern the community dynamics. recent findings suggest a link between nutrient conditions  and colicin production and release : production of colicins 1b, k, and the lysis protein of colicin e <dig>  are controlled by nutrient-responsive regulators  <cit> . environmental factors such as the type and amount of nutrients present in a habitat, may thus have a marked impact on colicin-mediated community dynamics and the persistence of biodiversity.

here, we study the community dynamics of colicin e <dig> producing, sensitive, and resistant non-producing strains in spatially structured habitats. using microfabrication, we create microhabitats that mimic the micro-scale spatial structure of natural bacterial habitats such as soil and the gut . we investigate the influence of different growth media on community dynamics and the persistence of biodiversity in those habitats. a fluorescent reporter for colicin production allows us to determine under what conditions colicin is being produced and released. our results demonstrate that e. coli utilizes information regarding nutrient conditions to decide whether or not to autolyse and release colicin into the environment. colicin release, in turn, affects the community dynamics and translates into either loss or persistence of biodiversity in the habitats. in particular, we reveal the significance of carbon storage regulator a  in integrating autolysis rates from nutrient availability by e. coli. we furthermore show that the three strains can coexist without interacting according to a rock-paper-scissors game and discover an alternative path to coexistence in which csra-mediated lysis repression allows producer, sensitive, and resistant cells to thrive in close proximity. exploring and manipulating the interplay between the environment, regulation, and community dynamics, allows us to understand how molecular-level regulatory mechanisms that govern interference competition give rise to community-level biodiversity patterns.

RESULTS
community dynamics and the persistence of biodiversity depend on nutrient type
we investigated the community dynamics of a colicin e <dig> producer, a resistant non-producer, and a colicin e <dig> sensitive strain in structured habitats in various growth media. using microfabrication, we created spatially structured microhabitats consisting of  <dig> habitat-patches connected by corridors . microfabrication allows us to create habitats that are spatially structured at the micrometer scale and perform replica experiments using various growth media  <cit> . similar to bacteria living in natural habitats, cells inhabiting a microhabitat can switch between a free-swimming  and surface-associated  lifestyle. switching between these modes allows cells to develop multicellular aggregates and disperse from those giving rise to a self-structured community that remains dynamic for days  <cit> . time-lapse microscopy of fluorescently labeled versions of the three strains enables us to study the community dynamics at high spatiotemporal resolution  <cit>  .figure  <dig> 
community dynamics in spatially structured microhabitats.
 schematic  and cartoon  showing a microhabitat consisting of  <dig> patches  connected by corridors . all  <dig> patches are connected to growth-medium reservoirs by  <dig> nm deep slits preventing bacteria from entering the reservoirs but allowing the diffusion of e.g. nutrients and waste. microhabitats are sealed using a cover slip.  kymographs  of representative sections of microhabitat experiments and the corresponding growth curves in lb , m9-amino acids , and m9-glucose . in all three media, producer  and resistant cells  grow readily. sensitive cells  show no growth in lb and m9-amino acids, and sometimes turn filamentous . in m9-glucose however, sensitive cells show exponential growth ) in close proximity to producer and resistant cells.


growth and biodiversity through time in different media.
 mean habitat-wide per-capita growth rates through time of producer , resistant , and sensitive  cells calculated from three replicate microhabitat experiments per medium, the dashed line indicates the standard error of the mean . insets show the initial phase in detail and demonstrate that the growth rate of the sensitive strain fluctuates around zero in lb  and m9-amino acids  but is positive in m9-glucose .  biodiversity through time is calculated at the level of an entire habitat as shannon’s index , full lines indicate the mean of three independent experiments, dashed lines indicate the sem. the dashed line at ln depicts maximum diversity for  <dig> types.



in order to assess the impact of the three growth media on biodiversity quantitatively, we measured the biodiversity of replicate microhabitat experiments by calculating shannon’s diversity index through time. shannon’s index reflects the relative abundance of strains in a microhabitat and peaks at a value of ln≈ <dig>  when all three strains are present at equal frequencies. in both lb and m9-amino acids medium, the biodiversity index stabilizes at values ≤ ln, the maximum biodiversity attainable when only  <dig> strains co-inhabit a habitat . this value reflects the presence of producer and resistant e. coli and indicates the  extinction of sensitive cells. often a small number of nondividing  sensitive cells could be discerned hours after inoculation in lb or m9-amino acids, indicating that sensitive cells are not always entirely eradicated. since colicin-mediated killing is an active process requiring energy  <cit> , dormant sensitive cells assuming a persister-like state might remain unaffected by colicin as long as they do not resume growth. as evidenced by the per-capita growth rates all three strains show growth in m9-glucose . this growth translates into a biodiversity index with a value that exceeds ln confirming the long-term coexistence of the three strains . colicin-producing cells do not prevent the growth of colicin sensitive cells in m9-glucose, even when growing in close proximity to each other . co-localized growth indicates that coexistence of the three strains in m9-glucose is not the result of spatial rock-paper-scissors dynamics but is caused by other factors, possibly by differential regulation of the colicin operon in different growth media.

to probe whether the community exhibits different dynamics in another spatial setting, we repeated the experiments performed in lb medium by inoculating the producer strain at one end of the habitat, and the resistant and sensitive strains at the opposite end . in this scenario, the two populations—producer only versus sensitive and resistant—enter the habitat ∼ <dig> mm apart and expand towards each other. when asymmetrically inoculated, competition will mainly take place at the colliding population fronts. in contrast, when inoculating all strains from both sides as discussed above, the three strains come face-to-face in all patches and competitive interactions occur between smaller populations over smaller spatial scales. we observed that in the asymmetric scenario, all three strains grow to high densities but the populations do not mix. instead, an unoccupied zone of several hundred micrometers forms in between the producer population on one side and the resistant/sensitive population on the other . this shows that although coexistence of the three strains is not possible in lb at the scale of micrometers , the three strains may coexist by spatial separation at larger scales .

colicin induction and release depend on nutrient conditions
the co-localized growth of sensitive and producer cells in m9-glucose prompted us to investigate the nutrient dependence of expression of the colicin e <dig> operon. due to producer-sensitive coexistence in m9-glucose, we hypothesized that expression of the colicin operon is likely to be lower in m9-glucose when compared to m9-amino acids and lb medium. transcription of the colicin e <dig> operon is part of the sos regulon and thus strongly repressed by lexa  <cit> . when the sos response is induced, reca stimulates autocleavage of lexa allowing transcription of the colicin operon. the colicin e <dig> protein is encoded by the first gene in the operon, followed by the immunity gene and the lysis gene . premature transcription of the downstream lysis gene is prevented by a transcriptional terminator between the immunity and lysis genes; lysis gene expression thus relies on transcriptional readthrough and is transcribed at a lower rate than colicin e <dig>  sos responsive genes are generally subject to expression heterogeneity  <cit>  and since colicin is released through self-destructive lysis, it follows that the operon can only be expressed in a fraction of the population to ensure population viability  <cit> .

we monitored the activity of the colicin e <dig> promoter  by placing the fluorescent protein e2crimson under the control of psos. figure 3a-d shows e2crimson expression at various phases of growth measured by flow cytometry. as expected, the colicin e <dig> promoter was only active in a fraction of the producer cells. in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , we observed an increase in the population fraction that induced the colicin operon in stationary phase in lb medium . in m9-amino acids, both the fraction of induced cells, and the level of expression increased upon entry into stationary phase and showed a decline in late stationary phase . interestingly, the expression distribution at the entry of stationary phase in m9-amino acids is trimodal: the majority of cells exhibits no expression, while the cells that do induce the colicin operon can be divided into a low-induction population  and a high-induction population . to our surprise, we found that both the fraction of induced cells and the level of induction of the colicin e <dig> promoter in m9-glucose were higher than in lb and m9-amino acids . this indicates that the co-localized growth of producer and sensitive cells observed in microhabitats in m9-glucose , can not be explained by the absence of colicin production when growing on glucose. flow cytometry of cultures grown in m <dig> medium supplemented with glycerol or acetate shows expression profiles comparable to m9-glucose, suggesting that induction of the colicin operon is similar when growing on different sugars . the e2crimson expression profile in m <dig> medium supplemented with both glucose and amino acids  is similar to that of m <dig> supplemented with glucose alone, showing a gradual increase of induction of the colicin operon along the growth curve and reaching a maximum in late stationary phase. the decline of the highly-induced population fraction observed in late stationary phase m9-amino acids cultures, however, does not appear in m9-glucose + amino acids.figure  <dig> 
colicin production and release depend on growth phase and medium.
 mean histograms of e2crimson expression measured using flow cytometry at various stages of growth of duplicate experiments in lb , m9-amino acids , m9-glucose , and m9-glucose + amino acids . e2crimson serves as a proxy for colicin production. colors of histograms correspond to the color-coded time-points on the corresponding growth curves . the first bin of all histograms  is not included for clarity. the population fraction that expresses e2crimson  increases along the growth curve in all media, the expression distribution has a distinct profile for the four media.  yfp expression histograms in lb , m9-amino acids , m9-glucose , and m9-glucose + amino acids  throughout the growth phase of a strain carrying plasmid pcole <dig> Δ
cel::eyfp. yfp expression is a proxy for lysis protein production.



to interpret these observations, it is important to realize that the expression distributions in figure 3a-d represent cells that induced the colicin operon, but did not yet lyse. high induction levels can therefore have multiple causes: they may result from strong induction of the colicin operon, from a reduced lysis rate, or both. in order to distinguish between these scenarios we created a lysis knock-out by replacing the lysis gene  with yfp. analyzing the yfp signal of this strain showed that expression of the lysis gene is not directly correlated with activity of the sos promoter, indicating that additional regulation is at play . in lb medium, the lysis gene is highly expressed during exponential phase and decreases in activity upon entry into stationary phase. the simultaneous increase in e2crimson signal  is thus likely to be  caused by e2crimson build-up due to lysis repression in stationary phase. in m9-amino acids, m9-glucose, and m9-glucose + amino acids the lysis gene is expressed at lower levels when compared to lb medium, which may lead to intracellular colicin build-up. in m9-glucose and m9-glucose + amino acids stationary-phase cultures, the high e2crimson signal  and small population fraction expressing yfp  together suggest that when colicin production is induced in the presence of glucose, lysis is strongly repressed. although expression of the lysis gene is certainly lower in m9-amino acids when compared to lb, there is significant expression of the lysis gene in late exponential and early stationary phase when cells are cultured in m <dig> medium supplemented with amino acids only. expression at those times is strongly repressed when m9-amino acids medium is supplemented with glucose. together these observations indicate that lysis repression and subsequent colicin build-up are triggered by high-glucose conditions, additional high amino acids content does not reverse this behavior.

using time-lapse live-cell imaging, we verified that producer cells indeed show a greatly reduced lysis rate in m9-glucose when compared to lb. figure  <dig> presents typical single-cell induction curves in lb and m9-glucose medium, indicating that lysis dynamics vary markedly: in lb medium 44%  and 15%  of the induced cells  lyse within  <dig> hours after induction. in m9-glucose however, only 1%  of induced cells  lyse within  <dig> hours after induction. these observations demonstrate that the vast majority of cells that express the colicin operon in m9-glucose medium do not release the produced colicin into the environment. the co-localized growth of resistant, producer, and sensitive cells in m9-glucose microhabitats is thus likely caused by an inhibition of colicin release and not by the absence of colicin production.figure  <dig> 
colicin release in lb and m9-glucose. representative microscopy images and induction-lysis curves of cells growing in lb  and m9-glucose  expressing e2crimson under control of the colicin e <dig> promoter  and having constitutive yfp expression . panel  shows induction-lysis curves of three cells labeled in image t
 <dig> of . e2crimson first rises, 2– <dig> hours after induction cells show a sharp drop in fluorescence indicating a lysis event. a faint red signal shows the remainder of the cell body after lysis. e2crimson time-traces in m9-glucose  of the cells labelled in  show that induced cells do not lyse and remain intact for periods longer than  <dig> hours.



csra determines biodiversity by modulating the lysis rate
next, we investigated the mechanism responsible for the nutrient dependence of the lysis rate. it was recently shown that carbon storage regulator a  can repress translation of the colicin e <dig> lysis gene by preventing ribosomal binding to its mrna  <cit> . sequencing of the colicin e <dig> plasmid revealed that the colicin e <dig> lysis gene also has a csra binding site. we therefore hypothesized that the strong reduction of the lysis rate in m9-glucose medium was due to repression by csra. yang et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that mutating the first two nucleotides of the csra binding site  relieves csra-mediated repression of the e <dig> lysis gene. in order to verify that the reduced lysis rate in m9-glucose was indeed caused by csra repression, we introduced this mutation into the colicin e <dig> operon yielding plasmid pcole2-tt. flow cytometry data of e2crimson expression  of producer cells harboring pcole2-tt are presented in figure  <dig>  these data demonstrate that csra-mediated lysis-repression indeed has a strong influence on colicin build-up within cells, and that relief of csra repression leads to a dramatic change in the expression distribution of the colicin operon. e2crimson expression of producers carrying pcole2-tt has shifted to lower values and is detected in a smaller population-fraction when compared to producers carrying the wild-type colicin e <dig> plasmid . this shift is most prominent in m9-glucose but also clearly visible in lb and m9-amino acids. using time-lapse live-cell imaging, we verified that producers harboring pcole2-tt indeed readily lyse in m9-glucose  which further demonstrates that the shift in the e2crimson expression-distribution of producers carrying the mutant plasmid is due to increased lysis.figure  <dig> 
relief of csra repression prevents colicin build-up through increased lysis. expression histograms of e2crimson through the growth phase of producer cells carrying the mutant pcole2-tt plasmid grown in lb , m9-amino acids , m9-glucose , and m9-glucose + amino acids , measured using flow cytometry. histogram colors correspond to time points along the corresponding growth curve , grey lines represent histograms of producers carrying the wild-type plasmid . expression profiles of producers harboring the mutant plasmid have shifted to lower expression values and show a decreased fraction of induced cells when compared to expression distributions of producers carrying the wild-type plasmid.
relief of csra repression increases lysis and results in loss of biodiversity in m9-glucose.
 kymograph of a section of a microhabitat showing typical community dynamics of sensitive , resistant  and pcole2-tt carrying producer cells . producer and resistant cells grow readily while sensitive cells either show no growth, become filamentous, or die.  corresponding growth curves  of the section shown in .  microscopy images and induction-lysis curves of producer cells carrying the pcole2-tt mutant plasmid, the e2crimson reporter for colicin induction , and expressing yfp constitutively  growing in m9-glucose. induction-lysis curves of the cells labelled in the microscopy images show a steep drop in fluorescence intensity after induction, indicating lysis.



the marked effect that csra has on producer cell lysis led us to hypothesize that the co-localized growth of sensitive, producer, and resistant cells that we observed in microhabitats filled with m9-glucose medium  may be explained by a reduced lysis rate of the producers. in this scenario, producers do indeed produce colicin in m9-glucose but refrain from releasing it, which safeguards sensitive cells growing in close proximity. in order to address whether this indeed is the case, we investigated the community dynamics of wild-type sensitive and resistant strains, and a producer strain carrying the mutant pcole2-tt plasmid in m9-glucose medium. in three replica microhabitat-experiments, sensitive cells initially showed some growth but ceased growth before resistant and producer cells did . the growth arrest of sensitive cells in the presence of producers carrying pcole2-tt in m9-glucose, shows that the community dynamics clearly differ from the m9-glucose microhabitat experiments performed with the wild-type producer, where the sensitive strain sustained growth longer than the resistant and producer strains. in agreement with the wild-type community in lb, filamentous growth of sensitive cells could be observed in m9-glucose in the presence of producers carrying pcole2-tt, indicating that producers carrying the mutant plasmid indeed release colicin into the environment and harm sensitive cells. these results demonstrate that csra-mediated lysis-repression has a strong impact on the community dynamics of colicin producing, resistant, and sensitive strains and suggest a key role for csra in determining whether biodiversity in this community will be maintained or lost.

discussion
tracking the dynamics of colicin producer, resistant non-producer, and sensitive cells at high spatiotemporal resolution has revealed that community dynamics depend critically on the environment. our results demonstrate that modulation of the colicin release rate determines whether the three strains coexist at small spatial scales, or whether the sensitive strain is eradicated. this observation establishes a direct link between nutrient availability  and chemical warfare . this coupling is implemented by csra, which translates environmental cues into antibiotic-mediated community dynamics. csra was first discovered as a master regulator of carbon metabolism  <cit> , but is now also emerging as a regulator of virulence genes, toxin secretion, and other behaviors . both carbon metabolism and toxin secretion are important parameters for determining the success of e. coli when colonizing its host  <cit> . our findings place csra at the nexus of these processes and it is therefore possible that csra is an important factor in determining the colonization success of commensal and pathogenic e. coli. competition between colicin producing and sensitive strains in mouse models has yielded outcomes ranging from eradication of the sensitive strain to long-term coexistence , our results suggest that variations in nutrient conditions may explain these differences.

chemical warfare through colicin production and release is costly behavior, the strategy adopted by producer cells thus likely reflects how the competitive benefit of chemical warfare compares to its costs. our experiments show that the chemical warfare strategy adopted by colicin producer cells depends on nutrient conditions: colicin production and release are highest when cells grow exponentially on peptides and amino acids  whereas colicin release is low in stationary-phase glucose cultures. both the availability and the type of nutrients thus affect whether producer cells engage in chemical warfare or refrain from it. the nutrient-availability dependence of the chemical warfare strategy can be understood from the perspective of a cost-benefit analysis, however, the adaptive virtue of the nutrient-type dependence is unclear at present. the situation where producer cells produce colicin but do not release it  suggests colicin is being stored for later use, possibly as a bet-hedging strategy.

previous work  <cit>  suggested that at large spatial scales  for a specific temporal modulation, rock-paper-scissors game dynamics can lead to long-term coexistence of the three strains in lb medium . yet, despite its appealing simplicity as a mechanism to maintain biodiversity, stable rock-paper-scissors game dynamics may be confined to a relatively minor region of parameter space  <cit> . the periodic removal of colicin for instance, effectively increases the cost of production which is to the advantage of the sensitive strain and may be essential for the long-term stability of rock-paper-scissors dynamics. increasing the cost of production may partially compensate for the asymmetry in interactions  which may otherwise lead to extinction of the sensitive strain as our experimental and modeling efforts in conjunction with theory  <cit>  suggest. in our system, the three strains do not coexist in lb when co-colonizing a microhabitat. only when the strains are colonizing the microhabitat from opposite ends, the populations remain spatially separated and coexist at the scale of the entire habitat, not within patches. theory has suggested that cellular dispersal is a key parameter in determining community dynamics  <cit> , in addition to that, the killing range of colicin—set by its diffusion rate—is likely to be an important parameter setting the spatial scale at which coexistence emerges  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the observation that colicin-producer and sensitive cells show exponential growth in close proximity in m9-glucose, together with our characterization of colicin-operon expression, puts forward an alternative hypothesis explaining coexistence of the three strains. when growing on sugars, the lysis rate of colicin producing cells drops drastically and interference competition is reduced to a minimum, this allows sensitive, resistant and producer cells to coexist at micrometer scales. in contrast, when growing on amino acids and small peptides, producers are more prone to produce and release colicin, and biodiversity is only maintained at larger spatial scales. it is interesting to note that in some natural habitats e. coli mainly grows on sugars and sugar acids , whereas amino acids and peptides are the source of growth in other habitats   <cit> . our results demonstrate that colicin-mediated chemical warfare results in population dynamics with disparate trajectories in these environments. the available nutrients in a habitat thus appear to be an strong driver of interference competition which may determine the success of colonizing strains. our study highlights the importance of the regulation of antagonistic traits, which, in response to environmental cues, can have a profound influence on biodiversity.

