BACKGROUND
"epigenetic" implies changes in regulatory states of genes or genomic dna without changes in dna sequence. the archetypical epigenetic modification in eukaryotic genomes is the addition of a methyl group to the fifth carbon of cytosine to produce 5-methylcytosine   <cit> , reviewed in  <cit> . cytosine dna methylation is an epigenetic modification that is shared by many eukaryotic organisms. along with various other epigenetic modifications such as methylation, phosphorylation and acetylation of histone amino acids, cytosine methylation is an important regulator of biological processes including transposon silencing, heterochromatin organization, genomic imprinting, and gene expression.

the distribution of cytosine methylation is highly variable within plant genomes  <cit> . this overall methylation pattern, which is conserved among diverse plant taxa, is often described as "mosaic," as it consists of interspersed methylated and unmethylated regions  <cit> . the patterns of 5mec, mechanisms for de novo and maintenance methylation and the requirement for specific proteins for cytosine methylation have been best studied in arabidopsis thaliana, where roughly 20% of the genome is methylated in whole seedlings  <cit> . cytosine methylation is strongly enriched in heterochromatin at pericentromeric and subtelomeric repeats, and at rdna clusters  <cit> . repetitive sequences, which consist largely of transposons, retrotransposons, and tandem or inverted repeats, are highly methylated  <cit> . a novel and unexpected finding from genome-wide surveys was that a third of a. thaliana genes are methylated within their transcribed regions   <cit> , while perhaps 16% of rice  genes are enriched for 5mec  <cit> . the relationship between gene body methylation and transcription is currently not well understood. while promoter methylation is generally associated with lower transcription in a. thaliana  <cit> , the relationship of gene body methylation to expression is complex, with methylation tending to occur most often in genes transcribed at moderate to high, but not very high, levels  <cit> .

in plants, 5mec can occur in all sequence contexts   <cit> . the mechanisms responsible for establishment and maintenance of 5mec are best studied in a. thaliana where the maintenance methyltransferase met <dig> targets hemimethylated cg sites, and the de novo methyltransferases drm <dig> and cmt <dig> target chg and chh sites. disruption of maintenance methylation results in abnormal developmental phenotypes including stunting, malformed leaves, decreased apical dominance, lower fertility, disrupted heterochrony, delayed flowering time and abnormal flower morphology  <cit> , while drm <dig> and cmt <dig> mutants display defects in rna mediated silencing  <cit> , as well as dwarfing and abnormal leaf phenotypes  <cit> . the activity of methyltransferases appears synergistic, at least in some cases, so that deletion of drm1/2/cmt3) affects cg methylation maintenance by met <dig>  <cit> . together, these results suggest that 5mec in all contexts can affect several aspects of chromatin regulation, with consequences for plant development and differentiation.

tissue-level variation in methylation has been noted in several plant species. for example, in arabidopsis, about six percent of cytosines were found to be methylated in immature floral  <cit> , while  <dig> percent of cg, six point seven percent of chg, and one point seven percent of chh were methylated in young plants  <cit> . few studies have compared high-resolution methylation profiles among tissues within a plant species. in rice, whole genome methylation patterns were found to be similar among mature leaves, embryos, seedling shoots and roots, but hypomethylation was correlated with preferential expression in endosperm  <cit> . patterns of 5mec in ltr transposable elements differed between rice leaves and roots and affected transcription of neighboring genes  <cit>  a phenomenon common to the sine containing fwa promoter of a. thaliana  <cit> .

in addition to well-established roles in transposable element silencing and genomic imprinting, dna methylation may be involved in plant adaptation to stress  <cit> . in a. thaliana, genome-wide methylation increased in the progeny of plants exposed to temperature extremes, ultraviolet light  <cit> , flood, and salt but decreased in progeny of drought-stressed plants  <cit> . in hybrid poplars , shoot apices from drought-stressed juvenile trees exhibited genotype-dependent 5mec variation  <cit> . differential dna methylation patterns in poplar clones that have acquired differential transcriptome responses to drought stress have been observed  <cit> .

while much has been learned from work on annual plants, in-depth investigations of cytosine methylation patterns in long-lived plants have been sparse. because of their long term tissue differentiation and perennial exposure to environmental stresses, dna methylation may play a greater role in both tree development and homeostasis. studies of gross cellular dna methylation indicate that it may vary substantially during tree development, whether assessed in vivo or in vitro. in apical buds of chestnut trees, castanea sativa, 5mec increased during bud set and decreased during bud burst  <cit> . in monterey pine, pinus radiata, 5mec levels in needles of reproductively mature trees were double that of juvenile needles  <cit> . in shoots of chestnut and monterey pine, a gradual increase in dna methylation accompanied aging over 5- <dig> years  <cit> . increased methylation in mature vs. juvenile leaves was associated with loss of capacity for in vitro organogenesis in p. radiata  <cit> . in micropropagated acacia, shoots with juvenile leaves exhibited higher dna methylation levels than shoots with mature leaves  <cit> . transient dna methylation of ovules accompanied embryogenesis in chestnut  <cit> . as noted above, in poplar drought stress induced changes in total cellular dna methylation  <cit>  and was associated with transcriptome changes within separately propagated clones  <cit> .

a variety of experimental techniques can be applied to study genome-wide dna methylation . on a gross scale, the proportion of 5mec can be estimated by hplc or hpce, as has been done to show differences in 5mec among tissue types or treatments  <cit> . the drawback of these methods is the lack of sequence specific information. immunoprecipitation with an antibody raised against 5-methylcytidine , followed by genome tiling array hybridization or high-throughput sequencing of the precipitated dna , has been used to enumerate and compare methylated regions in homo sapiens  <cit> , mus musculus  <cit> , neurospora  <cit>  and a. thaliana  <cit> . the most detailed, single-base resolution maps are generated by sequencing of genomic dna treated with sodium bisulfite, which converts unmethylated cytosines to uracils but leaves 5mec unconverted  <cit> . however, this technique requires very high sequencing depth and is not suitable for mapping to repetitive genomic regions where uniqueness can be confounded by the presence of c to t snps. genome-wide bisulfite sequencing was first used in arabidopsis  <cit> , but has now also been used to assess genome methylation in oryza sativa and p. trichocarpa  <cit> , as well as mammals including. h. sapiens  <cit>  and m. musculus  <cit> . for the present work, we chose medip-seq of many different tissue types because it provides comprehensive methylome coverage at a lower cost than genome-wide bisulfite sequencing.

the black cottonwood, populus trichocarpa, is widely recognized as a reference species for tree biology. it has been studied in great detail over the past  <dig> years, and many resources are readily available, including a draft genome sequence http://www.phytozome.net/poplar, custom microarrays, and extensive transcriptome data  <cit> . for our studies we used genome assembly version  <dig>  in combination with published expression microarray data from multiple tissue types  <cit> . while mature leaves from p. trichocarpa have recently been subjected to genome-wide bisulfite sequencing  <cit> , high-resolution epigenomic methods have not yet been applied to discern tissue-level variation. we investigated variation in genome-level cytosine methylation among all of the major types of differentiated poplar tissues. to this end, we sequenced methylated dna obtained by medip from seven p. trichocarpa tissues on an illumina gaiix. we found overall patterns of cytosine methylation that are consistent with those seen in arabidopsis, but observed differences in methylation patterns among tissue types not previously studied. we also found a different pattern of association of gene body methylation to gene expression.

RESULTS
collection of medip-seq data
medip-seq data representing three to five illumina sequencing lanes were obtained for each of seven tissues . each tissue sample consisted of two biological replicates, with the exception of xylem, for which there was a single biological replicate. "pooled bud" data was compiled from separate medip-seq tissue samples representing three bud dormancy stages . libraries prepared from non-immunoprecipitated "input" dna from three biological replicates of fall bud tissue were sequenced as a control.

mapped reads include all non-clonal reads, allowing up to two mismatches.

validation of medip-seq results by bisulfite sequencing
bisulfite sequencing of eight selected targets was used to confirm quality of the medip-seq data. regions were selected to represent a range of rpkm values and maximum per-nucleotide coverage values , and were mainly at 5' ends of genes in promoters and coding regions. there was a strong correlation with both rpkm  and maximum per-nucleotide coverage  . cytosines in all three sequence contexts  were methylated in the target regions, but in targets with an overall low cytosine percentage, the chh context was more frequently methylated than cg or chg , and was more variable than the other contexts among the three examined bud stages .

mapping of medip-seq reads to the genome
coverage of the total genome was calculated for each tissue type separately for uniquely mapping reads and for distributed repeats. uniquely mapped non-clonal reads represented  <dig> to 59% of the total number of reads . for non-immunoprecipitated control samples, uniquely mapping reads covered ~80% of the genome and k-mer redistributed repeats covered 23% of the genome; these percentages included overlaps at the ends of reads between the two types. in contrast, reads from medip samples that were aligned to unique positions in the reference genome covered 26%-56% of the genome, while an additional 14%-19% of the genome was covered by distributed k-mer repeats . within the covered portion of the genome, average coverage was deeper for distributed k-mer repeats  than for uniquely mapping reads  .

fewer medip-seq reads mapped to chromosomal regions where gene density was higher . several high-coverage regions also displayed high inter-tissue variability . eleven of the  <dig> chromosomes  had high coverage by both unique reads and k-mer repeats that indicated possible centromeric or pericentromeric regions . in all eleven cases, these regions corresponded to putative centromeres identified on the basis of high repeat-to-gene ratios that were also correlated with recombination valleys . in addition, our k-mer repeat maps correlated well with their equivalent "ambiguous reads" maps, for which no pre-selection process had been done prior to sequencing; this further supports our finding that genome regions with k-mer repeats tend to be more highly methylated than regions with uniquely mapped reads.

we identified methylation as statistically significant by applying three analytical methods to the  <dig>  1-kb tiled windows that spanned the genome. the rpkm and cppd methods, both at a 1% fdr, agreed in more than 60% of the windows called when assessing methylation within individual tissues; agreement was 92% and 49% when assessing windows that were ubiquitously methylated or unmethylated, respectively. based on the windows in common among the two methods, 64% of the genome was unmethylated in all tissues and just over 2% was methylated in all tissues. as expected, the negative binomial analysis, when considered at p-value cutoffs of 10- <dig> or 10- <dig>  called many fewer methylated windows than the rpkm or cppd methods. however, the windows that were called were mostly common to those called by the other two methods. at a p-value threshold of 10- <dig>  50%  to 97%  of the windows it called were in common with those called by both the rpkm or cppd methods .

number of  <dig> kb windows in each of seven tissues  called methylated using rpkm cutoff , cumulative poisson probability distribution , or a negative binomial analysis . "common" refers to the number of  <dig> kb windows called methylated by all three of the analytic methods. percent agreement nb refers to the percent of windows called by the nb method that were also in common with those called by both rpkm and cppd. tissue specific proportion is proportion of tissue-specific called windows as a fraction of all the windows in the genome that were found to be methylated in any tissues.

mapping of medip-seq reads to genes
the p. trichocarpa v.  <dig>  genome contains  <dig>  annotated genes on chromosomal scaffolds. of these, over all tissues, we identified  <dig>  promoter-methylated genes  and  <dig>  body-methylated genes , including genes that were methylated at both features. in order to determine patterns of 5mec relative to protein-coding genes, we used rpkm calculations to describe medip-seq data distribution across promoters, 5' and 3' utrs and coding regions , and intergenic space. gene promoters, gene bodies and intergenic regions had relatively high coverage in all tissue types from both unique reads and distributed repeats . across an idealized gene model, average rpkm values showed relatively high coverage in promoters, steadily decreasing 5' to 3', with a small peak 5' of the minimum at the transcription start site. there was higher coverage in the central portion of the transcribed region than at the 5' and 3' ends, and an increase of coverage 3' of the transcribed region .

variable methylation of transposable element classes
when methylated regions were categorized by genome feature, intergenic  and repetitive sequence features  were the most frequently methylated . counts of methylated genes and transposable elements were compared to each group's overall frequency in the genome, and genes, short repeats, and two subcategories of line repeat elements were underrepresented among methylated regions, while retroelements, ltr transposons, hat and cacta elements, and two other subcategories of lines were enriched . methylation in male catkins was an exception to the overall trend, with genes overrepresented, and hat, line <dig> and unknown ltr elements underrepresented.

differentiation in methylation among tissues
on a chromosome scale, overall medip-seq read coverage was similar across tissue types, but there were visually striking regions of large-scale heterogeneity among tissues that ranged from approximately  <dig> kb to  <dig> mb in length . many of these areas of methylation heterogeneity had low gene density and contained clusters of transposable elements, but one region we examined more closely was a cluster of leucine-rich repeat  genes. the regions with the highest methylation tended to show the highest tissue-associated variation in methylation . however, there were also large chromosomal sections where methylation signals were relatively low for all tissues, but a particular tissue was consistently highest .

genome-wide methylation in different tissues, determined using 1-kb tiled windows across the genome as described above, showed that  <dig> % of the genome was differentially methylated. further, pairwise tissue methylation comparisons based on the 1-kb windows showed substantial differential methylation , with an overall mean pairwise similarity of  <dig> %. male catkins had by far the greatest number of gene-body-methylated genes that were not methylated in any other tissue type  . seventeen to 31% of gene models methylated in any tissue had both promoter and body methylation . within a tissue type, promoter-methylated genes were more frequent than body-methylated genes, accounting for 50-60% of all methylated genes. roots accounted for 41% of promoter-methylated genes that were restricted to one tissue type, and male catkins accounted for 80% of single-tissue body-methylated genes. when gene-associated features were compared among tissues, there was also extensive tissue-associated variation . promoters methylated in common among tissues ranged from a maximum of 16%  to less than one percent . gene bodies methylated in common ranged from 11%  to less than one percent .

differences among tissues were examined by generating all possible pairwise comparisons in  <dig> kb read-count windows using the cppd method. each entry is the ratio of the number of differentially methylated windows in the comparison  divided by the sum of the union of the methylated windows in either tissue compared to input. the total number of methylated windows in each tissue is shown on the diagonal.

sets of significantly methylated gene-associated features compared among tissues determined by the rpkm method. gene counts per tissue are shown on the diagonal as: number with significantly methylated promoter/number with significantly methylated gene body. proportions of these sets shared by pairs of tissues is shown, with promoter commonalities above the diagonal and gene body commonalities below the diagonal.

gene ontology of methylated genes in male catkins
to determine the functional classification of body-methylated genes specific to male catkins, we tested for enrichment of gene ontology  categories. this analysis revealed significant enrichment  in  <dig> specific gene ontology categories, including those related to translation/protein metabolism , nucleic acid binding  and rna metabolism . some of the enriched go categories observed are illustrated in additional file  <dig> 

association of methylation and gene expression
we compared the categorized gene feature methylation to tissue-specific gene expression data from previous expression microarray studies  <cit> . we did this on both a global scale, looking at methylation and expression data pooled across all tissue types, and on a per-tissue basis. we also analyzed the association of gene expression to methylation at particular genic features. clustering of tissues by only their overall gene expression patterns suggested that floral tissues, the bud samples, and root and xylem had the most similar gene expression profiles . however, when tissues were clustered based on only rpkm data, the patterns were highly dissimilar . the biological replications clustered for both the male and female inflorescence tissues, as well as for the buds and input samples. however, the biological replications for the root, leaf and phloem tissues did not cluster, and the positions of all tissues bore little similarity to what was observed based on gene expression data. the lack of concordance was also observed when biological replications were pooled and methylation of gene bodies or promoters clustered . thus, at the gross genome level, tissue specific gene expression and methylation had no obvious association.

to further test the hypothesis that gene methylation differences among tissues were correlated with tissue predominant gene expression, we interrogated our methylation data using lists of genes determined to have high tissue-predominant  expression based on calculations in rodgers-melnick et al.  <cit> . they used much of the same microarray dataset as analyzed in this paper to identify sets of genes with high levels of tissue differential expression by applying the formula:

 bias=+ 

for which tissues were divided into subsets s and o, with ns assigned to the number of tissues in subset s, and no was assigned to the number of tissues not in subset s ; ws denotes the weight applied to tissues in subset s, i.e. max/ns, wo denotes the weight applied to tissues in subset o, i.e. max/no, es denotes the sum of expression values of tissues in subset s, and eo denotes the sum of expression values of tissues in subset. a gene was considered biased at or above a calculated bias of  <dig> . the number of tissue biased genes varied from  <dig> for leaves to  <dig>  for male and female catkins . from this set, we found that  <dig>  to  <dig> % and  <dig>  to  <dig> % of genes called as biased based on expression were called methylated by our criteria at promoters or gene bodies, respectively. when all of the genes showing bias for a tissue type were compared to all genes in our dataset for their rpkm levels, the differences were small; however,  <dig> of  <dig> comparisons were statistically significant and consistent in direction . in all cases where a difference was significant, the tissue predominant genes had lower methylation, both for promoters and/or gene bodies. in every case, whether significant or not, the genes with upwardly biased expression in that tissue never showed a higher rpkm value for promoters or for gene bodies. excluding male catkins as outliers due to their unusual go patterns , for gene bodies all six tissues were consistent in having lower rpkm for the expression-biased tissue set .

when medip-seq reads and transcript abundance were pooled across tissue types, a much stronger association of methylation and gene expression was evident . the lowest three deciles of expressed genes had significantly higher rpkm values  for both promoters and gene bodies than genes in higher expression deciles. the 5' and 3' utrs, however, were unassociated with gene expression. the pattern of increased methylation in promoters and/or gene bodies for the most weakly expressed genes was also consistent  when gene expression was examined by tissue type. all seven tissues had consistent patterns when the top three and bottom seven deciles were considered for gene body, exon and intron: the lowest three deciles of expressed genes had higher mean rpkm values and a much wider rpkm range. this trend was also present for promoters in all tissues except for male catkins. as expected, genes with the highest expression were called unmethylated, whereas methylation at genes and/or promoters was associated with reduced expression . in all seven tissues, non-methylated genes had higher expression than the other three categories of genes shown, and those with only methylated gene bodies had higher expression than those with both methylated gene bodies and promoters . male catkins were again somewhat of an exception to otherwise highly consistent patterns; genes with only body methylation had a narrower range and slightly higher median expression than promoter-methylated or promoter-and-body-methylated genes. among the subset of significantly methylated genes, with male catkins again excluded as an outlier, gene body methylation was significantly higher than promoter methylation in all tissues  .

discussion
we have taken advantage of two of poplar's characteristics as a model tree species--high quality genomic resources and extensive, highly elaborated tissue types--to interrogate epigenomic variation at genome scale. previous studies have either compared total dna methylation among different tissue types, or have looked at one or very few tissues at genomic scale. most high-resolution studies of methylation in arabidopsis and rice have used seedlings or young plants, which are complex mixtures of different tissues rather than discrete tissue types, each composed of their own complex cell types. only a handful of previous studies have examined genome-wide, high-resolution methylation differences among coherent tissue types  <cit> , and these have mainly focused on comparisons of cytosine methylation in endosperm and embryo during seed development  <cit> .

the medip-seq method does not provide single-base resolution as does genome scale bisulfite sequencing, and therefore does not allow detailed analysis of cytosine context in methylated regions. however, region-specific bisulfite sequencing validated our medip-seq results, showing that both calculated rpkm and maximum coverage per nucleotide reflect the underlying percentage of methylated cytosines in regions with varying cytosine content and position relative to genes. within bisulfite-sequencing target regions, cytosines in all three  sequence contexts were identified, with cg and chg methylation being more consistent within tissues. however, in the two targets with cytosine content < 10%, cytosines in chh context were methylated more frequently than those in the other two contexts. one of these targets was 5' of a gene model, and the other spanned the 5' end of a gene model coding region. previous studies have reported that cgs are more frequently methylated than chgs or chhs, especially in coding regions, and 5mechh, while less frequent in general, is more common in repeat regions and short transposable elements  <cit> .

differential tissue methylation was extensive at genic and non-genic regions
medip-seq read calculations and rpkm and cppd statistical analysis based on differences among 1-kb genome windows showed that only ~2% of the p. trichocarpa genome was methylated in all seven assayed tissues. in contrast, 64% of the genome was ubiquitously unmethylated. the difference implies that one-third of the genome was differentially methylated among the tissues studied. comparisons of promoter- and gene body methylated genes likewise showed extensive tissue differential methylation;  <dig> to 16% or less were methylated in common among tissues. we know of no comparable estimates of tissue-level variation in other plants; the few studies that have compared gene-level variation in different tissue types have used small numbers of tissues and reported low 5mec variation among tissues, most of which were accounted for by variation in transposable element methylation  <cit> . at least some of the chromosome blocks we observed that had highly tissue-differentiated methylation were also rich in transposable elements .

chromosome methylation supports the locations of putative centromeres
we separately mapped unique medip-seq reads and k-mer repeat reads, distributing k-mer repeats over all their genome occurrences. the p. trichocarpa genome is highly duplicated, with ~41% of the assembled genome considered repetitive . due to the difficulty of assembling repetitive genome regions, k-mer repeats were masked from the original genome assembly  <cit> . this repeat exclusion may be the reason that unique reads covered a much larger proportion of genome space than k-mer repeat reads. on a chromosomal scale, repeat regions were also correlated with genome gaps; the v <dig>  assembly includes a large number  of scaffolds that are not yet assigned to specific chromosomes.

our chromosome methylation maps showed concentrations of medip-seq reads, in particular k-mer repeats, on more than half of p. trichocarpa chromosomes. these regions correspond with areas of low gene density, which are expected for centromere/pericentromere locations. a similar chromosome methylation profile, with high methylation in centromeric and pericentromeric regions, has been observed in arabidopsis  <cit> . centromeric satellite repeats are generally methylated and silenced  <cit> , although repeats associated with centromere-specific histone cenh <dig> are hypomethylated compared to their counterparts in pericentromeric heterochromatin  <cit> . genes near centromeres are also likely to be methylated  <cit> . chromosomes lacking a single methylation peak had either more than one distinct methylation peak , or more broad, indistinct methylated regions . these regions likely reflect the large chromosomal rearrangements and segmental duplications that mark the evolutionary history of populus  <cit> .

retroelements showed extensive and differential tissue methylation
our data showed that protein-coding genes were underrepresented in the methylated fraction of the genome, while transposable elements and other simple repeats were generally methylated. ltr-gypsy retroelements are abundant in heterochromatic centromeric and pericentromeric regions in plants, and are the most plentiful repetitive element in the p. trichocarpa genome  <cit> . we found that this retroelement class was also enriched in the methylated fraction of the genome in all tissue types. four other retroelement categories  were also overrepresented in the methylated genome fraction, which is not surprising given the extensive evidence of methylation-mediated transposable element silencing in eukaryotic genomes  <cit> . two classes of line elements  were underrepresented among the methylated genome fraction, and one class of line elements  was overrepresented in xylem, phloem and male catkins, but underrepresented in buds, female catkins, leaves and roots. thus, these elements showed considerable differential methylation by tissue. line elements are more abundant in populus compared to other plant genomes, and there appears to have been a recent expansion of this element class in the genome  <cit> .

genes were extensively methylated
four to 12% of annotated protein-coding genes were methylated, with the level varying widely among tissues as discussed above. this is lower than the estimated 30% of methylated transcribed regions in arabidopsis  <cit> , but closer to the 16% predicted for rice  <cit> . the pattern of methylation within and around protein-coding genes was consistent with that seen in previous studies  <cit> , with methylation high 5'and 3' of the transcribed portion of genes. within the transcribed region, methylation was lowest near the transcription start and stop sites and increased away from there within the gene body. interestingly, we observed a prominent methylation peak ~ <dig> bp 5' of the transcription start site. a similar peak was seen in methylation profiles of a. thaliana embryos and endosperm in one study  <cit> , but not in a second study  <cit> . in oryza spp., a small 5' peak was seen for methylation in chh context, but not chg or cg context  <cit> , while no spike in methylation in any sequence context in this region was identified elsewhere  <cit> . the cause for both the apparent peak and the incongruity of results remains unclear.

promoter and gene body methylation is negatively correlated with transcription
our data showed that promoter-methylated genes had a wider expression range and higher median expression than body-methylated genes in most tissues. methylation upstream or downstream of genes is generally understood to repress transcription  <cit> . our results support this notion, as promoter-methylated genes had lower expression than genes that were not called methylated at any feature. surprisingly, our results also indicated that gene body methylation was more repressive of transcription than promoter methylation. this contradicts what has been reported for arabidopsis, where body-methylated genes are often highly transcriptionally active  <cit> . however, the relationship between gene body methylation and gene expression in plants appears to be confounded by additional factors such as gene length  <cit> , and additional local epigenetic modifications. dna methylation in gene bodies may not cause either absence or presence of transcription at all but rather mark splice junctions and thus be correlated to gene expression  <cit> .

several studies have examined the transcriptional effects of combinations of 5mec and histone modifications: in arabidopsis seedlings, histone  <dig> lysine  <dig> monomethylation  was highly correlated with cg-context methylation in transcribed regions of transcriptionally-active genes  <cit> , while h3k27me <dig> was anticorrelated  <cit> . in zea mays roots and shoots, genes with low levels of transcription had either 5mec or h3k27me <dig>  also in an apparent mutually exclusive pattern  <cit> . in rice shoots, a complex pattern was observed, with hypermethylated genes tending to have fewer histone modifications and lower transcription, while hypomethylated genes exhibited a range of expression, with concurrent h3k4me <dig> associated with higher transcription levels, and concurrent h3k27me <dig> associated with lower transcription levels  <cit> . the emerging picture is of a complex hierarchy of combinations of 5mec with other epigenetic modifications, in addition to overall sequence context and chromatin context, that ultimately regulate transcription.

we examined the correlation between methylation and tissue predominance of gene expression in two ways: by comparing hierarchical clustering patterns of gene methylation and expression, and by querying methylation status of sets of genes deemed to be expressed in a tissue-preferential manner. hierarchical clustering patterns revealed no large scale, consistent tissue-level patterns between methylation and expression. in zea mays, dna methylation in shoots and roots was also uncorrelated with differential gene expression on a genome scale  <cit> . however, when methylation profiles of sets of genes with tissue-biased expression were examined, they did show differences in promoter and gene body methylation. though small on average, the differences were highly statistically significant and consistent between promoters and gene bodies. this analysis suggests that dna methylation may indeed play a role in directing or maintaining tissue differential gene expression, though its extent appears modest. to our knowledge, this is the first observation of genome scale tissue differentiation of gene expression with dna methylation in plants.

male catkins showed a unique pattern of methylation and associated gene expression
surprisingly, male catkins had a far greater number of genes with body methylation than other sampled tissues, and the level of methylation of these genes was lower than that observed in other tissues. expression of gene body-methylated genes was also higher than in other tissues except for female catkins. three retroelement categories  were underrepresented in the methylated fraction in male catkins, but overrepresented in all other tissue types. these unusual patterns seen may reflect the demethylation and reactivation of several types of transposable elements in pollen vegetative nuclei, with the associated sirna cascade silencing transposable elements in sperm nuclei. our male catkins were collected at anthesis  and the majority of their biomass appeared to be made up of dehiscing  anthers; pollen dna can therefore be expected to be highly represented in our male catkin data. perhaps hypermethylation of surrounding transposable elements could also result in some associated low-level methylation of protein-coding genes, resulting in the unusual pattern of genic methylation seen. genes that were body-methylated only in male catkins and not in the other tissue types had lower expression in male catkins than in all other tissues types except leaves, and gene ontology categorization of these genes showed enrichment of categories related to protein metabolism, cellular signaling, and dna/rna binding. at least some of these genes may play a role in pollen-associated changes in small rna metabolism and associated dna methylation. in contrast, female catkins did not show a distinctive pattern of dna methylation or associated gene expression, even though genome-wide demethylation has been observed in endosperm relative to embryo tissue  <cit> . active demethylation is brought about by demeter, which is expressed specifically in the central cell of the female gametophye and removes methylated cytosines via a mechanism involving single-strand break repair  <cit> . we believe the difference between male and female catkins was mainly because we collected female catkins during early pollen release, well before endosperm and embryo development was likely to have begun on a large scale. in addition, examination of a subset of our collected female inflorescences did not show any signs of seed development when a subsample of ovules was dissected .

CONCLUSIONS
epigenomic studies have been applied to very few plant species to date. our study is the first description of epigenomic differentiation among tissues in in any tree or perennial plant species at genome scale resolution. we sequenced methylated dna from seven distinct tissues representing a wide range of developmental variation. although the general pattern of chromosome and genic methylation agree with those of arabidopsis and rice, there were a number of important differences or elaborations that may relate to its distinctive biology and evolution, and warrant further analysis. these include the degree of tissue-specific methylation throughout the genome and its association with genes; the negative association of gene body methylation with gene expression; the modest but consistent association of tissue-differential gene expression with promoter and gene body methylation; the peak in methylation 5' to genes; and the distinctive pattern of male catkin transposon and gene body methylation. the genomic catalog provided will also provide a foundation to inform a variety of other investigations, including those related to natural variation in rate of recombination throughout the genome, position effects observed during genetic engineering, and the interspecific heterosis and gender differentiation  that are observed in poplar and many other plant species.

