BACKGROUND
calluna vulgaris l.   belongs to the order ericales, which comprises  <dig> families including  <dig> genera with more than  <dig>  species in total  <cit> . the ericales incorporate about  <dig> % of core eudicot diversity, one third of which is made up of the ericaceae alone  <cit> . the economic significance of c. vulgaris to the horticultural industry in europe and north-america is continually increasing  <cit> . the current market share in germany for instance, amounts to approximately  <dig> million eur, or >  <dig> million plants per year, respectively  <cit> . in principal, this economic significance is the results of a single but considerable change in the flower morphology: the loss of stamens that is accompanied by a non-opening of the flower bud. in contrast to wild-type flowers  that are only attractive from august to october the resulting 'bud-flowering' phenotype  preserves its unpollinated stigmas within the never-opening buds and has an extended flowering period up to december. for this reason, it is the most valuable flower type of this species to the horticultural business. in contrast, other forms, such as the 'filled' or the 'multi-bracteate' types are less important. previous investigations revealed the monogenic recessive inheritance of the 'bud-flowering' trait  <cit>  that was described in literature for the first time  in  <dig>  <cit> .

the synoecious flower of wild-type c. vulgaris is of radial symmetry, posing with two outer perianth whorls with four to five colored organs in each whorl, two whorls of four to five stamens and four to five coadunate carpels  <cit> . the sepals are grouped into two distinct whorls of two times two  <cit> . the colored organs of the perianth whorl ii are fused at the receptacle to form a corolla tube  <cit> . two whorls of at least six green leaves in total surround the flower  <cit> . these uppermost whorls of green leaves do not match the perianth symmetry, since they are aligned with the sepal whorl instead with the petal whorl .

in contrast, the 'bud-flowering' type completely lacks the male reproductive organs, which is probably at least one of the reasons for its developmental arrest in the bud stage. in  <dig>  three different subforms of the 'bud-flowering' type were described : f. diplocalyx , f. polysepala  and f. clistanthes . evidences or justifications for this classification of organs e.g. of the colored organs either as sepals or petals are absent  <cit> . moreover, no explanation is given for the grouping of the sepals into two whorls and for the grouping of stamen in two whorls  <cit> . furthermore, the described classification of f. polysepala and f. clisthantes could not be reproduced by the authors, since the cultivars that are given as examples all looked like the diplocalyx-type in our hands.

two different approaches are commonly applied to identify organ characteristics in the perianth of angiosperms: morphological comparisons and gene expression studies  <cit> . the molecular procedure mainly investigates the expression of the floral homeotic genes. according to the classical 'abcde'-model of flower organ identity, changes in flower morphology are the results of expression shifts of different classes of floral homeotic genes encoding transcription factors in the corresponding whorls : class a gene function in the outmost whorl leads to the formation of sepals; combined expression of class a and b genes in the second whorl leads to the formation of petals; class b and c gene function in whorl three promotes the development of stamens, and expression of class c genes in the innermost whorl leads to the development of carpels. additionally, class d gene function is required for ovule formation, whereas class e gene function is required for the development of all organs, respectively . several studies demonstrated that the perianth organs can be distinguished by the assessment of their epidermal cell surface structure by scanning electron microscopy , as shown in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  or in the ericales   <cit> . both assays - the morphological and the molecular assay - have to be regarded as complementary  <cit> .

regarding the indistinct descriptions and the lack of current in-depth studies and molecular data in c. vulgaris, several uncertainties still exist on the topic of the flower organ identity in this species. on the one hand, questions arise regarding the discrete identity of the two outer whorls of colored organs. on the other hand, the lack of the androecium in the 'bud-flowering' type has not been ascertained either. until now, it is even uncertain, whether stamen development is been initiated or whether the initiation of primordia is inhibited.

the determination of the flower organ identity and the understanding of the development of the 'bud-flowering' mutation itself are of importance for future breeding efforts in c. vulgaris since the 'bud-flowering' phenotype is the most important breeding target in this species. we therefore initiated histological, microscopic and molecular examinations to clarify the identity of flower organs and of existent differences between wild-type and 'bud-flowering' phenotypes.

RESULTS
in order to elucidate the unknown organ identities of the two most important flower phenotypes in c. vulgaris flower development was monitored histologically for both, the wild-type as well as the 'bud-flowering' type. in addition, the perianth organs were examined by sem and became successfully distinguishable among themselves and if compared to bracts and leaves. in order to achieve a better understanding of mutations in flower morphology in this crop, an initial cloning of two mads-box genes was realized in addition to preliminary expression analyses. the genome size was determined in order to evaluate the chances of future cloning of new unknown genes by map-based cloning.

morphological perianth organ analysis of the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' phenotype
in wild-type phenotypes, the whorl ii organs are commonly fused at their base and are more delicate compared to whorl i organs, which are clearly separated and appear quite robust. in contrast, 'bud-flowering' organs of whorl ii are not fused and resemble the whorl i organs in shape, color and stability. sem of the abaxial and adaxial epidermis structures  of whorl i and whorl ii organs in both the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' phenotype was carried out  to identify, whether whorl i organs in the wild-type can be identified as sepals or petals and in order to clarify the identity of the whorl ii organs in the 'bud-flowering' phenotype. cells of the outermost whorls of the wild-type phenotype are flat and stretched . in contrast, cells of the second whorl appear bloated , are shorter in diameter and length and are striated with papillate structures . on the contrary, the cell surfaces of the 'bud-flowering' perianth organs are indistinguishable from each other, since both whorls consist of the flat and stretched cell type , comparable to the outmost whorl of the wild-type. in particular, the second whorl leaves are not 'dome-shaped'. thus, concerning whorl i organs of the wild-type phenotype, both their position and their cell surface structure indicate a sepaloid identity, whereas their color suggests a petaloid identity. regarding whorl ii organs, all three criteria investigated may be a hint to petaloid identity. in contrast, all organs in both perianth whorls of the 'bud-flowering' phenotypes are morphologically not distinguishable and show the same characteristics as whorl i organs of the wild-type phenotype. therefore, they are likewise presumably to be identified as sepals by two out of the three criteria mentioned above; once more, their coloring suggests a petaloid identity.

differentiation between bracts and leaves by morphological characteristics became possible via sem analysis of both tissues . the surface structure of leaf tissue of both flower types  showed a puzzle-like cell structuring, both on ad- and abaxial sides. in contrast, in the uppermost whorls of green leaves of both flower types as indicated in fig. 1c, we identified a slightly differing cell structure. the abaxial side  is characterised by the occurrence of a channel, in which most of the stomata are located , whereas the adaxial side is covered with hair-like structures . therefore, we assume these uppermost whorls of green leaves to be bracts. however, bracts and leaves resemble each other in the occurrence of stomata  which, in contrast, we did not observe in any colored perianth organ.

cloning of mads-box genes
mads-box transcription factors were identified using race-pcr. our initial 3'-race experiments resulted in the cloning of two gene fragments, one putative ap3/def-like gene we named cvap <dig> , and one sep1/2-like gene we named cvsep <dig> . for cvap <dig>  the sequence data resulted from three independent experimental pcr and cloning assays. cvsep <dig> was cloned by chance since the primer was originally designed to amplify b-genes. thus, cvsep <dig> could not be verified independently until now. both partial genes were obtained by cloning a pcr fragment of approximately  <dig> bp.

using the blast conserved domain database  <cit> , the k-box and the  mads-box were identified in cvap <dig>  and the k-box in cvsep <dig>  furthermore, both the euap <dig> motif and the pi derived motif  <cit>  were identified within cvap <dig>  whereas the cvsep <dig> gene included the sep i and sep ii motif  <cit> . the latter motif, also termed as agl2/sep <dig> terminal motif  <cit> , may be used to discriminate sep1/ <dig>  and sep <dig> genes: sep <dig> genes are missing this motif, but instead, they contain either the agl9/sep <dig> or the zmm <dig> motif  <cit> . our approach to furthermore determine gene homology by calculating phylogenetic similarities based on nucleotide alignments  resulted in unrooted phylograms  of sparse information content due to low posterior probability values for c. vulgaris samples. the connection of cvap <dig> remains unresolved, since it is rather placed near the arabidopsis outgroup than near any of the included genes of the ericales family . in case of cvsep <dig>  the calluna gene is placed near diospyros kaki which is, beneath impatiens, the only available sample from the ericales. in both cases, the anticipated outgroup genes are identifiable.

molecular perianth organ analysis of the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' type
the relative expression of the c. vulgaris ap3/def- and sep1/2-like genes was analysed in three different genotypes per flower type . ΔΔct-values have been calculated to compare expression levels between the different flower tissues including bracts and the leaf tissue of the corresponding flower type, since the expression of both genes was lowest  in leaves. for better comparison between wild-type  and 'bud-flowering'  samples, the y-axes are uniformly scaled for each gene.

although the expression levels of both genes were genotype-specific, an overall organ-specific expression patterns were revealed. the expression levels of cvap <dig> significantly increased in whorl ii organs of the wild-type compared to whorl i organs and bracts in the three tested genotypes . only 'roter oktober' showed an increased expression of cvap <dig> in whorl i organs, too . this petal-related increase of mrna amount was not observed in all three 'bud-flowering' genotypes . these data support the morphological classification of whorl ii organs in the 'bud-flowering' types to be a second whorl of sepals.

for cvsep <dig> , expression was higher in both perianth whorls in both flower types with an at least  <dig> x increase of expression between bracts and whorl i organs. the variety 'roter oktober' showed an almost  <dig> x higher expression of cvsep <dig> in whorl i organs than in whorl ii organs. in the 'bud-flowering' phenotypes, the expression of cvsep <dig> did not differ markedly between whorl i and whorl ii organs  and was clearly lower if compared to the corresponding wild-type organs, respectively. the differences of especially cvsep <dig> gene expression between leaf tissue and the uppermost green leaves furthermore supports our morphology-based classification of the latter ones as bracts.

for both target genes, the unusual expression in leaf tissue was confirmed in several independent samples of different ages of three other wild-type and 'bud-flowering' genotypes. cloning and sequencing of these pcr products confirmed the identity of the amplified transcripts.

floral formula of different flower types
since we were not able to decide whether organs of the same identity were arranged in one or several whorls, we uniformly speak of one whorl per organ type, except for flower types with changes in organ identity. thus, the floral formulas presented are based on the described morphological  and molecular results and not on positional information of the organs.

in contrast to the wild-type a8g, fig. 5a; ca: calyx; co: corolla; a: androecium; g; gynoecium), the 'bud-flowering' phenotype completely lacks stamens whereas its petals are transformed to sepals , fig. 5b). this type corresponds to the 'diplocalyx' type  <cit> .

flower organ development
flower organ development of the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' type were investigated comparatively by histological analysis. samples were derived from the uppermost part of shoots for which the initiation of flower development could undoubtedly be ascertained. fig.  <dig> shows three equal stages of both the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' type in parallel. generative meristems of both flower types did not differ anatomically . both flower types also show the development of stamen primordia . we classify these as such as a consequence of experiments in a. thaliana  <cit> , since these authors describe initial nectary development during developmental stage  <dig>  however, petal and stamen primordia already arise during the developmental stage  <dig>  <cit> . therefore, nectary primordia in c. vulgaris seem not to develop until carpel formation. when the carpels are clearly recognizable as such , the comparison of wild-type and 'bud-flowering' types reveals there is no residual indication of former stamen formation in the latter phenotype.

interestingly, petal and sepal tissues are differently stained in the wild-type  but both whorls of petaloid sepal organs in the 'bud-flowering' type display the same staining pattern . furthermore, in the wild-type, petals and stamens show a comparable staining pattern and petals consist of an increased amount of cell layers if compared to the petaloid sepals of the wild-type and the 'bud-flowering' type. this becomes even more obvious in opened, mature flowers of each type, using sgl instead of fca staining .

estimation of the genome size
the genome size of c. vulgaris was estimated by laser-based flowcytometry since the knowledge of this parameter is essential for future genetic applications. we compared seven wild-type, two 'bud-flowering', one 'filled' and one 'multi-bracteate' genotype from different countries . three to six replications of each sample led to an overall average genome size of  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  pg/2c . according to the equation given by  <cit> , from this the total dna length of c. vulgaris can be calculated to be approximately  <dig>  mbp.

the table indicates the flower type, the denomination of the genotype or variety, the country of origin  and the amount of measured replicates n. genotypes in italics are samples collected in the wild.

discussion
the vague and differing descriptions of the flower anatomy  of c. vulgaris necessitated more in-depth investigations regarding the flower organ identity. we combined different microscopic  and molecular analyses , since both approaches are complementary . as a result from the indications received from these analyses, we were able to appoint the organ numbers for c. vulgaris wild-type and 'bud-flowering' phenotypes as summed up in the given floral formulas.

in wild-type flowers sepals and petals are morphologically clearly distinguishable. in contrast, regarding the 'bud-flowering' type, our anatomical analyses revealed that whorl ii organs are macroscopically indistinguishable from the whorl i organs. in both flower types the uppermost green leaves have been identified as bracts, since they differ morphologically from both, sepals as well as leaves.

these morphological and anatomical data were supported by our gene expression analyzes. we detected expression of cvap <dig>  a class b-like mads-box gene, mainly in the inner perianth organs of the wild-type phenotype. according to the classical 'abcde model' and its modifications, we anticipated expression of the ap3/def-like gene to be restricted to whorls ii and whorls iii  <cit> . in contrast, no difference of expression was observed between the whorl i and ii organs in the 'bud-flowering' type, which supports our morphological  data suggesting an additional whorl of petaloid sepals and the coincidental loss of petals in this flowering type. thus, differential expression of cvap <dig> consistently reflects changes and similarities in the morphology of whorl i and whorl ii flower organs in the wild-type as well as in the 'bud-flowering' type. however, these differences are of a quantitative and not of a qualitative nature. the gradual decrease of ap3/def-like gene expression between petals and sepals that we reported for one of three genotypes tested is already known from other ericales .

the expression pattern of cvsep <dig>  a class e-like mads-box gene, reflects the expectations resulting from experiments in model organisms; namely, expression of sep1/2-like genes was expectable for whorls ii-iv, although 'expression in sepals is common but not universal' . in c. vulgaris wild-type flowers, this expression was consistently reproduced expect for the variety 'roter oktober' that showed a surprisingly high and increased mrna amount in whorl i. in 'bud-flowering' phenotypes, the petal whorl is presumably transformed into sepaloid sepals and thus, expression of cvsep <dig> is lower, but comparable between whorl i and ii.

regarding the identification of bracts, our expression analyses also confirmed the morphological argumentation. on the one hand, the higher expression of both cvap <dig> and cvsep <dig> in these organs indicates a clear difference to leaves, especially for cvsep <dig>  on the other hand, besides the clear morphological dissimilarity, expression of cvsep <dig> was obviously repressed in these uppermost green leaves compared to the sepals. therefore, we identified these leaves as bracts. again, this result is in line with another ericales , in which a def-like gene was shown to be expressed at low levels in bracteoles/sepals compared to petals or stamens of the same species  <cit> .

expression of cvap <dig> and cvsep <dig> was detected and confirmed in leaves independent of tissue age for both flowering-related genes. expression of floral organ identity genes in non-floral tissues is already known from other species. in gerbera, the sep1/ <dig> gene ghgrcd <dig> is expressed in vegetative tissues and sep <dig>  usually restricted to the inner three whorls, is described to be expressed in vegetative tissues in more than one species, too . likewise, in rose expression of the ap3-like gene masako eub <dig> was detected in vegetative tissue  <cit> .

regarding our results, it has to be borne in mind that, according to the floral quartet model, floral organ identity genes concertedly regulate the organ identity  <cit> . petal identity in eudicots, for example, is usually based on the simultaneous occurrence of ap3/def-like, pi-like and sep3-like gene products, since these are all required for establishing full petal identity. furthermore, epidermal cell shape is known to be controlled by myb transcription factors, which themselves are, in turn, under control of class b-like genes  <cit> . it was shown recently, that sep <dig> expression in a. thaliana is spatially distinguishable between ab- and adaxial petal sides  <cit>  and hence, may be at least partially responsible for cell surface shaping as it was already known for other sep-like genes  <cit> . thus, our analyses necessarily remain incomplete and comprehensive results require substantially more laboratory and phenotyping experiments. nevertheless, we presumably were able to differentiate all organs in question by expression analyses of just two putative mads-box transcription factors.

the wild-type flower of c. vulgaris is synoecious, while the final 'bud-flowering' flower is unisexually female due to a total loss of once initiated stamens. this is in line with the claim, that every unisexual flower that has been investigated until now showed a certain degree of initial hermaphroditic characteristics  <cit> . whether the change of organ identity in the perianth and the loss of stamen are necessarily linked remains to be analysed.

within the ericaceae, the genome size is only known in seven vaccinium species  <cit> . here, the nuclear dna content ranged from  <dig>  -  <dig>  pg/2c. knowledge of the genome size is an essential prerequisite for prospective genomic applications in this species including mapping and genome walking for isolation of putative genes responsible for the 'bud-flowering' genotype. although the measured value of  <dig>  pg/2c is low, it is still approx. four times higher than in arabidopsis  library and subsequent map-based cloning.

CONCLUSIONS
our study presents a first step towards the analyses of flower organ identity and their modifications in the ornamental crop c. vulgaris. we confirmed the identity of petals, sepals and bracts in wild-type as well as in the 'bud-flowering' phenotypes.

the simultaneous degeneration of stamens and the conversion of petals to sepals in the 'bud-flowering' type cannot be explained by modifications of the 'abcde'-model. neither can apparent candidate genes be deduced from comparison with other plant species so far.

further investigations should include additional cloning of further floral organ identity gene homologs as well as studies of their expression in all floral organs of the relevant flower types. since a comprehensive understanding of the genetics of the 'bud-flowering' phenotype is a prerequisite for future breeding of this economically important ornamental crop, mapping of this trait with subsequent map-based cloning will be the next step to identify candidate genes, since the relatively small genome size of c. vulgaris allows efficient construction of a bac library.

