BACKGROUND
gc and at skews are departures from chargaff 's  <cit>  second parity rule, that the amount of g  equals the amount of c  in a single strand. skews have been extensively studied in bacterial, mitochondrial and viral genomes, where they generally indicate origins of replication, with the leading strand tending to be g-biased and t-biased  <cit> . skews received less attention in eukaryotic genomes although some studies reported skews in mitochondria  <cit> , at origins of replication  <cit>  and at transcription start sites in animals  <cit> , plants  <cit> , and fungi  <cit> .

interestingly, previous studies point to extensive variability in the presence and the exact patterns of skew among eukaryotes. for example, transcription start sites are typically g-biased in mammals but c-biased in invertebrates  <cit> , and analysis of fungal species identified significant skews only among five of the seven species examined  <cit> . this variability may indicate that the skews themselves encode some regulatory information  or, alternatively, that the skews are a byproduct of mutational pressure . this latter possibility would imply that different mutational mechanisms are operating in different species. these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, and both imply much broader implications.

previous studies hypothesized that gc and at skews in genes, and particularly at transcription start sites, are caused by transcription-coupled mutations  <cit> . as the two strands of dna are separated by the rna polymerase ii complex, each strand is placed in a different environment, causing different mutation pressures and thus strand asymmetries. for example, deamination of cytosine to thymine  has been proposed to preferentially occur at the coding strand  <cit> . notably, skews are found at most genes in single-celled organisms and in plants, which do not segregate their germ lines, but are only found at genes which are expressed in the germ cells of animals, consistent with the transcription-coupled mutation hypothesis  <cit> .

here we report a consistent pattern of gc skew across most unicellular fungi, while the model budding and fission yeasts are among the few exceptions examined. surprisingly, we show that the 5'-ends of genes are c-biased but that the skew changes signs and is g-biased towards the 3'-ends of genes. we propose two possible explanations, one concerning mutational pressure, and one adaptive.

RESULTS
asymmetrical pattern of gc-skew within genes of most unicellular fungi
we first examined the average pattern of gc-skew at three model yeast species, saccharomyces cerevisiae, schizosaccharomyces pombe and candida albicans. in each species, we averaged the skews of all genes at each position  relative to the translation start and stop sites . in all three species, we observe a trivial positive skew at the exact start and stop sites . in addition, we find a tendency for negative gc-skew  around the translation start sites and positive gc-skew  around translation stop sites. notably, the magnitude of these skews varies between species, with weak gc skews in s. cerevisiae and s. pombe and a much stronger gc skew in c. albicans. in fact, in c. albicans, simple inspection of the gc skew in relation to genes shows that many, but not all, genes have a pattern of gc skew that increases from 5' to 3' end. 

to evaluate the scope of this pattern we examined for each gene whether the change in skew between the translation start and stop sites is significant. genes were shuffled  <dig> times, and gc skew in the 5' and 3' hundred base pairs calculated. if the difference in gc skew was in the top 5% of randomized data, we scored the gc skew change as significant. we found a significant change of gc skew along 33% of the genes in c. albicans but only 14% and  <dig> % of the genes in s. cerevisiae and s. pombe, respectively. thus, the observed pattern of gc skew is a common property of c. albicans genes but is much less frequent in the other model yeast species.

the variability among the three model yeast species prompted us to examine the patterns of gc-skews among additional species. we thus downloaded the genomic sequences and gene annotations of all sequenced unicellular fungi and examined the average pattern of gc-skew in each species . surprisingly, we found that most species have a considerable average gc skew, as in c. albicans but not as in s. cerevisiae and s. pombe. furthermore, most species follow the trend described above, with a relative preference for c at the 5'-end and for g at the 3'-end, suggesting that this is a conserved phenomenon among unicellular fungi.

the species can be divided roughly into four groups. at the top of figure 2a can be seen those with a steep gradient of c-bias from the promoter to the begining of the coding region, followed by the majority of the gene g-biased. these are mainly candida and saccharomyces species. the second group is the schizosaccharomyces species, which are c-biased in the promoter, but not gc-skewed within the gene, except to a very small extent. the third group is the sensu stricto saccharomyces species, with a few non-saccharomyces members. this group is not gc-skewed in the promoter, but shows a slight pattern of increasing g-bias in the gene, which does not extend into the 3' utr. the fourth group, which consists of most of the species analysed, is c-biased for most of the gene, with a small g-biased region at the 3' end, which often extends into the utr. as expected, closely-related species tend to share the same gc-skew signature, although there are some exceptions. for example, candida glabrata and saccharomyces castellii are closely related , but s. castellii is clearly in group one and c. glabrata in group three.

gc-skews affect amino-acid choice
since the pattern of gc skew shifts from negative to positive along genes, we examined the abundance ratio of each nucleotide, between the 5' and 3' ends. strikingly, a and t showed only minor deviations in abundance between 5' and 3' ends, whilst g and c showed considerable gene-position effects, with g being highest at the 3' end, and c highest at the 5' end. .

next we examined if the usage of amino acids also differs between 5'-ends and 3'-ends. indeed, we find that most amino acids are biased to either 5'-ends or 3'-ends of c. albicans genes, in agreement with the gc-skew of the corresponding codons . . for example, the tryptophan  codon, ugg, is g-biased, and tryptophan is approximately twice as common at the 3'-ends than at the 5'-ends of c. albicans genes.

the correlation between gc-skew and a preference for certain amino-acids could indicate that the choice of amino acids is under selection and that this generates the observed pattern of gc skew. for example, we noted that pairs of similar residues  often have similar fold-change between the 5' and 3' ends . however, the pattern of increased gc skew from the 5'-end to the 3'-end continues beyond the coding region, both into promoters and into 3'- utrs . in fact, for most species, the strongest  gc skew is observed at the promoter and then decreases sharply at the coding region. thus, the patterns of gc-skew could not be accounted for solely by selection for amino-acid choice, and we propose that it primarily reflects mutational load.

the mutational load hypothesis would predict a greater effect at fourfold-degenerate positions, as these positions are believed to be less constrained, yet we find an effect of similar magnitude at non-degenerate positions  . this could, in principle, indicate a role for selection for amino-acid choice in generating the observed patterns of gc-skew. however, we note that fourfold-degenerate positions are constrained by the choice of codons, as some codons are more efficiently translated than others. notably, efficient codons are particularly enriched with cytosines  in their third-base positions , and are depleted the 5' ends of genes  <cit> . this should generate an opposite bias to the one that we observe, with abundance of cytosines  at the 3' ends of genes. we thus speculate that selection pressure for increased translational efficiency along genes  <cit>  reduces the gc-skew at fourfold-degenerate positions. accordingly, the effects of constraint for amino acid choice, at non-degenerate positions, and translational efficiency, at degenerate positions, could reduce the impact of mutational load to a similar extent, thereby generating seemingly codon-position independent increase in gc-skews along genes.

uniform at-skews are correlated with positive, but not negative, gc-skews
most species also have considerable at-skews within genes, although somewhat lower than gc-skews , and the extent of at and gc skews are correlated both across genes within the same species  and across different species . however, in contrast to gc-skews, at-skews are largely constant across the length of genes, with a general preference for a over t  and correlate primarily with the extent of gc-skew at the middle of genes, but less so at the 5' and 3' ends . these results suggest that a common mechanism generates a uniform and positive at- and gc-skew throughout genes, but that additional unknown mechanisms generate the decreased gc skew at 5' ends and increased gc skew at 3'-ends. consistent with this possibility, we note that for some species such as c. albicans, the pattern of skew fits well with a model of three regimes: a constant gc-skew at most of the gene, a gradual  decrease of gc-skew at the 5'-end and a gradual  increase at the 3'-end .

gc-skews may be associated with transcription and dna methylation
the observation that gc-skews extend from coding region to the surrounding utrs and is in fact strongest at the 5'-utr supports the possibility that gc-skews are generated by a mechanism that is coupled to transcription. to further examine this possibility we examined the correlation between gc-skew and expression levels across c. albicans genes. we found significant , yet very weak correlations with both the negative gc-skew at the 5'-utr  and the positive gc-skew at the 3'-utr  . these weak correlations support the possibility of transcription-coupled gc-skews but suggest that the extent of gc skew is not determined primarily by the level of transcription but rather largely by other aspects of the transcriptional process. for example, polii dynamics  and the gene-specific binding of various regulatory factors to the transcriptional machinery may have strong effects on the degree of gc-skew.

methylation of cytosine bases is an evolutionary ancient system that has been lost separately in s. cervisiae and s. pombe , but retained in n. crassa and c. albicans   <cit> , and therefore might be related to the mechanisms that generate the observed gc-skews. however, we did not detect any significant difference in gc skews between the  <dig> methylated candida genes listed in  <cit>  and the genome-wide level of gc skew, nor did we find any correlation between the level of methylation in those  <dig> genes and their gc skews .

discussion
mutational pressures may differ between the 5' and 3' ends of genes
gc-skews within genes have been described by multiple previous studies and have been traditionally explained by transcription-coupled mutational pressures  <cit> . the tripartite nature of the gc skew that we observe across dozens of unicellular fungi , is not consistent with a uniform mutational pressure and may thus suggest that mutational pressures vary within genes. such intragenic variability could be related to the various auxiliary proteins and co-factors that bind transiently to rna pol ii during initiation, elongation, or termination, and may generate different regimes of mutations or dna repair. for example, polii undergoes frequent abortive initiation and is often stalled at the 5'-ends of genes, while bound by various co-activators  <cit> . this may define a distinct transcription initiation state at the genes 5'-ends that could facilitate certain mutation or repair mechanisms, thereby accounting for our observation that gc-skew is typically most negative around the tss and then gradually increases within the genes. similarly, transcription termination involves the binding of multiple accessory proteins which may affect the pattern of mutations and repair at the 3'-end. however, in contrast to the 5'-end, the positive gc-skew at the 3-end is strongest at the stop codons rather than the transcription termination region. this seems inconsistent with an influence of transcription termination, unless termination factors bind to pol ii before termination and around the position of the stop codon.

dna methylation has been lost in s. cervisiae and s. pombe, but retained in c. albicans and n. crassa. this pattern is consistent with a role for methylation in generating gc-skews in fungi, although it is based only on four species while  the presence or absence of dna methylation is not known in the other unicellular fungi. it has recently been shown that methylated regions of dna show a greater rate of c to t deamination in c. albicans  <cit> . this could generate skew if the methylation was itself strand-biased. however, we did not find any relationship between gc skew and the presence or the extent of dna methylation in c. albicans  <cit> .

c-to-t deamination has been proposed as a dominant source of gc-skews and as mentioned above is also linked to dna methylation. however, c-to-t deamination both increases gc-skew  and decreases at-skew  and thus would generate inversely correlated patterns of gc and at-skews. the observation that gc- and at-skews are positively  correlated, and the relative uniformity of at skews across genes argues against a major role of c-to-t deamination in generating the observed patterns of gc and at skews and instead suggests that these patterns reflect other types of strand-biased mutations. there is selective pressure on at skew because t-rich codons tend to code for more expensive amino acids  <cit> . we also note that gc skew is negatively correlated with gc content , perhaps implicating base composition in influencing patterns of mutation and repair. interestingly, nucleotide excision repair acts preferentially on the transcribed strand and could thus promote transcription-associated gc and at skews, as recently suggested from analysis of cancer genomes  <cit> .

patterns of skew may reflect an adaptive tendency for c-avoidance at 5' ends
in contrast to the mutational pressure hypothesis we can also consider an adaptive explanation. according to this possibility gc-skew influences the rate of transcription elongation  and, as recently suggested for translation elongation  <cit> , it might be beneficial to have initially slow elongation  followed by faster elongation  as this reduces the degree of collisions between rna polymerases  <cit>  . this argument relies on the observation that ctp is found at a lower abundance than atp, gtp and utp: a relative depletion of ctps was previously observed in multiple organisms including mammalian cytosols   <cit> , chick fibroblasts  <cit>  and plants  <cit> . a significant, albeit weaker, ctp depletion was also observed in s. cerevisiae   <cit> . ctp depletion was also proposed to generate a global c-avoidance across various bacterial genomes  <cit> . thus, a high c-frequency at the 5' ends  may slow down the initial rate of elongation if ctp loading is a rate limiting step for elongation under physiological conditions. elongation rate may then increase along the gene as the c-frequency decreases, and this strategy may decrease the extent of polii collisions. this hypothesis raises two predictions that could be tested in the future:  ctp pools are lower in gc-skewed than non-skewed species, and  the kinetics of rna elongation is relatively slow for c-rich transcripts at physiological ntp concentrations.

it is tempting to further speculate why this composite gc-skew is absent in other organisms based on the collision avoidance hypothesis. first, the model budding and fission yeasts were chosen as laboratory model organisms partially since they can grow easily on minimal media. this could indicate that they synthesize most of their essential molecules  rather than scavenging it from the environment and thus have higher ctp abundance. second, higher eukaryotes have much longer, intron-rich genes, and therefore may rely on other mechanisms for avoiding rna pol ii collisions.

CONCLUSIONS
most unicellular fungi have significant gc-skews in transcribed sequences, with a negative skew at the 5'-end and a positive skew at the 3'-end. this pattern of skew influences amino acid composition at the ends of proteins, but cannot be accounted by selection for amino acid composition. we propose two models that could explain this pattern: mutational pressures that differ between the 5' and 3'-ends of genes, for example due to preferential nucleotide excision repair at 5' ends, or alternatively, selection for avoiding pol ii collisions through preferential c-avoidance at the 3' ends of genes.

