BACKGROUND
in the marine realm, pelagic species that have large geographic range and high dispersal capabilities represent a serious challenge to the idea of allopatric divergence  and to speciation processes in a seemingly continuous environment  <cit> . the high mobility of these species and the dearth of barriers to gene flow in oceans might be expected to limit the division of species' ranges and, as a result, even distant regions might be connected genetically  <cit> . although examples of genetic homogeneity over large distances are common in marine systems, there are also many examples of surprising population structure in marine species with high dispersal potential  <cit> .

cetaceans are good examples of this kind of species. despite their broad range and their high dispersal capabilities, many cetaceans often show substantial genetic structure at regional or even fine scale, although the extent varies among species  <cit> . it is generally argued that these patterns, not always correlated with geographic features, are related to a combination of complex behaviours, such as philopatry, specialisations for local resources, or social organisation into kinship groups  <cit> . on the other hand, while the dispersal and segregation of populations of terrestrial mammals are frequently influenced by geographic features or climatic characteristics, few such obvious barriers are expected to restrict cetacean dispersal and gene flow in the world's oceans  <cit> . variation in oceanographic properties of the water column, such as depth, temperature, currents and winds, are known as important factors in the life of these animals, most obviously in conditioning the availability of their food , but their effect on cetacean dispersal and on population structure remains enigmatic.

small coastal cetaceans such as those of the porpoise family are a model of choice to investigate this issue because they have to face a suite of intrinsic problems not encountered by larger dolphins and whales. their small size, their demanding reproductive schedule, and their limited ability to store energy force a strong dependency on their food  <cit> . therefore, we expect that variation in oceanographic features that determine food availability and abundance  should markedly affect local density and dispersal of porpoises. if true, their population genetic structure should correlate, at least partly, with oceanographic characteristics. to test this hypothesis, we examined the genetic structure of one the most widely distributed porpoises, the harbour porpoise phocoena phocoena , with regards to seascape characteristics. harbour porpoises occur fairly continuously throughout cold coastal waters of the north pacific and the north atlantic, with a relict population in the black sea separated from the atlantic range by the mediterranean sea where porpoises are nowadays absent  <cit> . we analysed genetic polymorphism at  <dig> microsatellite loci for an extensive sampling  covering the main distribution of harbour porpoises in the central and eastern north atlantic  using a combination of recent individual-based landscape genetic approaches  <cit> .

here, we provide strong and clear evidence that seascape imposes major constraints on the demographic and genetic structure of a cetacean, and thus on its dispersal. this finding is of general interest in the context of climate change and habitat fragmentation for marine species, as ecosystems in the eastern north atlantic are shifting toward a warmer dynamic equilibrium with significant changes already detected in plankton and fish assemblages.

RESULTS
we applied two complementary bayesian clustering algorithms, namely structure v. <dig>   <cit>  and geneland v. <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , to infer population structure  and to assign individuals  to populations  based on individual multilocus genotypes and, for the second algorithm, also on individual spatial origins. both of these approaches assume that populations are panmictic units with distinct allele frequencies. to test whether individual dispersal is restricted in space, we analysed the pattern of isolation by distance  using the individual-based approach developed by rousset  <cit> . this involves regression of an index of genetic differentiation on marine geographic distance among pairs of individuals . finally, recent migration among populations  was assessed using a bayesian model implemented in bayesass v. <dig>   <cit> . this algorithm requires few assumptions for assigning individual genotypes to population of origin and, in particular, relaxes the key assumption of hardy-weinberg  equilibrium within populations.

clustering analyses
structure analysis
structure provided consistent results over  <dig> replicated runs tested for each k and over the different models tested . generally, in highly structured data sets, as k is increased the most divergent groups separate into distinct clusters first  <cit> . the probability of the data ) greatly increased from k =  <dig> to k =  <dig>  and then reached a maximum value at k =  <dig>  after which the values decreased gradually . the increase of likelihood ); figure 2b), i.e. the gain of explanatory power of the model when adding a new cluster to the analysis, is high at k changing from  <dig> to  <dig>  at k =  <dig>  the two clusters are anchored by the black sea  and the north atlantic porpoises . the addition of a third cluster  further increases the probability of the data, the gain of power becoming null or negative for higher values of k . at k =  <dig>  the north atlantic cluster splits in two distinct parts that persist and become more clearly distinct for higher values of k . the first is a genetically homogeneous cluster that encompasses porpoises from spain and portugal with high membership coefficients . the second group is composed of the remaining individuals sampled further north . most of these display membership coefficients that tend to distribute evenly across clusters others than the black sea and iberian clusters as k is increased. the same pattern was observed whatever the model considered in the analysis. this pattern might result from  lack of sufficient signal in the data set to confidently assign these individuals, and/or  low underlying genetic structure of porpoises in that area, or  departure from the basic assumptions of the model. instead of discrete genetic units at hw and linkage equilibrium, the population structure in northern waters might be much more continuous than discrete, with continuous gradations in allele frequency over the range .

geneland analysis
while structure uses only the individual multilocus genotype data to infer the population structure, geneland also exploits the spatial positions of the individual samples as a supplemental parameter in the analysis  <cit> . interesting features of the geneland model that further distinguish it from that of the structure model are its ability  to deal with an unknown number of populations simultaneously with other parameters,  to locate population boundaries across space, and  to account for uncertainty in the positioning of sampled individuals . this last feature is particularly useful in the present context as the locations of sampled harbour porpoises, composed of by-caught and stranded animals, might be poorly representative of the normal range of individuals.

the geneland model provided results consistent with those of the structure one. posterior distributions of the estimated number of populations  across  <dig> replicates displayed a clear mode at k =  <dig> in  <dig> out of the  <dig> replicates  and at k =  <dig> in the remaining trials . similar to the structure results, geneland identified three spatially coherent clusters : the first gathers all porpoises from the black sea and marmara sea  isolated from those in the atlantic by the mediterranean ; the second gathers the porpoises from the iberian peninsula  isolated from samples further north by a barrier to gene flow located in the southern bay of biscay ; and the third is unequivocally composed of the samples further north in the atlantic , widely distributed from the french coast of the bay of biscay to the arctic waters of iceland and norway . this last result contrasts slightly with that of the structure analysis . while the structure model did not confidently assign these individuals, geneland assigned almost all them to the nat cluster with high membership coefficients that remain consistent even for higher values of k . this suggests that taking into account the spatial context of individuals might improve the efficiency of the analysis. no individuals were assigned to the fourth cluster detected in  <dig> out of the  <dig> geneland replicates . this is not surprising as this cluster is centred on landmass . such occurrences of "ghost" populations, with no individuals assigned, is reported by geneland's authors as a poorly understood problem  <cit> . it could be related to the process of tiling a heterogeneous sampling distribution, with "landmass" tiles being reported as a "ghost" population. as there are no individuals assigned to this cluster, as it only occurs in a minor proportion of the trials and as it does not affect biological interpretation in the present context, this "ghost" population can be ignored .

genetic diversity and differentiation among inferred populations
the three identified clusters differed greatly with respect to their genetic diversity assessed using heterozygosity and allelic richness, corrected for difference in sample size . harbour porpoises from iberian waters and the black sea displayed comparable genetic diversity that was much lower than that observed in the nat cluster. for example, the allelic richness over all loci was twice as low in the black sea and in iberia as it was in the nat cluster .

n: sample size; a: allelic richness ; ho: observed heterozygosity; he: gene diversity; fis values calculated after weir and cockerham  <cit> . asterisks refer to the significance level of the tests for heterozygosity deficiency .

the amount of genetic differentiation among clusters, estimated using fst  <cit> , illustrated the high divergence of black sea harbour porpoises from those in the north atlantic :  <dig> – <dig> ; bs-nat =  <dig> , 95% ci:  <dig> – <dig> ). the fst values between iberian porpoises and those sampled further north in the atlantic were lower, but remained substantial . in contrast, fst values between parts of the nat cluster  were much lower . figure  <dig> provides a global view of the system. it shows that for pairs of sampled localities from different clusters, genetic differentiation is much larger than that between intracluster pairs that have the same geographic distance. in other words, genetic differentiation between clusters is not only induced by geographic distance between them but also by barriers to gene flow.

tests of departure from hw equilibrium  show no significant deviation for porpoises from iberia and the black sea, but a significant deficiency in heterozygosity at  <dig> of the  <dig> loci analysed in the nat cluster. this slight heterozygote deficiency recorded at almost all loci in porpoises of northern atlantic waters and the failure of the structure model to assign these individuals in comparison to the geneland model suggest that a subtle spatial structure  with a continuous gradation in allele frequencies across regions and/or isolation by distance could occur  <cit> .

isolation by distance analyses
when ibd occurs in 'continuous' populations distributed in a two-dimensional habitat, genetic differentiation among individuals is expected to increase linearly with the logarithm of geographic distance  <cit> . this linear relationship was demonstrated to hold best at local geographical scale because heterogeneity of demographic parameters  and the effect of mutation rate are reduced and hence their confounding influence on genetic differentiation is also reduced  <cit> . however, the scale of population ranges in the marine realm is often unknown and can be quite large , especially for cetacean species  <cit> . as we cannot know the appropriate scale a priori for the nat cluster, we conducted the ibd analyses considering the range at three different spatial scales . we first analysed ibd in the global range of the nat cluster that latitudinally extends over  <dig> km from the french coast of the bay of biscay northwards to the arctic waters of norway and iceland . then, we subdivided the global range into two parts of equal latitudinal range , then into three parts  and repeated the analysis on each part.

we found a significant positive relationship between the index of genetic differentiation  and the marine geographic distance among porpoises in the nat cluster at all scales considered  except one: the region nat-3b. this latter corresponds to the area where the sample size is the lowest , where the sampling is the most spatially heterogeneous , and also where the marine distances among porpoises are the shortest . therefore, the absence of significant evidence in this region likely results from the low power of the analysis to detect ibd .

rousset  <cit>  demonstrated that the regression slope is proportional to 1/4πdσ  <dig>  where d is the effective density of individuals and σ <dig> the second moment of axial dispersal distance, best described as the mean squared parent-offspring axial dispersal distance. σ <dig> can be understood as a measure of the speed at which two gene lineages issuing from an ancestor move away from each other, as it is the rate at which the mean squared axial distance between these two lineage increases per time unit  <cit> . the comparison among subset areas at the medium and at small scale showed significant north-south variation in the parameters of the regression for the  <dig> microsatellite loci . the slope  in the south part of the nat cluster was significantly higher than that in northern parts at medium scale  and at small scale , suggesting that either density , dispersal , or both are reduced in the south part compared to the north.

recent migration rates among populations
recent migration rates  were estimated between porpoises from the black sea, iberia and the southern part of the nat cluster  adjacent to the detected barrier to gene flow  using the bayesass v. <dig>  algorithm  <cit> . when simulating the effect of having no information in the data from which to estimate migration rates, we obtained a 95% ci of  <dig> – <dig>  for the proportions of individuals derived from the source populations each generation  and a ci of  <dig> – <dig>  for migration rates. confidence intervals recovered from the data set were considerably smaller than those obtained from the null hypothesis , suggesting that the data set contained an appreciable amount of information to support the results.

virtually all porpoises from the black sea were identified as non-migrant . although this result is not surprising, as the black sea population is now geographically isolated from the atlantic populations by the mediterranean sea, this result can be useful as reference to assess the status of the iberian population. almost all porpoises from iberian waters were also identified as non-migrant , while the nat cluster showed a slightly lower non-migrant proportion . the migration rates between iberia and the nat cluster were low  with the lower 95% ci bounds not different from  <dig>  except in one case: the migration rate from iberia to the nat cluster appeared slightly higher than the reverse, but the large overlap of 95% cis did not allow us to conclude there was asymmetry in migration rates.

discussion
the individual-based approaches we used here revealed that most of the harbour porpoise range in the central and eastern north atlantic behaves as a 'continuous' population that widely extends over thousands of kilometres from the french coasts of the bay of biscay northwards to the arctic waters of norway and iceland, with significant isolation by distance. this striking result is concordant with the low but sometimes significant level of genetic differentiation previously reported at microsatellite loci between arbitrarily defined groups in the north sea and adjacent waters  <cit> . however, strong barriers to gene flow in the south-eastern north atlantic range isolate, on a relatively small scale, porpoises from iberian waters and on a larger scale porpoises from the black sea.

the total isolation of harbour porpoises from the black sea has long been suggested on the basis of the lack of field observation of porpoises in the mediterranean sea  <cit> , of private mtdna alleles reported in that population  <cit> , and of morphological differences  <cit> . our results lend further support to this hypothesis. the pronounced genetic footprint of this isolation left at nuclear and mtdna loci suggest this is an ancient isolation that might date back to the last ice age . the genetic differentiation detected at microsatellite loci between the iberian porpoises and those further north was not apparent at the mtdna control region previously analysed  <cit> . the lack of mitochondrial lineage sorting and of private microsatellite alleles suggests that the differentiation we observed with microsatellite analyses is caused by a more recent isolation process than that of the black sea.

the corollary of these results is the inference of strong barriers to gene flow in the southern bay of biscay and in the mediterranean sea that isolate almost completely the iberian and black sea populations. these barriers coincide with strong oceanographic changes of similar nature . to take them in turn, the conditions in the southern bay of biscay differ sharply from those at its margins  <cit> . the continental shelf, widely extended in the northern part, narrows considerably to the south and is cleaved asunder by the cap breton canyon, which drops to the abyssal plain in the south-east, only  <dig> km from the shore. warm and oligotrophic surface water spreads from the cap breton canyon to cover half of the southern bay in summer  <cit> . in contrast, off the iberian atlantic coast upwelling becomes evident from late spring to early autumn  <cit> , bringing to the surface cold nutrient-enriched waters that support a rich food-web  <cit> . on the north side of the barrier, shallow, cold, and nutrient rich waters prevail most of the year from the french waters of the bay of biscay northward to the northern north sea. from a biogeographical point of view, the southern bay of biscay is not only a barrier for porpoises but it is also a transition zone between the boreal and subtropical provinces, with many species reaching their southern or northern limit of distribution in that area  <cit> .

still further north, depth increases towards nordic seas , but waters remain cold and highly productive  <cit> . however, the bathymetric change does not seem to restrict gene flow in nordic seas, consistent with sightings of some porpoises reported far offshore in deep water  <cit> . while this suggest there are few, if any, potential barriers to dispersal of porpoises from the northern bay of biscay up to arctic waters, the heterozygosity deficit related to the detected ibd shows nevertheless that porpoises do not mate randomly over that extended area and that gene flow is spatially restricted. we observed a north-south variation in the ibd pattern with higher ibd slope at the southern end of this range compared to northern parts . one could argue that this north-south variation in ibd pattern might reflect drift disequilibrium  <cit>  in northern areas associated with the postglacial porpoise recolonisation of nordic waters in contrast to the southern habitats, which likely remained more stable in time. however, simulation-based sensitivity analysis of current dσ  <dig> estimation to demographic instability in time and space conducted by leblois et al  <cit>  showed that spatial expansion with constant density does not significantly affect present-time dσ  <dig> estimation, especially when the spatial expansion occurred  <dig> or more generations ago, as it is the case for postglacial recolonisation. consequently, the higher ibd slope detected in the southern area  compared to that in waters further north  most likely represents a lower current-time dσ  <dig>  although we cannot exclude variation in σ <dig>  a lower porpoise density in southern waters is supported by field estimates based on aerial and ship surveys conducted in the north sea and adjacent waters  <cit> . these variations in density  likely reflect variation in habitat. the southern part of the 'continuous' population  borders the barrier to gene flow detected in the southern bay of biscay and should thus display sub-optimal conditions for porpoises while the middle  and northern areas  would be more optimal for a cold water species such as the harbour porpoise.

the mediterranean sea displays similar characteristics to those encountered in the southern bay of biscay but at a larger scale. the mediterranean is composed mostly of deep basins and narrow continental shelves with warm oligotrophic surface waters prevailing most of the year  <cit> . these characteristics are likely quite unfavourable for cold water species and might explain why the harbour porpoise is absent from this area. the oceanographic conditions in the black sea are, by contrast, more suitable for harbour porpoises with low salinity, colder and more nutrient rich surface waters than in the mediterranean sea  <cit> . there are however reports of porpoise strandings in the northern aegean sea  <cit> . this can be understood with regard to oceanographic features in that area. the subdivision of the aegean into two basins has long been recognised. the northern basin is under the influence of cold, low salinity waters that pour out of the black sea. this water is entrained into a cyclonic circulation affecting the northern and western parts of the aegean, causing an ecological isolation of the northern basin from the southern basin  <cit> . in the southern basin the continental shelf is very limited and the waters become quickly characteristic of mediterranean waters  <cit> , unfavourable for harbour porpoises.

to summarise, surface water temperature and primary production seem to be the factors that best characterise the nature of barriers to gene flow encountered across the harbour porpoise range, their population structure, and their geographic distribution. it is worth noting however that in oceanography, these two parameters are often linked  <cit> . indeed, the sea surface temperature acts as a useful proxy for other physical processes, such as vertical stratification and nutrient contents, regulating the size structure, taxonomic composition, and abundance of the phytoplankton community, and thus the food availability for top predators  <cit> . these results reinforce previous ecological studies on harbour porpoises that reported significant relationships between abundances and movements with sea surface temperature and food availability  <cit> . although bathymetry can be important in harbour porpoise ecology  <cit> , we showed that this factor alone seems not to restrict gene flow in northern waters of the sampling range.

while the proximal causes of porpoise dependence on these habitat characteristics are beyond the scope of this paper, the ultimate underlying mechanism is likely related to the high energetic constraints this small cetacean has to face in order to survive. as one of the smallest endothermic marine predators, and furthermore with limited energy storage capacity, it is currently assumed that harbour porpoises must feed frequently without prolonged periods of fasting  <cit> . their distribution, their movements, and in sum their overall biology should therefore be closely related to those of their prey and thus to nutrient rich waters.

CONCLUSIONS
in the marine realm, community structure is shaped heavily by physical processes . in this study we provide for the first time strong evidence that physical processes determining food availability have major impacts on the demographic and genetic structure of a cetacean. the small body size of harbour porpoises undoubtedly has profound consequences at all levels of their biology and makes this species particularly sensitive to habitat variation. we can however reasonably expect that this will be also applicable to other cetaceans of similar body size, habitat and thermoregulation constraints. however, these constraints could be reduced for larger cetaceans, leading to more complex patterns of population structure not necessarily correlated to seascape features . ecosystems in the eastern north atlantic are shifting toward a warmer dynamic equilibrium with significant changes detected in plankton and fish assemblages  <cit> , but the consequences for marine mammals remain to date unclear  <cit> . although further analyses would be require to address the demographic trends of these populations, the genetic pattern highlighted here , the more recent isolation of those in iberian waters, and the higher ibd in the southern end of the northern atlantic continuum, suggests that habitat-related fragmentation of harbour porpoise range is under way and that it is likely to continue with the predicted changes in climate.

