BACKGROUND
over the past few decades, geneticists have primarily focused their research on protein-coding dna sequences, leading to the identification of essentially all genes, the understanding of the molecular function for many of them, as well as the implications of gene mutations in human diseases and disorders. the study of protein-coding dna sequences remains important, but also focuses on only a small fraction of the human genome . the next big challenge in the field of human genetics lies in understanding the role of the remaining 98% of the genome, which comprises non-coding dna sequences critical for gene regulation, chromosome function, and generation of untranslated rnas  <cit> . new experimental strategies are needed to understand the functional role of non-coding sequences in health and disease. pioneer examples in this work include large-scale efforts from the encyclopedia of dna elements  consortium  <cit>  seeking to catalog regulatory elements in the human genome, and the pleiades promoter project  <cit>  identifying brain-specific regulatory elements using humanized mouse models  <cit> . the latter project aimed at refining our understanding of regulatory elements, as well as providing researchers with novel tools for directed gene expression in restricted brain regions  <cit> . these tools were designed to be amenable to gene therapy as they were minipromoters of less than 4 kb, made entirely from human dna elements, and selected for expression in  <dig> brain regions and cell types of therapeutic interest  <cit> . however, the bioinformatic approaches used for minipromoter design resulted in a biased selection for genes with low regulatory complexity, having well-defined and conserved non-coding regions that were close to the transcription start site   <cit> .

an additional set of ten genes, which were judged to be important for brain expression and/or relevance to disease, were omitted from pleiades minipromoter development because they either had regulatory regions that were too large, too numerous candidate regulatory regions, or multiple tss. for these genes, the pleiades promoter project designed maxipromoters as an alternative  <cit> . a maxipromoter consists of a bacterial artificial chromosome  that has a reporter gene sequence  inserted at the start codon. for a bac to be ideally suited for maxipromoter design, it has to span the whole predicted gene sequence plus extensive flanking intergenic sequences, but cannot contain the predicted promoter region of an adjoining gene.

these maxipromoters were used to test the veracity of the predicted regulatory regions, as well as to define the boundaries of the genomic dna that were sufficient for brain-specific expression, thus leading to a refinement of our knowledge regarding the complexity of gene regulation. the strategy used to generate the mice for expression study in vivo was built on our method for high-throughput single-copy site-specific generation of humanized mouse models; entitled hugx   <cit> . characterization of expression from the maxipromoter reporter construct was performed in development at embryonic day  <dig>  , postnatal day  <dig> , and adult brain and eyes. in this study, we characterize for the first time the expression of human maoa, and nr2f <dig>  two genes for which the mouse homologs have been extensively studied in central nervous system  development  <cit> , and amotl <dig> and nov, for which roles in cns have been unclear in either species.

amotl <dig> , initially known as junction-enriched and -associated protein , encodes a member of the motin protein family  <cit> . the gene was selected for being enriched for expression in the thalamus, a brain region implicated in the cognitive impairment of early stage huntington’s disease   <cit> . in vitro and in vivo mouse studies have demonstrated that the amotl <dig> protein localizes at 'tight’ junctions in cells  <cit> . amotl <dig> regulates sprouting angiogenesis by affecting tip cell migration, and cell-cell adhesion in vivo <cit> . northern blot analysis demonstrated high levels of transcripts of the mouse amotl <dig> gene in the brain, heart, lung, skeletal muscle, kidney, and uterus  <cit> . these results differed from previously reported immunohistochemical analysis demonstrating absence of expression in the brain, heart, and kidney  <cit> . discrepancy between the studies can be partly explained by the existence of different isoforms of the amotl <dig> protein, highlighting the need for further characterization  <cit> .

maoa  is a gene encoding a membrane-bound mitochondrial flavoprotein that deaminates monoaminergic neurotransmitters  <cit> . the gene was selected for expression in the locus coeruleus , a component of the neuroadrenergic system that has been linked to the etiology of depressive illness  <cit> . in mice, characterization of maoa by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry during cns development demonstrated expression in a variety of neurons, including noradrenergic and adrenergic neurons as well as dopaminergic cells in the substantia nigra  <cit> . maoa is expressed in neurons populating the developing brainstem, amygdala, cranial sensory ganglia, and the raphe  <cit> . transient expression in cholinergic motor nuclei in the hindbrain, and in non-aminergic neurons populating the thalamus, hippocampus, and claustrum has also been detected during development  <cit> . in adult rodent brain, maoa transcription is detected in neurons populating the cerebral cortices, the hippocampal formation , and the cerebellar granule cell layer  <cit> . maoa knockout models implicate this gene as a regulator of neurochemical pathways, leading to increased levels of serotonin ), norepinephrine, dopamine, and noradrenaline neurotransmitters in adult brain  <cit> . this increased level of neurotransmitters leads to behavioral abnormalities including aggression, which can be rescued by a maoa forebrain-specific transgenic mouse model  <cit> . the role of maoa in regulating neurotransmitters also impacts development by affecting telencephalic neural progenitors and retinal ganglion cell projections  <cit> .

nov , belongs to the ccn  family of secreted matrix-associated signaling regulators  <cit> . the gene was selected for being enriched in the amygdala and basolateral complex, which includes brain regions that have been implicated in affective processing and memory  <cit> . the nov protein stimulates fibroblast proliferation via a tyrosine phosphorylation dependent pathway  <cit> . in mice, nov characterization by in situ hybridization revealed that the gene transcripts are first observed at e <dig> in a subset of dermomyotomal cells of muscular origin along the entire embryonic rostrocaudal axis  <cit> . in the cns, nov transcripts are first detected at e <dig>  in scattered cells of the olfactory epithelium, the developing cochlea and the trigeminal ganglia  <cit> . transcription observed in the olfactory epithelium extends later to cells populating the olfactory lobe   <cit> . at e <dig>  and onward, nov transcription is detected in muscle cell types of diverse developing tissues including vertebral muscles, limb muscles , aorta, and other major vessels, maxillary muscles, and extraocular muscles  <cit> . additionally, at e <dig> , nov transcription is observed in developing motor neurons in the ventral horns of the spinal cords  <cit> . in situ hybridization transcript localization on human fetal tissues revealed similar results and suggest that nov plays an important role in neuronal differentiation  <cit> . furthermore, investigation on prenatal lead exposure has revealed a reduction in the expression level of nov in rat offspring hippocampus, demonstrating a potential mechanism by which lead exposure affects learning and memory  <cit> . overall, these results highlight the need for further investigation of the role of nov in central nervous system.

nr2f <dig> , also known as coup-tfii/arp <dig>  is a gene encoding for a transcription factor belonging to the orphan receptors group. like nov, nr2f <dig> was selected for being enriched in the amygdala and basolateral complex, which includes brain regions that have been implicated in affective processing and memory  <cit> . in mice, transcription of nr2f <dig> by in situ hybridization during cns development is first observed at embryonic day  <dig>  , peaks at e <dig> to  <dig>  and declines after birth  <cit> . nr2f <dig> expression in the developing telencephalon is restricted to the caudal lateral domains, with positive staining in the medial ganglionic eminence, and caudal ganglionic eminence   <cit> . nr2f <dig> function in the cge is essential for the migration of inhibitory interneurons during forebrain development  <cit> . these interneurons migrate from the cge via the caudal migratory stream to populate the neocortex, hippocampus, and amygdala  <cit> . recent studies demonstrated a role for nr2f <dig>  and its closest relative  in regulating the temporal specification of neural stem/progenitor cells in the ventricular zone of the developing cns  <cit> . in the adult cns, nr2f <dig> is expressed in a subpopulation of calretinin-positive interneurons in the postnatal cortex, and a population of amacrine cells in the mouse adult retina  <cit> . finally, nr2f <dig> participates in the development and proper function of multiple organs, including the inner ear, limbs, skeletal muscles, heart, and pancreas  <cit> . the expression of nr2f <dig> in heart and pancreatic development highlights the role of this gene in regulating angiogenesis, a property that in turn affects tumor growth, and metastasis in cancer  <cit> .

RESULTS
high-throughput construction of humanized mice to study gene expression
gene choosing for this study was based in part on serial analysis of gene expression  profiling of brain regions of therapeutic interest, as well as data mining of both the allen mouse brain atlas   <cit>  and brain gene expression map   <cit> . the ten chosen human genes all had enriched expression of their mouse homologs in brain regions of therapeutic interest . the expression pattern of these human genes was then analyzed in this study using mouse models generated through the hugx method, that is, carrying a single copy of a human bac maxipromoter reporter construct docked at the hprt locus  <cit> . this approach was used to validate the genomic dna boundaries that were predicted to be sufficient for adult brain-specific expression of the selected human genes, and to document the expression pattern resulting from the human maxipromoter constructs at different developmental stages in mouse.

a
apleiades  promoter design number.

bglra <dig> failed retrofitting with hprt homology arms.

cneurod <dig> failed bac isolation from the library.

bac bacterial artificial chromosome, n/a not applicable.

of the ten selected genes, eight bac maxipromoters were successfully constructed that contained an hprt complementation cassette and a reporter gene  . one planned bac construct, rp11-463 m <dig> , was abandoned due to rearrangement in the parental bac clone, resulting in a smaller dna insert than expected. thus, using our retrofitting approach a success rate of 89%  was obtained, with the largest construct spanning >213 kb . the only retrofitting failure was partly due to an irresolvable primer design issue for glra <dig> . while many technical challenges can occur when using recombineering technology in a high-throughput manner, the high success rate obtained in our approach demonstrates the overall efficiency of the technology.

the eight retrofitted maxipromoter constructs were electroporated into embryonic stem cells , and positive recombinant clones were selected, and screened as described in materials and methods. on average, 35%  correctly targeted clones were recovered for each construct . for each maxipromoter, correctly targeted escs were microinjected to generate chimeric animals from which germline transmission was obtained; 100% success rate . maxipromoter expression was evaluated in e <dig>  embryos, p <dig> brains, and adult brains and eyes. gross dissection and whole body staining for expression investigation of adults was also performed. based on these studies, 63%  maxipromoter strains were positive for expression of the human gene in mouse tissues . of the three negative strains, the failure to detect expression from the lct maxipromoter could be attributable to sensitivity issues regarding the egfp reporter gene. this fluorescence reporter was subsequently excluded from our single-copy insertion work  <cit> , and replaced with the lacz reporter, which offers greater sensitivity when direct readout of the enzymatic product is used. all other maxipromoter constructs were retrofitted with lacz. the two additional negative results, for the ngfr and pitx <dig> strains, could be attributable to undetected construct mutations. however, almost all the deletions that were detected, during screening for correctly targeted esc clones , were large and eliminated multiple polymerase chain reaction  assays. furthermore, both the ngfr and pitx <dig> strains were examined using the same multiple pcr assays, which showed that the bac constructs had not changed in the mice. hence, these negative results were more likely due to missing human gene regulatory regions, and/or the human regulatory regions present in the bac being non-functional in the mouse genome. in parallel to our work, the gene expression nervous system atlas  project  <cit>  reported positive brain expression using mouse pitx <dig> and ngfr in random-insertion bac-mouse models   <cit> . sequence comparison, using relative coordinates between human and mouse, revealed that our human bac constructs  were shorter than the mouse bacs used by gensat. pitx <dig> was shorter at the 5′ end by approximately 30 kb, and ngfr was shorter at the 3′ end by approximately 40 kb. thus, our work suggests a testable hypothesis that important regulatory elements reside in these differential regions. finally, we characterized in detail the expression patterns observed from four of the five positive humanized mouse strains generated in this project: amotl1-lacz, maoa-lacz, nov-lacz and nr2f2-lacz. the detailed analysis of the nr2e1-lacz strain was presented in a previous publication  <cit> .
hprt 
targeted embryonic stem cell lines successfully generated

aobtained from multiple electroporations.

esc embryonic stem cell.

mems .

mmrrc mutant mouse regional resource center, n/a not applicable, n/d not determined.

human genes can be conditionally deleted using flanking functional loxp sites
the hugx method used in this study consisted of retrofitting existing human bac constructs to carry an hprt complementation cassette that allowed site specific targeting into the genome of hprtb-m <dig> escs by homologous recombination  <cit> . the resulting complementation targeting event was detectable using described pcr assays  <cit> . the insertion of the hprt complementation cassette by recombineering resulted in the disruption of a sacb gene present on the original bac vector, as well as the addition of loxp sites flanking the entire human gene. to verify that these loxp sites were functional in the final maxipromoter carrying strains, we bred amotl1-lacz, maoa-lacz, nov-lacz and nr2f2-lacz female mice to actb-cre male mice , and examined the resulting brain expression patterns from male offspring. positive animals for the complementation at the hprt locus by genotyping were evaluated based on the presence or absence of the actb-cre transgene. the results showed that in all strains, lacz staining  was only detected in males, positive for the complementation at the hprt locus and negative for the presence of the actb-cre transgene  . absence of lacz staining was only found in brains of the animals that were positive for both the complementation at the hprt locus and the actb-cre transgene , suggesting complete excision of the bac construct from the genome and proper function of the loxp sites .

human amotl1-lacz revealed staining in mature thalamic neurons in adult brain, and amacrine as well as ganglion cells in adult retina
amotl <dig> expression was predicted to be in the thalamus in the adult brain. whole mount lacz e <dig>  stained embryos revealed expression of the amotl <dig> reporter construct in components of the vascular system such as the jugular vein, the posterior cerebral artery, and the vertebrate arteries . additional analyses using embryos subjected to a clearing protocol confirmed staining in the previously described regions, and revealed expression in the basilary artery, the dorsal aorta, and vertebrate arteries . staining was observed in the omphalomesenteric vascular system, and the lateral nasal prominence . p <dig> developing mouse brain sections revealed expression in the anterior thalamic nuclei, and hpf . adult mouse brain sections revealed expression in the anteromedial, and anteroventral thalamic nuclei, the pontine nuclei, and the hpf, with sharp staining in the cornu ammonis fields  . additional staining was detected in the subiculum and extended to the lower cortical layers with pronounced staining in layer vi . on cryosections positive colocalization between the β-gal staining product  and neuronal nuclei -specific antibody  indicated that the amotl <dig> reporter construct was expressed in mature neurons in all brain regions, including the anteroventral thalamic nuclei . the β-gal-positive cells  did not colocalize with glial fibrillary acidic protein  , a marker of astrocytes . further amotl1-lacz expression pattern characterization revealed staining in the adult retina, extending from the inner limiting membrane  to the junction between the inner plexiform layer  and the inner nuclear layer  . the β-gal staining product  detected at the junction of the ipl, and inl, colocalized with anti-tyrosine hydroxylase  , demonstrating expression of the amotl <dig> maxipromoter reporter construct in a subpopulation of amacrine cells found in the inl   <cit> . colocalization using an anti-brn <dig> antibody revealed expression in the ilm corresponding to ganglion cells in the retina . additional staining was found in the nasal structures, extending from the naris, to the nasopharynx, and at the sternum junction, in the extremities of the ribs in the amotl1-lacz animals in gross dissections .

human maoa-lacz revealed staining in th-positive neurons in the locus coeruleus in adult brain as well as horizontal, and ganglion cells in adult retina
maoa expression was predicted to be observed in the lc in the adult brain. whole mount lacz e <dig>  stained embryos revealed expression in the prepontine hindbrain that extended to the basal midbrain and the prosomeres  <dig> and  <dig> of the diencephalon . staining extended from the pontine hindbrain  to the medullary hindbrain  . e <dig>  cleared embryos confirmed staining in the previously described regions, and revealed expression of the maoa reporter construct in major neuron fibers extending from the prepontine hindbrain, and the pontine hindbrain . staining was present in fibers of the medullary hindbrain that extended into the thoracic cavity; and fibers of the ventral region of the somites that started in the upper thoracic cavity, and extended towards the posterior limbs . p <dig> developing mouse brain sections revealed expression at the lateral extremities of the fourth ventricle, demonstrating expression of the maoa maxipromoter reporter construct in the region of the lc at this developmental stage . adult mouse-brain-section staining revealed high levels of expression in the lc and lateral cerebellar nuclei, as well as the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei . further colocalization experiments on cryosections revealed that the maoa-lacz reporter gene  was expressed in mature neurons, positive for neun , in all brain regions, including the lc and medial parabrachial nucleus . the β-gal staining product  found in the lc colocalized with th-positive cells , revealing expression of the maoa reporter construct in th-positive neurons populating the lc . the β-gal-positive cells  in the lc did not colocalize with gfap , a marker of astrocytes . furthermore, maoa-lacz expression pattern characterization revealed staining in several layers in the adult retina such as the ilm, the outer plexiform layer , and the outer limiting membrane . calbindin is a marker for three different cell types in the retina: the ganglion cells that populate the ganglion cell layer , the amacrine cells found in the inl, and the horizontal cells populating the opl  <cit> . colocalization using an anti-calbindin antibody revealed that the maoa-lacz construct was expressed in both the horizontal cells populating the opl and the ganglion cells found in the gcl . additional staining was detected along the spinal cord in the maoa-lacz animals in gross dissections .

human nov-lacz revealed staining in neurons populating the hippocampal formation, basolateral amygdaloid nuclei, and cortical layers in adult brain
nov expression was predicted to be observed in the amygdala and basolateral complex in the adult brain using our approach. whole mount lacz e <dig>  stained and cleared embryos revealed expression throughout the olfactory epithelium and the primitive nasopharynx . p <dig> developing mouse brain sections demonstrated strong expression of the nov maxipromoter reporter construct in the retromammillary nucleus  and light expression in the hpf . adult mouse brain sections had high expression levels in the mid-cortical layers, and the hpf . pronounced staining was detected in the posterior basolateral amygdaloid nuclei , and the adult rm . we investigated the nature of the positive cells expressed in the upper cortical layers, hpf, and blp using colocalization experiments on cryosections. positive colocalization between the β-gal staining product  and neun  revealed that the nov reporter construct was expressed in mature neurons in all brain regions, including the cortical layers ii, iv and vi, as well as the hpf, and blp . the staining pattern in the hpf suggested expression in pyramidal neurons, with staining of the cell body in the ca <dig> that extended into the apical dendrites found in the stratum radiatum . a similar experiment, using gfap as a marker of astrocytes, revealed absence of colocalization of the nov-lacz reporter construct in astrocytes populating the cortex, hpf, and blp .

human nr2f2-lacz revealed staining in mature neurons, immunoreactive for the nr2f <dig> mouse protein in the basolateral, and corticolateral amygdaloid nuclei in adult brain
nr2f <dig> expression was predicted to be in the amygdala and basolateral complex in the adult brain. whole mount lacz e <dig>  stained embryos revealed strong expression of the nr2f <dig> maxipromoter construct in the rostral secondary prosencephalon that extended throughout all three prosomeric regions of the diencephalon . staining was present in the nasal cavity, the vestibulochochlear ganglion, and mesenchyme of the posterior limbs . e <dig>  cleared embryos confirmed staining in the previously described regions, and suggested expression of the nr2f <dig> human gene in the developing bladder . p <dig> developing mouse brains sections revealed expression of the nr2f <dig> reporter construct in the amygdala and subthalamic nuclei . adult mouse brain sections exhibited expression in brain regions including the posterior blp, the basomedial amygdaloid nuclei , the posterolateral cortical amygdaloid nuclei , the posteromedian cortical amygdaloid nuclei , and the posteroventral part of the medial amygdaloid nuclei  . strong staining was detected in various thalamic nuclei . colocalization experiments on cryosections revealed that the nr2f2-lacz reporter gene  was expressed in mature neurons, positive for neun , in all brain regions, including the blp, and bmp . colocalization was found in the plco, pmco, and mepv . lower levels of nr2f2-lacz expression were detected in mature neurons in the anterolateral amygdalohippocampal area , and posteromedial amygdalohippocampal area  . the β-gal-positive cells  did not colocalize with gfap , a marker of astrocytes . an additional colocalization experiment, also performed on adult brain cryosections, revealed strong β-gal labeling in cells expressing the nr2f <dig> mouse gene in brain regions extending from the pmco to the mepv . lower levels of β-gal were detected in the ahial .

human regulatory regions specifying expression in adult brain regions of therapeutic interest are functionally conserved from human to mouse
initially, in choosing the bacs for each gene in this study, and again to understand the relevance of the expression pattern results obtained from the four humanized mouse models, we examined the primary literature and public genomic databases. specifically, we performed comparative sequence alignment of the bacs against multiple genomes using the university of california, santa cruz  genome browser  <cit> . further, we compared our expression results against the databases of the aba, bgem, and egfp-reporter mouse models generated throughout gensat.

the amotl1-lacz animals showed staining in the thalamic nuclei at p <dig>  which correlated with available expression data from the aba at similar developing timepoints . in contrast, the aba data showed an absence of expression in the developing hpf for both timepoints suggesting a discrepancy with expression results from our human construct. however, the expression results obtained from the aba in the adult brain for the amotl <dig> gene did correlate with the results obtained from our human construct, with expression in the thalamic nuclei, and hpf regions ca <dig> and ca <dig>  thus, the simplest explanation of the developmental discrepancy in expression in the hpf is a sensitivity difference, with the maxipromoter driven lacz being detected earlier than the aba in situ hybridization for endogenous mouse transcripts. this would presume that both are being expressed, but that lacz detection is more sensitive than in situ hybridization for the endogenous gene. since, both studies were performed on the c57bl/6j background; strain differences are unlikely to be a factor. however, it is also formally possible that human regulatory regions important for silencing expression of the amotl <dig> human gene in the developing hpf are non-functional in mouse, or that they are missing from the maxipromoter construct . regardless, the key regulatory regions allowing expression of the amotl <dig> gene in the anteromedial, and anteroventral thalamic nuclei, for which this gene was chosen, as well as the hpf regions ca <dig> and ca <dig> in the adult brain, are functionally conserved from human to mouse and were included in our construct.

the maoa-lacz animals showed a staining pattern suggesting expression in the developing lc at p <dig>  which correlated with available expression data from the aba  and bgem  at similar developing timepoints. staining of adult brain sections in our mouse model revealed expression of maoa in the lc; results which again correlated with the aba. colocalization experiments revealed that the maoa-lacz reporter gene was expressed in th-positive neurons in the lc, which correlated with previously observed results for the mouse gene  <cit> . additional staining was detected in the lateral cerebellar nuclei as well as the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei. a careful review of the results obtained by in situ hybridization from the aba revealed low level of expression in the lateral cerebellar nuclei, and absence of expression in the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei. again, the discrepancies between our results and the ones obtained from the aba could be attributable to sensitivity differences; with the maxipromoter-driven lacz being more easily detected than the aba in situ hybridization for endogenous mouse transcripts. another possible explanation is that human negative regulatory elements within the bac are non-functional in mouse. however, in this case we note that the bac used in the current study was chosen to favor the inclusion of predicted regulatory regions 5′ of the gene, but because of the size of maoa and the available bacs, lacked extensive 3′ coding and non-coding sequences . subsequent to obtaining these expression results, comparative genomic investigation using the ucsc genome browser and focused on the 3′ untranslated region  of human maoa revealed the presence of a microrna binding site for a human-mouse conserved microrna . micrornas have been implicated in various biological processes, including gene expression regulation, which argues in favor of including the maoa 3′ utr region in future gene expression studies  <cit> . nevertheless, the expression results in th-positive neurons in the lc in the adult brain showed that the regulatory regions allowing expression of the maoa gene in these cells, for which this gene was chosen, are functionally conserved from human to mouse, and were included in our construct .

the nov-lacz animals showed staining in the developing rm, and light staining in the hpf at p <dig>  which correlated with available expression data from the aba , bgem , and gensat . however, the nov-lacz animals at p <dig> had no detectable expression in developing cortical layers, which was seen at similar timepoints in aba, bgem, and gensat. nevertheless, by adulthood the nov-lacz animals demonstrated strong expression in mid-cortical layers, as well as the hpf, and blp, results that correlated with those obtained for the aba, bgem, and gensat datasets. given the small size of the nov gene, the proximity of neighboring genes, and substantial 5′ and 3′ sequences in the bac chosen , the simplest explanation for the temporal delay in expression of our reporter gene in the cortical layers would be a lack of function of human regulatory sequences in mouse, although it is also formally possible that the maxipromoter construct is missing regulatory sequences. building on this latter hypothesis, sequence alignment between the bac construct used in our study and the one used by gensat suggested that the additional regulatory regions may be present in human-dna homologous to the large non-overlapping 3′ mouse-bac region. finally, additional detailed expression analyses revealed staining of the nov-lacz reporter gene in layers ii, iv and vi of the cortex, results that correlated with expression data coming from both the aba, and gensat. expression in the hpf was detected in ca <dig> pyramidal neurons in our nov mouse model, results that again correlated with the mouse model generated by gensat. this suggests that the regulatory regions allowing expression of the nov gene in the adult blp, the brain region for which this gene was chosen, as well as the cortical layers and hpf, are functionally conserved from human to mouse, and were included in our construct .

the nr2f2-lacz animals showed staining in the developing amygdala, and subthalamic nuclei at p <dig>  which correlated with available expression data from bgem and gensat at the same timepoint. however, nr2f2-lacz animals at p <dig> had no detectable expression in the developing hypothalamus, which was seen at similar timepoints in bgem, and gensat. nevertheless, by adulthood the nr2f2-lacz animals demonstrated expression in the anterior hypothalamic nuclei, as well as the basomedial amygdalar nuclei, results that correlated with those obtained for the aba, and gensat datasets. again, this temporal delay in expression of our reporter gene in the hypothalamus may be due to lack of function of human regulatory sequences in mouse, or that they are missing from the maxipromoters construct.

for nr2f <dig>  additional detailed expression analyses included colocalization experiments performed using an antibody for β-gal and an anti-nr2f <dig> antibody; the latter was raised against the human protein but cross reacted with the mouse ortholog. this analysis revealed specific expression of the nr2f2-lacz reporter construct in cells expressing the nr2f <dig> endogenous mouse gene in various amygdala regions. we obtained similar detection levels when comparing the β-gal staining to the endogenous nr2f <dig> mouse gene in regions extending from the pmco to the mepv in the amygdala. interestingly, our nr2f2-lacz reporter strain gave lower detection levels in the ahial, an amygdala region that showed robust detection levels of the endogenous nr2f <dig> mouse protein . this discrepancy could again result from a lack of function of human regulatory sequences in mouse, or the absence of regions that regulate expression level in the ahial in our maxipromoter construct. finally, characterization using the nr2f <dig> antibody revealed nr2f <dig> protein in retinal amacrine cells  <cit> . however, the nr2f2-lacz reporter strain demonstrated no expression in the retina . in contrast, the gensat project reported expression of their nr2f2-egfp reporter strain in retinal amacrine cells   <cit> . thus, we observed a discrepancy between the results obtained using our reporter mouse model and those from both the endogenous nr2f <dig> mouse gene, and the mouse model generated by gensat. one possible explanation was eliminated when sequence alignment of nr2f <dig> human gene revealed that the aug we targeted with our reporter is for the same nr2f <dig> isoform recognized by the nr2f <dig> antibody as mapped by previous studies   <cit> . thus, the lack of expression of our construct in retinal amacrine cells is attributable to the lack of function of human regulatory sequences in mouse, or the absence of those regulatory regions in the maxipromoter construct. if the latter is the case, we can hypothesize that these regulatory regions may be present in human-dna regions homologous to the additional 5′ non-overlapping portion of the mouse-bac construct used in the gensat project . nevertheless, the expression results in amygdala in the adult brain showed that the regulatory regions allowing expression of the nr2f <dig> gene in this region, for which this gene was chosen, are functionally conserved from human to mouse, and were included in our construct.

despite the minor discrepancies between the expression results of our four different maxipromoter constructs and the corresponding expression from the endogenous mouse gene, it is noteworthy that by using bioinformatics predictions, we were successful in each case to delineate the genomic dna boundaries that were sufficient for expression in the specifically chosen adult brain regions. the delineation of these genomic dna boundaries is not only important as a proof of principle, but is also crucial for the design of future minipromoter constructs for gene-based delivery to these therapeutically important regions.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we describe an in vivo approach by which to further refine our understanding of gene-expression regulation. we first generated a list of ten human genes with expression enriched in brain regions of therapeutic interest, and predicted to have all essential non-coding regulatory regions contained within an identified bac. we then tested the veracity of these predictions using novel knock-in reporter mouse models. this approach, using the hugx method, was built on expertise from five specialized laboratories, and scaled to higher-throughput with the help of the pipeline previously designed within the pleiades promoter project  <cit> .

for the ten genes chosen, bacs were recovered for nine, and of these bacs eight were fully retrofitted to contain the hprt homology arms and a reporter gene . the success rate of 89%  in the retrofitting steps demonstrates the efficiency of the approach. the success of obtaining correctly targeted esc clones for all constructs , at a rate that varied between  <dig> and 50%, with an average of 35%, was very efficient. the high correct-targeting rate, afforded high selectivity with regard to the esc clones injected and increased efficiency of obtaining germline transmission, further streamlining the method. finally, we observed expression from the human gene in mouse for 63%  genes. two of the negative results have enabled testable hypotheses to be developed identifying additional critical regulatory regions for those genes.

four of the five positive mouse strains, including amotl1-lacz, maoa-lacz, nov-lacz, and nr2f2-lacz were characterized in this study. the fifth construct, nr2e1-lacz, was the subject of extensive characterization published  <cit> . for all the positive strains, the expression for the human gene matched the predicted specific adult brain region for which they were chosen. this defined the genomic dna boundaries that were sufficient for adult brain-specific expression, as well as refined our knowledge regarding the complexity of gene regulation, and demonstrated that a careful investigation, using both elements from publicly available resources and bioinformatics, can lead to accurate prediction of gene expression.

careful analyses of the expression patterns of these human genes demonstrated slight variations from available mouse expression data. these variations could be a true reflection of species-specific differences in expression. however, they could result from the misuse of human regulatory regions in the mouse environment, or the omission of minor regulatory regions from the bac construct. another possible source of difference lies in the effects resulting from the insertion site on the x chromosome. the endogenous hprt locus is widely expressed  <cit> , nevertheless, it is considered a relatively neutral docking site since the expected restricted expression is observed from tissue-specific promoters inserted at the locus  <cit> . in addition, it has been suggested that the introduction of a larger dna construct  would further minimize the risk of influences from the hprt insertion site by providing the essential chromatin environment, thus producing endogenous patterns of gene regulation  <cit> . nevertheless, the possibility remains that the slight variation in expression between our knock-in human construct and the mouse gene could be attributable to influence from the hprt locus.

the future of gene therapy may rely upon the development of small human promoters to finely regulate the expression of therapeutic genes in a cell-specific manner. the results from this project delineate, refine, and characterize non-coding-regulatory regions of human genes. thus, we have characterized the expression pattern, and the non-coding regulatory regions, of four therapeutically important human brain genes. in the near future, refined mouse models using subsets of the regulatory regions defined within these boundaries could lead to the generation of minipromoters driving the expression of a gene therapy specifically in the thalamus, locus coeruleus, and various amygdala nuclei in the brain.

