BACKGROUND
in sexually reproducing species, males and females evolve differently due to differing regimes of natural and sexual selection . nonetheless, the evolution of sexually dimorphic traits within a species is constrained because most of the genome is shared between males and females. therefore, the development of sex-specific traits is thought to be predominantly accomplished by sex-specific gene expression . quantitative analyses of complementary dna  from male and female tissues of mice   <cit> , zebrafish   <cit> , birds   <cit>  and turkey   <cit> ), and insects  have shown that a significant fraction of autosomal genes are differentially expressed between the sexes in their reproductive as well as non-reproductive tissues. this suggests that sex-biased gene expression contributes to sexually dimorphic phenotypes and sex-biased genes may evolve differently under selection pressures acting on the sexual phenotypes  <cit> . research on evolutionary properties of sex-biased genes has shown accelerated rates of coding sequence changes in reproduction-related male-biased genes  <cit> . this is primarily attributed to greater sexual selection on males than females. elevated nucleotide substitution rates of sex-biased genes expressed in somatic and reproductive tissues may also occur due to relaxed selection on non-pleiotropic tissue-specific genes  <cit> . sex-biased genes also show non-random genomic distribution with x- or z-linkage  <cit>  that can arise due to differential selection on the hemizygous sex chromosome  <cit> .

so far, sex-biased gene expression has mainly been explored in species with well-differentiated sex chromosomes, while species with young or undifferentiated sex-chromosome systems are just beginning to be studied . in this regard, teleost fish with their spectacular diversity of sex determination mechanisms and a large repertoire of duplicated genes provide largely unexplored resources to study sexual dimorphism resulting from sex-biased and sex-limited gene expression  <cit> . among teleosts, members of the family poeciliidae are known to have multiple sex determination systems  <cit>  and are characterized by highly variable sexually dimorphic traits including color patterns, body size, genital morphology, and mating behavior . the guppy  was one of the first vertebrates where xy sex determination and y-linked inheritance of sexually selected traits were demonstrated  <cit> . sexual dimorphism in guppies is characterized by male-specific color patterns that attract females but are disadvantageous in the presence of predators . these male-advantageous traits are believed to have co-evolved with female mate-choice preferences  <cit> . the guppy also displays sexual size dimorphism. female guppies grow throughout their life, whereas males slow down their growth during maturation  <cit> . male and female guppies also display behavioral differences in the amount of time spent mating, foraging, shoaling, and avoiding predators .

while the evolutionary ecology of the guppy’s sexual dimorphism has been well studied with respect to heredity and adaptation, the molecular mechanisms governing this dimorphism are largely unidentified. recently, using a high-density linkage map, quantitative trait loci  influencing male size, shape, and color traits were mapped to several sex-linked and autosomal loci  <cit> . nevertheless, in order to understand the contribution of sex-biased gene regulation to sexually dimorphic phenotypes, a genome-wide comparison of gene expression in sexually dimorphic tissues is required.

current transcriptome resources of the guppy include a database of sanger-sequenced expressed sequence tags  and a more recent  <dig> sequenced transcriptome, that together correspond to roughly  <dig>  unique transcripts from embryos and adult guppies originating from several different populations  <cit> .

here we extend these resources by assembling a reference transcriptome using high depth illumina sequencing. we used cdna from multiple tissues from embryos and adults from a single guppy population, thereby minimizing population-specific effects in phenotypic variations and x- and y-linkage  <cit> . we then combined the predicted coding sequences from both genome-independent and genome-guided assemblers. the merged reference comprises expressed sequences from embryos and differentiated adult tissues. the transcriptome reference was then used to identify genes with either male- or female-biased expression in three tissues with phenotypic sexual dimorphism in the adult guppy. these included two somatic tissues  and the gonads. furthermore, by examining sex-biased genes we determined whether i) the expression bias in adult guppy tissues reflects the morphological and physiological differences between the sexes; ii) there is non-random genomic distribution of these genes; and iii) they show signatures of relaxed selection when compared to unbiased genes, as hypothesized for genes subject to sexual selection.

RESULTS
genome-guided and genome-independent transcriptome assemblies
to generate a comprehensive reference transcriptome of the guppy and to investigate gene expression variations between the sexes, we prepared a non-barcoded and a barcoded set of illumina rna-seq libraries . to ensure high complexity cdna for the reference assembly, the first set of libraries represented cdna in approximately equal amounts prepared from whole embryos and five different adult tissues from several pooled individuals. for a second set cdna libraries were prepared from brain, tail, and gonads with individual barcodes for each tissue from six different individuals to allow quantitative comparisons . in total we obtained  <dig> million quality filtered read pairs . the combined dataset of sequenced cdna was used for de novo assembly of the reference transcriptome .figure  <dig> 
assembly of the guppy reference transcriptome.  flowchart describing read summary, assembly strategy, and assembler comparison. the high quality paired reads from each sequenced dataset, non-barcoded  and barcoded , were assembled using genome-independent  and genome-guided  assemblers. venn diagram shows the total number of protein sequence orthologs identified between at least two species using translated sequences from the two guppy assemblies , and protein sequence databases from eight teleosts, mouse, and human ;  inset  shows an alternate view of the ortholog comparisons. barplots show the number of orthologs identified in two-way reciprocal best blast-hit comparison between platyfish, tilapia, medaka, stickleback, takifugu, tetraodon, zebrafish, cod, human, and mouse proteins. the stacked bars show the number of orthologs common between gga and gia , unique to gga  and unique to gia ;  inset rectangle  summarizes the steps for merging predicted cds from both assemblies and functional annotation of the guppy reference transcriptome .
phenotypic sexual dimorphism in the guppy. males  are smaller than females  and have complex color patterns on the body. the encircled region  indicates the tissues that were used for preparing the barcoded libraries, 1) brain and eyes; 2) male testis and female ovary; and 3) tail.



the genome-independent assembly was assembled with trinity, and resulted in  <dig>  transcribed sequences, with  <dig>  unique components including their isoforms. the genome-guided assembly was assembled using a draft female genome  and cufflinks and yielded less than half as many contigs, with  <dig>  transcribed sequences comprising  <dig>  unique gene groups . exact splice variant prediction requires more elaborate algorithms and was not the focus of our study, therefore we used only the longest isoform for each component  or gene group  for further analysis. we use the term ‘transfrag’ for each individual sequence in the assembly and refer to the longest transcribed isoform as ‘transcripts’ .table  <dig> 
comparison of transcriptome assembled with genome-guided and genome-independent assemblers



annotations

xiphophorus maculatus

oryzias latipes

gasterosteus aculeatus
we compared a number of metrics to determine which assembler performed better. open reading frame  are those with a minimum length of  <dig> amino acids. the number of annotations obtained for each assembly are given from best blastp hits against other protein sequence databases . the number of orthologs  are given from reciprocal best blastp hits identified using protein
ortho.



genome-guided assembly resulted in longer transcripts with more complete open reading frames 
the genome-guided and genome-independent assemblies were compared using read-based, length-based, and annotation-based metrics. we compared the i) percent of reads remapped to the transcriptome ; ii) the percent of correctly oriented mapped read pairs ; iii) total length of assembly and mean length of assembled transcripts ; iv) number and length of predicted orfs, and v) number of orthologs identified using reciprocal blastp against other validated protein sequence databases .

mapping the rna-seq reads to each assembly we found that the genome-independent assembly incorporated a larger number of correctly oriented read pairs as compared to the genome-guided assembly . on the other hand, the genome-guided assembly was more contiguous with longer transcripts, greater number of orfs, and substantially more full-length orfs .

transcriptome annotation and alignment to the genome
by examining the number of single-copy orthologs identified from comparing translated coding sequences  of the guppy against other teleost, human, and mouse protein sequence databases, we identified a greater number of orthologs in the genome-guided assembly than in the genome-independent assembly . the total number of orthologs found between guppy and other species was related to divergence between the species  . we identified  <dig>  reciprocal best-blast hits shared between the genome-guided and genome-independent assemblies . for approximately half  of these overlapping sequences, orthologous protein sequences were identified in other vertebrates. an additional  <dig>  vertebrate orthologs were identified from only one of the two assemblies . in addition to the identified orthologs, 30-40% of the remaining translated cds aligned  with significant sequence similarity  to protein coding sequences of the other vertebrates .

we merged the cds predicted from transcripts of genome-guided and genome-independent assemblies to obtain a single comprehensive reference combining advantages from both assembly methods. this final dataset consisted of  <dig>  sequences, hereafter referred to as the guppy reference transcriptome  . in total,  <dig>   sequences showed significant alignment  to  <dig>  unique protein sequences in the ncbi non-redundant protein database   <cit> . out of these,  <dig>  were annotated with functional categories  . a complete list of the best-blast hits and go annotations is given in additional file 2: table s <dig> and additional file 3: table s <dig>  a total of  <dig>  sequences could be aligned to assembled scaffolds from the female genome. of these,  <dig>  aligned to scaffolds that were assigned to guppy linkage groups. all the sequences that did not align  were from the genome-independent assembly and of these  <dig>  could be aligned to the genome of the closely related platyfish, xiphophorus maculatus .

tissue-specific variation in the degree of sexually dimorphic expression
the combined cds database was used as a reference for quantifying differentially expressed sequences  in the brain , tail , and gonads of adult guppies . by mapping reads to coding sequences instead of transcripts, we tried to increase the accuracy of read assignment to putative genes but lost the information from reads that represent untranslated regions . therefore, we also performed differential expression analysis after mapping reads to both the genome-guided and genome-independent assemblies and to the full-length transcripts in the merged guppy reference transcriptome. since the four analyses produced similar results , we focus only on results obtained by mapping against the predicted cds, referred to as genes hereafter. we found the highest number of expressed genes in the brain, followed by gonads and then by tail . there was a strong correlation in expression within tissue type for non-reproductive tissue between individuals , suggesting only a few differences between the sexes. as expected, the greatest sex related difference was observed between the adult ovary and testis where overall expression clustered by sex . the magnitude of differential expression between sexes varied between the reproductive and non-reproductive tissues, therefore we chose tissue-specific medians as the threshold fold-change required for a gene to be identified as sex-biased . the complete lists of all median-fold sex-biased genes in individual tissues are available in additional file 6: table s <dig>  additional file 7: table s <dig> and additional file 8: table s <dig>  functional categories that were over-represented among sex-biased genes in each tissue and co-expressed sex-biased genes in brain and tail are described in additional file 9: table s <dig>  additional file 10: table s <dig>  additional file 11: table s <dig> and additional file 12: table s <dig> table  <dig> 
differentially expressed genes between males and females in brain, gonad, and tail tissue



multiple tissues
we report the total number of genes expressed, and those that were sex-biased at two different fold-change cutoffs  and fdr <  <dig> . we also report genes that were sex-biased in multiple tissues with the same direction of change between the sexes.



greater number of female-biased genes expressed in the guppy brain
we observed more genes with female-biased expression than with male-biased expression in the brain . gene ontology  terms enriched among male-biased genes in the brain were related to signal transduction, regulation of transmembrane receptors, and cellular response . annotated genes with the strongest expression bias in the male brain included genes encoding neuropeptide precursors- galanin/gmap prepropeptide , urotensin related peptide <dig> , and cart prepropeptide; transmembrane receptors- glutamate receptors, hypocretin/orexin transmembrane receptor; na+- k+- and ca2+- cation transport channels; and lens crystallins- crygm2d <dig> and crygmxl <dig> .figure  <dig> 
quantitative differences in gene expression between sexes. male to female expression ratios  plotted against the average expression intensity  in  brain,  tail, and  gonads. genes with greater than median-fold bias  are shown in red while the others are shown by black dots or smoothened. the blue lines mark a 4-fold difference in expression between the sexes. genes with sex-limited expression are underlined in black . the number of male-biased and female-biased genes in each comparison is mentioned at the top-right and bottom-right respectively in each figure. heatmaps showing the mean centered log2fpkm  for the highest differentially expressed genes  and a  <dig>  fold-change in the brain ,  <dig>  fold-change in the tail , and  <dig> fold-change in the gonad . the top  <dig> genes that show sex-biased expression in each tissue are listed and ranked by fold-change in grey text boxes at the left  and at the right .


enriched gene ontology  terms in male-bias and female-bias genes



 brain tissue

male: differentially expressed: 702; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 420; genes with go terms: 237

female: differentially expressed: 1764; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 1596; genes with go terms: 955

 tail tissue

male: differentially expressed: 755; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 635; genes with go terms: 404

female: differentially expressed: 705; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 616; genes with go terms: 387

 gonad tissue

male: differentially expressed: 4891; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 3879; genes with go terms: 2033

female: differentially expressed: 5163; best
blastx
hits in nr database: 4577; genes with go terms: 2847
for each tissue we show go terms enriched in both male-biased and female-biased genes. we report the total number of genes that have sex-biased  expression and the number of sex-biased genes that were annotated with blastx against nr and with go terms. for each enriched go term we report the go term, its id, and ontology , the number of sex-biased sequences, number of expressed sequences  and the p-value. statistical significance values were calculated with the fisher’s test using the elim algorithm for reducing comparisons. we also list representative genes associated with the enriched go term ordered by fold change expression.

* indicates that the same genes  were associated with both the cellular component and biological process go terms.

most genes identified as female-biased in the brain were expressed in both sexes but with significantly higher expression in females . these transcripts were enriched with go terms related to cell migration, cell adhesion, development, dna replication, growth, glycolysis, and immune response . several top female-biased transcripts encoded components of the proteinaceous extracellular matrix. for instance, genes encoding nidogens, laminins, fibronectins, collagens, as well as specific matrix metalloproteinases  and members of disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs  family were higher expressed in female brain . annotated genes with the strongest expression bias in the female brain included genes encoding peptide hormones- growth hormone- <dig> , chorionic gonadotrophin beta  <dig>  and prolactin ; and the calcium binding proteins parvalbumin- <dig>  and calsequestrin- <dig> . expression of the gene encoding teleost brain-specific aromatase, cytochrome p <dig> 19a1b , was 5-fold higher in the female than the male brain .

sex-biased gene expression in the tail
we found similar numbers of male-biased and female-biased genes in the tail . go terms related to signaling pathways, vesicle organization and transport, and transmembrane transport were enriched in the male-biased sequences . several of the top male-biased genes encoded proteins with functions in pigment biosynthesis . among female-biased genes, go terms for cell-division, dna replication, repair and recombination, glycolysis, and extracellular matrix components were enriched . differentially expressed genes with growth-related functions included genes encoding mitotic cell-cycle factors - cyclin b <dig>  cyclin a <dig>  cyclin dependent kinase- <dig>  and mini-chromosome maintenance  replication initiation factors .

adult male guppies display male-specific pigment patterns, therefore we examined differential expression of genes involved in pigmentation and patterning in more detail. we identified guppy orthologs for  <dig> genes and a few of their paralogs described for their role in pigment synthesis and pigment pattern formation in vertebrate model organisms   <cit> . none of these genes were identified as male-specific because all of these could be aligned to the assembled female genome. of these pigmentation candidates,  <dig> genes showed significant differential expression between the sexes, with  <dig> showing male-biased expression . among these, ten genes showed a four-fold higher expression in male tail tissue , gtp cyclohydrolase  <dig> , melanoma a , melanophilin a , oculocutaneous albinism ii , premelanosome a , transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily m member 1b , tyrosinase a , tyrosinase-related protein 1b  and xanthine dehydrogenase ).figure  <dig> 
male-biased expression of guppy pigmentation orthologs in tail. barplots show male to female expression ratios  in tail tissue for differentially expressed candidate pigmentation genes . horizontal grey dotted line marks a 4-fold change in gene expression. candidate gene names and linkage groups are specified at the bottom.



testis-biased genes show high fold-change in expression
in gonads, 77% of all expressed genes showed sex-biased expression . we also found a number of genes with probable sex-limited expression in ovary or testis . male-limited and male-biased transcripts showed a greater magnitude of fold-change than the female-biased transcripts . these included genes encoding some male-specific sex-development and differentiation associated proteins  ; sperm associated antigens, ciliary and flagellar proteins ; spermatogenesis related - spatc1l, spata4; and testis expressed tex <dig> . enriched go-terms associated with male-biased genes included cilium assembly, spermatogenesis, and microtubule-based movement . among the female-limited and female-biased sequences, we found genes encoding aromatase a , the zona pellucida glycoproteins zp <dig> and zp <dig>  oocyte specific proteins zar <dig> and zar1l , ovarian folliculogenesis factors gdf <dig> and bmp <dig>  and forkhead domain transcription factors foxl <dig> and foxr <dig> . over-represented go terms associated with female-biased genes were blood vessel development, regulation of bmp signaling pathway, amino acid transport, focal adhesion, cell migration involved in gastrulation, fgf receptor signaling, apical protein localization, regulation of body-fluid levels, and gas transport .

genes with common sex-biased expression in multiple tissues
a greater number of female-biased than male-biased genes showed a common direction of sex-bias in two or all three tissues . over-represented go terms among genes with female-biased expression in both brain and tail included glycolysis, dna replication and recombination as biological process terms, and proteinaceous extracellular matrix as cellular component term. while only a few genes showed male-biased expression in both brain and tail, we found that enriched terms related to transmembrane ion transport were common to both .

non-random distribution of sex-biased genes on the female genome
based on alignment positions of all genes on the currently available female draft genome sequence, we analyzed the distribution of all sex-biased genes  in comparison to all expressed genes  along the guppy linkage groups. the total number of sex-biased genes per chromosome with their observed proportions and significance values for difference from expected proportions is described in additional file 14: table s <dig> 

we found that the frequencies of ovary-biased genes on lg <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and testis-biased genes on lg <dig> , is significantly different  from the frequencies expected for a random distribution of sex-biased genes in the gonads . among these, the greatest difference was seen for lg <dig>  the putative x-chromosome  <cit> , where we found 26% greater than expected proportion of ovary-biased genes and 23% less than expected proportion of testis-biased genes . although, we found a higher proportion of ovary-biased genes and lower proportion of testis-biased genes on lg <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  only lg <dig> and lg <dig> show a significant difference after correction for multiple testing . sex-biased genes in the somatic tissues brain and tail did not show significant non-random distribution on any linkage group. higher fold-change in expression suggests greater sex-specificity; we therefore repeated our analysis counting all genes that showed median-fold differential expression between sexes . we found accumulation of genes with  <dig> -fold higher expression in ovary than testis on lg <dig> and lg <dig> but the difference was not significant after correcting for multiple comparisons . for genes with median-fold sex biased expression in somatic tissues, a significantly greater proportion of male-biased genes in brain and lower proportion of female-biased genes in gonads  was found on the scaffolds that could not be assigned to any linkage group .table  <dig> 
linkage groups  with over-representation or under-representation of male-biased or female-biased genes



all

median
we use two expression differences cut-offs, ‘all’,  <dig> -fold difference in expression  and ‘median’, median-fold difference in expression  for three different tissues . the lgs with significant over- or under-representation of sex-biased genes  are listed and those with p <  <dig>  after correcting for multiple testing are highlighted in bold.
linkage group distributions of sex-biased genes. distribution of percentage of testis-biased  and ovary-biased  genes over all gonad-expressed genes per linkage group . sex-biased genes were identified as those that show significant difference in expression  above the  <dig>  fold-change . lgs with a significant over- or under-representation of sex-biased genes are marked with an asterisk .



rapid evolution in sex-biased genes
using proteinortho we obtained  <dig>  single-copy orthologous protein sequences, between guppy, medaka and stickleback. after estimating rates of non-synonymous  and synonymous  substitutions, and rejecting sequences with high ds,  <dig>  three-way alignments  remained. the genes with female-biased expression in the brain had higher mean values for dn/ds and dn compared to unbiased and male-biased genes. similarly, we observed higher mean values for dn/ds and dn of genes with female-biased expression in the tail, but the difference between means was not as high as found in the brain . in gonad tissues, both the testis-biased genes and ovary-biased genes had a significantly higher average dn/ds and dn than the unbiased genes.figure  <dig> 
nucleotide substitution rates in sex-bias genes per tissue. mean values with 95% confidence intervals for rate of nucleotide substitutions in coding sequences. 
d
n
/d
s ratios; 
d
n; and 
d
s. male-biased , female-biased , and unbiased  genes for brain, gonad, and tail. asterisks above the boxplots indicate a significant difference in substitution rate was found between the sex-biased and unbiased genes using mann–whitney u test for non-parametric distributions .


comparison of d
n
/d
s
values for sex-biased genes to unbiased genes for brain, tail, and gonad tissues



all
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 

autosomal
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 

single tissue

 <dig> 
 <dig>  
<  <dig> 
 <dig>  

multiple tissue
<  <dig> 
 <dig> 
<  <dig> 

highly expressed
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
<  <dig> 
we first compare mean dn/ds values for all sex-biased genes  to unbiased genes . we then compare sex-biased genes mapped to autosomal linkage groups only. we also compare those expressed only in a single tissue and multiple tissues separately. in the single tissue gonad set we also compared dn/ds to unbiased genes on autosomal linkage groups only . finally, we compared only highly expressed genes . for each comparison we give the number of genes , the mean dn/ds, and p-value, with p-values less than  <dig>  in bold.

sex-linked genes may evolve at faster rates due to recombination differences between male and female germline, we therefore repeated the analysis using only autosomal genes and found similar rates of coding sequence evolution . also, magnitude and breadth of gene expression may be associated with functional constraints on coding sequence evolution  <cit> ; we therefore further compared autosomal genes that were sex-biased in single tissues, multiple tissues, and had overall high expression . grouping by expression level or by expression breadth did not change the trend for higher dn/ds of genes with female-biased expression in brain or sex-biased expression in the gonads .

discussion
assembly of a reference transcriptome
recent studies have shown that different assembly algorithms have varying strengths and limitations and a comprehensive assembly strategy should include the use of multiple assemblers . while information from genomic coordinates assists in the assembly of full-length transcripts, at the same time genome-independent assemblies are free from biases caused by potential gaps and mal-orientations found in draft genomes. therefore, we combined both assemblies to generate a non-redundant reference transcriptome composed of  <dig>  cds. approximately,  <dig>  cds  were assigned as bona fide orthologs of published coding sequences. the remaining sequences may represent partially assembled sequences as well as incomplete cds predictions and they may also include as yet unknown cds , noncoding rna, or assembly artifacts like chimeric transcripts. our reference transcriptome provides a resource for investigating the genetics of complex adaptive traits such as guppy color patterns, life-history, and behavior  <cit> .

sex-biased gene expression associated with phenotypic dimorphism
based on go terms and orthology predictions, we attempted to relate our observations on sex-biased gene expression to sexually dimorphic phenotypic traits of the guppy. pigment cells contributing to the adult male ornaments were expected to show a sex-biased expression mainly in adult skin, included as part of the tail in this analysis. of the candidate genes associated with pigmentation, several were indeed higher expressed in male tails. a distinctive trait of the live-bearing female guppies is their lifelong growth, while male growth slows down after puberty  <cit> . in concordance with this phenotypic difference, transcripts encoding cyclins and kinases characteristic of the mitotic phase of the cell cycle, dna replication proteins and several growth factors were higher expressed in the female tail.

female-biased expression of genes encoding cell-cycle and growth related hormones was also observed in the brain. moreover, transcripts of the neurogenic zone associated aromatase, cyp19a1b, were highly expressed in the female brain but not the male brain, suggesting sexual dimorphism in adult neurogenesis in the guppy  <cit> . we found a female bias in expression of many ecm components, which previously have been associated with neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity  <cit> . interestingly, greater brain plasticity in females as compared to male guppies has been postulated based on predator avoidance, kin-recognition, and mate choice differences in the wild  <cit> . we also detected male-biased transcripts that encode neuropeptides and several transmembrane receptors in the brain, suggesting sex-differences in signal transduction. one example of such a male-biased transcript encodes the neuropeptide galanin, known to be involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of growth and reproduction in fish  <cit> . galanin neuropeptide and its receptor have also been shown to be more highly expressed in parts of the male versus female brain of sailfin mollies   <cit> .

the highest degree of sex-bias in gene expression was found in the gonads, as expected in a gonochoristic organism. expectedly, testis-biased transcripts encoded proteins with functions pertinent to testicular cells, e.g. spermatogenesis, sperm motility, and meiosis. testis-specific and testis-biased expression of genes encoding dmrt <dig> and dmrt <dig>  respectively, suggests a requirement of these transcription factors for testis maintenance  <cit> . ovary-biased transcription factors included the steroidogenesis regulators foxl <dig> and nr5a <dig>  <cit> . continuous foxl <dig> activity is known to be required for suppression of trans-differentiation of ovarian cells into testicular cells in adult mice  <cit> . the ovary-specific expression of the aromatase cyp19a1a and testis-biased expression of cyp11b <dig>  which encodes for an enzyme for androgen 11-ketotestosterone biosynthesis  <cit> , also indicates differences in sex-steroid synthesis in the two tissues. according to functional go classification, female-biased genes were enriched for follicular vascularization factors, likely related to the lecithotrophic developmental strategy of the guppy  <cit> . during oocyte growth in lecithotrophic species, the follicle is required for efficient transport of yolk precursors and probably amino acids and other metabolites from the blood to the maturing oocyte. after fertilization, the highly vascularized follicle persists as a placenta that is essential for osmoregulation, gas exchange, waste disposal, and transport of some essential factors  <cit> .

chromosomal distribution of sex-biased genes
we found a significant enrichment of female-biased genes on the putative x-chromosome, lg <dig>  sex-biased genes have been reported to accumulate on differentiated sex-chromosomes of many species. enrichment of female-biased genes on x-chromosomes has been reported in species with heterogamous males, e.g. several drosophila species  <cit> , mouse  <cit> , and the nascent x-chromosome of the stickleback   <cit> . similarly, enrichment of male-biased genes has been found on the z-chromosomes of species with heterogamous females, e.g. zebra finch  and chicken  <cit> . in guppies, the majority of the sex chromosome is pseudo-autosomal, yet the x and y chromosome show genetic and cytological distinctions  <cit> . although differentiation between x- and y-chromosomes is not comparable to the situation in mammals, birds, or drosophilids, the over-representation of ovary-biased genes and under-representation of testis-biased genes on the guppy lg <dig> indicates sex-specific selection pressures even in the absence of a truly hemizygous state in males. previous studies have indicated reduced synaptic pairing  <cit>  and reduced recombination  <cit>  between x- and y-chromosomes during male gametogenesis in guppies. this may lead to accumulation of deleterious mutations in y-linked alleles of genes on lg <dig>  ovary-biased or ovary-specific genes are likely not needed in males and therefore mutations in these genes will persist on the y-chromosome, while mutations in testis-biased genes and other non-biased genes will be selected against. further analysis of recombination frequencies and gene order along the length of the sex chromosomes, coupled with comparisons across multiple populations, will enable better understanding of the effect of genomic location of sex-biased genes.

molecular evolution of sex-biased genes
our comparisons of dn/ds of sex-biased and unbiased genes in the guppy revealed elevated coding sequence change of testis and ovary biased genes, and female-biased genes expressed in the brain and those co-expressed with a female-bias in the brain and at least one of the other tissues. current knowledge on protein evolution suggests that sex-biased genes in reproductive and non-reproductive tissues show accelerated evolution in many species including drosophila, mouse, and chicken  <cit> . sex-biased genes may show rapid divergence due to their evolution under sexual selection. additionally, accelerated sequence divergence may also occur under sex-specific natural selection, or relaxed purifying selection on genes that have reduced functional pleiotropy  <cit> . our results indicating rapid evolution of sex-biased genes in gonads driven by testis-biased genes are in concordance with the results obtained from other vertebrates  <cit> . rapid divergence of reproductive proteins driven by testis-specific proteins may be involved in sexually-antagonistic selection  <cit> , post-copulatory sexual selection resulting from co-adaptation  <cit> , or kinship recognition and incipient speciation in guppies  <cit> . these processes may be important in guppies given their highly promiscuous mating system with coercive internal fertilization by males and long-term sperm storage in females  <cit> .

we also found a higher dn/ds ratio in female-biased genes expressed in the brain. while considerable evidence suggests that sexual selection in guppies is driven by the multivariate mating preferences of females, male-male competition, male mating tactics, and male mate choice may also be under selection  <cit> . an association between molecular evolution of female-biased genes and sexual selection on behavioral traits was not easy to elucidate as these genes were expressed in both sexes and co-expressed in multiple tissues, suggesting some pleiotropy in function. rapid evolution of female-biased genes with growth-related and metabolic functions may be pertinent to the sexual size dimorphism seen in this species and may be driven by natural selection on life-history traits  <cit> .

unexpectedly, we also found signatures of rapid evolution in female-biased genes whose expression was not tissue-specific. usually a broad expression profile indicates pleiotropic functions that would constrain divergence of coding genes  <cit> . this prediction is, however, not necessarily cogent for fish, where the teleost-specific whole genome duplication allows for evolving sub-functionalization or even some redundancy when co-orthologs are preserved  <cit> . furthermore, many of the co-expressed female-biased genes identified in our study encode ecm components, cell-cycle factors, and glycolytic enzymes. these proteins have conserved functions across all tissues and therefore may not be pleiotropic. moreover most of these proteins are located in the cytosol or in the extracellular region where adaptive evolution has been described to be more relaxed  <cit> . conversely, no difference in evolutionary rate was found between male-biased genes co-expressed in the brain and tail and unbiased genes. many of these genes encoded neuropeptides, transmembrane receptors, and gated ion-channels that evolve under structural and functional constraints of ligand-receptor specificity and transmembrane localization  <cit> . therefore, these proteins are likely to have low tolerance of mutations and more conserved evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses of sex-biased gene expression in guppies revealed differences that are likely to be pertinent for the mechanisms underlying its sexual dimorphism. the observed female-biased expression of growth-related genes in the three tissues investigated could reflect the life-long growth observed in female guppies. at the same time, elevated male-biased expression of genes known to be relevant for pigment cell differentiation was limited to the tail, the tissue including part of the adult skin. as expected, sperm-specific and cell-cycle-relevant transcripts were highly expressed in the testis, and the expression profile of the ovary signifies maternal provisioning of this lecithotrophic species. correlations between gene expression and phenotypic traits will remain speculative in guppies until methods of experimental gene gain and loss of function can eventually be established in this system.

we detected accumulation of ovary-biased genes on the putative x-chromosome, supporting the hypothesis that genes advantageous to only one sex accumulate on the differentiating sex chromosomes. we also observed more rapid evolution of testis-biased genes, possibly indicating increased sexual selection on males. however, the observed rapid evolution of genes with female-biased expression in brain and other tissues not seen in males may be confounded by differences in the biological functions and cellular locations of male- and female-biased genes. it is probable then, that there are differences in selection on protein sequences of males and females independent of the breadth of tissue expression.

