BACKGROUND
proteins exert their diverse functions usually through interactions with other molecules, and indeed often through interactions with other proteins. protein-protein interactions are currently the focus of intensive study, as they allow functional characterisation of proteins and help interpret the role of uncharacterised gene products in organisms with fully sequenced genomes. apart from direct biochemical analysis to detect protein-protein interactions, an in silico approach is sometimes used to predict protein-protein interactions. this fusion analysis  takes advantage of the study of genomic structures and sequence similarity to detect putative interacting protein pairs, which, importantly might not have been suspected based on current biochemical knowledge. briefly, if a pair of non-homologous proteins which are found in different genomic regions in organism a, are found fused into a single orf in organism b, this suggests that the two independent proteins in organism a may interact. these protein-protein interactions may be transient or more long-lived, either within a metabolic pathway, or as part of a multi-subunit protein complex.

fusion analysis has been used to identify putative protein-protein interactions in completely sequenced genomes of various prokaryotes, and eukaryotes  <cit> . here we have applied gene fusion analysis to a number of recently sequenced protists, and in particular tried to infer interacting protein pairs in the pathogenic parasite trypanosoma brucei. trypanosome brucei, a flagellated parasitic protist, is responsible for african trypanosomiasis, a neglected disease known as sleeping sickness in humans. the protozoan uses the tsetse fly as an insect vector, and the sickness is fatal if untreated. all the available treatment drugs are generally unsatisfactory, due to dangerous side effects, high cost of production, and difficulty in distribution  <cit> . protein-protein interaction analysis can thus provide clues into new protein functions and new potential drug targets. importantly, t. brucei is amenable to genetic manipulation for verification of the results presented here.

we chose seven other organisms for our analysis, representing all major eukaryotic lineages . four of the organisms analysed are also pathogenic:

the proteomes of the species studied were downloaded as fasta files from the ncbi or uniprot databases and used during the domain fusion analysis as target organisms against trypanosoma brucei.

 giardia intestinalis, another flagellated parasite in the excavate group, is a common pathogen infecting not only humans, but also dogs, birds and cats. this single-celled organism is responsible for giardiasis, an infection of the small intestine which causes diarrhea and which may be fatal for people with a compromised immune system  <cit> .

 candida albicans is a diploid fungus, residing in the human mouth and gastrointestinal tract. under normal conditions, the microorganism does not affect humans. however, under certain circumstances, the overgrowth of c. albicans results in candidiasis, also known as "thrush", which occurs in the blood and genital track and mainly affects people with a compromised immune system  <cit> .

 entamoeba histolytica is an amoeba that infects mammals, such as dogs and cats along with human beings. entamoeba infection leads to amoebic dysentery and liver abscess, including fulminating dysentery, bloody diarrhea, weight loss, fatigue, abdominal pain, and amoeboma  <cit> .

 phytophthora infestans, an oomycete that affects agricultural crops, is responsible for the late blight potato disease, also known as potato blight. the organism can also infect tomatoes  <cit> .

three model organisms were also used in this study:

 dictyostelium discoideum, an amoeba with an asexual life cycle, is a natural host for many bacteria, some digested and some not, which lead to the death of the host after their proliferation. it might constitute a role model organism, to identify how macrophage defends itself against intruders  <cit> .

 chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a single celled green alga is a model organism mainly used to study cell mobility, how the cells regulate their proteome to control flagellar length, and how cells respond to changes in mineral nutrition. in addition, chlamydomonas reinhardtii attracts great interest due to its ability to photosynthetically produce molecular hydrogen  <cit> .

 monosiga brevicollis, a unicellular flagellated organism, is part of the choanoflagellates which are aquatic protists and the closest known relatives of metazoans  <cit> .

the automatic analysis identified putative gene fusions in all organisms, but we discuss only those in entamoeba, phytophthora, chlamydomonas and monosiga, which passed all further verification steps. two of the results have previously been experimentally verified.

RESULTS
to determine protein linkages between a kinetoplastid protozoan species, trypanosoma brucei, and seven protists representing all major eukaryotic lineages, we used the domain fusion analysis method modified by our in-house software as described in the methods. trypanosoma brucei treu <dig> was used as a reference organism and its complete proteome of  <dig> proteins was compared with the proteomes of the seven target species , in terms of domain architecture, to identify distant relationships. this analysis gave us a total of  <dig> putative composites . furthermore, within the set of  <dig> domain architectures, we tried to verify which represented proteins that evolved by fusion. the criteria for verifying the predicted events included best hit of the reverse blast process, blast e-value threshold parameter, length of composite protein, length of fused protein, similarities of function between split and composite domain architectures and their role in biological pathways. any result which did not accord with these criteria was not analysed further. only  <dig> composites passed all the verification steps . furthermore, after checking for conservation in the closely related species leishmania major, only  <dig> composites were considered genuine. we discuss the final results, representing functional linkages, separately for each species.

for each species studied, the full number of proteins in the proteome is given, as well as the number of fusion events identified after the automatic analysis , after manual verification including reverse blast score and domain annotations , and after a further verification of the results in the closely related species leishmania major . asterisks denote results that have already been experimentally verified. embl accession numbers for the final results discussed in the text are also given, and the organisms that gave potential genuine results are highlighted in bold.

the number of interactions identified is lower than might be expected, but it should be noted that our method is highly selective. we tested the performance of our automatic in-house software by comparing the same organisms analysed by enright et al.  <cit>  and we detected almost 90% of the events reported by enright et al. . however, only 20% of the events reported by enright et al. conform to all our selection criteria  although some novel events were also detected by our program which were not reported by enright et al. .

example of fusion links in phytophthora infestans 
from the automatic analysis, we found  <dig> predicted fusion links between pairs of proteins in p. infestans and t. brucei. following the more detailed analysis, including reverse blast, only one of these, eey <dig>  conformed to all our selection criteria. the domain architecture of the fusion linked protein identified in phytophthora infestans corresponds to the domain architecture of the corresponding split protein pair in the t. brucei proteome. the t. brucei proteins aax <dig> and aax <dig> are non-homologous, reside on different chromosomes, and are annotated as "putative hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase" and "conserved hypothetical", respectively. the region of alignment between eey <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with the hmgl-like family domain  which is found in a diverse set of enzymes, including various aldolases and pyruvate carboxylase . the region of alignment between eey <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids and coincides with the snf <dig> domain  which is found in a family of proteins that are involved in protein sorting and transport from the endosome to the vacuole or lysosome in eukaryotic cells . as is often seen for modular proteins, independent domains of two proteins might be found adjacent to each other in other proteins. thus, a link between a protein associated with a hmg-coa lyase deficiency and a protein with a snf <dig> functional domain, suggests that they both function within the same pathway. this is unexpected, as aax <dig>  appears to be a true hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase orthologue by reverse blast. this enzyme  is involved in leucine metabolism and ketogenesis and localises to mitochondria and peroxisomes in humans  <cit> . in t. brucei, this proteins was recently predicted to localise to mitochondria  <cit> . in contrast, aax <dig>  has been reported as a vps <dig> orthologue, a component of escrtiii, which is involved in sorting ubiquitylated proteins at the multi-vesicular-body for degradation in the lysosome  <cit> . thus an association between these two proteins in phytophthora , might suggest a role for ubiquitylation in the sorting of hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase.

when we examine the evolution of the fusion linked protein pair across the full range of eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the data suggest multiple independent fusion events within the archaeplastida . only one of the two proteins of the composite is conserved in prokaryotes , namely the hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase, since prokaryotes do not posses the full ubiquitylation machinery. although divergent escrtiii factors have been identified recently  <cit> , these are not readily detectable by blast. surprisingly, only the snf <dig> part is conserved in leishmania, while the hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase enzyme seems to be missing . it is thought that in l. major hmgcoa is incorporated directly into sterols by the isoprenoid synthetic pathway  <cit> .

example of fusion links in monosiga brevicolis 
from the automatic analysis, we found  <dig> predicted fusion links between pairs of proteins in m. brevicollis and t. brucei. following the more detailed analysis, including reverse blast, only one of these, edq <dig>  conformed to all our selection criteria. the domain architecture of the fusion linked protein identified in monosiga brevicolis corresponds to the domain architecture of the corresponding split protein pair in the t. brucei proteome. the t. brucei non-homologous proteins, aax <dig> and aax <dig>  are annotated as "putative glutamine hydrolysing  carbamoyl phosphate synthase"  and "putative aspartate carbamoyltransferase" , respectively. the region of alignment between edq <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with the carbamoyl-phosphate synthase l-chain & glutamine amidotransferase class-i domains  . the region of alignment between edq <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with the otcase_n & otcase domains  which catalyze the conversion of ornithine and carbomoyl phosphate to citrulline . a link between these proteins suggests that they both function within the same pathway. indeed, they are both involved in pyrimidine biosynthesis and catalyse two subsequent reaction steps in the pathway  <cit> . interestingly, the two t. brucei genes encoding these proteins  reside on the same chromosome, interspersed by a single orf. the intervening orf  is annotated as "putative orotidine-5-phosphate decarboxylase/orotate phosphoribosyltransferase" , which also participates in the same pathway, at a later step. given that the proteins participate in the same pathway, it is perhaps not surprising that the fusion seems to have occurred before the divergence of the fungi and metazoa and also within some branches of the eubacteria . indeed, where the protein pair is not found as a fused composite, it is often heterotrimeric, suggesting further fission of one of the multi-domain components .

example of fusion links in entamoeba histolytica 
from the automatic analysis, we found  <dig> predicted fusion links between pairs of proteins in e. histolytica and t. brucei. following the more detailed analysis, only one of these, eal <dig>  conformed to all our selection criteria. the domain architecture of the fusion linked protein identified in entamoeba histolytica corresponds to the domain architecture of the corresponding split protein pair in the t. brucei proteome. the t. brucei proteins ean <dig> and ean <dig> are non-homologous, reside on different chromosomes, and are annotated as "putative huntingtin interacting protein" and "putative gtpase activating protein", respectively. the region of alignment between eal <dig> and ean <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with two ankyrin repeat domains  . huntingtin interacting proteins regulate the cytotoxicity of huntingtin, a protein whose mutation causes huntington's disease  <cit> . however, it is unclear why the t. brucei protein has been annotated as "putative huntingtin interacting protein", as it does not contain any of the expected conserved domains for such a function, and does not match huntingtin interacting proteins when checked by reverse blast. instead, all the top reverse blast hits are characterised by the presence of the ankyrin repeats, which mediate protein-protein interactions. the region of alignment between eal <dig> and ean <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with the tbc domain  which is found in gtpase activator proteins of rab-like small gtpases . thus, a link between a protein with ank domains and a protein with a gtpase activating functional domain, suggests that they both function within the same pathway. indeed, this agrees with a recent hypothesis proposed by kanno et al. that tbc domain proteins do not directly interact with rabs, but depend on other protein-protein interaction domains, such as ankyrin repeats; this was shown by studying the binding of truncation mutants for a protein containing both a rab-gap and a c-terminal ank domain  <cit> . analysis of the evolution of this fusion linked protein pair indicates that the fusion detected is unique to the amoebozoa, while prokaryotes do not posses tbc domains .

example of fusion links in chlamydomonas reinhardtii 
from the automatic analysis, we found  <dig> predicted fusion links between pairs of proteins in the two species. following the more detailed analysis, only two of these, edp <dig> & edp <dig>  conformed to all our selection criteria. the domain architecture of the fusion linked proteins identified in chlamydomonas reinhardtii correspond to the domain architecture of the corresponding split proteins pair in the t. brucei proteome.

• the t. brucei proteins, aax <dig> and ean <dig>  are non-homologous, reside on different chromosomes, and are annotated as "putative, dna topoisomerase ib, large subunit" and "putative, dna topoisomerase ib, small subunit", respectively. the region of alignment between edp <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and consists of two domains: a non-conserved hydrophilic n terminus, and a dna-binding fragment  . the region of alignment between edp <dig> and ean <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and coincides with the c-terminal catalytic core  . in all other eukaryotes, outside the kinetoplastids, dna topoisomerase ib exists as a single fused protein , and the apparent fission in t. brucei was previously identified by sequencing and protein purification, and experimentally verified by catalytic activity characterisation of the protein pair, as well as genetic studies of essentiality of the genes encoding both subunits  <cit> . only the large subunit is conserved in bacteria, and neither the large nor the small subunit are found in the euryarchaeota .

• the t. brucei proteins, aax <dig> and ean <dig>  are non-homologous, reside on different chromosomes, and are annotated as "putative, electron transfer protein and "putative, succinate dehydrogenase", respectively. the region of alignment between edp <dig> and aax <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and consists of the n-terminal half of the multi-domain succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase iron-sulfur subunit . the region of alignment between edp <dig> and ean <dig> extends for  <dig> amino acids, and consists of the c-terminal half of the multi domain succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase iron-sulfur subunit . indeed, one of the t. brucei proteins, aax <dig>  corresponds to the first half of the "succinate dehydrogenase iron-sulfur subunit of complex ii", and the other, ean <dig>  to the second half. also both proteins are similar to, for example, protein sdh <dig> from schizosaccharomyces pombe  which is annotated as "succinate dehydrogenase  iron-sulfur subunit, mitochondrial", with aax <dig> aligning to the first half and ean <dig> aligning with the second half. interestingly, this protein binds two iron-sulfur clusters, one at 34- <dig> aa, and one at 155- <dig> aa, so in t. brucei these two domains are split between the two proteins. succinate dehydrogenase  is part of the mitochondrial electron transport chain for respiration/oxidative phosphorylation, which is generally thought to be inherited from the ancestor of mitochondria, i.e. from bacteria. so, in bacteria and most eukaryotes this protein is fused, but in trypanosomes it is split into two . this split is conserved in other organisms similar to t. brucei, such as t. cruzi and leismania. succinate dehydrogenase  was originally reported as not found in the t. brucei genome publication  <cit>  . however, the perplexing result identified by our fusion analysis method was recently verified experimentally in a publication which identified all the components of complex ii in t. cruzi, and which reported that sdh <dig> is encoded by two different proteins   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
two polypeptides a and b in one organism, are likely to interact if their homologues are expressed as a single polypeptide ab in another. the in silico method used to detect such protein fusions is called domain fusion analysis and the composite polypeptide ab, is referred to as a rosetta stone protein, as it gives information about a functional link between domains a and b. the method was introduced by marcotte et al.  <cit>  and enright et al  <cit> , and is used to infer that two genes or proteins, which are not necessarily similar to each other, i.e. have different domain architectures, may interact, i.e. participate in the same biological pathway or be part of the same protein complex. it should be noted that the domain fusion analysis method often detects "promiscuous" or paralogous domains, which occur at a high frequency in many different protein sequences that do not share similar functions  <cit> . in the present study, one major goal was to exhaustively check the results to remove false positives, thereby increasing the robustness of predictions made using the rosetta stone analysis.

we analysed the proteome of trypanosoma brucei against seven divergent protists. the automatic analysis, based on the blastp algorithm with appropriate thresholds for e-value, alignment length, protein coverage, and excluding homologous sequences, produced  <dig> putative composites, i.e. 3- <dig> fusion events detected in each species . after verification by reverse blast, and by looking at the functional domain architecture, we rejected 85% of the putative composites. the remaining  <dig> results were analysed further by checking for conservation in the closely related species leishmania major, after which only  <dig> composites were considered genuine. this result can be considered very conservative compared to previous analyses which for example, analysed  <dig> microbial genomes and detected 16- <dig> fusions in each  <cit> . this is most likely due to the more strict verification criteria used in the present study, including 70% protein coverage in alignments  <cit> , reverse blast  <cit> , and checking against the closely related species l. major. indeed, the selectivity and the performance of our automatic in-house software were tested by comparing the same organisms analysed by enright et al.  <cit> . although almost 90% of the events reported by enright et al. were also detected by our method , only 20% of these conformed to all our selection criteria . many are classified by our software as paralogues, or participate in multiple fusions events indicative of promiscuous domains that are found in many modular proteins. however, our software also detected a number of events not reported by enright et al.  so, although it is selective, it is also highly sensitive. nonetheless, the lower number of detected fusion events among the species analysed may be indicative of a lower occurrence of protein fusions or fissions within protists, as opposed to prokaryotes, yeast, and metazoa; further analysis including more species would be needed to verify this. the fact that most of the results of the automatic analysis did not pass our verification criteria, indicates a very high occurrence of false positives, and highlights the need for extra verification steps, especially reverse blast  <cit> . a  <dig> % false positive rate was reported by marcotte et al.  <cit>  not including proteins annotated as "unknown". the extra verification step proposed here, checking for conservation of the fusion or fission event in a closely related species , is a generally applicable verification method that can be useful for other domain fusion analysis studies.

of the five results analysed in detail, two have previously been independently identified and experimentally verified in t. brucei, namely the two fusion events identified in chlamydomonas resulting in a split topoisomerase ib, and a split succinate dehydrogenase in t. brucei  <cit> . these provide direct experimental confirmation that the fusion-linked proteins are indeed part of the same complex and interact, confirming that the in silico analysis is finding functionally relevant pairs of genes. both cases appear to result from a unique fission event in the kinetoplastida. the reason for this is unknown , but the fact that these heterodimeric proteins are unique to the kinetoplastids, marks them as potential drug targets for new therapeutic strategies  <cit> . analysis of the topoisomerase ib homologues across prokaryotes and eukaryotes, favors a single fission event in trypanosomatids; an alternative scenario proposed by bodley et al.  <cit> , that the situation in trypanosomes represents the persistence of discrete proteins, and that the trypanosomes provide a missing link between a hypothesized ancient independent catalytic domain and the contemporary fused composites, is not supported by our analysis.

the fusion event identified in monosiga, resulting in a combined "glutamine hydrolysing  carbamoyl phosphate synthase"  and "aspartate carbamoyltransferase" , appears to be common among fungi, metazoa and some bacteria, and concerns enzymes that participate in subsequent steps of the pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. heterotrimeric versions also exist in the bacteria, archaea, and archaeplastida, suggesting multiple independent fusion events between these domains. this is in agreement with previous domain fusion analyses that have identified many composites consisting of pairs of functionally linked proteins that participate in the same metabolic pathway  <cit> .

two of the results reported here are truly novel. one is the fusion in entamoeba of a tbc gtpase activating domain with an n-terminal ankyrin domain. this suggests that the two interact, and some support for this is lent by a recent study of gtpase activating proteins, that reported that tbc proteins do not directly interact with rab proteins, but require another protein-interaction domain, confirmed by truncation mutant analysis for the case of a c-terminal ankyrin domain  <cit> . therefore, although the particular fusion is unique to the amoebozoa, further studies are needed to identify putative extra binding partners that mediate rab and tbc protein interactions, and our results provide a testable starting point for such studies. as rab activity is crucial to many cellular processes in trypanosomes  <cit> , disruption of such interactions could provide a further therapeutic drug target. the other novel result is the fusion in phytophthora of a hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase with a snf <dig> domain protein. this fusion, which is also shared by diatoms and brown algae, may suggest a role for ubiquitylation or the escrt system in the sorting of hydroxymethylglutaryl-coalyase. again, this is a testable hypothesis.

the functional links identified through domain fusion analysis in this study agree with the general principles for gene fusion and fission events established by previous studies. for example, gene fissions are relatively rare events compared to fusions  <cit> , and in this case two lineage-specific fissions were identified in trypanosomes , both of which have already been experimentally verified. the other gene fusions identified, are either lineage-specific  or have occurred multiple times or been transferred by horizontal gene transfer . horizontal gene transfer has played an important role in the evolution of fused proteins  <cit> . within the eubacterial and archaeal groups, often only domains of one component protein within a fusion-linked pair were identified, when the other is eukaryote-specific. finally, as has been reported previously, the genes participating in fusions are not confined to a specific category or genomic position. the advantages of gene fission are that separate domains may permit the subunits to function independently, perhaps in conjunction with other partners, as well as the possibility of exchanging or replacing domains. the advantages of gene fusion are that protein-protein interactions are enhanced by proximity and do not need to rely on diffusion. the low number of fusion-linked gene pairs identified here may indicate a lower occurrence of this evolutionary mechanism within parasitic protozoa, but more data would be needed to reach a firm conclusion on this.

