BACKGROUND
in a darwinian sense, species formation is an outcome of a continuum of gradual evolution, from ecological races and biotypes, to hybridizing taxa and, ultimately, to "good" biological species that no longer cross  <cit> . the long disagreement over species concepts is the best demonstration of such a continuum between populations, at a proximal scale, to the ultimate extreme of reproductively isolated species  <cit> . the different biological properties of species upon which several of the alternative concepts are based, such as distinct adaptive zones, fixed character traits or reproductive isolation , arise at different times during the process of species formation and do not necessarily occur in a predictable order  <cit> . moreover, empirical examples increasingly show that evolution of these properties does not occur in one predetermined direction. taxa may remain genetically isolated without approaching full ri, as, for example, by forming hybrid zones maintained by a balance between dispersal and selection.

alternatively, if selection is strong, reinforcement of reproductive barriers may lead to full ri  or, if the strength of selection decreases due to environmental change, gene flow might fully reverse the differentiation process by homogenizing the parental taxa into a single gene pool . in spite of the ongoing discussion of the relative importance of ri in the continuum that culminates in the formation of new species , there is a consensus that the effect of ri is to cause divergence along that continuum. therefore, once ri is complete , the evolution of closely related taxa is no longer reversible and they are bound to follow independent evolutionary trajectories, even in the face of environmental change.

reproductive isolating mechanisms are generally understood to accumulate gradually as a function of molecular genetic distance, a surrogate for time since divergence  <cit> . substitutions that are neutral or beneficial on one genetic background may be deleterious on another, and postzygotic isolation may often reflect such negative epistatic interactions. experimental studies strongly favor this view, showing that mutations in coevolving gene complexes can rapidly cause hybrid incompatibilities in closely related species  <cit> .

alternatively, non-neutral processes such as ecological divergence may incidentally cause ri  <cit> , either due to pre- or post-zygotic mechanisms. if fitness is habitat-dependent, rather than a consequence of the overall genomic composition, it would be lower for immigrants from alternative habitats or for individuals that are intermediate for ecologically relevant traits. two central predictions of ecological species formation  <cit>  are 1) ecologically divergent pairs of populations will exhibit greater levels of ri than ecologically similar pairs of populations of similar age; and 2) traits under divergent selection, or those genetically correlated with them, should incidentally affect ri . the recent accumulation of ecological and genetic data in natural populations enables this hypothesis to be formally tested using comparative approaches that separate the effects of genetic and ecological divergence. meta-analyses across plant and animal taxa that statistically remove the effect of time since divergence show that, as the degree of ecological divergence increases, so too does their degree of ri  <cit> . however, this study relies on broad taxonomic comparisons across plant and animal species, which are neither historically nor biologically related. this hypothesis has been further evaluated using comparisons of closely related units with known genealogy, extending that approach to a phylogenetic scale that is more appropriate for the scale at which ri develops . however, this has only been tested in organisms that experienced parallel evolution, in which ecological divergence between sympatric populations repeatedly results in assortative mating, resulting in taxa with little or no genetic differentiation . yet, these results might not be generalizable to taxa that do not evolve in situ, such as those in which geography is an important component of the process of species formation leading to spatial fragmentation, genetic and ecological divergence, and secondary contact.

ring species were initially hypothesized as a single species that expands along two pathways around a geographic barrier, with terminal forms gradually diverging and eventually behaving as two species when they meet on the other side . the persistence of two reproductively isolated forms, connected by a chain of intermediate populations, demonstrate the linkage between micro-evolutionary processes and formation of reproductively isolated taxa, i.e. "good" biological species. only a few species complexes are known to meet these criteria, including ensatina eschscholtzii  <cit> , phylloscopus trochiloides  <cit> , and platycercus elegans  <cit> . in spite of the varying degrees of regional extinction or present connectivity between intermediate populations, all these examples are natural demonstrations of the continuum between population- and species-level divergences. therefore, ring species are excellent candidates for studies of genetic interactions at different stages of divergence, in a natural setting, and for investigating how species properties such as ri might arise.

the plethodontid salamander ensatina eschscholtzii is a well characterized ring species complex, with an almost complete ring distribution. gradual genetic and morphologic transitions occur between intermediately derived forms around the ring, whereas abrupt changes occur between the most divergent forms at the terminus , with rare hybridization restricted to few generations of hybrids or even full ri  <cit> . the complex originated in northern california, probably during the late miocene  <cit> , and expanded southwards around the central valley, which constitutes a long standing geographic barrier, first as a lake and more recently as ecologically unsuitable habitat. during the climatic change of the holocene  <cit> , a presumed temporary corridor across the central valley enabled the coastal populations to colonize the foothills of the sierra nevada, providing a second closure of the ring approximately midway along the ring distribution. molecular studies brought strong support for the colonization around the central valley , but also indicate that historical periods of geographic isolation, more or less prolonged, occurred between populations around the ring, due to the dynamic geographic history of california  <cit> . these studies suggest that time since divergence might have strongly contributed to the continuum of genetic interactions observed in the ring species, but the contribution of ecological factors promoting local adaptation in ensatina remains to be evaluated.

as the species expanded its range, it colonized habitats in the coastal and inland ranges of california that are substantially different in ecology. distinctive and different color patterns resulted from the evolution of alternative predator avoidance strategies  <cit>  that are more extreme at the southern closure of the ring. the distinct color patterns are presently recognized as seven subspecies  that do not correspond to the deepest genetic breaks  <cit> , suggesting that the evolution of coloration cannot be explained by neutral processes . moreover, this high phenotypic variability in color pattern is strongly regionalized in areas with ecologically similar habitat . cryptic and mimetic color patterns are hypothesized to be advantageous with respect to predation in their own habitats, resulting in strong selection against inter-population migration or hybridization between alternative color morphs  <cit> . field experiments support fitness differences for alternative color patterns  <cit> , and strong selection occurs at a hybrid zone between taxa with mimetic and cryptic coloration in the area of the mid-closure of the ring  <cit> . these facts suggest that the ecologically diverse landscape of california plays an important role in the diversification of this complex and in the limitation of genetic interactions among lineages  <cit> . thus, in addition to the genetic differentiation around the central valley, adaptation to local habitat conditions might also be correlated with the continuum of ri observed in this ring species.

episodes of geomorphological and climate change led to varying degrees of geographic isolation and ecological divergence around the ring, in particular to the ring-like geographic range with mid-way and terminal closures, offering a natural replication of secondary contacts along the continuum of species formation. previous work showed an association between genetic differentiation in allozymes and ri, but did not consider whether other co-occurring indices of genetic divergence  and major ecological factors known to be important for ensatina might explain the observed levels of ri. we take advantage of the multiple contact zones in the ensatina ring species  to employ a quantitative framework to infer the processes restricting genetic interaction upon secondary contact, which may result in full ri. using previously published datasets on allozymes from all extant populations around the california's central valley  <cit> , we distinguished allopatric populations that are not affected by recent introgression from regions of secondary contact where localized genetic introgression occurs. by augmenting genetic datasets and collecting new ecological data on the allopatric ranges, we now estimate levels of genetic and ecological divergence in all populations, prior to secondary contact. by measuring the frequency of genetically admixed individuals at the center of each secondary contact we estimate the degree of ri between pairs of parental population contacting around and across the ring species distribution, and how it is predicted by the several axes of divergence between parental populations. our results indicate that the isolated effect of ecological divergence between parental populations does not result in reproductively isolated taxa. instead, processes related with overall genetic divergence are the best predictors of reproductive isolation.

RESULTS
sampling and study units
although most of the  <dig> genetically distinct populations interact in zones of secondary contact around the central valley  <cit> , there are a few gaps around the ring that either represent real distributional gaps  or possible sampling deficits . our sampling detected  <dig> contacts around the ring, plus one at the mid-ring and two others at the terminus, for a total of  <dig> contacts. however, because three of the contacts around the ring involved parental populations with low genetic divergence , we consider a total of  <dig> contacts in our analysis of ri . these contacts involved  <dig> different pure parental populations, of which  <dig> were used in a single pairwise comparison, and only four were used in two comparisons .

                              n
contributors to genetic divergence
as expected given the known phylogeography of the ensatina complex based on mtdna  <cit> , genetic distances in ndna are in agreement with the ring species scenario  <cit> . populations that diverged along the same side of the central valley are more similar in ndna, compared to those that diverged on opposite sides of the ring. the new individuals sequenced for cyt b recover some new sequences nested within the clades already described for the whole species complex  <cit> . the parental populations as defined by allozymes do not share any haplotype in mtdna. however, the degree of genetic divergence in mtdna across secondary contacts does not match that in ndna, showing that these two genetic distances are not correlated. while the higher nuclear genetic distances only occur between taxa that contact across the ring, higher genetic distances in mtdna are found between coastal populations within the ring .

contributors to ecological divergence
in california, the climatic space occupied by ensatina as defined by pc <dig> and pc <dig> captures  <dig> % of the variation in the entire distributional data . pure parental populations that contact around or across the ring distribution of ensatina have little or no overlap in climatic space . however, the degree of dissimilarity between the focal comparisons of parental populations matches the underlying climatic variation intrinsic of california . despite the heterogeneity of climatic space in california, the highest degrees of climatic dissimilarity between ensatina populations are found in northwestern california, along the sierra nevada, and near the terminus of the ring distribution .

in contrast with climate, the focal parental pairs of ensatina are generally associated with similar types of vegetation . this pattern does not reflect the background variation of vegetation in california, which has areas with very similar and very dissimilar vegetation. a few of our focal contacts occur between populations with high dissimilarity in vegetation , such as in the northwestern coast of california and in southern sierra nevada.

degree of genetic admixture in secondary contacts
the frequency of admixed individuals fits our expectation for a ring species . in contacts around the ring we generally found a high frequency of hybrids , with a couple of exceptions between groups that are genetically and morphologically divergent . reproductive isolation is nearly complete at the southernmost contact across the ring, where  <dig> % of  <dig> individuals sampled in sympatry were hybrids. in the mid-ring contact, the frequency of hybrids  was intermediate to values found in contacts around the ring and at the terminus. the hybrid individuals sampled in the  <dig> secondary contacts consist almost entirely of backcrosses of second or older generations . the exceptions are at the two terminal contacts of the ring, where the few hybrids detected  are assigned to f <dig> hybrids or first generational backcrosses, suggesting that in addition to the nearly complete level of ri between parental populations, hybrid individuals rarely reproduce and therefore are not contributing for gene flow between parental populations.

model for reproductive isolation
when the four kinds of divergence between pairs of parental populations  are taken together in a multiple regression as independent variables, we obtain a model that predicts the degree of genetic admixture observed within ensatina ring species . after statistically correcting for the correlation between predictors , genetic distance, as determined in ndna, is the only predictor that shows a prominent negative relationship with the degree of genetic admixture , as expected for divergence processes associated with the development of ri. the isolated effect of ecological dissimilarity  and mitochondrial divergence is not associated with a decrease of genetic admixture in secondary contacts.

discussion
we predicted that divergence in properties of parental populations that cause ri, or that are associated with them, should be correlated with a decrease in the degree of genetic admixture, i.e. percentage of hybrids in contact zones. traits of parental populations related to genetic divergence, particularly nuclear genetic distance, are the best predictors of ri. in contrast, divergence in the ecological traits measured here  is unlikely to result in reproductively isolated units. previous analysis using data from species pairs across plants and animals  <cit> , after statistically removing the effect of time , found ecological divergence to be associated with ri. however, we did not detect such an association within ensatina, which suggests that taxa subjected to ecological divergence may fail to achieve complete ri. instead, the complete cessation of genetic interactions between closely related taxa is strongly associated with the overall genetic divergence in nuclear markers, which likely reflect selectively neutral processes.

discordance between genetic divergence in mt and ndna
the degree of mitochondrial divergence is a widespread criterion in phylogeography that is often used to make predictions about the evolutionary independence of lineages and ultimately their taxonomic status. even though simulation and empirical studies strongly discourage applying single-gene criteria for species discovery  this approach has motivated ongoing data collection across the entire tree of life . in our comparative study within ensatina, while we find a good qualitative agreement between mitochondrial and nuclear markers , we also find a quantitative disagreement in the depth of genetic divergence across pairs of populations . thus, the degree of divergence in mtdna does not predict the degree of ri between parental populations, whereas average divergence across nuclear markers does.

whereas mitochondrial genetic distances effectively reflect the evolutionary history of a single non-recombining locus, the multi-locus perspective from nuclear genetic distances was calculated using  <dig> to  <dig> physically unlinked allozyme loci  <cit> . in addition, the mitochondrial molecule has an effective population size four times lower than the nuclear markers, and therefore is more subjected to the effect of genetic drift, leading to a rapid fixation of the most common alleles in populations that are spatially fragmented or that experience low migration rates. an alternative explanation is that mtdna is not evolving neutrally and therefore does not reflect time since divergence in geographic isolation. studies in allopatric ranges of ensatina populations do not detect molecular signatures of selection in mtdna  <cit> . however, studies of secondary contacts show that steep parapatric transitions between mitochondrial lineages are accompanied by leaky borders for allozymes  <cit> , suggesting that selection might prevent introgression of the mitochondrial genome.

although obtaining mtdna data is fast, inexpensive and is a useful source of genetic information on population structure, conclusions about the degree of ri drawn from mitochondrial genetic distances can be misleading. in contrast, information on the degree of divergence determined using several autosomal loci is more informative in predicting the degree of genetic interactions in secondary contacts.

ecological divergence as a factor in reproductive isolation
adaptation to distinct environments via natural selection is doubtless a major process that can drive species diversification  <cit> , and it has deservedly received attention from both theoretical and empirical biologists . in association with development of the modern synthesis and the biological species concept, ri became regarded as the main property of species that would assure genetic integrity, and therefore evolutionary independence  <cit> . ri evolves as the pleiotropic effect of loci under divergent natural selection, or the direct effect of loci in linkage disequilibrium  <cit> . therefore, a central prediction of ecological species formation is that ecologically divergent pairs of populations will exhibit greater levels of reproductive isolation than ecologically similar populations of the same age  <cit> .

integrating ecological and genetic data into the framework used here has provided a powerful way to evaluate the relative contribution of genetic and ecological divergence for the development of isolating mechanisms between closely related taxa . by analyzing ecological and genetic data from inter-specific comparisons, across plants and animals, funk et al.  <cit>  found an association between ecological divergence and ri, after correcting for genetic divergence. however, when we extend that same approach to intra-specific comparisons within the ensatina ring species, no such association is detected . our results should be taken as an indication that generalizations are premature, and that for taxa in which geography conditions genetic and ecologic divergence, the development of ri might differ from the known examples of parallel speciation  <cit> . polytypic species and species complexes provide a multitude of comparisons of units of known genealogy, and enable testing the hypothesis at various temporal scales during the progression of species formation.

the selected ecological predictors, climate and vegetation, are proxies for two distinct processes that are putatively important for the diversification of ensatina, respectively adaptation to physiological challenges and specialization to particular habitats. in other systems, divergence in color pattern is known to lead to ri due to physical genetic linkage with loci controlling for assortative mating  <cit> . also, divergence in diet or micro-habitat choice is known to affect ri by pleiotropic effects  <cit> . at the spatiotemporal scale considered here, divergence in climate and vegetation is not associated with a decrease of genetic interactions upon secondary contact . accordingly, their isolated effect does not result in ri barriers. however, both color pattern and habitat choice are likely to constitute complex traits in habitat-dependent organisms such as ensatina. thus, it is possible that both climate and vegetation might affect ri at a finer spatial scale, more proximate to the scale at which the organism uses the habitat , or at an older time scale, during which vicariance within the ring species complex likely occurred . the possibility remains that other ecological parameters not evaluated here, such as local predators or microhabitat characteristics, might be associated with the evolution of ri. testing those new hypotheses will require extending this approach to other ecological factors and spatial scales appropriate to the population biology of this salamander, such as neighborhood size and dispersal rate.

ecological divergence and genomic heterogeneity
ecological diversification without complete ri is commonly observed in nature  and is often considered an indication of "incomplete speciation"  <cit> . our results in ensatina question the almost generalized expectation that ri is also a property of species formed by ecological divergence, and support the observation that "ecological species" might not develop complete reproductive barriers  <cit> . despite the lack of ri, divergent natural selection on traits between environments is likely to result in other properties that are generally assigned to species, such as morphological diagnosability, an ecological niche, a stable geographic range, and eventually genetic distinctiveness in neutral loci. however, ri might be a product only of geographic isolation, rather than a direct consequence of divergent selection for ecologically relevant traits. spatial contact between ecologically divergent taxa, rather than resulting in ri, might more often lead to the formation of hybrid zones , which are generally located in ecotones where individuals with parental traits will have intermediate fitness and may co-occur  <cit> . as long as divergent selection between parentals remains stable, parental taxa, or the properties we recognize in them , are preserved without approaching complete ri.

the lack of ri in "ecological species" might not represent a lack of integrity or stability through time. hybrid zones are likely to constitute important selective filters to gene flow, allowing locally adapted alleles to remain in the environments where they are most fit, while neutral alleles might introgress. reports of genomic divergence across sister species that diverged ecologically show a consistent pattern of highly heterogeneous genomes . this is hypothesized to happen because the few genes under selection or physically linked to loci experiencing strong disruptive selection can diverge, whereas gene flow will homogenize the remainder of the genome, resulting in isolated "genomic islands of speciation" . at an extreme, genomes of sister ecological species might be completely homogeneous, with the exception of those areas that initiated ecological divergence .

the genic view of species postulates that "species are groups that are differentially adapted and, upon contact, are not able to share genes controlling these adaptive characters, by direct exchanges or through intermediate hybrid populations. these groups may or may not be differentiated elsewhere in the genome"  <cit> . our results are in agreement, and suggest that ecological divergence per se does not result in reproductively isolated taxa. the patterns of clinal genetic variation or weak genotypic clustering commonly found between ecologically divergent taxa  in nature probably result from processes similar to those in ensatina. the fact that we consider species formation to be "incomplete" results only from our assumption that species will only endure in time in the presence of ri, rather than being genetically isolated in most of their genomes, or particular genomic regions controlling for ecologically relevant traits. hybrid zones between ecological taxa  where transition in ecological traits remains abrupt despite the lack of complete ri or absolute restrictions to gene flow, constitute the evidence that ri is not necessary, or even advantageous, for ecological differentiation. while it is irrefutable that natural selection is an important force in species diversification, that process may well be uncorrelated with the development of ri.

CONCLUSIONS
since the time of the modern synthesis, we have made major progress in understanding how ri may arise in various geographic contexts . whereas ri is the ultimate test as to whether two populations should be considered species, this process only reflects a single axis of the whole process of species formation. this limitation has been both technological and conceptual. however, recent technological advances now allow us to operate not only at the level of the organism, but also on the genes responsible for the traits we attribute to species, and how they interact with the local environment. extending this same approach to other response variables that are now more tractable, such as restriction of gene flow in selected versus neutral loci, and comparison across several hybrid zones with different levels of divergence, will soon enable us to break from assumptions of what a "good" species should be, and directly illuminate the multidimensional nature of species formation.

