BACKGROUND
cardiolipin  is an important phospholipid component of mitochondrial inner membrane and bacterial membrane. in mitochondria, cl stabilizes the respiratory complexes and the supercomplexes mainly made up of complex iii/iv  <cit> , and maintains the generation of atp  <cit> ; it is also involved in mitochondrial protein import, cell wall biogenesis, translational regulation, aging and apoptosis  <cit> . in bacteria, cl interacts with energy metabolism proteins such as succinate dehydrogenase  <cit> , formate dehydrogenase-n  <cit> , and respiratory complex  <cit> , and is assembled into reaction centers  <cit> , and is also involved in proper localization of proteins on membrane  <cit> . whereas, no cl have ever been found in archaea yet  <cit> .

cl is biosynthesized from two molecules of phosphatidylglycerols  molecules in bacteria while from a pg and a cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol  in eukaryotes   <cit> . in bacteria, the biosynthesis reaction is a reversible transesterification catalyzed by a kind of cardiolipin synthase  containing two phospholipase d  domains--cls_pld, while in eukaryotes, the reaction is not a reversible one catalyzed by another kind of cls containing one cdp-alcohol phosphatidyltransferase  domain--cls_cap. in addition, only in eukaryotes the nascent cl is further remodeled to become mature cl, which generally contains the same fatty acids at sn- <dig>   <dig> sites in a molecule of a certain organism  <cit> . the indispensable eukaryotic cl maturation process and enzymes are as follows: nascent cl is deacylated to form monolysocardiolipin , which is catalyzed by either of the two kinds of enzymes--cl-specific phospholipase  identified in yeast  <cit>  and calcium-independent phospholipase a <dig>  beta or gamma reported in drosophila and rat  <cit> ; mlcl is then reacylated by coa-independent tafazzin   <cit>  or acylcoa:lysocardiolipin acyltransferase  <dig>   <cit>  to become mature cl. through this process, a high degree of acyl chain symmetry in cl is established. in bacteria, there is not such a maturation process at all.

as seen above, the cl biosynthesis and maturation pathways in eukaryotes are distinct from those in bacteria. however, the simultaneous appearance of cl in both bacteria and eukaryotic mitochondria has been considered to be a line of evidence for the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondrion from bacteria  <cit> . according to the endosymbiosis theory, many mitochondrial properties such as energy metabolism including respiratory chain are inherited from the bacterial endosymbiont. but the above differences between mitochondria and bacteria make it uncertain whether this is true to cl biosynthesis pathway. therefore, in fact how the eukaryotic cl biosynthesis and maturation pathways arise during the origin of eukaryotes from prokaryotes is still a mystery.

moreover, cl was reported to be absent in some anaerobic protists such as giardia lamblia  <cit>  and trichomonas vaginalis  <cit> . these organisms possess no canonical mitochondria but mitosomes or hydrogenosomes, which do not have electron transport chain , membrane potential, and proton-driven atp generation  <cit> . the lack of mitochondria in g. lamblia was once taken as the main evidence by many authors to support this organism is the most primitive eukaryote diverging from the eukaryotic trunk before the emergence of mitochondria  <cit> . therefore, whether the lack of cl in these 'amitochondriate' protists is due to their primitiveness or secondary degeneration is a question even relating to the early evolution of eukaryotes.

to study the origin and evolution of cl biosynthesis and maturation pathways, herein, phylogenetic distribution and phylogeny of the cl biosynthesis and maturation enzymes were investigated in diverse eukaryotes of the five supergroups: opisthokonta, amoebozoa, archaeplastida, chromalveolata, and excavata, and diverse bacteria, and some interesting observations were obtained.

RESULTS
phylogenetic distribution of cl biosynthesis enzymes in eukaryotes and their similar sequences in bacteria
cl synthase 
homologs of cls_cap were identified in opisthokonta , archaeplastida, and stramenopiles  of chromalveolata . the two supergroups and one subgroup contain all the multicellular eukaryotes  and some unicellular eukaryotes . this means all the multicellular eukaryotes and only those unicellular eukaryotes that belong to the same supergroups  or subgroup  with these multicellular eukaryotes possess cls_cap. generally, each species has only one homolog, but a few of them such as h. sapiens, m. musculus, c. elegans, d. melanogaster, s. purpuratus, and h. magnipapillata have more than one copy . multiple sequence alignments revealed most of these identified homologs possess the conserved amino acid residues and membrane-binding regions of the cls_cap  <cit>  . many  bacterial similar sequences were found in diverse bacteria following eukaryotic homologs in the hit list when searching against refseq_protein database when the cutoff e-value is  <dig> , though most of them are annotated as cdp-diacylglycerol-glycerol-3-phosphate 3-phosphatidyltransferase . to reduce computation burden, only those top hits  were included in the below analyses. among them there are two previously reported cls_cap from two actinobacteria  <cit> , and according to our phylogenetic analysis, much more sequences from actinobacteria  and some other bacteria including diverse proteobacteria and others are cls_cap . when these bacterial homologs were aligned to build hmm profile, and then the profile was used as query to search against all kinds of prokaryotic genomes, we also found only a small part of the surveyed bacteria , which are mainly proteobacteria, actinobacteria, and a few other bacteria, possess cls_cap .

+ = presence; - = absence; a, homologs obtained by tblastn search rather than by blastp search as others; *, nr database rather than genome database was searched against for homologs; #, est database rather than genome database was searched against for homologs

whereas, interestingly, in all the other two investigated eukaryotic supergroups and one subgroup, which all exclusively consist of unicellular eukaryotes , including amoebozoa , excavata , and alveolata in chromalveolata, no cls_cap but cls_pld homologs were identified . these homologs all contain the two conserved motifs which were proposed to be involved in phosphatidyl group transfer  <cit>  . many  sequences annotated as cls from diverse bacteria were also found to be top hits of cls_pld. to investigate the distribution of cls_pld in prokaryotes, a hmm profile built from seven genes whose cls function were confirmed experimentally  <cit>  was used as query to search bacterial genomes, cls_pld homologs was found in most investigated bacteria . none type cls is found in archaea.

none of the eukaryotes investigated contains the both types of cls. whereas, in all the amitochondriate protists mentioned above in brackets , neither of the two types of cls were found. no cls were found in b. hominis yet, but this is probably due to its incomplete genome database.

cl-specific phospholipase 
homologs were found in most genomes of four of the five eukaryotic supergroups except amoebozoa, but within the four supergroups some subgroups or species such as microsporidia, ostreococcus, g. sulphuraria, perkinsida, apicomplexa, b. hominis, heterolobosea, parabasalia, and diplomonadida do not have the homolog yet . two typical motifs  of cld  <cit> , which are considered to function as lipase and acyltransferase, respectively, were found in almost all of these identified homologs . many  bacterial similar sequences were also found following the eukaryotic homologs in the hit list, but most of them were annotated as "alpha/beta hydrolase" or "hypothetical protein". we only choose those very close to eukaryotic sequences in the hit list for the below phylogenetic analyses.

calcium-independent phospholipase a <dig> 
as the hits of ipla <dig> beta and gamma mixed together in the hit list due to high sequence similarity between the two enzymes, they were discriminated according to the below phylogenetic analyses. it was found homologs of ipla <dig> gamma exist in most genomes of four of the five supergroups  and homologs of ipla <dig> beta were found in all animals and a fungus in opisthokonta and two species in amoebozoa. none homologs of the two ipla <dig> were found in many subgroups and species, such as choanoflagellate, most fungi , entamoebida, g. sulphuraria, ciliata, cryptosporidium, oomycetes, b. hominis, parabasalia, and diplomonadida. but many other fungi not listed in table  <dig> were found to have ipla <dig> homologs when searching against refseq_protein database. some organisms possess multiple homologs . most of the identified homologs possess the two conserved segments which are the features of ipla <dig>  <cit>  . many bacterial similar sequences annotated to be "patatin" were found following these eukaryotic homologs in the hit list, and only those top hits  were picked and supplied to the below phylogenetic analyses.

acyl-coa:lysocardiolipin acyltransferase  <dig> 
besides annotated alcat, other eukaryotic enzyme homologs such as "1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate o-acyltransferase   <dig>   <dig>  5" and "lysophosphatidylglycerol acyltransferase " were also found in the genomes of all five supergroups when searching against the refseq_protein database. because of the high sequence similarities among them, their identities were further determined by the below phylogenetic analyses. no homolog was found in several subgroups and species including d. melanogaster, microsporidia, entamoebida, most chlorophyta , rhodophyta, alveolata, t. pseudonana, heterolobosea, diplomonadida, and parabasalia . many  bacterial similar sequences were also found following the above eukaryotic homologs in the hit list. their relationship with eukaryotic alcat homologs was determined by the below phylogenetic analyses.

tafazzin 
homologs were found in all the five supergroups, but not found in several subgroups and species such as microsporidia, entamoebida, alveolata, kinetoplastids, parabasalia, diplomonadida, s. pombe, p. sojae, and p. tricornutum . bacterial sequences were also found after eukaryotic taz homologs in the hit list, and were mostly annotated as "acyltransferase". but they have very low sequence similarities with eukaryotic taz homologs, and our preliminary phylogenetic analysis does not support they have close relationship with eukaryotic taz, thus they were not included in the further analyses.

briefly, the distribution of the maturation pathway enzymes can be summarized as the following three conditions: 1) not any enzymes exist in microsporida, entamoebida, cryptosporidium, parabasalia, and diplomonadida; 2) there are only one or two enzymes in some protists, including g. sulphuraria, alveolata , and b. hominis, they are unable to form the complete two-step maturation pathway in these protists; 3) all the other eukaryotes possess most of the enzymes, which can form the complete two-step maturation pathway.

phylogeny of cl biosynthesis enzymes
as the maximum likelihood  and bayesian trees showed similar topologies, here we chose the bayesian tree as a representative with the bootstrap values of ml tree also on the tree .

on the cls_cap phylogenetic tree , all the identified homologs from eukaryotes are recovered into a highly supported big monophyletic clade . within this clade, homologs from opisthokonta, archaeplastida, and stramenopiles of chromalveolata form three subclades with high support values, and within these subclades many groups corresponding to their source lineages were also recovered. furthermore, multiple homologs from a species always cluster together firstly, suggesting they are the products of species-specific gene duplication. a clade consisting of all homologs from alpha proteobacteria was recovered to be the closest sistergroup of the clade e with a moderate support value  with all the homologs of other diverse bacteria being its outgroups. among these outgroups, the actinobacterial clade, which contains the two previously reported cls_cap identified from two actinobacteria  <cit> , is the outmost group, suggesting all the homologs of these outgroups are cls_cap. finally, pgps from diverse bacteria form an outgroup of all the above clades. therefore, our results suggest besides in actinobacteria as reported previously, cls_cap might have already emerged in some other bacteria including diverse proteobacteria and others, and eukaryotes might acquire their cls_cap from alpha proteobacteria.

on the cls_pld phylogenetic tree , all the identified homologs from eukaryotes are also recovered into a highly supported big monophyletic clade . within this clade, homologs form three subclades almost corresponding to their three source supergroups--alveolata of chromalveolata, amoebozoa, and excavata, and within these subclades homologs also form groups corresponding to their source lineages . however, clade e does not show any particular close correlations with those similar sequences from any current bacterial lineages. these results suggest that all the cls_pld from the eukaryotes  of the three eukaryotic supergroups have a common ancestor, which does not fall into any of the present bacterial lineages.

phylogeny of cl maturation enzymes
due to their very low sequence similarities with taz and alcat, bacterial similar sequences of these two enzymes were not included in the final phylogenetic analysis. the obtained four phylogenetic trees  showed: 1) all the eukaryotic homologs of each enzyme cluster together firstly with high support values, none of these enzymes show a close relationship with any particular bacterial similar sequences, and the low support values also do not support they have direct phylogenetic correlations with any bacterial sequences, suggesting they are not inherited from bacterial ancestors directly but arose after the emergence of eukaryotes, and each of these enzymes in all eukaryotes has a common ancestor which have might already emerged in the last eukaryotic common ancestor  of the five supergroups; 2) homologs of each enzymes from a common supergroup or lineage  do not form a common clade corresponding their source supergroup or lineage but usually form two or more separated clades, and alternative trees constraining them as monophyly were rejected significantly , suggesting gene duplication and loss occurred frequently on these enzymes at different lineage levels. moreover, as for alcat, firstly, all the homologs form a sistergroup to agpat 3/ <dig> clade, suggesting alcat arose through gene duplication and divergence with the enzyme agpat 3/ <dig>  this means gene duplication and divergence also have ever occurred between alcat and agpat 3/ <dig> during the origin of alcat. what is more, multiple copies of homologs of each of these enzymes from a species generally clustered together, suggesting gene duplication of these enzymes continues occurring relatively recently in some species.

discussion
the origin and evolution of cl biosynthesis pathways in eukaryotes
as mentioned above, cl is biosynthesized by two distinct synthases--cls_cap and cls_pld. the two types of enzymes belong to two distinct protein families without any primary sequence similarity between them  <cit> . generally, it is considered eukaryotes have cls_cap and bacteria cls_pld. however, our investigation revealed although most bacteria possess cls_pld, some kinds of bacteria including actinobacteria, proteobacteria, and some others, bear cls_cap, suggesting cls_cap has already arisen in some bacteria actually; in eukaryotes, all the multicellular organisms and only those unicellular organisms  which belong to the same supergroups or subgroup with these multicellular organisms possess cls_cap. our phylogenetic analysis further showed all the cls_cap in these eukaryotes have the closest relationship with those of alpha proteobacteria. since alpha proteobacteria is generally considered to be the endosymbiotic ancestor of mitochondrion  <cit> , then the cls_cap pathway in these eukaryotes most probably originated from alpha proteobacteria through the mitochondrial endosymbiotic event. this is inconsistent with the previous postulation that eukaryotic cls originated from the prokaryotic type pgps which existed in ancestral eukaryotes  <cit> .

on the other hand, our investigation revealed all the other eukaryotes whose supergroups or subgroup consist exclusively of unicellular eukaryotes  possess cls_pld. among these eukaryotes a few lineages such as trypanosoma, leishmania, theileria, plasmodium, cryptosporidium and dictyostelium had previously been reported to have cls_pld by other authors, and this condition was explained as an evolutionary survival of the prokaryotic reaction for cl formation into the eukaryotic kingdom  <cit> . actually, cl was reported to really exist in these eukaryotes such as d. discoideum, t. thermophila, p. tetraurelia, p. marinus and t. cruzi  <cit> . but, according to our present work, since 1) cls_pld is widely distributed in so many kinds of protists , and forms a complementary distribution with the cls_cap within the entire eukaryote domain ; 2) on the phylegenetic tree, all the cls_pld from different eukaryotes  were clustered together as a common clade, without showing close relationship with the cls_pld from any particular extant bacterial lineages, suggesting they have a common ancestor which is probably very ancient and is not kept in any extant bacterial lineages without obvious changes, then these cls_pld in eukaryotes can not be a secondary acquisition by independent horizontal gene transfer  from different bacteria in different protist lineages, but must have be inherited from a common ancestor of these eukaryotes. because 1) such a common ancestor can only be the last eukaryotic common ancestor  or the first eukaryotic common ancestor ; 2) most bacteria  possess cls_pld pathway, and the emergence of cls_cap in partial bacteria might occur much later than cls_pld; 3) the common ancestor of these eukaryotic cls_pld can not be found in extant bacteria as that of eukaryotic cls_cap, so the acquisition of these eukaryotic cls_pld might occurred very anciently . therefore, it is most probably that the feca inherited the cls_pld pathway from a ancient bacterium such as the bacterial partner according to the "fusion hypothesis"  <cit> , or the proto-eukaryote derived from bacteria according to the 'phagotrophy hypothesis'  <cit> , or the bacteirium related to the origin of the nucleus according to the 'endosymbiosis hypothesis' <cit> .

neither cls_cap nor cls_pld was found in all the investigated amitochondriate protists, inspite of which eukaryotic supergroup  these protists belong to. this is consistent with the lack of cl in these organisms such as g. lamblia, t. vaginalis, and e. cuniculi  <cit> . since both bacteria and all the other eukaryotes have cl and the corresponding cl biosynthesis pathways, the absence of either of the two cl biosynthesis pathways in these amitochondriate protists must be the results of secondary loss due to their degeneration of mitochondria. consistently, it was showed anaerobic prokaryotes lack cl, and anaerobic condition can cause the decrease of cl in contrast to aerobic in yeast  <cit> . the existence of cl in a relative of t. vaginalis-- tritrichomonas foetus  <cit>  further support such a secondary loss once occurred at least in t. vaginalis. the lack of either type of cls in b. hominis might also due to its lack of mitochondria or incomplete genome database.

considering the distinctive difference of phospholipid between archaea and bacteria and eukaryotes  <cit> , and the absence of either type of cls in archaea, it is reasonable to postulate archaea may not contribute to the origin of eukaryotic cl biosynthesis. therefore, based on the above analyses, we can propose a evolutionary scenario about the cl biosynthesis pathway in eukaryotes as follow : in the process of the origin and evolution of eukaryotes, the feca inherited the cls_pld pathway from its bacterial ancestor, which is probably the bacterial partner according to any of the hypotheses about eukaryote evolution such as the 'fusion hypothesis', the 'phagotrophy' hypothesis and the 'endosymbiosis hypothesis'; later, when the feca evolved into leca, the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondrion brought in another cl synthase--cls_cap, which had arisen in the endosymbiotic bacteria--alpha proteobacteria; then, in those leca individuals which would evolve into those unicellular eukaryote lineages  from which multicellular eukaryotes  could arise, the endosymbiotic-original cls_cap gene was transferred into the nuclear genome of the host cell, and the previous cls_pld pathway was substituted, while in the other leca individuals which would just evolve into the other unicellular protist lineages  from which no multicellular eukaryotes would arise, the previous cls_pld was retained and the endosymbiotic-original cls_cap was lost; in the amitochondriate protists  the cl biosynthesis pathway  was secondly totally lost due to their secondary degeneration of mitochondria.

the origin and evolution of cl maturation pathway in eukaryotes
the eukaryotic cl maturation pathway consists of two steps, and altogether five enzymes have been previously identified to participate in this process in different eukaryotes.

cl maturation is indispensable in higher eukaryotes though the purpose of this process is not very clear. our phylogenetic analyses indicated all maturation enzymes arise after the emergence of eukaryotes, and might have already emerged prior to the divergence of all the eukaryote supergroups. except alcat seems to arise through gene duplication and divergence of other existing enzyme , the origins of the other enzymes are not clear yet.

our phylogenetic analyses also indicated gene duplication and gene loss occurring frequently at different lineage levels in the evolution of maturation pathways. these gene duplications and losses result in a patchy distribution of the maturation pathway enzymes in diverse eukaryotes, increasing the diversity of the pathway. different enzymes or multiple homologs in the same step of the pathway can widen the recognition of substrates carrying different fatty acid substituents, and ipla <dig> beta and gamma are just such a reported example for this  <cit> . such a condition for the maturation pathway might be the results of adaptive evolution for coping with the complicated cellular process in various eukaryotic cells.

in the present work, we found except some unicellular eukaryotes including all the amitochondriate protists , all alveolata in chromalveolata, and a few other species , all the other eukaryotes, which distribute in all the five eukaryotic supergroups, either unicellular or multicellular, either parasitic or free-living, possess a complete cl maturation pathway by having at least one enzyme for each step of the pathway. the absence of the complete pathway in b. hominis and g. sulphuraria might be caused by their incomplete databases, and the lack in other protists are probably due to various secondary losses, because 1) each enzyme of pathway from various lineages form a monophyly on the phylogenetic trees, 2) their close relatives have this pathway, and 3) some, though not a complete set, of the enzymes of the pathway, appear in some of these protists. the totally absence of this pathway in amitochondriate protists  is consistent with the lack of typical mitochondria and cl in these protists, and must be due to the degeneration of mitochondria in them. whereas, the presence of partial of the enzymes of this pathway in some protists  might suggest their maturation pathways are in the process of losing or the enzymes left might have other functions.

implications to the evolution of eukaryotes and the classification of the five eukaryotic supergroups
according to our above analysis about the phylogenetic distribution and the phylogeny of the two types of cls in eukaryotes, the acquisition of cls_cap pathway through mitochondrial endosymbiosis might have offered some potential for the evolution of multicellularity. because the cls_pld pathway exists exclusively in unicellular eukaryotes , while the cls_cap pathway is distributed in all the multicellular organisms and only those unicellular eukaryotes  that belong to the same supergroups or subgroup with these multicellular organisms. therefore, for the first time, our work implies the endosymbiotic event of alpha proteobacteria not only led to the origin of mitochondria, but also might affect the subsequent evolution of eukaryotes such as the evolution of multicellularity, which may depend on what kinds of genes of the endosymbiont are transferred into the host nucleus and thus what kinds of endosymbiotic relationships are established.

the classification and relationships of the five eukaryotic supergroups are still under controversial now  <cit> . in the present work, it was showed the cl biosynthesis and maturation pathways are very different between the two subgroups in supergroup chromalveolata--stramenopiles possess the cls_cap pathway and a complete maturation pathway, while alveolata bear the cls_pld pathway and not a complete maturation pathway . therefore, the classification putting these two subgroups into a common supergroup may be unreasonable.

amitochondriate protists were once thought as the most primitive extant eukaryotes because of their lack of mitochondrion and other primitive characteristics  <cit> . however, recently, accumulating molecular evidence and the identification of atypical mitochondria-- mitosome or hydrogenosome--in these organisms argued they might once possess mitochondria  <cit> . our investigation indicates the absence of cl biosynthesis and maturation pathways in these amitochondriate protists might be due to secondary losses. thus, these atypical mitochondria in these amitochondriate protists might also result from degeneration of their once-existent typical mitochondria.

CONCLUSIONS
we propose that the feca inherited the cls_pld pathway from its bacterial ancestor ; later, when the feca evolved into the last eukaryote common ancestor , the endosymbiotic mitochondria  brought in another pathway--cls_cap pathway, and then in some leca individuals the cls_cap pathway substituted the previous cls_pld pathway, and these leca would evolve into the protist lineages from which multicellular eukaryotes could arise, while in the other leca individuals the previous cls_pld pathway was kept and the cls_cap pathway was lost, and these leca would evolve into the current protist lineages that possess the cls_cap pathway. besides, our work indicated cl maturation pathway arose after the emergence of eukaryotes probably through mechanisms such as the duplication of other already-existent genes, and gene duplication and loss occurred frequently at different lineage levels, increasing the diversity of the pathway probably so as to fit the complicated cellular process in various cells. on the other hand, our work implies what kind of the endosymbiotic relationship is established during the evolutionary origin of mitochondrion in early eukaryotes might affect the subsequent evolution of multicellularity; the classification putting stramenopiles and alveolata together to form chromalveolata may be unreasonable; the absence of cl synthesis and maturation pathways in amitochondriate protists is most probably due to secondary degeneration.

