BACKGROUND
variation in voice pitch, an auditory impression of the rate of vocal fold vibration , plays a different linguistic function in tone and non-tone languages. tone languages, such as thai and mandarin chinese, use differences in either average f <dig> or f <dig> contours  over strings of otherwise identical phonemes to distinguish between different words in the lexicon from one another. for instance, the thai syllable  means something completely different when pronounced with a tone that is low-falling , low-falling and then rising , high-falling , high-rising  or mid-level . in non-tone languages such as english, on the other hand, pitch variation is not used to differentiate word meaning. however, even though f <dig> is not used to distinguish meaning between words in english, it can make one syllable more perceptually prominent or more salient than neighboring syllables in multi-syllabic words. for example, the first syllable of the word 'cookie' is stressed, and perceptually more salient than the second syllable. the f <dig> or pitch  of the stressed syllable is typically higher than its neighboring unstressed syllable. in addition, lexical stress can also be used to distinguish a compound word 'a hotdog' from a noun phrase 'a hot dog'. variation in the linguistic functions of f <dig> may account for perceptual difficulty typically experienced among adult native speakers of a non-tone language when consciously perceiving and distinguishing among lexical tones differing in pitch level or pitch contours. the aim of the present erp study was to investigate whether the processing of lexical tones is affected by the listener's native language  even when the participants are not paying conscious attention to the stimuli, and whether such non-attentive perception can be altered by laboratory training, even in adults.

previous behavioral studies have shown that native speakers of a non-tone language  poorly discriminate among lexical tones as compared with native speakers of a tone language , even when the latter are unfamiliar with the tones being tested  <cit> . this perceptual difficulty for speakers of non-tone languages is due in part to differences in the way lexical tones are processed among native and nonnative listeners of tone languages. native speakers of a non-tone language have been shown to focus more on the average f <dig>  and f <dig> offset or onset values, whereas speakers of a tone language focus more on f <dig> contour  <cit> . interestingly, previous behavioral studies have also shown that adult native speakers of a non-tone language may improve in their perception of lexical tones after exposure to the tones either in a natural or classroom setting, or during laboratory training  <cit> . training also affects the brain areas involved in lexical tone processing. fmri studies comparing brain activation during lexical tone perception after versus before training showed an increase in activation in the left posterior superior gyrus  <cit> . in addition, right hemisphere activation was observed  <cit> , especially in poor learners  <cit> . this suggests that the perceptual and neural systems involved in processing differences in pitch and pitch contours are still malleable, even in adulthood.

the discrimination or identification tasks used in the behavioral and fmri studies on lexical tone perception involve conscious comparison or categorization. performance in these experiments may therefore have been affected by factors such as working memory load or attention. in the present study we therefore studied the non-attentive discrimination of lexical tones and the effect of language background and training by using event-related brain potentials . erps can be recorded while the participant is presented with auditory stimuli, but engaged in an unrelated task such as watching a movie. the mismatch negativity  is a frontal negative erp component occurring about 100– <dig> ms after stimulus onset. it is elicited by infrequent stimuli that deviate from frequently presented  stimuli in pitch, duration, voice onset time, or other acoustic or phonetic properties  <cit> . since this component is elicited even while people are asleep or in a coma, this component is regarded as an index of automatic processing of auditory differences, that is, processing that does not require voluntary attention. the mmn has been shown to increase in amplitude and, in some cases, to have a shorter peak latency as behavioral discrimination performance improves. in addition, changes in the mmn have been attested before changes in behavioral discrimination performance  <cit> . the mmn is therefore a useful tool to study the processing and acquisition of non-native language contrasts  <cit> . since this technique taps into a different level of processing, and does not require overt attention and active comparison by the participant, this method may help us further tease apart the aspects of the stimuli that different language groups are differentially sensitive to at a non-attentive level of processing.

only a few studies have employed the mmn to investigate the processing of lexical tones. chandrasekaran et al.  <cit>  investigated the effect of language background on lexical tone perception. both mandarin chinese and untrained english speakers showed a mmn to tone contrasts in mandarin chinese. however, only the chinese participants showed a larger mmn to a distinction that was acoustically more salient, suggesting that language background affects non-attentive processing of lexical tones to some extent. to investigate the effect of both training and language background, kaan et al.  <cit>  recorded erps from native speakers of english, mandarin chinese and thai while they were presented with three thai tones in an oddball paradigm. erps showed no differences between the groups before training. after a two-day perceptual training on the mid-level and low-falling tone, the english showed an increase in mmn amplitude to untrained high-rising deviants, whereas the chinese showed a decrease in a later negativity in that condition. this suggested that native speakers of tone and non-tone languages were sensitive to different aspects of the stimuli as a result of training. however, no effect of training was observed on the  low-falling tone deviant, to which all groups showed a large mmn before and after training. in addition, behavioral performance at the start of training was close to ceiling for all three subject groups. the differences found in the erps may therefore have not been indicative of improved perception of the tones. the ceiling performance may have been due to the use of only one token per tone condition, which did not encourage abstraction of contour categories. in the present experiment we therefore used multiple tokens of three thai tones, all generated from one naturally produced token .

three subject groups  were tested in an erp oddball task in which they were presented with the stimuli while watching a silent movie. although this task does not prevent participant from occasionally paying attention to the stimuli, the auditory stimuli are not task-relevant and do not require voluntary attention, in contrast to overt behavioral tasks. high-rising or low-falling tokens were presented as deviants among mid-level standard tokens, and vice versa. in addition a behavioral same/different discrimination task was conducted on the same stimuli. both the behavioral discrimination and the erp oddball task were conducted before and after a two-day perceptual categorization training task. we were particularly interested in seeing how the mmn and the later negativity for deviant versus standard stimuli would be affected by language background, training and the degree of behavioral improvement as a result of training. as one can see in figure  <dig>  the three tone categories differed from each other with respect to their f <dig> onset values, the steep f <dig> slope right after the f <dig> onset, as well as with respect to a later, more gradually developing f <dig> slope. given that speakers of a non-tone language  have been shown to be sensitive to f <dig> onset and offset differences, whereas native speakers of a tone language are more sensitive to the later f <dig> contour, we expected the native english speakers to initially show a larger mmn than the native chinese and thai speakers. the chinese and thai speakers, on the other hand, were expected to show a more pronounced later negative effect, which may be related to the later contour differences  <cit> . as the native english speakers become more sensitive to the contour differences, we expected them to pattern more with the thai and chinese after training. moreover, since the stimuli were meaningful words to thai speakers, but not to chinese and english speakers, we expected some differences related to the linguistic status of the stimuli. linguistically perceived stimuli have been shown to involve the left hemisphere more than the right  <cit> , but see  <cit> . the thai were therefore expected to differ from the english and the chinese participants in terms of the lateralization of the mmn and late negativity, at least, to the extent that the lateralization of scalp-recorded erps reflects hemispheric differences in the neural processes involved.

RESULTS
behavioral discrimination task and categorization training
performance on the behavioral discrimination task  improved after training . this was more so for chinese and english than for thai participants, although the language group by test time interaction did not reach significance . before training, the three language groups differed from each other, with the english performing worse than the chinese and thai . the chinese and thai groups did not differ in their performance . after training, the groups did not differ in their ability to discriminate among the tones .

the mean d' scores pre- and post-training per language group. standard deviation in parentheses.

performance in the categorization training  improved between the first and the last training sessions in all three language groups . the english showed the largest improvement, the thai group the smallest . overall, the english performed the worst . after the first training session, the language groups performed significantly different from each other , with the english performing worse that the chinese  and the thai . the chinese and thai did not differ significantly from each other . a similar statistical pattern was obtained after the last training session .

mean percentage of errors after the first and last 30-minute training session, per language group. standard deviation in parentheses.

pre-and post training performance in the behavioral discrimination task correlated strongly with accuracy in the first and last categorization training, respectively : the fewer errors made in the categorization training, the higher the d' scores in the discrimination task. this indicates that the behavioral discrimination task is a good measure of a participant's pre- and post-training perception ability.

erp experiment: movie comprehension questions
mean comprehension accuracy on the movie-related questions in the erp experiment was 84% , before as well as after training. before training, the english group scored 87% correct , the chinese 83%  and the thai 81% . after training, the accuracy was 85%  for the english group, 85%  for the chinese, and 84%  for the thai groups. there were no significant differences in accuracy between pre- and post training sessions and/or among the language groups .

erps to low-falling tones
mmn
the low-falling deviants  showed a mmn at the f <dig> and f <dig> electrodes. erps for the f <dig> electrode are displayed in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the isovoltage maps for the mmn. t-tests of the mmn amplitude at f <dig> and f <dig> versus a hypothetical zero showed that the mmn was significant before and after training in the english and thai speakers . in the chinese, the mmn was weakly present before training  and significantly after .

an anova on the mmn amplitude  at the f <dig> and f <dig> electrodes showed an interaction of test time by hemisphere : before training, the mmn was numerically larger at the left hemisphere electrode ; after training, the mmn was numerically larger at the right electrode, with the difference almost reaching significance . training also weakly affected the differences in the mmn between the groups : the groups weakly differed from each other before training , with the mmn being larger for the english compared to the chinese , but not compared to the thai . after training, the groups did not differ  .

the difference in mmn latency and amplitude after versus before training correlated weakly with the degree of learning: the greater the improvement in the behavioral discrimination task , the earlier the mmn peak and the smaller  the mmn amplitude was after compared to before training .

late negativity
a late negativity was seen for the deviant versus standard in the 350– <dig> ms window   the negativity was larger over the left hemisphere , especially before training . the degree of learning affected the change in the late negativity in the 350– <dig> ms interval: the larger the increase in d' scores from pre- to post-training, the smaller the late negativity in the 350– <dig> ms interval post- versus pre-training .

the negativity persisted in the 500– <dig> ms interval, see figure  <dig> , and remained larger over the left than the right hemisphere . effects involving the factor test time were not significant in this time window. the later negativity was not affected by language background in either the 350– <dig> ms or the 500– <dig> ms time window.

erps to high-rising tones
results for the high-rising deviants versus high-rising standards are displayed in figures  <dig> to  <dig> 

mmn
separate t-tests on the mmn amplitude  at f <dig> and f <dig> versus a hypothetical zero showed no significant differences in any of the groups before training . after training, the mmn was most robust in the native thai speakers . anovas showed no effects of the experimental manipulations on the mmn .

late negativity
between  <dig> and  <dig> ms, a negativity was elicited by the high-rising deviants versus standards, particularly over the left hemisphere , see figure  <dig>  this left-lateralized negativity was only seen in the english and in the chinese, but not in the thai, leading to a weak interaction of condition by hemisphere by language group . training had an effect on the anterior-posterior distribution of the negativity : pre-training, the negativity was numerically largest at frontal sites , after training the negativity became broader in distribution and the two-way interaction between condition and anteriority was no longer significant . figure  <dig> suggests that this effect was mainly driven by the english group, however the interaction with language group was not significant.

the negativity for the high-rising deviants persisted in the 500– <dig> ms interval  , with the negativity being larger over the left hemisphere . the negativity was greater left than right at all except parietal regions . the left lateralization was especially seen in the chinese and english participants compared with the thai . as in the previous interval, the distribution was frontal before training and became broader after training .

summary
all groups showed a mmn before and after training to the low-falling deviants. the mmn was larger over the right hemisphere after training. the english group tended to show a larger mmn before training than the chinese, even though they performed worse in the behavioral tasks. both mmn amplitude and latency decreased after training the more the participant improved in the behavioral discrimination task. the mmn was followed by a slow negativity, which was slightly larger over the left than the right hemisphere, and reduced in amplitude as a function of learning. the high-rising deviants elicited no or only a small mmn. the late negativity in this condition was left-lateralized for the english and the chinese groups. the later negativity was frontal before training, but became broader after training.

discussion
the aim of the present erp study was to investigate the processing of lexical tones when participants are not forced to pay attention to the stimuli, as opposed to previous studies using behavioral techniques only, and to see to what extent such non-attentive processing is affected by training and by native language background. in contrast to previous erp studies  <cit> , we used multiple tokens per stimulus type to encourage the formation of abstract contour categories and to avoid pre-training ceiling effects. results from the behavioral discrimination task suggest that this manipulation was successful: performance significantly increased after training in the english and the chinese groups, who were initially unfamiliar with the thai stimuli used. furthermore, behavioral discrimination scores correlated significantly with performance in the categorization training task.

based on previous experiments showing that native speakers of a non-tone language are more sensitive to f <dig> onset and offset when discriminating lexical tones  <cit> , we predicted that the english group would show a larger mmn to the deviant categories; the chinese and thai on the other hand, previously shown to be more sensitive to f <dig> contours, were expected to show a more robust later effect. in addition, given that the stimuli were meaningful words in thai, we predicted a lateralization difference between thai on the one hand, and english and chinese on the other.

our predictions were only partly borne out. we will discuss our findings in turn for the mmn and the late negativity.

the mmn
all groups showed a mmn to the low-falling tone deviants, before as well as after training; whereas no, or only a smaller mmn was elicited by the high-rising tone deviants. note that two of the three low-falling tones have an onset frequency falling below the range of the mid-level tones . the onset frequency of the high-rising tones, on the other hand, falls within the range of that of the mid-level tokens. it is therefore likely that the large mmn found for the low-falling tones reflects differences in f <dig> onset between the deviant and standard stimuli presented in the same block. these differences were much smaller in the high-rising tones  <cit> .

the mmn was weakly affected by native language background: the english showed a larger mmn to the low-falling tones than the chinese before training. this supports previous findings  <cit>  that speakers of a non-tone language are more sensitive to differences in onset f <dig>  our english speaking participants may have been more sensitive to the early f <dig> differences in the low-falling conditions, eliciting a larger mmn compared to the chinese and thai groups. note that although the english language group showed the largest mmn before training, they performed worse than the thai and chinese in the behavioral discrimination and training. this can also be accounted for by the different sensitivity of tone versus non-tone language speakers. the behavioral tasks probed participant's sensitivity to differences in f <dig> slope and direction rather than f <dig> onset, and was therefore harder for non-tone language speakers. the categorization training with multiple tokens per type caused the english speaking participants to become more sensitive to the direction of the pitch contour. this may have induced a modulation of their non-attentive perception, hence a reduction of the mmn amplitude in the english language group after training to the level of the speakers of tone languages.

the mmn became smaller and earlier with behavioral improvement. typically, the mmn has been found to become larger after training  <cit> . the decrease in mmn amplitude therefore suggests that the participants, and especially the learners, non-attentively perceived the stimuli in a different way and became less sensitive to the f <dig> onset differences after training, or at least, as a result of repeated exposure.

for all three language groups, the mmn to the low-falling deviants became more prominent over the right hemisphere after training. this is in contrast to several previous erp studies that reported an increase in mmn over the left hemisphere after training on linguistic contrasts  <cit> . to the extent that the lateralization of scalp-recorded erps reflects hemispheric differences in the neural processes involved, our findings suggest that even native speakers of thai employ the right hemisphere more than the left in processing the low-falling versus mid-level tone contrast. this is in spite of the fact that the stimuli are meaningful words for the thai. a previous study on mandarin chinese speakers reports a similar right hemisphere distribution for meaningful lexical tone contrasts  <cit> . under an alternative account of hemispheric specialization of speech, the left hemisphere is involved in processing rapid formant transitions, whereas the right hemisphere deals with slower differences in pitch  <cit> . it may therefore be the case that our participants became more sensitive to the gradual change in f <dig> contour, focused less on the differences in f0onset values and the abrupt change in f <dig> at the beginning of the stimuli, and thus involved the right hemisphere more as a result of training.

the later negativity
second, we were interested in the later negativity. in contrast to our prediction, no difference was seen between english and chinese speakers. all groups displayed a negativity to both the low-falling and high-rising deviants versus standards. late negativities reported in the literature have been associated with cognitive, possibly non-attentive processing of sound change  <cit> , or processing at a higher level of abstraction  <cit>  including harmonic integration in music contexts  <cit> . alternatively, the late negativity may reflect reorienting of attention after involuntary attention to deviant stimuli  <cit> . a smaller late negativity may then indicate a more efficient neural processing, or less attentional reorienting. for the low-falling deviants, the late negativity became less left-lateralized after training and smaller in amplitude the more the participant improved on the behavioral task. for the high-rising deviants, the chinese and english speaking groups showed a left-lateralization of this negativity for the high-rising deviants, regardless of training.

note that the low-falling stimuli continue to differ from the mid-level stimuli in terms of a falling pitch slope right after the initial sharp fall in f <dig> . the high-rising tones, on the other hand, only show a gradual increase in f <dig> compared to the mid-level tones, starting at around  <dig> ms after onset. two of the three high-rising tokens start to exceed the f <dig> range of mid-level tones even later. the contour deviance is therefore more subtle in the high-rising than low-falling conditions in the current study. since training focused on contour differences, the processing of the low-falling contour may therefore have required less effort after training in the learners, hence the reduction of the late negativity in this condition, but not in the high-rising condition in this experiment. the left-lateralization of the late negativity in the high-rising condition in the chinese and english groups suggests that the non-native language groups process the thai high-rising contour in a manner that is different from native thai speakers. comparable to the mmn, and the late negativity in the low-falling condition, this waveform may shift from the left to the right hemisphere when listeners become more proficient in detecting the contours. apparently, the categorization training was not sufficient to give rise to these effects in the non-native speakers. it remains to be seen if a longer period of training will lead to a shift in hemispheric lateralization to be observed.

the relation between erps and behavioral data
behavioral studies on the perception and acquisition of foreign language contrasts are potentially confounded by the attentional and memory load that is imposed by most discrimination or categorization tasks. using erps overcomes this problem because passive listening tasks can be used which do not require any explicit attention or overt behavioral response from the participant. on the other hand, behavioral and erp studies may tap into different aspects of processing. erps may be more sensitive to differences in physical properties of the stimuli than behavioral tasks. in addition, behavioral studies may encourage participants to actively form abstract perceptual categories, whereas passive listening oddball tasks, as used in the current erp study, may do so to a lesser extent. it is therefore not surprising that we observed some discrepancies between our behavioral and erp data. erps are therefore a good complementary method to behavioral studies, and are a good tool to help uncover what aspects of the stimuli different language groups are differently sensitive to.

we have already discussed the larger mmn to low-falling deviants seen in the english group pre-training in spite of this group's poor performance on the behavioral tasks. this can be accounted for by the mmn being a reflection of a participant's sensitivity to early differences between the stimuli, whereas the behavioral tasks tapped more into the participant's ability to actively form categories on the basis of the later pitch contour. in contrast to the mmn, the late negativity did not correspond to the behavioral differences observed between the groups before training. however, the amplitude of the late negativity in the low-falling conditions did correlate with behavioral improvement: the late negativity amplitude became smaller the more the participant improved in the discrimination task. in the high-rising condition, the late negativity became more broadly distributed after training. finally we would like to point out that in spite of differences in language background, all participant groups elicited largely similar erp components and that, with the exception of the mmn, the effect of training was largely the same among the groups. this suggests that the neural mechanisms involved in non-attentively perceiving tone stimuli and the effects of training thereon may have been largely unaffected by language background.

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, native speakers of english, chinese and thai recruited largely similar neural mechanisms when non-attentively processing thai lexical tones. training induced comparable changes in the language groups. however, and converging with results from behavioral methods using different stimuli and techniques, we found that native speakers of english were initially more sensitive to early f <dig> differences before training. after training, this language group became more similar to native tone-language speakers. in addition, native speakers of english and of mandarin chinese processed the late shallow contour in the high-rising thai tone differently from native thai speakers. future experiments will determine whether this can be affected by a more extended period of training.

