BACKGROUND
surveys of variation in gene regulation among different species, populations and individuals indicate that such variation may be strongly influenced by genetic drift and purifying selection  <cit> . this evolutionary pattern is reminiscent of the generally neutral evolution of synonymous sites and of purifying selection on non-synonymous sites in protein-coding genes  <cit> . similar to positive selection observed at non-synonymous sites in protein-coding genes, changes in gene expression also have been shown to be subject to positive selection  <cit> . investigating genes whose expression is affected by positive selection will allow us to understand the role of gene regulation in evolution  <cit> .

the distinction between the molecular components that influence gene regulation that might evolve in a neutral fashion and those that may respond to positive or purifying selection is not clear  <cit> . indeed, only a few studies have shown the adaptive value of point mutations in cis-acting regulatory sequences or trans-acting regulatory proteins let alone the effect of such adaptive substitutions upon gene regulation  <cit> . additionally, genetic variation within promoter regions may affect chromatin structure leading to differences in gene expression  <cit> . furthermore, cis-regulatory sites and trans-regulatory proteins may occur in a variety of combinations with the same effect on gene expression  <cit> . this complexity makes it difficult to determine the genetic basis of regulatory variation or the forces that influence their evolution.

a reductionist approach in which adaptive substitutions in regulatory regions are tested for their influence on gene regulation and fitness provides another pathway for evaluating the role of gene regulation in evolution  <cit> . first, the adaptive substitution and its role in gene regulation as either a cis- or a trans-regulatory mutation are known. second, the evolutionary forces that led to the substitution's detection are clearly defined by the experimental conditions under which it was discovered. third, the effects of the substitution on gene regulation and on fitness are easily determined. in this approach, simple hypotheses can be easily defined and tested. for example, mutations that alter transcription factor binding sites such that binding efficiency is reduced are hypothesized to lead to the down regulation of gene transcription, but the environments in which such down regulation will improve fitness are unknown. these points can be addressed directly by a reductionist approach, providing a bottom up view of the evolutionary forces and genetic basis of regulatory variation.

such an approach requires a model organism whose biology and evolution are well studied. for over  <dig> years, the bacteriophage ϕx <dig> has been a model organism in the study of dna replication, gene regulation and virion structure, so that the molecular biology and physiology of this positive-strand, ssdna phage is well understood  <cit> . ϕx <dig> utilizes its host's replication, transcription and translation machinery in order to reproduce making it an amenable organism for studies of regulatory evolution. in particular, the only components of the gene expression machinery that are encoded by the phage genome are the cis-acting regulatory sequences, although a possible role for the phage protein h was recently proposed  <cit> . hence, studies of regulatory evolution using ϕx <dig> can focus on the importance of cis-acting sequences.

the simplicity of ϕx <dig> gene regulation also makes it a useful model for evolutionary studies of gene transcription. over the approximately  <dig> minute life cycle of the wild type phage,  <dig> genes are expressed . these genes encode six procapsid proteins , two proteins that are involved in viral genome replication , two that interact with other phage or the host , and one whose function is unknown   <cit> . gene transcription is controlled by promoters that appear to consist solely of sigma factor binding sites upstream of genes a, b and d   <cit> . the transcript that starts from pa encodes the a and a* proteins and is very unstable. the length of transcripts starting from pb and pd varies based upon which of the rho-independent termination signals after genes j, f, g and h are used   <cit> . thus the transcripts that begin from pb and pd overlap in encoding six of nine genes . the percentage of transcripts that continue through a termination signal to the following gene differs for each terminator , and there is considerable variation in the half-life of each transcript  <cit> . a ribosome binding site immediately upstream of the start codon has been identified experimentally for genes a, d, e, f, g and h, and there are consensus shine-dalgarno sequences appropriately spaced upstream of b and j, but not before c  <cit> . ϕx <dig> is an excellent model organism given this detail of understanding of its life cycle and the relative simplicity of its regulatory machinery.

for over  <dig> years, the bacteriophage ϕx <dig> has been a model organism for the study of the genetic basis of adaptation as well  <cit> . many of these studies have grown phage in chemostats under various environmental conditions to observe evolution under strong positive selection with negligible influence of genetic drift  <cit> . selection pressures in the chemostats include competition between phage and adaptation to novel temperatures and/or hosts, which are not allowed to evolve during these experiments. multiple parallel substitutions arise under similar environmental conditions, especially in the major capsid protein f, the replication initiation protein a and the pilot protein h  <cit> . these chemostat experiments also have resulted in adaptive substitutions in the promoters before genes a, b and d, the ribosome binding sites of a, e and g, and the transcript termination loops after genes j and h . indeed, the fraction of sites undergoing adaptive substitutions in both regulatory sequences and protein sequences is the same, 11-12%, even though the target size for regulatory substitutions is an order of magnitude smaller than the total protein sequence of this phage  <cit> . thus the adaptive substitutions identified in these experiments provide multiple opportunities for understanding the molecular and phenotypic consequences of regulatory evolution.

our goal is to understand the processes involved in regulatory evolution by identifying adaptive substitutions in regulatory sequences, observing the influence these substitutions have upon gene regulation and correlating this regulatory variation to fitness. our choice of regulatory substitutions is guided by their spread under experimental conditions that elicit strong positive selection. therefore, we are focusing on adaptive substitutions that have accumulated in cis-regulatory sequences of the bacteriophage ϕx <dig> in response to selection at high temperatures in previous evolution experiments  <cit> . in the present study, we find that these adaptive substitutions down-regulate gene expression at both temperatures and that they consistently increase fitness at high temperature, regardless of bacterial host.

RESULTS
the goal of this study was to determine whether strong positive selection influences gene transcription. in multiple chemostat evolution experiments, adaptive substitutions arose in at least one of the three ϕx <dig> promoters. we chose to study the - <dig> region of the sigma factor binding site upstream of gene d , because substitutions arose in this region in response to selection at high temperature in three hosts, escherichia coli, shigella sonnei and salmonella typhimurium  . these substitutions arose within  <dig> days and as early as five days when grown on s. typhimurium at high temperature and within  <dig> days when grown on e. coli or s. sonnei. in only two experiments were more than one of these four substitutions detected in the population at the same time. interestingly, in both cases g319t was fixed in the population and a323g eventually was lost  <cit> .

*conditions under which substitutions arose 

** also, one reversion after switch to e. coli host at  <dig> °c.

the gene for the dna packaging protein c is immediately upstream of gene d and contains the entire d promoter sequence. two of the substitutions, g319t and a323g, affect the amino acid sequence of protein c . two of the substitutions, t321c and c324t, are silent substitutions. additionally, g319t is immediately adjacent to the canonical - <dig> sigma factor binding site, rather than within the site, so the effect of nearby substitutions can be observed. using site-directed mutagenesis of the ancestral ϕx <dig> sequence, four strains were constructed that had a single substitution at one of these four sites  <cit> . quantitative pcr  was used to measure the transcript levels from the d promoter for the ancestral and mutant strains under each environmental condition. two fitness assays, time to lysis and doublings per hour, were conducted for each of the four mutant strains and for the ancestral strain at 37°c and 42°c in each of the three bacterial hosts. chemostats were used to directly compete the ancestor with either of two mutant strains at 37°c or 42°c using e. coli c as the host.

transcription is strongly down-regulated for all four mutants regardless of temperature or host
the promoter upstream of b controls the start of transcription for up to nine of eleven ϕx <dig> genes, including c, and these transcripts overlap with the transcripts for six genes that start at the promoter upstream of gene d . amplification of cdna for gene d, therefore, includes transcripts from both the b promoter and the d promoter. thus, the transcript level of the b gene can serve as an internal control for the efficiency of infection, for contaminating phage dna and for the effect of temperature or host on phage transcription in general. additionally, the transcript levels for gene b are a proxy for the transcript levels for gene c, because transcripts other than those shown in figure  <dig> are rapidly degraded and do not contribute to phage mrna levels  <cit> .

the effect of mutations in the promoter upstream of gene d was determined at two time points after the synchronized injection of phage dna into host cells. after rna extraction and conversion to cdna, regions of the b and d cdnas  were amplified by qpcr, and the ratio of the d transcript relative to the b transcript was measured . in each host at both temperatures and at both time points, the consequences of the mutations in the promoter were the same. all of the mutant strains were significantly down-regulated compared with the ancestor . the decrease in the amount of transcript for the d gene ranged from no transcript to almost the same amount of transcript as for the b gene.

*anova on relative transcript levels for each environmental condition and time point with  <dig> degree of freedom for each test.

fitness of all mutant strains was higher than ancestor at high temperature
fitness was measured as the number of times the phage population size doubles in an hour when grown in batch culture. fitness was measured for each strain with each host at each temperature, and the fitnesses of the mutant strains were compared to that of the ancestor. in all three hosts, the mutants had more doublings per hour than the ancestor when grown at 42°c regardless of the host, but the amount of improvement of the mutant over the ancestor at 42°c depended upon the host . at 37°c, relative fitnesses of mutants to ancestor depended upon the host. in s. typhimurium, all of the mutants had higher fitness than the ancestor . in s. sonnei, all of the mutants had lower fitness ; in e. coli, the mutants had the same or lower fitness than the ancestor at 37°c .

*anova on doublings per hour for each environmental condition with  <dig> degrees of freedom for each test, and t-test comparing ancestor to all mutants.

mutants out-compete the ancestor in a chemostat at high temperature
the substitutions in the d promoter evolved in the high multiplicity of infection  environment of a chemostat, but the fitness assays were conducted in low moi batch cultures. competition assays between the ancestor and either of two mutant strains were conducted in chemostats to confirm that the differences in fitness shown in figure  <dig> reflect a competitive advantage within a chemostat. figure  <dig> shows the average change in frequency of the mutant for replicate competition experiments in e. coli at two temperatures. at 37°c, the frequency of the mutant barely changes, even when the chemostat is started at different ratios of mutant to ancestor. at 42°c, however, the mutant frequency increases to around 80% over a two-hour experiment . in contrast with the low moi fitness measurements, which show that doublings per hour of the mutant is less than the ancestor, the competition assays at 37°c indicate that the ancestor does not out-compete the mutants. the results of the competitions at 42°c, however, coincide with the low moi fitness measurements. the change in frequency of the mutant strains in the 42°c chemostats is significantly greater than in the 37°c chemostats .

time to lysis for all mutant strains is different from ancestor, except in s. typhimurium
one component of overall fitness is the time it takes from injection of the phage dna into the cell until the cell is lysed, releasing the progeny phage. phage that lyse earlier can infect new hosts earlier, but late-lysing phage may have more progeny. time to lysis was measured for each of the five phage strains under six conditions: three hosts at two temperatures. the time point at which the number of phage in the culture was greater than or equal to twice the number at the zero time point determined time to lysis. this is a coarse-scale assessment because time points were taken every two minutes starting at ten minutes after eclipse of the phage into the host cell. this coarse scale was more than sufficient for seeing differences between phage in e. coli and s. sonnei. in both hosts, the ancestor lysed by  <dig> minutes at 37°c and by  <dig> minutes at 42°c. each of the mutants, on the other hand, lysed by  <dig> minutes at 37°c and by  <dig> minutes at 42°c, reversing the pattern of the ancestor. this pattern was not seen in s. typhimurium, where only mut <dig> at 42°c showed an earlier lysis time of  <dig> minutes. all of the other phage lysed s. typhimurium by  <dig> minutes at both temperatures.

discussion
we have shown that substitutions in regulatory sequences contribute to adaptation under strong selective conditions. these adaptive substitutions down-regulate the expression of transcripts from the d promoter. compared to the ancestor, the mutants had significantly lower transcript levels regardless of the host or temperature at which the phage were propagated. this change in expression, however, was only consistently correlated with adaptation in the high temperature conditions under which these substitutions were first identified.

one reason for choosing the - <dig> sequence of the d promoter was because of the number of sites at which adaptive substitutions arose in this region and because two of the four substitutions were synonymous, t321c and c324t, and two non-synonymous, g319t and a323g, in protein c . thus, we are able to observe the fitness effect of the changes in transcription alone and the changes in transcription and in the amino acid sequence of c. the two synonymous substitutions appear to have almost identical doublings per hour for each experimental condition . the two non-synonymous substitutions, on the other hand, do not appear to be similar to each other or to the synonymous substitutions. there appear to be pleiotropic effects on fitness due to the amino acid substitutions in protein c for the two non-synonymous substitutions, as we expected.

although synonymous substitutions are known to be adaptive under certain circumstances, these circumstances are not applicable here. the synonymous substitutions, t321c and c324t, are for common codons in the e. coli c genome. moreover, the correlation between codon bias and selective advantage is generally correlated with highly-expressed genes, and protein c has a very low level of expression  <cit> . indeed, there is no canonical shine-dalgarno sequence before c's translation start codon. it is possible that all four substitutions affect some other aspect of phage biology, such as genome packaging or dna secondary structure, however, the inconsistency in the effect on gc-content suggests that these are also unlikely factors. the strict decrease in transcript levels for all conditions and the significant increase in fitness at high temperature for all hosts suggests to us that transcription provides the underlying basis for the adaptive advantage of these synonymous substitutions.

it was somewhat surprising to us that each of the four substitutions would have such a strong effect on fitness on their own because we expected epistatic effects to be important. ϕx <dig> was lab-adapted to e. coli starting in the 1950's, and its fitness on s. typhimurium is quite low . multiple experiments have shown that the first adaptive substitutions to sweep through a chemostat in which ϕx <dig> is grown on s. typhimurium at  <dig> °c generally are in the capsid protein f, and these substitutions seem to affect capsid stability and/or host attachment  <cit> . these selective sweeps are accompanied by a large increase in the fitness of the evolved phage. either the g319t or the a323g substitutions were subsequently seen in these same populations, and g319t and several of the adaptive substitutions in the capsid protein reverted to the ancestral state when the strain carrying them was grown on e. coli  <cit> . these results suggest that the amino acid substitutions in protein c  are interacting either with the host or with the capsid protein. the small increase in fitness for our single mutants when s. typhimurium was the host  further suggests that the interaction is with the salmonella-adapted capsid protein. we hypothesize that had adaptive substitutions been present in the capsid proteins of the mutant strains, the increase in fitness due to the regulatory substitutions would have been more substantial. in particular, because g319t has occurred in the most high temperature, salmonella experiments, we expect that it has the greatest fitness effect in a salmonella-adapted background contrary to its small fitness advantage relative to the other mutants. tests for such epistatic and pleiotropic interactions await future experiments.

we can think of several non-exclusive hypotheses to test our conclusion that down regulating gene expression is adaptive at high temperature. first, the higher temperature is deleterious for the host as well as the phage. the main costs of constitutive expression of non-essential genes in e. coli are the acts of transcription and/or translation, and over expression of genes is also costly in yeast  <cit> . since the phage use the transcription and translation machinery of the host, down regulating gene expression may reduce the stress on the host's regulatory machinery, thus maximizing the number of phage progeny produced.

secondly, it seems reasonable to predict that the ratio of the different transcripts  reflects the levels needed to produce the optimal ratio of proteins for each capsid. the ϕx <dig> procapsid is composed of  <dig> b ,  <dig> f ,  <dig> g ,  <dig> h  and  <dig> d  proteins. in the provirion, the b proteins are replaced by  <dig> j  proteins  <cit> . the reduction in transcript levels due to the three transcription terminators prior to gene h, which has the lowest number of subunits per procapsid, and the strong promoter before gene d, which has the highest number of subunits per procapsid, lend support for this prediction . environmental changes that disrupt the ratio of phage proteins, such as increased temperature, may be a selective force leading to changes in gene regulation.

our second hypothesis, therefore, is that the relative concentrations of proteins at high temperature are suboptimal, possibly because some of the proteins are unstable or because the efficiency of the transcription terminators changes at the higher temperature. protein b is required for the assembly of pentamers of protein f, for the assembly of pentamers of protein g and pentamers of protein f into an intermediary complex, and b facilitates the incorporation of protein h into this complex  <cit> . protein b appears to have a chaperone-like quality in that it keeps protein f as well as protein h from aggregating  <cit> . if the amount of protein b that is produced at 42°c is insufficient for performing these functions, then decreasing the amount of proteins f and h by down regulating transcription from the d promoter may optimize the ratio of phage proteins at this temperature. our future work will test whether maintaining the proper ratio of phage proteins is the molecular basis of these adaptive regulatory substitutions.

these two hypotheses do not shed light on the puzzling inconsistency between the time to lysis studies and the lower transcription rates of the mutants. the lysis protein e is a transmembrane protein that affects the host so that at cell division, the cell membrane fails and lysis occurs  <cit> . it seems consistent that at 37°c, the ancestor would lyse earlier than the mutants, which are producing less transcript from the d promoter, and hence, fewer transcripts for protein e . it is not consistent that at 42°c when the transcription level of the mutants is again low relative to the ancestor, that the time to lysis should decrease for the mutants. our first hypothesis seems to be the most consistent with the results at 42°c. if the host's transcription/translation machinery are overtaxed at high temperature, the length of the cell cycle may be increased. decreasing the pressure on this machinery by down regulating gene expression may lead to earlier cell division, and thus earlier lysis.

CONCLUSIONS
one consequence of strong positive selection on the bacteriophage ϕx <dig> was to down regulate gene transcription from one of two promoters whose transcripts overlap in encoding six of nine genes. the fitness advantage that correlated with this change in transcript levels was consistent only under high temperature conditions, suggesting that understanding the evolution of gene regulation will rely upon evaluating regulatory variants under the appropriate environmental conditions. the physiological mechanism by which decreased transcript levels may lead to increased fitness is still to be ascertained. continued in-depth studies on the molecular basis of adaptation by changes in gene regulation will provide essential background for following up on whole-genome expression studies.

