BACKGROUND
the mammalian epididymis is a segmented organ comprised of a single highly convoluted tubule divided into four regions: the initial segment, caput, corpus, and cauda regions. as sperm produced in the testis pass through the epididymis, they undergo sequential, marked changes to develop motility and the ability to fertilize an egg  <cit> . sperm are transcriptionally and translationally inactive. therefore, post-testicular maturation of sperm is not under the control of the germinal genome but rather it is mediated by factors within the lumen of the epididymis. the contents of the epididymal lumen are constantly changing due to ion transport across the epithelium and protein secretion into the epididymal lumen. some of these proteins are found only in certain regions  and their expression is regulated by androgens or testicular factors  <cit> . efforts have been made to identify the genes involved in sperm maturation during epididymal transit. some proteins that are secreted into the epididymal lumen and which are believed to be crucial for sperm maturation have been characterized and shown to bind to the sperm surface membrane, but many remain unknown  <cit> .

recent high-throughput genomics projects have focused on the identification of cell- and tissue-specific transcriptomes that are expected to provide important insights into biological processes. characterization of expressed sequence tags  derived from cdna libraries has led to the discovery of novel genes with tissue-specific expression profiles. currently, the largest and most widely used est database is unigene, which automatically partitions genbank sequences into non-redundant sets of gene-oriented clusters, so each unigene cluster contains sequences that represent a unique gene  <cit> . each cluster also contains related information such as the dbest cdna library from which the sequence was derived. details of dbest library construction almost invariably contain information about the tissue from which the library was constructed. as a result, ests in unigene are individually linked to their tissue of origin through their dbest library id number. these links provide a simple method for identifying ests with increased expression in specified dbest libraries. thus, the unigene databases combined with other computational bioinformatics databases provide a large amount of information to predict the tissue specificity of gene expression, genomic nature, and the putative structure and function of novel gene products.

comprehensive understanding of epididymal function in sperm maturation requires the identification and functional characterization of epididymis-specific genes, because sperm maturation in the epididymis is a highly specific process that does not occur in any other tissues. in this study, we identified several novel epididymal genes using the epididymis unigene library. the genes were initially identified by in silico analysis and their transcript characteristics, region-specific expression, postnatal expression, and hormonal regulation, and characteristics of the expressed proteins were characterized in vitro. our results demonstrate a tool for identifying genes that may have a crucial role in sperm maturation in the epididymis and that could be used to identify new targets for the development of male contraceptive or infertility treatments.

RESULTS
the epididymis unigene library and in silico selection of novel gene candidates with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression
to identify putative epididymis-specific novel genes, we analyzed the epididymis library  deposited in the unigene data base at the ncbi. at the start of our study , the epididymis library contained  <dig> unigene entries. this library was used for an in silico search to identify epididymis-specific novel genes according to four criteria:  genes previously named or assigned with potential functions were counted as known genes, and unnamed genes with unknown or unassigned function were considered as unknown or novel genes;  unigene entries composed of a single est were excluded from the present study as they are likely to be expressed in the tissue at a low level;  if all ests of a given gene were epididymal or the number of epididymal ests of a gene was much higher than that of non-epididymal ests, the gene was considered to be a putative epididymis-specific gene;  if more than half of the ests of a particular gene were found in the epididymis, but were also found in certain other tissues , the gene was considered to be a putative epididymis-predominant gene. as a result, we identified  <dig> gene entries with two and more est copies, and of these  <dig> represented known genes and  <dig> represented unknown genes . it should be noted that some of the unknown genes have been annotated or named in updates of the unigene database during the course of our study. the in silico tissue distribution was analyzed by comparing the numbers of ests in unigene libraries of different tissues, and demonstrated that most of the known and unknown genes are widely expressed and relatively few genes are epididymis-specific or -predominant. however, the number of epididymis-specific or -predominant genes in the unknown gene category was much greater than in the known gene category. this indicates that the unigene epididymis library is a good source for identifying putative epididymis-specific novel genes and that, although several epididymis-specific genes have been characterized in the past few years, many of the epididymis-specific genes have not yet been characterized. in the present study, we selected  <dig> unknown genes with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression for analysis .

authenticity of novel genes with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression
to determine whether the candidates selected from the unigene library are genuine novel genes with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression, we performed in silico analyses and various expression analyses. analysis of the amino acid sequences deduced from the cdnas showed that the open reading frames of  <dig> of the  <dig> genes were possible encoding sequences, whereas the open reading frames of  <dig> candidates were too short  or contained unreliable coding regions . thus, these  <dig> candidates were eliminated from further analysis. reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  analysis showed that  <dig> of the  <dig> candidates were expressed with the predicted molecular sizes in the epididymis, whereas the other seven candidates were not detected in the epididymis. it should be noted that the reaction was designed to be similar for all candidate genes and all reaction conditions were the same. tissue distribution of the  <dig> candidates was investigated by pcr using cdnas from various tissues . thirty two of the  <dig> genes were found to be epididymis-specific or -predominant . taken together, analyses of the  <dig> potential genes identified  <dig> coding genes with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression. thus, these  <dig> genes were analyzed further .

transcript analysis and genomic characterization
to determine the expression levels and transcript sizes of the  <dig> genes, we performed northern-blot analysis . for all of the genes, significant amounts of signal were detected in the rna samples from the epididymis, but not in the samples from the spleen, which were used as a negative control. this result is consistent with the rt-pcr tissue-distribution result  and further demonstrates the abundant expression of the genes in the epididymis. the sizes of the epididymal transcripts ranged from  <dig>  kb  to  <dig>  kb , and some of these genes  produce multiple transcripts of different sizes, which suggests that multiple transcript isoforms are produced by alternative splicing . considering the polyadenylation tail and 5' or 3' untranslated regions , transcript sizes estimated from the unigene database  were similar to those determined by northern-blot analysis for most of the genes. marked differences in transcript size  between the northern blots and the database sequences were found for eight genes, suggesting the presence of additional transcript sequences in these genes. we performed 5' rapid amplification of cdna ends  analysis to determine the full-length transcript sequences of these genes. it should noted that 3'-race was also performed for three of the eight genes, because no poly signals and sequences were found for these genes in the database . the transcript sequence of mm. <dig> increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  kb , changing the coding sequences. however, extended sequences were not obtained for the other seven genes from the race analysis . taken together, the transcript sequences for at least  <dig> genes can be regarded as full-length cdnas or sequences containing entire cdna sequences. estimated transcript sizes based on the northern-blot results and the most recent unigene database entry are summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

to characterize the novel genes, we performed genome database searches with the transcript sequences. figure  <dig> shows structures, exon organization, and chromosomal locations of the genes. the sizes of the genes range from  <dig>  to  <dig> kb. the number of exons in the genes also varies, ranging from a single-exon gene to a 28-exon gene. the novel genes were found to be widely distributed on mouse chromosomes and  <dig> of these novel genes have human orthologues in the regions of conserved synteny between mice and humans.

regulation of gene expression
to investigate the transcription regulation of the  <dig> genes, we analyzed the expression of the genes in gonadectomized mice. we performed northern-blot analysis using total rnas isolated from the epididymides of sham-operated  mice, mice that had been bilaterally castrated and reared for  <dig> week, and mice that had been bilaterally castrated, reared for  <dig> week then treated with dihydrotestosterone . the expression of  <dig> genes stopped after castration, whereas dht treatment retained the expression partially or completely . the remaining  <dig> genes showed an androgen-independent expression pattern. the expression levels of  <dig> of these genes were downregulated by castration and did not increase after dht treatment, indicating that the expression of these genes is highly dependent on testicular factors rather than androgens . the expression of the other three genes did not change notably with castration and dht treatment, indicating that they are constitutively expressed in the epididymis regardless of the presence of androgen or testicular factors .

regional and developmental expression profile of novel genes
many epididymal genes are expressed in specific regions of the epididymis   <cit> . thus, to investigate the region-specific expression of  <dig> candidate genes, we performed rt-pcr on samples from the four different regions of the epididymis. all of the genes were expressed in at least one region of the epididymis and could be divided into  <dig> groups based on expression pattern . the expression of half of the genes was greater in the proximal region of the epididymis, which secretes proteins at a higher rate than other regions and starts the maturational changes, suggesting that these genes have a role in sperm maturation and fertility.

we next investigated the developmental expression pattern of the  <dig> genes . rt-pcr analysis on epididymides from mice of different ages demonstrated that  <dig> genes were expressed early in development , during the first few days after birth, whereas another  <dig> genes were only detectable in mice aged at least  <dig> days , which corresponds to the stage of epithelial cell differentiation. the remaining six genes were only detected in mice aged at least  <dig> days , implying a close relationship between gene expression and puberty  <cit> . these results suggest that many of the novel genes are expressed in epithelial cells of the epididymis where active secretion occurs and has an important role in sperm maturation.

analysis of protein characteristics
to gain an insight into the structures and functions of proteins expressed from the novel genes, a protein-coding region in each gene was defined by selecting the longest amino-acid-coding sequence, which terminates before a polyadenylation signal , and these amino acid sequences were subjected to protein database searches. for most of the genes, the predicted coding regions are considered to be accurate. the exceptions are the eight genes whose transcripts are known to be significantly smaller in size than indicated by the northern blots . nevertheless, it should be noted that all of these genes contain complete coding sequences, suggesting that 5' or 3' utr sequences are responsible for the size discrepancy between the northern-blot results and the unigene database. analysis of the amino acid sequences defined from the cdnas by blast search revealed that eight genes contained conserved domains characteristic of protease inhibitors such as the kazal-type serine protease inhibitor domain  or the whey-acid-protein  four-disulfide core domain . furthermore, an additional six genes were found to contain conserved cysteine residues typical of β-defensins    <cit> .

it is important to note that epididymal proteins must be secreted to interact with sperm either directly or indirectly. thus, to investigate if novel proteins are secreted, to further confirm the authenticity of the novel genes, and to determine the sizes of novel proteins expressed in mammalian cells, cos- <dig> cells were transiently transfected with a pcdna <dig> -myc/his plasmid expressing the  <dig> novel proteins with a myc/his epitope tag at the carboxy terminus. an immunoblot analysis showed that  <dig> of the  <dig> genes were relatively well expressed in cos- <dig> cells, and the expressed proteins were of the sizes predicted from the cdna sequences . by contrast,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes were not expressed, indicating that the expression of these proteins is highly transient, very low or delayed, vulnerable to the endogenous protease, or toxic to the cells  <cit> . of the  <dig> expressed proteins, six proteins were detected in the culture media , whereas the remaining nine proteins were detected within the cells . interestingly, two of the secreted proteins  were post-translationally modified after secretion, potentially by processes such as glycosylation, phosphorylation, or enzymatic digestion. it should be noted that the six proteins found to be secreted may interact with sperm in the epididymis, playing important roles in sperm maturation or fertility.

discussion
in the present study, we identified and characterized  <dig> novel epididymis-specific or -predominant genes by in silico and in vitro approaches, providing comprehensive information about the genes. we initially selected these genes by analyzing the epididymis unigene library. currently, unigene is the largest and most widely used est database and contains a large amount of unanalyzed information. thus, in silico gene identification and analysis is becoming a rapidly expanding and powerful tool of modern molecular biology, and it has been successfully used in several studies to identify novel tissue-, cell-, and stage-specific gene transcripts  <cit> . recently, several studies have investigated epididymis-specific genes using in silico approaches  <cit> ; however, although these studies have provided important information about the expression profile of several epididymis-specific genes, they have been limited in the number of transcripts analyzed. by contrast, our data presented here provide systematic identification of previously uncharacterized genes with epididymis-specific or -predominant expression and further extend analysis to the cellular and biochemical level, providing insights to their potential function in sperm maturation during epididymal transit. using information about the est source in the database,  <dig> of  <dig> genes were predicted to be unknown and abundantly expressed in an epididymis-specific or -predominant manner. of these  <dig> possible genes,  <dig> were identified as authentic, epididymis-specific or -predominant genes by several expression analyses. the other  <dig> gene candidates were not considered further because they did not contain reliable open reading frames or coding regions, or were found to not be expressed in the epididymis or epididymis-specific by pcr analysis.

our study provides extensive information about  <dig> novel genes at both the transcript and genomic levels, and  <dig> of these genes have also been characterized at the protein level. the northern blot analysis, critical but usually excluded in large scale studies, revealed various characteristics of the genes at the transcript level, such as expression level, size and the presence of isoform. the genomic analysis identified an intriguing feature: the absence of orthologues in the human genome for  <dig> mouse genes in the human genome. despite high synteny between the mouse and human genomes, the proportion of mouse genes with a single identifiable orthologue in the human genome is known to be about 80%. thus, the other 20% do not have a single orthologue due to differential expansion in at least one of the two genomes. most genes expanded in the mouse lineage have common features. these genes seem to be involved in reproduction, olfaction, and immunity, and are present as a family and found clustered in the mouse genome, suggesting that they were generated by local gene duplication. of  <dig> mouse-specific gene clusters,  <dig> contain genes that are involved in reproduction  <cit> . it has been proposed that the "reproduction" genes in these clusters are related to rodent-specific aspects of reproductive physiology such as placental structures, litter sizes, estrous cycles, and gestation periods. there is a marked expansion of several families of protease inhibitors in the mouse genome compared with the human genome, similar to comparisons between the mouse and human degradomes  <cit> . our results demonstrate that, of the  <dig> mouse-specific genes lacking human orthologues, three  are protease inhibitors. furthermore, the recent studies on the genomic analysis of the β-defensins have reported that several β-defensins are species-specific, indicating that sequence divergence has occurred recently during evolution  <cit> . supporting the idea that β-defensins have recently evolved by divergence and duplication, we have found no human counterpart for the four β-defensins identified in this study , indicating either that these sequences were lost from the human genome after primate-rodent divergence, or that duplication occurred in rodents after this event.

our study shows that most of the epididymal genes are differentially expressed in a segment-specific manner and that most genes are mainly expressed in the proximal regions of the epididymis rather than the distal regions. furthermore, more than half of the novel genes were expressed during functional maturation of the epididymis, after the age of  <dig> days. taken together, these findings suggest that many of the novel genes are expressed in epithelial secretory cells of the epididymis and have important roles in sperm maturation. recently, the importance of proteins that are secreted in the initial segment has been confirmed by the fact that when the segment is absent, as for example in a knockout mouse for the c-ros tyrosine kinase receptor, the animals are sterile even though other parts of the male reproductive system are unaffected  <cit> . similarly, in transgenic mice expressing the sv <dig> virus tumor antigen in the initial segment, the epithelium in this region is slightly hyperplastic, and its protein production is altered, resulting in infertility  <cit> . thus, many novel genes that have been identified as being expressed in this region may be involved in sperm maturation or fertility, although the functional significance of these genes remains to be determined. in addition to being region-specific and developmentally regulated, epididymal gene expression is known to be affected by androgen concentrations. consistent with this, our results have shown that many epididymal genes are regulated by androgens. interestingly, most of the androgen-regulated genes were found to be expressed in the caput region, rather than either the corpus or cauda regions, indicating that more androgen-responsive genes are active in the caput region. supporting this observation, several reports have shown that levels of protein synthesis are higher in the caput region than in the rest of the epididymis and the high amount of protein synthesis may be linked to androgen-activated gene expression  <cit> .

in this study, we identified six novel epididymal genes that are predicted to encode proteins with secretory activity. unigene information, and domain and homology searches showed that these are potential epididymal secretory protein , β-defensins , or protease inhibitors . it should be noted that, of the  <dig> novel genes, six were identified as β-defensins and eight contained a protease inhibitor domain . numerous studies have shown that functionally related sets of genes often exhibit correlated patterns of gene expression and that the encoded proteins share several structural and functional characteristics  <cit> . thus, it is tempting to postulate that these proteins may have similar characteristics such as secretory activity or cellular localization. nevertheless, most of them were not expressed or, if they were expressed, were secreted. this result is consistent with previous reports suggesting that many β-defensins and protease inhibitors have cytotoxic effects as well as antimicrobial activity  <cit> . recently, the rat gene bin1b was identified and shown to be exclusively expressed in the caput region of rat epididymis. the resulting protein is responsible for sperm maturation by inducing ca2+ uptake and subsequent motility and progressive movement of immature sperm, as well as protecting sperm from infections due to antimicrobial activity  <cit> . bin1b has structural characteristics and antimicrobial activity similar to that of β-defensins. thus, bin1b seems to be a natural epididymis-specific antimicrobial peptide that has roles in the reproductive tract, host defense, and male fertility. moreover, the epididymis-specific β-defensin macaque defb126/esp <dig>  coats the entire ejaculated sperm and masks zona pellucida ligands on the sperm surface, but becomes dissociated when sperm are fully capacitated. this indicates that defb <dig> may be an important decapacitation factor on the sperm surface that needs to be removed before sperm-zona can interact and fertilization can occur  <cit> . it is interesting to note that six of the  <dig> genes in our study  were identified as β-defensins  <cit> . thus, it is likely that, in addition to their antimicrobial activity, each has unique functions in the epididymal tract, similar to rat bin1b and defb <dig>  however, this observation raises questions as to why these β-defensins exhibit redundancy with diverse forms and how these different proteins cooperate to protect the epididymis. further studies are needed to fully explore the biological importance of β-defensins in the epididymis, and may lead to the development of therapeutic agents to increase immunity against sexually transmitted pathogens, and development of male infertility and contraceptive agents.

in addition to β-defensins, proteases also have important roles in several physiological processes in the epididymis. regulation of proteases by their inhibitors is important for maintaining levels of protein degradation  <cit> . previous results suggest that during maturation some of the spermatozoa modifications result from specific proteolytic processing of sperm surface proteins  <cit> . in support of the idea that proteolytic processing occurs in the epididymis, several proteases have been found in epididymal fluid  <cit> . several proteases have also been found attached to the sperm surface membrane  <cit> . hence, protease inhibitors in the epididymis might have an important role in inhibiting the activities of proteases involved in the acrosome reaction until they are needed. in addition, it has long been suggested that protease inhibitors could be involved in capacitation and fertilization, and over the past few years several protease inhibitors have been identified in epididymal secretions and characterized at the molecular level  <cit> . for instance, male mice lacking the protease c inhibitor serpina  <dig>  which is usually present at high concentrations in the male reproductive tract, are infertile, apparently owing to abnormal spermatogenesis and changes in the epididymal duct  <cit> . thus, the epididymal-specific protease inhibitors identified in this study may be involved in proteolytic processing on the sperm surface in the epididymis and fertilization.

CONCLUSIONS
identification of genes that are expressed specifically or predominantly in the epididymis, which is indicative of their specific epididymal functions, is crucial to understanding the molecular basis of sperm maturation. the present results indicate that our genome-wide approach to gene identification may provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of sperm maturation in the epididymis. using in silico and in vitro analyses, we have identified and characterized  <dig> novel genes by systematic and integrative approaches, providing insights to their region-specific and developmental expression during postnatal maturation, the hormonal regulation of their expression, and their possible secretory activity. however, further studies are needed to determine if the proteins expressed by these genes can bind to sperm and to fully understand their role in the maturation and fertilizing ability of sperm. nevertheless, the data provided by this study provide a large resource for further investigations into molecular mechanisms of the epididymis in sperm maturation, which may help us identify new targets for the development of male contraceptive or male infertility agents.

