BACKGROUND
protein nmr is the method of choice for determining protein structures at the atomic level in solution. in addition, nmr experiments allow characterization of protein dynamics at a wide range of time scales  <cit> . dynamical studies of the past decade led to the emerging paradigm that the so-called 'native structure' of a protein can be better viewed as a number of more or less similar conformers interconverting on different time scales. functional interactions perturb this state by shifting the equilibrium towards 'active conformations' that are present but are low-populated in the apo state. the most extreme examples of this kind of behavior are provided by intrinsically disordered proteins  that adopt a plethora of diverse conformations in their free state but, at least some of them, might become fully or partially well ordered upon partner molecule binding  <cit> .

idps can not be described with single-conformer models but only with conformational ensembles capturing the diversity of structures. nevertheless, even the conformational heterogeneity of globular proteins due to their internal dynamics requires the use of such representations. in turn, these can be useful to understand details of molecular interactions and function  <cit> . the so-called dynamic conformational ensembles reflecting the flexibility of proteins can be regarded as a novel type of models of protein structure. it should be kept in mind that all representations of protein structures are actually models of the 'real' ones and thus can have different types of errors. precision comes from experimental uncertainty, whereas accuracy reflects the correspondence to reality  <cit> . accuracy can only be reliably assessed by means of independent measurements which can range from obtaining distinct parameter sets not used for structure calculations  to the reproduction of the full structure determination procedure by a different research group.

the use of dynamic structural ensembles is further supported by a notion put forward recently on the example of h-d exchange protection factors, namely that it is not reasonable to assume that even a single molecule exists in the nmr tube fulfilling all measured nmr parameters simultaneously  <cit> . thus, both the generation and evaluation of dynamic structural ensembles is based on treating nmr observables as ensemble properties, instead of stemming from a single conformer .

currently there are a number of methods to treat several types of nmr-derived restraints as ensemble properties during structure refinement, such as noes  <cit> , s <dig> values  <cit> , rdcs  <cit>  and csa values  <cit> . it should be noted that different types of restraints are effectively averaged over different ensemble sizes, a problem addressed by the mumo  approach  <cit> . protocols aimed at generating ensembles reflecting the internal dynamics of proteins include der , mumo  <cit>  and eros . it should be mentioned that nmr-derived information can be also used in a time-  averaged manner  <cit>  and that other types of restraints are increasingly used for the determination of heterogeneous structural ensembles  <cit> .

structural ensembles that reflect nmr-derived parameters better than 'conventional' ones are not necessarily derived from simulations restrained with these data. for example, multiple x-ray structures may reflect differences occurring in solution  <cit> , or the existing variability in conformer sets can be extracted and complemented for more complete sampling of structural heterogeneity  <cit> . other ensemble-generating approaches, such as inferential structure determination  avoiding the inherent errors in conventional single-conformer refinement methods have also been put forward.

although there are programs  allowing ensemble refinement of a number of nmr parameters, to our knowledge, there are currently no approaches incorporating all measurable nmr-derived parameters in structure calculations in an ensemble-averaged manner. one of the reasons of this is clearly the growing number of such parameters. however, as it was shown recently, this might not be even necessary, as dynamic protein ensembles generally reproduce even parameters not used for their calculations better than conformer sets obtained with single-structure refinement  <cit> . thus these parameters can be used as independent factors for the cross-validation of structural ensembles.

in this paper we report the development and evaluation of the consensx approach , capable of comparing nmr-derived parameters with the corresponding ones back-calculated from a protein structural ensemble. the method is available as a web service and is aimed at promoting the generation of dynamic conformational ensembles and their use in understanding the links between protein dynamics and function. to demonstrate the capabilities of the consensx method and the features of dynamic structural ensembles, we present a detailed analysis of different ensembles of three proteins: human ubiquitin as a well-characterized and relatively rigid protein, a 35-residue protease inhibitor as a small flexible protein and a disordered protein.

RESULTS
the consensx web server
in protein nmr, the widely used structure calculation protocols, termed single conformer refinement  methods below, yield a family of conformers, each and every one aimed at corresponding to a set of experimental restraints as much as possible. this also means that despite early expectations, these conformer ensembles are not necessarily suitable to analyze the internal dynamics of the molecules. therefore, the calculation of dynamic structural ensembles is a separate task yielding conformer sets that might substantially differ from scr-derived ones  <cit> .

motivated by the ensemble view of protein structures and aimed at providing standardized tools for the analysis of dynamically relevant structural ensembles of proteins, we developed an application, consensx  capable of evaluating the correspondence of nmr-derived parameters to structural ensembles as a whole . the justification for our approach is that ensemble averaging is a key component of consensx which would need extra, although relatively simple, calculations even for programs that could be run separately, like shiftx  <cit>  and pales  <cit> . consensx is designed to offer unbiased and ready-for-use structural ensemble evaluation.

the consensx program is designed as an easy-to-use tool taking three files as input, a pdb formatted file containing the atomic coordinates of the protein conformers, an x-plor/cns formatted distance restraints file and an nmr-star file containing all available nmr parameters the user wishes to evaluate . we note that there are no required parameter types as the program skips the missing ones .

the program is capable of evaluating the following types of experimental parameters against those back-calculated from the ensemble:

• 1h-1h distance restraints are evaluated twofold:

◦ pride-nmr, assessing the correspondence of each conformer to the set of noe restraints  <cit> .

◦ ensemble-averaged restraint violations .

• s <dig> order parameters.

• chemical shifts .

• residual dipolar couplings  .

• several types of scalar couplings that can be back-calculated using the φ backbone dihedral.

the consensx web server is freely available at http://consensx.chem.elte.hu.

we note that noe violation calculation is different from that implemented in standard quality-checking tools and thus their results are not directly comparable to those obtained using consensx. for full details of the calculations, see methods.

for s <dig> order parameters, chemical shifts and couplings, consensx returns the correlation between experimental and back-calculated values, an ensemble q-factor and an rmsd. also, a histogram with the distribution of the pride-nmr values per structural model and another with noe restraint violations is returned. we have refrained from combining the results of consensx into a single measure of quality for several reasons. first, consensx by no means replaces commonly used structure validation tools such as procheck-nmr  <cit> , which serve a different purpose. second, the type and amount of nmr parameters available for different structures varies greatly, rendering a single quality measure meaningless for comparing different ensembles evaluated with different sets of parameters.

the server also returns a diagram depicting the relationship between the correlation of experimental vs. back-calculated values obtained for individual structures and the full ensemble. this yields information about whether the use of ensemble representation can be justified on the basis of better reproducing the experimental values for that particular parameter type.

analysis of structural ensembles of human ubiquitin
we chose human ubiquitin as the first test protein for the evaluation of the consensx approach. human ubiquitin is probably the most thoroughly studied protein by nmr spectroscopic methods and a wide range of structures determined with different methods and under different conditions are available. also, there are a number of different experimental data sets available for ubiquitin, making it an ideal first test candidate for consensx. moreover, it can be characterized by high backbone lipari-szabo s <dig> parameters indicating a fairly rigid structure at the ps-ns time scale.

we have used as many as  <dig> different structural ensembles of ubiquitin, taken from publicly available databases such as the pdb  <cit>  and the recoord  <cit> , and we have generated three additional structural ensembles specifically for this study. the various ubiquitin ensembles used for evaluating their correspondence to experimental data are summarized in

the ensembles were evaluated against a wide set of nmr parameters taken from the bmrb database  <cit>  and the literature. although for some of the ensembles specific data sets are available, we have used the parameter set valid for ambient conditions for the evaluation of each ensemble. this allowed us to characterize the differences between the ensembles in terms of their capability to reflect parameters obtained under ambient conditions.

after a literature survey, we have chosen the following nmr parameter sets, admittedly arbitrarily in some cases, for evaluating the ubiquitin ensembles:

• the initial distance restraint list was taken from the pdb database as deposited along with the structure 1d3z <cit> . from this set, all lines containing the word "or" were omitted to yield  <dig> clearly unambiguous restraints used for structure evaluation.

• backbone n-h s <dig> values were taken from  <cit>  .

• cα-hα s <dig> order parameters are taken from  <cit>  .

• n-h rdc values reported by  <cit>  were used.

• n-hα rdcs were taken from  <cit>  .

• cα-hα, c-cα and c-hα rdcs reported in  <cit>  were used .

• chemical shifts used were described in  <cit>  .

• j-couplings reported in the supplementary table  <dig> of ref.  <cit>  were used.

with the exception of 1h-1h distance restraints, all the above listed parameters were complied into a single bmrb format file that was used as input for consensx. a sample output for the u_nnr ensemble is shown in figure  <dig>  results obtained for various ubiquitin ensembles show no dramatic differences in the correspondence of structures to experimental nmr data . this is quite surprising at first sight given the differences in the techniques used to obtain them. we note that we have used the same dataset of experimental nmr parameters for all ensembles, thus our analysis is only relevant, at best, in assessing the compliance of structure sets determined with various methods and under different conditions to parameters in solution at ambient temperature and pressure. put it another way, no critique of the original structure calculation approaches can be derived from non-compliance with these parameters, but the conflict of structures obtained under non-ambient conditions with the input data can indicate perceivable conformational deviation from the others.

interestingly, all ensembles perform well in terms of amide n-h s <dig> parameters, and poorly for cα-hα s <dig> values, which are not used as restraints in any of the calculations. we note that amide n-h s <dig> values are uniformly high except for the c-terminus, thus a protocol yielding uniformly restricted n-h vectors for all residues is still expected to give a relatively high correlation with experimental data.

most rdc values tested yield acceptable agreement with all of the ensembles, a notable exception being the hα-n data set. note that rdcs were back-calculated ab initio using the coordinates only without applying singular value decomposition  using the experimental data. consensx allows performing svd by invoking pales in best fit mode. chemical shifts also show good agreement with experimental data for all ubiquitin ensembles, and their different sensitivity to structural factors can clearly be traced, e.g. cβ shifts are most dependent on residue type, thus deviation could reflect assignment errors rather than being structurally relevant.

we conclude that human ubiquitin has a well-defined structure for which reliable models can be obtained by a number of different approaches, possibly reflecting the inherent overall rigidity of the structure  <cit> . none of the ensembles yields good agreement with hα-cα s <dig> order parameters and hα-n rdcs with first-principles approximation of the alignment tensor. not unexpectedly, the solid-state nmr structure  <cit>  deviates remarkably from several solution-state parameters, as can be accessed by a very low average pride-nmr score. this reflects that the consensx approach is capable of revealing structural deviations even when they are not straightforward upon visual inspection . it is also apparent that only integrated investigation of multiple parameters tested is able to unambiguously reflect the deviation of the high-pressure solution structure  related to the experimental parameters obtained under ambient parameters. the u_nnr ensemble  performs well for restrained parameters such as noe, amide n-h s <dig> and amide n-h rdc values and for several unused ones, like cα and hα chemical shifts. this is similar to the case of other dynamically restrained ensembles . the u_1ubqmd ensemble  still yields acceptable values, although somewhat worse than the u_coco set , which shows reasonable agreement with most parameters.

analysis of structural ensembles of a small serine protease inhibitor
schistocerca gregaria chymotrypsin inhibitor  was chosen to represent small, flexible proteins in our consensx test. there are two structural ensembles available for this molecule, one determined by 'conventional' single-conformer refinement  using x-plor  <cit>  and one calculated with ensemble noe and backbone nh s <dig> restraining  <cit> . this inhibitor can be characterized by relatively low backbone lipari-szabo s <dig> values around  <dig>   <cit> , justifying its use as an example for a flexible molecule. the recently generated dynamically restrained structural ensemble is substantially more diverse and has been shown to reproduce experimental parameters better than the scr one. sgci is also an example of a system with limited data as only noe distance restraints , 1h and 15n chemical shifts, and backbone amide s <dig> values are available .

we have used various ensembles of sgci, summarized in table  <dig> <cit> . among sgci ensembles, only the dynamically restrained one reproduces experimental backbone n-h s <dig> data. except for the s_1kgm and s_coco ensembles, all correspond to hα and amide n chemical shifts reasonably well. in the scr-derived ensemble s_1kgm, thr <dig> is in a conformation which differs from all other ensembles giving rise to a back-calculated hα chemical shift far from the experimental value. none of the ensembles tested yields acceptable correlation with back-calculated amide h chemical shifts .

analysis of structural ensembles of the intrinsically disordered γ subunit of pde 5/6
the γ subunit of cgmp phosphodiesterase 5/ <dig> is an intrinsically disordered protein for which a conformational ensemble is available in the pdb  <cit> . the 100-membered conformer set was calculated using noe and pre -derived restraints. the ensemble consists of highly diverse structures with a backbone rmsd over  <dig> Å. for this protein, only the deposited ensemble  was investigated. for all chemical shift types for which data are available, the correlation between experimental and back-calculated data is considerably better for the full ensemble than for any individual conformer . this observation clearly justifies the use of such a diverse conformational ensemble for representing the conformations realized by this molecule in solution.

discussion
conformational ensembles as novel models of protein structure and their evaluation
protein structure determination from nmr data conventionally yields a number of conformers that are all compatible with the restraints used for structure refinement. this generally reflects the uncertainty of the parameters obtained as all the conformers are compatible with them. however, the expectation that such ensembles reflect the internal dynamics of proteins is not necessarily met, one of the reasons being that one of the aims during structure refinement is to arrive at a set of structures that are reasonably similar as reflected by a low rmsd value. this can be regarded as an effort to represent solution-state protein structures as single conformers just like in x-ray crystallography - where this view would often also be an oversimplification of the observations. the uncertainty of e.g. noe restraints can be turned to advantage by including other restraint types reporting more directly from internal dynamics to arrive at ensembles those variability primarily stems from the experimentally observed flexibility. nevertheless, as discussed above, an ensemble of any origin might represent the internal dynamics of a protein reasonably well on a given time scale.

ensemble-based representations can be viewed as a new type of models of protein structure incorporating the conformational diversity originating from the internal dynamics of the molecules. however, one fundamental problem resides in the wide time range of internal motions. thus, a given structural ensemble may aim at reflecting dynamics only at a given time scale . at the same time, the majority of nmr parameters measured represent the average over a number of different time scales. thus, the expectation that a single ensemble should reflect all the motions included in the parameters might be unreasonable at present and might even be practically unachievable as it could require the use of ensembles with high number of conformers. in particular, at a given ensemble size, improving the correspondence of the ensemble to one selected parameter might only be achieved at the cost of worse compliance with several others, e.g. due to counteracting forces arising in restrained calculations  <cit> . the second problem is technical, meaning that typically only a small subset of all measurable parameters is available for the molecule/system studied, impairing the meaningful assessment of compliance with multiple data. moreover, new nmr parameters can be introduced with the advancement of measurement techniques. nevertheless, we propose that a general tool can be of help both for inspiring more measurements and the use of ensemble approaches in structure refinement.

to our knowledge, consensx is the first structure analysis tool that handles and evaluates all input parameters in an ensemble-averaged way. this is particularly important for diverse structure sets such as those reflecting the internal dynamics of flexible molecules and ensembles of intrinsically disordered proteins. currently, there is no consensus on the evaluation of such conformer sets  <cit>  and it is not straightforward to coin a generally acceptable method. in these cases, individual conformers might yield substantially different results in single-conformer evaluation and structure analysis tools  <cit> , which are clearly not suitable to offer an overall picture of the ensemble. moreover, there are some data types, notably s <dig> order parameters that can only be interpreted as an ensemble property. consensx offers a simple way to assess the compliance of measured parameters with the ensemble as a whole and to judge whether the ensemble-based representation is improved relative to the single-conformer one.

interpreting the output of the consensx server
the consensx server has been specifically designed to yield information about a structural ensemble as a whole and using as many parameters as possible. structural ensembles can be very different regarding the number and structural similarity of the conformers included. on the other hand, the availability of nmr-derived parameter sets varies from protein to protein and laboratory to laboratory. therefore, no standardization of the output has been attempted and no arbitrary thresholds are suggested for interpreting the reported values. rather, all data are presented to give a useful overview of the compliance to each data set. the most informative application of the consensx approach is the comparison of multiple ensembles and evaluating their differences in reproducing different data. this is expected to facilitate both the production of ensembles meeting the goals of structural biologists more closely and choosing those that are most suitable for a particular analysis.

it must be stressed that structural ensembles might have been generated for different purposes and can contribute to the understanding of biochemical processes at different time scales. thus, non-conformity to one or more parameter sets does not necessarily mean that the ensemble is irrelevant or unrealistic. on the other hand, it is clearly necessary to be able to judge the limitations of an ensemble-based structural representation of a particular protein.

pride-nmr as means of selecting representative conformers
as protein ensembles reflecting dynamics are substantially diverse  <cit> , the often cumbersome task of selecting a representative conformer becomes even more difficult. it is generally expected that the selected conformer conforms to most experimental data and is in some sense an 'average structure' of the molecule. this expectation is directly opposed to the concept of representing structures with multiple conformers. although there might not be a single 'best solution' to this problem, we suggest that the representative conformer from proteins could be selected as the one with the highest pride-nmr score with the corresponding nmr distance restraint set. it should be noted that the pride-nmr approach implemented in consensx, evaluating a single noe list against all conformers of the same protein, differs from that available in the pride-nmr server. the latter is aimed at finding the most closely matching protein structure in a database to the submitted noe list. noe data are available for most structures to be determined by nmr, and these data represent well the fold of the protein. pride-nmr is straightforward to calculate and the resulting score is an unambiguous way to assess the completeness of this representation. in addition, the distribution of pride-nmr scores for individual conformers reflects the heterogeneity of the ensemble.

CONCLUSIONS
the purpose of consensx is to provide a quick, easy-to-use and standardized way to assess the correspondence of structural ensembles to experimental nmr data.

it is important to stress that all structures used to represent proteins, either determined from experimental information or not, are models of the actual structure, and thus can be useful for one aspect and unusable for some other  <cit> . dynamically restrained ensembles represent a novel type of models, the accuracy of which needs complex and reproducible testing. consensx offers a standardized way for this by evaluating their correspondence to a number of independent experimental data.

