BACKGROUND
polyploidy, the heritable duplication of whole genomes, is a key feature of plant diversification and is found in most, if not all, plant taxa  <cit> . polyploidization can lead to speciation or creation of distinct reproductively-isolated cytotypes within a species. an ancient genome-doubling event and subsequent gene loss has shaped the genomes of all grass species  <cit> . though an estimated 30-80% of angiosperms may be polyploid  <cit> , the relative frequencies of allopolyploids which arise through hybridization of different species versus autopolyploids which arise within a single species are difficult to ascertain. evolutionary processes that mask the origins of polyploid evolution such as introgression, deletion, concerted evolution, and mutation may create uncertainty. there is possible recurrent hybridization of genomes over time and interracial or close interspecific hybridization of genomes may produce similar outcomes. incongruent tree-topologies from independent marker sets such as chloroplast and nuclear markers can suggest the presence of reticulate relationships, but these are not conclusive  <cit> .

the interspecific relationships of taxa in the subgenus panicum sensu stricto  that comprises approximately  <dig> c <dig> grass species, including panicum virgatum l. , haven’t yet been elucidated and likely represent a complex situation  <cit> . because switchgrass is being pursued as a promising feedstock for renewable energy production in the united states and elsewhere, these relationships are of importance for understanding the breadth of germplasm that might be useful in a breeding program. the plant’s broad geographic range, water- and nutrient-use efficiency, and perennial growth habit make it ideal as a bioenergy crop  <cit> . the species encompasses multiple cytotypes with a basic chromosome number of nine  <cit> , and a range of ploidy levels from diploid  to duodecaploid   <cit> . as a polyploid species, switchgrass exhibits two basic subgenomes that are genetically divergent but maintain complete or near complete disomic inheritance  <cit> . two separate ecotypes are distinguished cytologically and geographically  <cit> . lowland accessions dominate the southern portion of the species range and are mainly tetraploid, while the upland accessions are usually either tetraploid or octoploid and dominate northern latitudes  <cit> . extensive aneuploidy has also been described, especially within populations of octoploids, but these are likely present in all populations at varying levels  <cit> .

although artificial crosses between switchgrass cytotypes have been largely unsuccessful  <cit> , questions still remain regarding historical hybridization between cytotypes, between upland and lowland ecotypes, and between several closely related species in the panicum subgenus. these species may represent a common gene pool that has undergone repeated hybridization during “secondary contacts” of once isolated populations  <cit> . a recent analysis of switchgrass collections has demonstrated that there are two distinct centers of genetic diversity for lowland accessions represented by the southern great plains and eastern gulf coast while upland accessions appear genetically as one broadly distributed tetraploid and two octoploid lineages  <cit> . using chloroplast sequence polymorphisms, molecular clock estimates have indicated that lowland and upland accessions diverged as early as  <dig>  million years ago, but have possibly diverged on several occasions during recent cycles of glaciation  <cit> .

in light of these uncertainties, independent methods to characterize genome structure would be useful for effective evaluation and utilization of germplasm resources. cytogenetic analysis using in situ hybridization techniques have proven very useful in resolving genome constitution in polyploids and is an important tool in chromosome karyotyping  <cit> . in polyploid plants with small and highly similar chromosomes, karyotyping is aided by fluorescence in situ hybridization  using labeled total genomic dna, repetitive sequences, or single copy probes. in particular, variation found at rdna loci  can sometimes be used to differentiate subgenomes or to distinguish between ecotypes of a species  <cit> . chromosome reduction, breakage, or fusion during or after polyploidization can result in a gain or loss of these tandem repeat sequences. in the triticeae, for example, both the location and order of rdna loci differ extensively among related species  <cit> . fish analyses using repetitive probes can further enable chromosome identification, and have been successfully employed in maize  <cit> , rice  <cit> , sugarcane  <cit> , soybean  <cit> , and pine  <cit> .

in complex polyploid organisms such as switchgrass, the development of genotypes with reduced chromosome numbers would prove useful for breeding and genetic research  <cit> . haploid plants, whether derived from a diploid or a polyploid, have half the chromosome number of the euploid form. therefore, “haploid” plants derived from switchgrass tetraploids will have two copies of the basic chromosome number of nine . with a true haploid number of nine, the term “dihaploid” has been used to describe androgenic switchgrass lines containing two sets of homologous chromosomes  <cit>  as well as gynogenic lines containing two sets of non-pairing homoeologous chromosomes  <cit> . the “dihaploid” terminology as well as the utility of such plant lines has been previously described for potato, barley, wheat, and several other species  <cit> .

early cytological studies in switchgrass focused mainly on overall counts of chromosomes rather than their individual morphology and molecular structure  <cit> . our purpose here is to describe a quantitative karyotype of p. virgatum l. to simplify analysis, we have used a dihaploid line  derived from a lowland tetraploid individual through gynogenesis  <cit> . the term “dihaploid” is used to indicate the polyploid origin of the line and the homoeologous constitution of its subgenomes. here we establish a standard reference karyotype that identifies visible features of individual switchgrass chromosomes and allows their unique discrimination. we demonstrate the presence of both additive and non-additive loci associated with rdna and centromeric repeats, indicating subgenome divergence. we also document karyotype differences between upland and lowland genotypes.

RESULTS
chromosome measurement data
somatic chromosome counts made from root tip squash preparations confirmed the presence of 2n =  <dig> metaphase chromosomes in the tetraploid cultivar kanlow , which agrees with published data  <cit> . chromosome numbers for alb <dig> were shown to be 2n =  <dig> based on data from more than  <dig> metaphase plate preparations . image analyses of metaphase spreads from alb <dig>  were performed to produce the switchgrass karyotype. digital measurements allowed for homoeologous chromosomes to be paired together and the base number n =  <dig> to be presented in a karyogram, from longest to shortest . morphological data from ten complete and undistorted chromosome spreads are presented in table  <dig>  indicating that switchgrass chromosomes are small to medium in length, ranging from  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm. identification of the centromeres via fish analyses  allowed for measurement of chromosome arms and calculation of arm ratios . all chromosomes were classified as metacentric  based on parameters described by levan et al.  <cit> .

aaverage value of  <dig> chromosome pairs .

barm ratio r  according to levan et al.  <cit> .

se = standard error; m = metacentric.

condensation pattern
chromosomes exhibit uneven staining due to variation in condensation pattern  along their length. this distinctive cp, especially at the prometaphase stage of mitosis, was utilized as a diagnostic measurement for chromosome identification. chias iv software  <cit>  takes advantage of this uneven staining pattern and was used to generate a distinctive cp profile for each of the nine switchgrass chromosomes . the same ten chromosome spread images used to generate the morphological data in table  <dig> were analyzed with chias iv software. homoeologous chromosomes were paired in each prometaphase spread and then averaged together with homologs across all ten spreads. the resulting ideogram based on chromosome length and cp is presented in figure 2c. gray scale images allowed for distinct characterization of each switchgrass chromosome based on features such as the large, condensed region on the long arm of chromosome  <dig>  interstitial constrictions on both arms of chromosome  <dig>  and the large white areas indicating euchromatic regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> . taken together with the length and arm ratio data, cp profiles allow each chromosome to be distinguished from all others in the karyotype.

localization of centromeres
a plasmid probe developed from the maize centromere repeat sequence centc  <cit>   was used for fish of switchgrass chromosomes. only one centc signal was observed in mitotic chromosome spreads of dihaploid alb <dig>  . upon fish analysis of the lowland tetraploid cultivar alamo , two centc signals were evident . moreover, four centc signals were present in chromosome spreads of the upland octoploid cultivar grenville  . chromosome length and arm ratio data of alb <dig> were used to determine that the centc probe hybridizes to chromosome  <dig> of the basic karyotype .

blast analysis of switchgrass  <dig> sequence data using the maize centc and rice cento sequences resulted in a subset of potential centromere-specific repeat sequences found in the switchgrass genome that, on average, were 73% identical to maize centc . primers designed from the corresponding consensus sequence were used to amplify and label a switchgrass-specific centromere repeat sequence for fish analysis. the labeled switchgrass centromere probe  produced a fluorescent signal on all  <dig> chromosomes of alb <dig> . in addition, one chromosome of alb <dig> demonstrated a centromeric fish signal significantly brighter than all the others. this pvicentc signal pattern was also present in all tetraploid cytotypes tested, where all centromeres were labeled and two chromosomes demonstrated a very high level of fluorescence . octoploid cytotypes maintained this pattern, demonstrating four strong fish signals on specific chromosomes while all others contained equal intensity signals at their centromeres . length, arm ratio, and condensation pattern analyses identified the high fluorescing chromosomes as chromosome  <dig>  which is consistent with the maize centc probe from which pvicentc was derived.

45s rdna localization
the distribution of 45s rdna on mitotic metaphase chromosomes of switchgrass was detected with fish using the wheat pta <dig> plasmid probe  <cit> . these results demonstrate that one pair of 45s rdna signal was detected in chromosome spreads of alb <dig>  suggesting that the basic karyotype  has one chromosome containing the 45s rdna sequence . when the tetraploid, lowland individual ap <dig> is probed, two pairs of 45s rdna signals are present . this pattern of one 45s rdna signal per base genome  also persisted in an individual from the octoploid upland cultivar caddo, where eight 45s rdna signals are visible . analysis of the morphology and fish staining patterns in multiple spreads indicates that the 45s rdna signal is found near the terminal end of the short arm of chromosome  <dig> .

5s rdna localization
sequence data from  <dig> reads of dihaploid switchgrass alb <dig> were used to blast against 5s rdna sequences of several grass species, including sorghum, rice, maize, and wheat. the resulting sequence hits were used to amplify and fluorescently label a 314-basepair orthologous 5s rdna sequence in switchgrass. these 5s rdna fish probes hybridized to a single chromosome of dihaploid alb <dig> and to two chromosomes of the lowland tetraploid cultivar kanlow . quantitative measurement data of alb <dig> chromosomes localize the 5s rdna signal to an interstitial region on chromosome  <dig> . in the fish image of kanlow chromosomes, one 5s rdna signal is strong and one 5s rdna signal is weak . in upland octoploid ecotypes, fish signals for 5s rdna demonstrate a different pattern than what would be predicted based on dihaploid and tetraploid data. instead of two strong and two weak signals, the upland octoploid cultivar caddo shows four strong and four weak hybridization sites . this suggests a unique difference between upland and lowland ecotypes at the 5s rdna locus.

ecotype variation at the 5s rdna locus
to further examine differences between ecotypes of switchgrass at the 5s rdna locus, upland tetraploid cultivars dacotah and summer were analyzed via fish and compared to the lowland tetraploids kanlow and alamo. two strong 5s rdna signals and two weak signals  were observed in the upland tetraploids, which is consistent with the pattern seen in upland octoploids of four strong and four weak 5s rdna signals . in contrast, lowland tetraploids kanlow and alamo contain only one strong and one weak 5s rdna signal . fish data also support the conclusion that the dihaploid alb <dig> has maintained one of the 5s rdna loci from its tetraploid progenitor  <cit> .

discussion
an accurate karyotype can incorporate physical measurements like total length and arm length ratios, but can also include landmarks such as heterochromatic knobs  <cit> , patterns of chromatin condensation  <cit> , and molecular features visualized by fish  <cit> . chromosome identification is critical for cytological analyses, as well as subsequent studies in genomics, taxonomy, and the evolution of polyploidy, enabling an understanding of the relationship between visible landmarks and genetic or physical map features  <cit> . to that end, the construction of a basic karyotype for switchgrass promises to facilitate genomic analyses. the somatic metaphase chromosomes of switchgrass are small, which may have limited examination of cytological features in earlier studies  <cit> . with the use of sophisticated imaging and molecular techniques, we are now able to present the first comprehensive karyotype for switchgrass that quantitatively distinguishes each of the nine base chromosomes of this bioenergy crop.

use of a dihaploid line of switchgrass  significantly simplified the karyotyping process. acetocarmine- and dapi-stained chromosome spreads allowed for visual pairing of homoeologous chromosomes in alb <dig> and produced a karyotype based on total and relative lengths as well as arm ratios. in our experiments, a single switchgrass root tip preparation yielded an average of  <dig> or more dividing cells . chromosome spreads often resulted in a high frequency of nuclei at the pro-metaphase stage of mitosis. pro-metaphase chromosomes demonstrated a characteristic condensation pattern  along their length, corresponding to the compactness of the chromatids, which was used to create a quantitative idiogram  <cit> . this approach has also been useful in cytological analysis of brassica species, sugarcane, and rice  <cit> . in conjunction with physical measurement data, cp data allowed us to unambiguously identify the small metacentric chromosomes of switchgrass.

although morphological and cp data suggest a balanced karyotype in the dihaploid line alb <dig> , fish data presented here indicate that the subgenomes have different repetitive dna content at pvicentc and 5s rdna loci. this finding is in general agreement with the highly differentiated genomes indicated by linkage map data in which tetraploid ecotypes demonstrate fewer than expected markers mapping across subgenomes, and complete or near complete disomic inheritance  <cit> . it also agrees with the observation of  <dig> non-pairing univalents at diakinesis of meiosis in the dihaploid line  <cit> . fish signal data at these genetic loci may point toward allopolyploid evolution of the switchgrass genome. however, these data are also consistent with natural loss of gene content following a whole genome duplication within a single species . to gain a greater understanding of the origins of switchgrass polyploidy, further phylogenetic analyses of the panicum  subgenus and/or genomic in situ hybridization  techniques should be used  <cit> .

under a simple additive model, fish signals for the 5s rdna locus and the centc locus would be expected to be present in  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> copies in the dihaploid, tetraploid, and octoploid lines, respectively. surprisingly, only one fish signal for these loci was observed in the dihaploid alb <dig>  in addition, the switchgrass-specific centromere probe, pvicentc, hybridized to all chromosomes of both subgenomes, but demonstrated a stronger fish signal on chromosome  <dig> of a single subgenome . this discrepancy in signal strength, particularly for the universal centromere probe pvicentc, suggests that a greater copy number of this repeat is present in chromosome  <dig> of one subgenome than in all other chromosomes. alternatively, or in conjunction, homology to the pvicentc fish probe sequence may be much higher in chromosome  <dig> than in all other labeled centromeres. the variation we observe at rdna and centromeric loci may also be a result of the allogamous habit and self-incompatibility of switchgrass  <cit> . in outbreeding species of the genus secale, high levels of repeat dna polymorphism between homologous chromosomes have been documented  <cit> . other outbreeding species in the lolium and lolium-festuca complex demonstrate variation at rdna loci  <cit> , suggesting that hemizygosity in switchgrass may result from out-crossing. also contributing to non-additive fish signal data may be the high frequency of switchgrass aneuploids, particularly among octoploid cytotypes  <cit> , which can lead to large-scale genetic changes and parental genome imbalance.

in our analyses of 45s rdna loci, pairs of telomeric fish signals demonstrated a regular, additive pattern up the ploidy series. among tetraploid cultivars, our data are consistent with those of costich et al.  <cit>  in which all tetraploids analyzed  demonstrated two pairs of telomeric 45s rdna signals. however, in octoploid cultivars, costich et al.  <cit>  describe a large amount of variation in size, number, and location of 45s rdna signals. the variation in 45s rdna signal intensity seen in our analysis of the octoploid cv. caddo  may suggest rdna repeat variation and/or differences in probe hybridization affinity. with only a single upland octoploid  analyzed with 45s rdna in this study, our results likely demonstrate one of many chromosomal constitutions for switchgrass octoploids. overall, fish analyses of tetraploid and octoploid individuals support elimination of rdna and centromere sequences and demonstrates that patterns of subgenome differentiation are broadly maintained.

our data also demonstrate unique ecotype differences at 5s rdna loci. variations in fish signal patterns between upland and lowland tetraploids  provide features that distinguish these taxonomic divisions within switchgrass. we hypothesize that these variations in rdna loci are related to both the phenotypic and geographic distribution differences observed between switchgrass ecotypes. in oryza species, polymorphisms in the number, the chromosomal location, and the repeat length of rdna loci have revealed species-specific and subgenome-specific fish patterns  <cit> . the authors suggest that specific inversions, rdna amplification, and locus transposition may have occurred during the process of oryza evolution. such a scenario may also be true for the divergence of switchgrass upland and lowland ecotypes. classified cultivars of switchgrass are barely removed from the wild, and rapidly evolving rdna loci are likely still undergoing change. the additive pattern of 5s rdna loci seen between lowland tetraploids  and upland tetraploids  may be indicative of chromosomal rearrangements and rdna changes that ultimately result in habitat adaptability differences between the two ecotypes. in addition, the conserved doubling pattern of 5s rdna loci from upland tetraploid to upland octoploid further supports the maintenance of ecotype divergence across different cytotypes.

the presence of gene flow between switchgrass ecotypes and/or cytotypes has ramifications on the development and use of specific gene pools for switchgrass improvement. therefore, knowledge of chromosome architecture and ploidy relationships is critical for cultivar development. cytogenetic data presented here can be used to classify switchgrass plants according to ecotype and ultimately aid in identifying and isolating regionally adapted cultivars  <cit> . switchgrass improvement through trait identification and breeding for significant heterotic effects also warrants the maintenance of independent gene pools  <cit> . recent analyses of several putative upland and lowland accessions of switchgrass have identified the presence of natural hybrids between ecotypes as well as evidence of gene flow  <cit> . results demonstrated a mixture of both cytotypes and phenotypes within hybrid populations, suggesting a long history of gene flow. in addition, genetic marker data indicated that gene flow is bidirectional, from upland to lowland and from lowland to upland  <cit> . a quantitative understanding of whole switchgrass chromosomes will help in distinguishing hybrid genotypes and aid in tracking genome sources during directed breeding programs. the use of fish and gish can identify translocations and/or introgression of new chromosome sources  <cit> , but can also be used to identify ancestral genomes that contribute to the evolution of polyploid species such as switchgrass  <cit> .

the development of a species karyotype, with unambiguous identification of individual chromosomes, is also critical for the integration of genetic and physical map data. genetic maps of switchgrass have been constructed using ssr and sts markers  <cit> . hybridization of these genetically mapped markers to switchgrass chromosomes would lead to definitive assignment of linkage groups. fluorescence detection of single- and low-copy sequences through the use of bac clones as probes has proven highly successful in many species, including rice  <cit> , maize  <cit> , and sorghum  <cit> . bac libraries for switchgrass have recently been developed and may be utilized for the integration of linkage and physical maps through bac-fish probing. bac sequences would also be useful in flow sorting of chromosome fractions for physical gene mapping and construction of chromosome-specific libraries  <cit> . in this light, fish technology will continue to be a valuable tool in understanding genome structure in switchgrass.

CONCLUSIONS
the relatively small size and lack of distinguishing features among switchgrass chromosomes have likely deterred detailed karyotype analysis in the past  <cit> . through the use of sophisticated molecular, cytological, and imaging techniques, we describe a quantitative karyotype for p. virgatum l. that distinguishes individual chromosomes. our data support the genetic divergence of the two subgenomes within switchgrass and provide a foundation for studying the evolution of polyploidy in this bioenergy crop. we also demonstrate karyotype differences between upland and lowland ecotypes that will aid in identifying and maintaining diverse gene pools for future breeding strategies. additional cytogenetic analyses of switchgrass chromosomes are necessary, but data presented here provide a quantitative foundation on which genomic and genetic studies can continue to advance. this karyotype will enable aneuploid stocks as well as alien substitution and addition lines to be characterized and used by others for classical genetic analysis and introduction of new variation.

