BACKGROUND
extensive study of emt6/ro  multicellular tumor spheroids grown in culture has provided useful insight into important aspects of tumor growth and tumor cell culture models. the behaviors of emt <dig> cells in culture fall reliably within narrow ranges, as if cell behavior and thus the underlying mechanisms are tightly choreographed. those actions can be thought of as being constrained and guided by a set of genetically specified biological operating principles. can we discover and attribute a small, robust set of operating principles that combine to create the system level phenomena that characterize emt <dig> growth in vitro? how can we represent and challenge those operating principles? what organization of the subcellular molecular biology enables the operating principles to emerge, and be sustained at the cellular level? before addressing the last question, we need answers to the first two, which has been the objective of this project.

an approach to understanding how individual cell behaviors can contribute to a diverse set of system level attributes is to discover a set of simple yet sufficient principles that enable abstract, cell mimetic agents, using only locally available information, to exhibit behaviors closely analogous to cells in culture. for this context, we define a biological operating principle to be an abstract, inferential representation of an action within a reliably behaved cell system. to discover these principles, we created a quasi-autonomous computer analogue comprised of individual cell mimetic agents  that adhered to a common, small set of axiomatic operating principles. we use axiom as commonly defined  <cit>  and to emphasize that the analogue, unlike emt <dig> cells in cultures, is a formal mathematical system and its execution is a form of deduction from the axioms within the analogue. hereafter, we use axiom to emphasize that we refer only to the computational analogue. an axiom specified a behavior that depended on the local environment perceived by the cell, given its internal state. individual axioms were implementations of in silico, axiomatic operating principles. each axiomatic operating principle was derived from a postulated in vitro counterpart as described in methods. the combined actions of an expanding population of cells, each adhering to the same set of operating principles, were sufficient to produce unique systemic behaviors. the system underwent several rounds of iterative refinement and parameter tuning. when measured, the resulting behaviors provided a set of systemic attributes that matched observed in vitro attributes closely for two different growth conditions. once that was achieved, we could postulate that the axiomatic operating principles may have in vitro counterparts, as illustrated in fig.  <dig>  to date, such principles have been arrived at piecemeal by induction following experimentation. experimental cell biology has been successful at discovering isolated cell level operating principles, but progress has been slow in providing a unified understanding of autonomous cellular behavior. we anticipated that iterative analogue refinement would lead to improved insight into cell level operating principles and plausible mappings to their biological counterparts. even though the emt <dig> cell line is tumor-derived, because it has proven stable and exhibits reliable behaviors, for the purposes of this research, we can treat emt <dig> cells as being in a healthy, not diseased state.

efforts to model tumor spheroid growth characteristics  have been extensive, informative, and successful. however, no one has proposed a cohesive set of cell level operating principles. only recently has it become feasible to design and instantiate quasi-autonomous, cell mimetic analogues,  <cit>  capable of exhibiting a rich phenotype of their own. the focus of most modeling and simulation efforts has not been in that direction. it has been primarily to provide precise, mostly mathematical descriptions of growth dynamics in terms of measured biochemical and physical factors combined with detailed descriptions of essential cell processes. the resulting models have been successful in explaining the time course and limits of spheroid growth in terms of nutrient depletion  <cit> , increased acidity near the spheroid's center  <cit> , and the dynamics of tumor spheroid metabolism  <cit> . jiang et al. combined these features into a comprehensive model that separately considered each cell and spanned three levels of mechanistic resolution  <cit> . other modeling efforts such as  <cit>  have used hybrid mathematical and individual based approaches that have shown initially promising qualitative results.

the objective of this project has been different: we aimed to discover a somewhat minimalist set of essential axiomatic operating principles that would enable the system level growth characteristics produced by cells to match a targeted set of tumor spheroid growth attributes, based on measures of similarity. given that constraint, we identified nine axiomatic operating principles. to narrow the scope and to achieve one of the key targeted attributes, we insisted that cells only acquire and use information available locally. we designed the system so that systemic properties were a consequence of only local cell interactions. we made it easy to revise cell axioms so that we could sequentially expand the set of targeted attributes achieved. the targeted attributes achieved  include those that are most characteristic of in vitro tumor spheroid growth: development of a stable size; a three-layered structure that maps to outer, proliferating cells and a core of inner, necrotic cells, with quiescent cells in between; the ability of cells to shed; and realistic growth curves under two different growth conditions. to achieve the targeted attributes, it was not necessary to simulate the release of growth inhibitory substances.

a cohesive set of operating principles  can provide a framework into which more detailed, subcellular and molecular level information can be connected directly to system level phenotype. the plan was to work backward from a targeted set of in vitro observations of emt <dig> cell and spheroid phenomena to a plausible set of analogue axioms, which would be necessary and sufficient to generate in silico counterparts of the targeted phenomena. with that vision, this project has been motivated by three expectations: 1) understanding hypothesized mechanisms in vitro would be facilitated by successfully building and studying analogous mechanisms in silico. 2) achieving and refining validated analogues would offer a scientific, experimental approach to discovering and studying cohesive sets of operating principles. 3) knowledge of axiomatic operating principles would facilitate exploration of their biological counterparts. this article reports on the design and implementation of the analogue, and the results of its execution.

RESULTS
to distinguish clearly in silico components and processes from corresponding components and processes within emt <dig>  we use small caps when referring to the former. variable names are in italics, and each is defined in the order it is introduced. cell growth leads to formation of simulated multicellular spheroids . measurements of sms attributes during execution mimic characteristics of emt <dig> spheroid growth. figure  <dig> shows an example qualitative measurement of the sms as a two dimensional cross-section. it shows that sms displayed the characteristic layered structure of emt <dig> spheroids. the proliferating layer appears thicker than is often seen in emt <dig> spheroids, but note that while the majority of cells in the viable rim are in the proliferating state, only the cells on the outer layer of the sms are actively creating new cells. figure  <dig> shows that sms growth curves were similar to reported emt <dig> spheroid growth curves when cells used the parameters listed in table  <dig> and the nine axiomatic operating principles listed in table  <dig>  axiom application was rigid in the sense that when a precondition was met, the appropriate axiom was always applied. axioms  <dig> and  <dig> were stochastic. during a simulation cycle, a cell could subsequently apply more than one axiom, such as  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> for a proliferating cell or  <dig> and  <dig> for a necrotic cell.

sourced parameters were obtained from literature. tuned parameters were adjusted to allow the analogue to reproduce in vitro data. calculated parameters depended on sourced or tuned parameters. all parameters were fixed, except initialval, which was set to high  or low  in different simulations.

* the value of diffusionrate is related to the simulation cycle and cell diameter, as described within the text.

** the mean value observed during simulation.

in each time step a cell will execute one or more of these axioms based on the environment the cell is exposed to and its internal variables. the axioms are executed in the order specified within additional file  <dig>  fig. s <dig>  random numbers for probability functions are generated from a uniform distribution in [ <dig> ), except as noted in the text.

in silico growth curves matched in vitro growth curves
for the parameter values listed in table  <dig>  sms growth curves were quantitatively similar to those of emt6/ro spheroids for both high and low nutrient conditions. cells within an sms proliferated initially at an exponential pace. growth then slowed and became linear because only cells near the outer sms rim could reproduce. the increase in cross-sectional area was linear until cellular necrosis began. thereafter, sms growth rate began decreasing toward zero. a stable size was reached when cell creation was balanced by cell removal. plots of sms cross-sectional area over time  closely mirrored emt <dig> spheroid growth  <cit>  for both high and low levels of nutrient. for simplicity, as discussed under methods, we conflated measured concentrations of glucose and oxygen, along with the other in vitro nutrients, and represented the entire collection using the factor nutrient. high nutrient level mapped to  <dig>  mm glucose and  <dig>  mm oxygen. low nutrient level mapped to  <dig>  mm glucose and  <dig>  mm oxygen. the reported coefficient of variation of mean cross-sectional emt <dig> spheroid area between multiple in vitro experiments was roughly 29% at  <dig> days, increasing over time  <cit> . given that, and the fact that emt <dig> spheroids increase their size by many orders of magnitude during growth, we judged that having simulated values within 15% of referent values would be reasonable, and made that a targeted attribute . the mean percent error between in silico and in vitro data was 12% for high and 8% for low nutrient, which was within the targeted 15% range. the only parameter changed between the two conditions was initialval, the level of nutrient present outside the sms during the simulation. for both conditions, cells used the same table  <dig> set of operating principles. under methods, we describe that only minimal tuning of the indicated subset of the parameters in table  <dig> was needed to achieve these matching growth characteristics.

in silico doubling times were similar to in vitro doubling times
the measured doubling times for sms and emt <dig> spheroids were similar at high nutrient levels, but quite different at low nutrient levels, as shown in table  <dig>  at low nutrient levels, emt <dig> cell number doubled every  <dig> hours, whereas the sms required  <dig> hours. this apparent discrepancy was initially difficult to explain, considering that the growth curves were very similar. some explanatory factors may include the high variability of the in silico results at small sms sizes, as well as the experimental variability between in vitro trials. in addition, initial doubling times were calculated  <cit>  using a best fit of the gompertz equation  <cit>  to data from multiple experiments. the gompertz equation describes an exponential curve with an exponentially decreasing growth rate. it can be fit to many types of in vitro animal and tissue growth data. the equation used was y=ae−e, where t is time, y is cross-sectional area, and a, b, and c, are the parameters of the equation. when we fit the in vitro results  to the gompertz equation, we obtained an initial doubling time of  <dig>  hours at high nutrient levels and  <dig>  hours at low, as compared to  <dig>  hours for in silico simulations at high and low nutrient, as shown in table  <dig>  these results are more consistent, which is not surprising, as we tuned prolifdelay and probias to generate in silico doubling times that could be mapped approximately 1: <dig> to wet-lab doubling times. prolifdelay, a stochastic parameter, is the average time interval that a cell must wait before it has the option to create a new cell. the value of prolifcounter specifies the interval for each cell. each prolifcounter value is calculated from prolifdelay as described under methods. to enable a successful proliferation event, a pseudo-random number must exceed a specified value. the variable probias specifies the probability distribution from which that value is drawn, as described under methods. the larger the probias value, the more extreme that distribution, making it increasingly difficult for a new cell to be created.

* values for mean of ten runs.

† from gompertz fit by freyer and sutherland  <cit> .

‡ from gompertz fit by authors.

measured viable rim widths were similar
viable cell rim widths, eighth in table  <dig>  have been characterized, and were used to further validate sms attributes. the data in table  <dig> show that viable sms rim widths were close to in vitro values. because the coefficient of variation of emt <dig> spheroid areas was at least 29%, the corresponding value for radius was roughly 15%. we specified that any sms radius within 15% of a referent radius would be acceptably similar because that radius would be experimentally indistinguishable from a repeat emt <dig> experiment, had one been preformed. we observed a mean sms rim width under the high nutrient condition that mapped to  <dig> μm, compared to  <dig> μm in vitro, a difference of 2%. at low nutrient, mean sms rim width mapped to  <dig> μm, compared to  <dig> μm in vitro, a  <dig> % difference. although we performed some tuning of the critical levels required to remain in the proliferating or quiescent state, these similarities are still noteworthy. they reinforce the likelihood that the principles of operation used by sms cells may map to a corresponding set of operating principles used by emt <dig> cells.

necrosis onset and final saturation size were similar
under high nutrient, measures of sms diameters at necrosis onset, listed in table  <dig>  achieved the targeted similarity measure. they were within 15% of those observed by freyer and sutherland  <cit> . following sms execution under high nutrient, mean diameter at which the sms first underwent necrosis mapped to roughly  <dig> μm, compared to  <dig> μm for the emt <dig> spheroids under comparable conditions, a  <dig> % difference. under the low nutrient condition, sms underwent necrosis when the system reached a diameter corresponding to approximately  <dig> μm, compared to  <dig> μm for emt <dig> spheroids, an  <dig> % difference.

the maximum sizes attained by sms were not similar to those predicted by freyer and sutherland  <cit> , . freyer and sutherland did not measure maximum sizes, but instead inferred them by fitting data to the gompertz equation and then using the fitted equation to predict an expected maximum size. the data fit were averages of results from experiments on different batches of emt <dig> spheroids. because the sms were being compared to data from a single experiment, we fit the gompertz equation to that referent data . table  <dig> shows that the new result did not differ significantly from the one originally reported at high nutrient levels: the moderate in silico-in vitro discrepancy remained. however, the maximum fit size was smaller at low nutrient concentrations, down from  <dig>  mm <dig> to  <dig>  mm <dig>  the maximum size reached by the sms at low nutrient mapped to  <dig>  mm <dig>  a difference of 11%. that was judged acceptably similar to our gompertz equation fit. a reasonable conjecture for the discrepancy at high nutrient levels is that the set of operating principles used by cells in maturing emt <dig> spheroids were somewhat different than the set used earlier, during spheroid expansion. our goal was to seek one set of sms operating principles that would enable validation for both high and low nutrient conditions. it would be straightforward to relax that requirement and achieve improved similarity at high nutrient levels.

sms shape and stability were controlled by probias
how important are the quantitative aspects of the axioms in controlling spheroid shape and stability? axioms  <dig> and  <dig> in table  <dig> play critical roles in controlling sms shape and stability. the consequences of their application in concert with the other seven depend to a large degree on the value assigned to the parameter probias, which, as explained under methods, influences the likelihood of stressed cells to proliferate. we conducted experiments at varied levels of probias. results are shown in fig.  <dig>  increasing probias improved an sms's ability to fill in fissures that formed after growth stabilization. low levels of probias enabled fissures to reach toward the sms center, destabilizing the structure and causing chaotic, uncontrolled growth. we have found no evidence that this destabilizing mechanism maps to in vitro counterparts. however, it may demonstrate a principle: surface irregularities can affect a spheroid's growth rate. an sms that has elongated to form a rod-like structure could not easily increase its width because of limited nutrient availability. however, absent other constraints, nothing would prevent it from elongating further. clearly, there are other factors and forces involved in maintaining the stability and shape of large spheroids in vitro. however, they are beyond the sms's current scope. sms are capable of maintaining stable shapes for a specified time within certain parameter ranges, outside of which new axioms and/or non-local constraints would be required.

sms long-term shape changes lead to instability
the axioms used to manage cell stress were effective at maintaining stable small and medium sized sms. however, when growth was extended beyond  <dig> days under high nutrient, sms began to lose their circular shapes. the 67-day old sms in fig.  <dig> is an example. because of the stochastic nature of the events involving each cell, the growth trajectories, shapes, and sizes of separate sms executions can be different under identical conditions. for the same reason, small regional differences in large, mature sms can gradually become amplified, resulting in large subregions having measurably different characteristics. this leads to an unstable system. measures of sms long-term growth at high and low nutrient are provided in additional file  <dig>  fig. s <dig>  emt <dig> spheroids do exhibit varied shapes during growth. however, we are not aware of in vitro observations that can be used to validate this sms behavior, possibly because it is challenging  to maintain large emt <dig> spheroids in culture for  <dig> days or more . if maintenance of generally circular shapes beyond  <dig> days under high nutrient were to be added to the targeted attributes list, the current sms would be falsified. inclusion of additional mechanisms would be needed to reestablish validation.

varying parameters changed growth curve and sms shape
we conducted experiments in which we varied parameter values and observed the effect on measures of sms growth and morphology. the results, summarized in table  <dig>  indicate whether increasing a parameter increased, decreased, or did not affect a specific measure . in addition, we examined the consequences of changing parameter values in more detail. changing moveemptybias had a limited but significant effect on sms morphology  and growth . the parameter moveemptybias influenced movement of cells exposed to the outside surface of the sms or adjacent to a fissure. the larger the value of moveemptybias, the less likely a cell at the edge experiencing low stress  would move into an adjacent empty space when given the opportunity. a larger moveemptybias value hindered fissure elongation. moveemptybias was tuned empirically to control sms shape but still allow cell-free spaces to exit the sms rather than be trapped inside for an extended duration. cells with larger moveemptybias values experiencing low stress rarely moved into adjacent empty spaces, whereas cells under high stress are likely to do so.

↑: positive effect. ↓: negative effect. ↔: effect limited or not easily determined. --: no effect. cells with two values  indicate different effects at high nutrient  and low nutrient . cells with one value indicate similar effect at high and low nutrient.

* quiescence onset and necrosis onset are the measured times of onset. a positive effect indicates that the time of quiescence or necrosis onset increased, thus they occurred later in the simulation.

as demonstrated by fig.  <dig>  when moveemptybias was set to zero, sms grew linearly at a high rate in low nutrient conditions and failed to saturate. fissures appeared, which caused the sms to destabilize and grow chaotically. increasing moveemptybias by as little as  <dig>  resulted in almost complete sms saturation. further increasing moveemptybias did not significantly affect growth rates or stability, but small changes were evident at both low and high nutrient levels. while moveemptybias does not directly map to an in vitro quantity, these results indicate that there may be threshold values for shape maintenance mechanisms, below which an emt <dig> spheroid would generally become unstable.

the value of quiconsumerate determined the amount of nutrient per second consumed by each quiescent cell. the value was tuned between zero and proconsumerate. varying quiconsumerate produced consistent and dramatic results. increasing the amount of nutrient consumed by quiescent cells reduced the number of quiescent cells capable of existing within the sms. the consequences are clearly visible in fig. 8: as quiconsumerate increased, the width of the viable rim decreased, as did the number of quiescent cells in the system and overall sms size. figure  <dig> shows that the growth rate and saturation size steadily decreased. proconsumerate specified the amount of nutrient per second consumed by proliferating cells. for simplicity, proliferating cells consumed the same amount of nutrient regardless of whether they were actively creating a new cell, waiting for an opportunity to do so, or were unable to do so because they were surrounded by other cells. proconsumerate's value in table  <dig> was purposefully selected to be within the range of glucose consumption rates reported in  <cit> .

a cell switched from proliferating to quiescent state when the amount of nutrient at its location dropped below the value of the parameter pronut. if nutrient later increased above pronut, the cell returned to the proliferating state. changing the value of pronut changed the amount of nutrient that cells required to remain in the proliferating state. when set to  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  cells transitioned directly from the proliferating to the necrotic state, as shown in fig.  <dig>  we do not distinguish between simulated necrotic and apoptotic cell death, instead conflating both into removal of necrotic cells. when referring to in vitro research we defer to the original documents for terminology. cell growth at that setting under low nutrient  was low, as proliferating cells consume more nutrient than quiescent cells. increasing pronut to  <dig>  × 10- <dig> produced little change in morphology or growth rate, but both measures changed dramatically when pronut was raised to  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  at that value, a population of quiescent cells became clearly evident, and the growth rate and stable maximum size was noticeably larger. that trend did not continue, however. as pronut increased further, first to  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and then to  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  only small changes in morphology and growth curves were evident. the population of quiescent cells was only slightly larger. another sharp change was evident as pronut reached  <dig>  × 10-3: the sms destabilized  and the growth curve did not plateau . the results suggested that a window existed within which the number of proliferating cells, having higher consumption rates, balanced the number of quiescent cells, which had lower consumption rates. when the level of nutrient within a location dropped below the value quinut, the cell switched irreversibly to the necrotic state. as is evident from additional file  <dig>  figs. s <dig> and s <dig>  varying quinut had less complex effects. as quinut was increased, the growth rate, saturation size, and viable rim width all decreased.

the consequences of changing probias at low nutrient were potentially confusing, because there were two dramatic and different effects on sms growth and morphology. the first effect, clearly observable in fig. 12b, was an increased growth rate when probias was decreased from the default validation value of  <dig> . cells that used smaller probias values were able to create new cells even when their stress was higher. as a result, they created new cells more frequently, increasing the overall growth rates. the increase in growth rate confounded our ability to analyze the changing stability of the sms, which was the second major effect of changing probias. at very low values of probias, individual cells proliferated quickly, and the sms grew to the edge of the space within a few days . consequently, it was not possible to determine whether the sms was more or less stable at these values without adjusting other parameters, such as prolifdelay. at values of  <dig>  and  <dig> , the growth rate decreased, and the sms was relatively unstable. as probias increased further , the sms became stable once again, though the growth rate decreased as the value was raised further . we believe that if prolifdelay were adjusted in concert with probias, maintaining the same initial doubling rate, the sms would become unstable at low values of probias. at high nutrient levels, shown in fig.  <dig>  the sms growth rate decreased as probias increased, but the relative sms stability did not change.

discussion
sms events and mechanisms were not intended to be exact replicas of the actual physical or chemical events ongoing in vitro during emt <dig> spheroid growth. nor were predictions of specific events part of the intended sms use. rather, the intent behind our method has been, given a set of emt <dig> spheroid attributes, to discover sms computational mechanisms that might map logically and intuitively to in vitro counterparts. this has been accomplished by exploring the inverse map from phenomena to mechanism. the primary functional unit of an sms – a cell – does map 1: <dig> to an emt <dig> cell. because an emt <dig> cell is autonomous, we designed sms cells to be quasi-autonomous. sms cells currently have no internal components. as atomic software objects, they needed operating principles to function. most of the principles that cause an emt <dig> cell to act in a particular way when faced with specific circumstances in culture were unknown. consequently, we needed to discover and implement operating principles that each sms would use, evaluate those mechanisms through simulation and observation, and modify them based on the results. following  <cit> , cell operating principles were formulated as axioms. their specifications were tightly guided by available knowledge of emt <dig> behaviors in culture  <cit> . by iteratively following the diagram in fig.  <dig>  we narrowed and refined early candidate axioms to nine. these axioms were refined further so that measures of sms growth characteristics would match prespecified, iteratively expanded, targeted sets of emt <dig> spheroid growth characteristics according to specific similarity measures. having achieved that objective, we suggest that the resulting sms operating principles  can stand as an abstract representation of emt <dig> operating principles under comparable growth conditions. we posit that the larger the targeted set of emt <dig> attributes satisfactorily matched, the more realistic the mapping between sms and emt <dig> operating principles.

it is significant that within a simulation cycle one cell can apply more than one axiom. this reflects the complexity inherent in even the simplest interpretation of a biological system. the amount of nutrients or growth factors in the environment, for example, can be independent of whether a cell is surrounded by other cells or isolated.

use of axiom  <dig> in combination with the others resulted in an extreme degree of contact inhibition: cells that were surrounded by other cells did not create new cells. that was a purposeful simplification. nevertheless, the targeted attributes were achieved. the evidence indicates that some cell proliferation does occur throughout emt <dig> spheroids  <cit> , but that the frequency decreases dramatically with distance from the surface. if those observations were to be added to the list of targeted attributes, it would falsify the current sms. validation against that expanded attribute set would require increasing sms complexity, possibly revising, as well as extending the list of axioms. relative to the current sms, the fraction of cell creation events occurring at the surface would be reduced and counterbalanced by division events occurring elsewhere. because sms components are quasi-autonomous, when the current set of targeted attributes is expanded one at a time, it is relatively straightforward to revise an sms to match each new, expanded set. we achieved the targeted attributes using an sms cell that exists in three states. when the attribute list is expanded , it is straightforward to add new cell states that possess different axiomatic operating principles.

the current set of abstract, axiomatic operating principles is believed to be the source of the discrepancy between in silico and in vitro growth at high nutrient . the sms can be parameterized so that simulated growth more closely matches the higher nutrient data , but at the expense of achieving a much poorer match to the low nutrient data. note that the differences in growth properties at low and high concentrations of oxygen and glucose are more extreme for the referent data than is seen with other available sets of growth data, such as the data used by  <cit> . achieving a tighter match would require adding more detail.

whereas freyer and sutherland described the inhibitory actions of a tumor extract on proliferating cells  <cit> , they did not separate the components to identify the source of inhibition. larue et al.  <cit>  observed cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors that are associated with cell-cycle arrest, but they did not demonstrate a causative role. researchers have speculated that a factor in spheroid growth stabilization may be cell inhibition caused by some material being released from necrotic cells  <cit> . we did not include such an attribute among those targeted, in part because it had not been confirmed. nevertheless, the current sms successfully produced stable spheroids without the production and action of such a factor, effectively establishing that one is not required for growth stabilization at biologically realistic sms parameter settings. of course, we cannot conclude from this in silico evidence that a necrotic inhibitor is absent in vitro. it is instead evidence that emt <dig> spheroid growth stabilization need not require the presence of such an inhibitor. it is also useful to contrast the modeling approach used here with that used by  <cit> . longo et al., having achieved some degree of satisfaction about the mechanisms implemented, focused on replication and prediction of referent results from particular axioms in an exploration of the forward map from generator to phenomenon. our approach focused on discovering appropriate axioms, such as the need for a potential inhibitor or a particular arrangement of neighboring components, and which were necessary and/or sufficient. we relied on falsification to select from the plausible generators.

cells that experienced a high stress were likely to move to reduce stress, while cells experiencing low stress were likely to proliferate and create more cells. as shown in fig.  <dig>  some large sms destabilized during long-term growth. we determined that this behavior was caused by the probabilistic, local nature of the stress based movement and proliferation algorithms. at small sms sizes, all deviations from the minimum-stress, convex curvatures are corrected by the movement and proliferation algorithms within a small number of simulation cycles. for much larger sizes, however, local curvature can be within the variability of the stress algorithm, yet the shape that emerges can be non-circular and irregular. that is because all axiom preconditions used only local information. when sms are very large, the surface adjacent to every surface cell can be relatively flat , yet the overall sms can be non-circular. if needed, the effect could be minimized in several ways, all of which would require increasing sms complexity. the simplest for the current sms design would be to enable sharing information about each cell's current stress with a larger cluster of neighbors.

although other models have not explicitly controlled spheroid shape, they have nevertheless done so implicitly. for example, by placing an adhesion term in their models, schaller et al. and jiang et al. caused cells to cling together, thus minimizing surface irregularities  <cit> . in fact, schallar et al. noticed differences in overall shape when they used different values for the adhesion parameter. anderson et al. found that changing the extracellular matrix structure in a simulated model of tumor invasion produced dramatic differences in tumor morphology  <cit> . our analogue did not initially contain a mechanism to control sms shape, but we found that the analogue could not mimic the targeted attributes without one. although the sms did not explicitly define and implement cellular adhesion like  <cit> , stress based movement and proliferation produced a similar effect.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented an idea: under the conditions of emt <dig> spheroid growth in culture, molecular cell biology manifests at the cell level in what can described as a small set of operating principles that are responsible for the characteristic in vitro phenotypic attributes. we anticipated needing to identify and understand the operating principles in order to better understand how specific, detailed subcellular events may be linked to attributes of systemic emt <dig> spheroid growth. our method and approach are diagrammed in fig.  <dig>  we designed, refined, and tuned quasi-autonomous software components that, upon execution, formed abstract sms analogues. we showed that measures of sms behaviors during simulated growth were similar to available wet-lab data using a quantitative similarity measure. we submit that sms mechanisms, with emphasis on the explicit axioms, may stand as a plausible, abstract hypothesis for what was observed during those emt <dig> spheroid growth experiments.

a future challenge will be to build a parallel system in which each  atomic cell component and its operating principles are replaced with a composite cell object containing a set of interacting components intended to map to modular components within emt <dig> cells. during intracellular interaction, specific internal components would each use a portion of the same local environment information to act on other internal components such that actions are essentially identical to the current sms events. the resulting growth characteristics would be indistinguishable from those described herein. the two systems could be iteratively advanced in parallel as new information and data were added to the set of targeted attributes. using cross-model validation in that way is expected to provide a systematic strategy to answer the third of the three questions posed in the introduction. what organization of modular and molecular biological details enables operating principles to emerge, and be sustained at the cell level?

