BACKGROUND
the concept of cloning by nuclear transfer  was introduced almost a century ago by hans spemann  <cit> . central in nt experiments is developmental reprogramming of the donor nucleus after transfer into an enucleated recipient oocyte or zygote. a breakthrough in nt experiments was the birth of the first clone from a somatic cell in  <dig>  <cit> . today, a number of animal species have been cloned, but the success rate rarely exceeds 5%  <cit> . the success rate depends on technical skills and the biological material used. for example, embryonic stem  cells are less differentiated and appear to be more efficiently reprogrammed when used as donor cells compared to somatic cells  <cit> .

many recent studies also suggested that nuclear remodeling after transfer might be involved in this reprogramming efficiency . indeed, in the early hours after natural fertilization, nuclear reorganization in embryos is associated with important modifications of paternal and maternal chromatin at the molecular and structural level. in most mammals, the protamines are rapidly replaced by histones in the paternal genome. concurrently, the paternal pronucleus is demethylated to an extend that depend on the species  <cit> , while the maternal pronucleus is passively demethylated upon several cell cycles  <cit> . microscopically visible changes in the embryo include expansion of the pronuclei and the formation of the nucleolar precursor bodies   <cit> . intriguingly, it has been shown in mouse embryos that centromeres and pericentric heterochromatin regions of chromosomes associate with the periphery of npbs  <cit> . this characteristic zygotic organization of constitutive heterochromatin can be observed in 1-cell mouse embryos but not at later stages of development, nor in differentiated somatic cells  <cit> . in interphasic somatic cells these regions, essential for proper chromosome segregation  <cit> , are usually forming chromocenters. chromocenters indeed represent clusters of the pericentric regions of different chromosomes, surrounded by the centromeres of the corresponding chromosomes  <cit> .

interestingly, we and others previously showed that donor cell nuclei, with distinct chromocenters, can be remodeled into a zygotic-like heterochromatin organization after nt into enucleated oocytes  <cit> . however, this remodeling was often incomplete: a large proportion of the cloned embryos displayed, at the end of the first cell stage, an abnormally high number of centromeres not associated with npbs, as compared to embryos obtained by natural fertilization at equivalent time-points. interestingly, we showed that the percentage of embryos displaying this abnormal distribution of centromeres correlated with the percentage of es cell-derived embryos that failed to develop until the blastocyst stage  <cit> . these findings supported the idea that proper genome remodeling in early embryos is essential for subsequent development.

on the other hand, it was recently shown that transient treatment of 1-cell stage mouse embryos with trichostatin a , a histone deacetylase inhibitor affecting chromatin structure, can significantly improve cloning efficiency after nuclear transfer from somatic cells  <cit> . in order to further address the hypothesis that proper nuclear remodeling in early embryos after nuclear transfer is essential, we investigated remodeling of centromeric and pericentric heterochromatin in embryos obtained by somatic cell nuclear transfer  with or without tsa treatment. the results were further correlated with the developmental potential of the scnt-derived embryos both in vitro  and in vivo .

here we confirm that in scnt-derived embryos nuclear reorganization of centromeric/pericentromeric sequences also occurs but is often abnormal. furthermore, the results show that nuclear remodeling is improved by transient tsa treatment, and that it was correlated with subsequent development of the embryos into blastocysts and healthy offspring. together, the results suggest that genome remodeling into a zygotic-like organization is associated with the initial steps of embryonic development and that proper initial nuclear remodeling is essential for subsequent development.

RESULTS
nuclear organization is aberrant in 50% of scnt embryos during the first cell cycle
the zygote-specific nuclear organization observed during the first cell cycle of mouse embryos obtained by natural fertilization is characterized by the association of centromeres with the peripheries of nucleolar precursor bodies . we previously showed that about 80% of embryos obtained by natural fertilization display at most  <dig> centromeres not associated with npb peripheries . interestingly, this percentage is significantly decreased in 1-cell embryos produced by nuclear transfer of es cells   and correlates with the percentage of embryos that fail to develop into blastocysts  <cit> . in order to further address the relationship between nuclear remodeling and developmental potential, we investigated embryos produced by nuclear transfer of cumulus cells , and analyzed the distribution of centromeric and pericentric heterochromatin during the first cell cycles. we therefore used immunofluorescent detection of heterochromatin protein 1β , strongly enriched at pericentric heterochromatin, and of cenp proteins localized within the centromeres.

as expected for somatic mouse cell nuclei  <cit> , constitutive heterochromatin in cumulus cells nuclei before scnt is clustered into chromocenters  that can easily be detected by the enrichments of hp1β into foci highlighted by the presence of associated centromeres .

after scnt, development of the embryos was initiated by artificial activation of the recipient oocytes in the presence of strontium. scnt embryos were then analyzed during the 1-cell stage at  <dig> and  <dig> hours post activation . already at  <dig> hpa donor nuclei derived from cumulus cells displayed substantial remodeling. npbs, which are a characteristic component of early embryonic nuclei, but are not found in somatic nuclei, could already be observed . moreover, chromocenters were disrupted and the characteristic prominent foci of hp1β surrounded by defined dot-like centromeres could not be observed anymore. instead, centromeres in such remodeled nuclei were decondensed as revealed by their diffuse appearance , and mostly associated with npb peripheries. hp1β displayed a relatively uniform nuclear distribution, although occasional accumulations of hp1β could be observed at npb peripheries in close proximity to centromeres .

at  <dig> hpa, the pronuclei of scnt embryos had increased in size and had a wider diameter than pronuclei at  <dig> hpa . the numbers of npbs did not change significantly compared to  <dig> hpa . at  <dig> hpa, the centromeres were not decondensed anymore and appeared again as small well defined dots, mostly located at npbs peripheries. hp1β was also enriched at npbs peripheries and confined to a thin rim encircling npbs . as outlined above, such organization of centromeres is a key feature of 1-cell stage embryos. moreover, the rim distribution of hp1β is similar to the one typically observed during the 1-cell stage in female pronuclei of fertilized embryos . these results suggest a strong remodeling of cumulus cell nuclei after nt. however, half of the scnt embryos we investigated harbored pronuclei where more than  <dig> centromeres were not associated with npbs , a proportion slightly but not significantly higher than in es-cell derived clones .

as immunodetection might be affected by the presence/absence of the antigens we then confirmed our observations with three-dimensional fluorescence in situ hybridization  using probes specific for centromeric and pericentric sequences. results showed that, at  <dig> hpa, centromeres and pericentric sequences are indeed not clustered in nucleoplasmic foci. instead, these sequences are associated with the nuclear and npb peripheries . remarkably, in 46% of the clones  a high proportion of these sequences were clearly observed at the nuclear periphery. these results are in accordance with our data obtained by immunofluorescent detection.

altogether, our data show that constitutive heterochromatin, especially the prominent chromocenters present in somatic cell nuclei, is rapidly remodeled into a zygotic-like organization during the 1-cell stage of embryonic development, regardless of the starting material . however, we also often observed aberrant reorganization of the centromeres that frequently did not associate with npb peripheries but with the nuclear periphery.

nuclear rearrangements are similar in 2-cell scnt and fertilized embryos but quantitative differences are observed
during the second cell cycle, embryos obtained by natural fertilization display dramatic nuclear rearrangements and relocalization of centromeric and pericentric heterochromatin. these dynamic events are associated with the rapid formation of chromocenters  <cit> . here, we observed similar nuclear rearrangements and rapid formation of chromocenters in scnt embryos during the second cell cycle. in early 2-cell embryos  most centromeres were still associated with npb peripheries . in contrast, at the end of the 2-cell stage , centromeres were associated to chromocenters displaying the characteristic enrichment in hp1β . in addition to chromocenter formation, we observed in scnt 2-cell stage embryos a preferential localization of centromeres and chromocenters in one half of the nuclei . a similar reorganization between the beginning and the end of the 2-cell stage, with a rabl-like polarization was previously observed in fertilized embryos , es-cells derived embryos  <cit> , and scnt embryos  <cit> . however, at the end of the 2-cell stage, when comparing scnt  and fertilized embryos , we noticed that the number of chromocenters as well as the number of npbs was lower in scnt embryos  than in fertilized ones .

in conclusion, although similar nuclear rearrangements occur during the 2-cell stage in scnt and fertilized embryos, significant quantitative differences are observed that might affect the onset of genome expression taking place at that time.

tsa improves nuclear reorganization of scnt embryos during the first and second cell cycle
it was recently shown that transient treatment of mouse 1-cell stage embryos with tsa significantly improves the success rate of cloning with cumulus cells  <cit> . tsa is known to increase histone acetylation in both somatic cells and embryos  <cit> . in addition, tsa has also been reported to induce extensive reorganization of pericentric heterochromatin and centromeres in somatic mammalian cell nuclei  <cit> . we therefore questioned whether tsa treatment on early scnt embryos might improve constitutive heterochromatin reorganization and how this could be correlated to the developmental rate. we chose to treat the cumulus derived scnt embryos with the optimal conditions reported by the aforementioned authors, i.e.  <dig> nm for  <dig> h from the time of activation but in a different standard culture media, frequently used in our laboratory . on these embryos fixed at various time points during the 1- and 2-cell stages, we first checked that the tsa treatment enhanced the histone acetylation level. indeed, acetylated histone h <dig> k <dig> is known to increase significantly at the perinuclear region after tsa treatment  <cit> . we then performed immunofluorescent analysis with cenp/hp1β antibodies at the same time points as above.

when scnt embryos developed in the presence of tsa the distribution of centromeres and pericentric heterochromatin at  <dig> hpa were similar to untreated scnt embryos . at  <dig> hpa, however, a significantly lower number of embryos displayed aberrant nuclear remodeling: the frequency of embryos harboring pronuclei with  <dig> or more centromeres not associated with npbs decreased from 51%  in untreated to 24%  in tsa-treated scnt embryos . this percentage was not significantly different from the one observed in fertilized embryos  at an equivalent time-point .

we next investigated the effects of tsa treatment on nuclear rearrangement events taking place during the 2-cell stage. at  <dig> hpa, we found that tsa had no effect on chromocenter formation and the number of chromocenters formed in tsa-treated scnt embryos remained significantly lower  than in fertilized embryos . however, there was an increased number of npbs in tsa-treated scnt embryos  in comparison to untreated ones . remarkably, after tsa treatment the number of npbs observed in scnt embryos was similar to the one observed in fertilized embryos .

together, these findings show that tsa treatment improves the remodeling of transferred nuclei both at the 1-cell stage with the acquisition of a zygotic-like heterochromatin organization and at the 2-cell stage with the rearrangements of npbs.

tsa improves further development of scnt embryos
next, we examined the effects of tsa treatment on further embryonic development. the rates of activation and cleavage to the 2-cell stage were similar in tsa-treated and untreated scnt embryos . the rate of development to blastocysts was not statistically different after tsa treatment . however, blastocysts from the tsa-treated group had a greater number of inner cell mass  cells than those from the untreated controls , albeit the total cell numbers were not different . more interestingly, the number of live pups obtained with tsa-treated scnt embryos  was significantly higher than with non-treated ones . thus improved foetal development and increased numbers of live offspring can be correlated with transient tsa treatment during early development of scnt embryos and improved nuclear remodeling at the initial stages of development.

statistical difference was calculated using chi-square and was found to be significant for live offspring only .

discussion
kishigami and colleagues  <cit>  were the first to report that tsa treatment improves full term development of mouse embryos obtained by transfer of cumulus cell nuclei. this was confirmed the same year by rybouchkin and colleagues who reported a remarkable and significant 5-fold increase in the efficiency of cloning from cumulus cells with a transient tsa treatment for  <dig> hours post activation  <cit> . in their initial work, rybouchkin and colleagues suggested that increased acetylation of histones after tsa treatment was linked to the improved developmental rates  <cit> . in the present work, we confirm the reproducibility of the beneficial effects of tsa treatment on long term developmental potential using another mouse strain and different culture conditions, as reflected by a significantly higher birth rate of live pups. in our laboratory,  <dig> % of the tsa-treated scnt embryos developed to term, which is identical to the  <dig> % of clones obtained from es cells  <cit>  and ten times higher than the developmental rate of control scnt embryos .

however, tsa was also reported to affect chromatin condensation and relocation thereby affecting higher order nuclear organization during interphase  <cit> . we therefore focused the present work on the effects of transient tsa treatment upon heterochromatin remodeling events during the first two cell cycles after nuclear transfer of cumulus cell nuclei, based on previous reports of constitutive heterochromatin distribution in early mouse embryos after fertilization and/or nuclear transfer  <cit> .

so far, it has been shown that constitutive heterochromatin becomes remodeled into a zygote-specific organization during the 1-cell stage of embryonic development after fertilization as well as after esnt and cumulus scnt  <cit> . as sperm, oocytes, es and cumulus cells display very different forms of chromatin organization prior to their introduction into an oocyte, these findings suggested that remodeling of chromatin into this particular form of organization might be fundamentally associated with the initial stages of development and might always occur, regardless of the starting material. here, we confirm that nuclear reorganization occurs after transfer of differentiated cumulus nuclei into an oocyte. we also show that this remodeling process was very rapid . remodeling was, however, not efficient in all nuclei, since about half of them showed a higher number of centromeres not associated with npbs.

the main finding is that tsa treatment largely improves the efficiency of this initial remodeling, since the percentage of transferred nuclei displaying a configuration with few mis-located centromeres is the same in tsa treated clones and in embryos from natural fertilization. the supplementation of tsa during the first cell cycle also affects the nuclear organization of embryos during the second cell cycle and increases the average number of npbs in scnt treated embryos , to the same level as in fertilized ones. this differs from the results of merico and colleagues  <cit> , where similar numbers of npbs in late 2-cell scnt and control embryos were reported. however, in that case in vitro fertilized embryos were used as controls, as well as a different strain of mice . what should be noted is that defects in the number and distribution of npbs may be correlated with delayed acquisition of functional nucleoli in cloned embryos  <cit>  and that tsa treatment might improve it. however, the exact mechanism through which tsa improves nuclear remodeling is still unclear. one could hypothesize that the increase in histone acetylation induced by tsa improves "opening" of the chromatin thereby sustaining mobility and relocalization of constitutive heterochromatin  as well as other genomic sequences . indeed, 3d-fish measurements of the volume occupied by pericentric sequences in tsa-treated and untreated scnt embryos suggest a slight increase upon tsa treatment: in untreated embryos pericentric chromatin occupies  <dig> % of the nucleus versus  <dig> % in tsa-treated embryos . one could also hypothetize that chromatin decondensation after tsa treatment and histone acetylation will allow access of different remodeling factors from the ooplasm. further work investigating the functional relationship between genome reprogramming and nuclear reorganization is currently under way in our group.

on the other hand, it is worth mentioning that the effects of tsa are not universal and are highly dependent on the level of differentiation of the genome treated. somatic and es cells, for example, have different gene expression and epigenomic profiles, including the cpg methylation levels at the centromeric and pericentric regions  <cit> . in a supplementary experiment, we tested transient tsa treatment on es-cells derived nt and observed that tsa actually raises from 40% up to 62% the fraction of pronuclei presenting more than  <dig> centromeres not associated with npbs by  <dig> hpa. moreover, no live pup was reported after such treatment . this suggests that tsa is not always beneficial and that the balance of acetylation and deacetylation activities should be maintained. trichostatin a probably exacerbates the profile of some key genes in early esnt embryos while improving their profile of gene expression in scnt embryos. whether gene expression is a cause or consequence of genome reorganization remains to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
the findings of the present study support the idea that initial nuclear reorganization plays an important role in genome reprogramming and is thus also important for further development. current models of nuclear architecture acknowledge that the positioning of gene loci at specific regions of the nucleus affects their expression and contributes to gene regulation  <cit> . we therefore believe that tsa-induced improvement of nuclear remodeling might support a more accurate regulation of developmental genes, crucial at the beginning of development. however, the very low birth rate, even after tsa treatment, implies that the nuclear reorganizations observed are important but often not sufficient for later development. to address this problem, further investigations of more subtle modifications in the nuclear remodeling processes and in chromatin structure after nuclear transfer are necessary.

