BACKGROUND
identification of differentially expressed genes  is a key step in comprehending the molecular basis of specific biological processes and screening for disease markers. this methodology looks at absolute changes in gene expression levels, and treats each gene individually. however, genes and their protein products do not perform their functions in isolation, but in coordination  <cit> , and the dynamic switch of a gene from one community to another always implies altered gene function  <cit> . therefore, gene coexpression analysis was developed to explore gene interconnection at the expression level from a systems perspective  <cit> , and 'differential coexpression analysis ', as a complementary technique to the traditional 'differential expression analysis'   <cit> , was designed to investigate molecular mechanisms of phenotypic changes through identifying subtle changes in gene expression coordination  <cit> .

in a typical dcea workflow, a pair of gene expression datasets under two conditions, such as disease and normal, are transformed to a pair of coexpression networks in which links represent transcriptionally correlated gene pairs , and then the differential coexpression is calculated for each gene . after surveying three previously proposed dcea methods : 'log ratio of connections'   <cit> , 'average specific connection'   <cit> , and 'weighted gene coexpression network analysis'   <cit> , we realize that although dcea methods have been used more and more frequently in transcriptome studies  <cit> , they have not been well developed, and the most crucial issue in dcea - the choice of differential coexpression measure, is far from settled.

in lrc  <cit> , the differential coexpression of a gene is defined as the absolute logarithm of the ratio of its two connectivities - the numbers of links connecting the gene in two coexpression networks. this method does not distinguish the coexpression neighbors of a gene, and hence may fail if the connectivities of a gene in two networks are close while the gene neighbors are rather different. this defect is overcame in the average specific connection  method  <cit> , which compares the 'specific connections' that exist in only one network. in simply dealing with the numbers of neighboring genes, however, both lrc and asc fail to achieve a more precise characterization of differential coexpression that would be attainable if the quantitative expression correlation values were not discarded. the third method, wgcna  <cit> , goes beyond asc and lrc as it compares the sums of expression correlation values associated with a gene between two conditions, which is essentially the comparison of weighted connectivities of a gene. we therefore classify all these three methods into a gene connectivity-based type. because these connectivity-based methods do not quantify coexpression changes link by link, they cannot precisely estimate the differential coexpression of a gene. as a result, they fail to distinguish dramatically changed links from those relatively trivial ones, and they also cannot detect a special type of coexpression change - correlation reversal between positive and negative, which is never rare  <cit>  and probably has important biological significance  <cit> .

since coexpression is in essence a property of gene pairs , it should be more reasonable to design link-based dcea methods that concentrate directly on the coexpresssion change of each gene pair. in this work, we develop two link-based dcea algorithms for identifying differentially coexpressed genes  and differentially coexpressed gene pairs or links . based on the exact coexpression changes of gene pairs, these methods take into account both the gene neighbor identity information and the quantitative coexpression change information. it was demonstrated on simulated datasets that both novel methods had an improved performance over the existing methods to retrieve predefined differentially regulated genes and gene pairs. we furthermore applied the methods to a publicly available expression dataset on type  <dig> diabetes  and provided additional information to characterize t2d-related genes. the novel methods for dcea analysis have been implemented in an academically available r package dcgl  <cit> .

RESULTS
novel 'half-thresholding' strategy in constructing gene coexpression networks
there are currently two accepted strategies, namely hard-thresholding  <cit>  and soft-thresholding  <cit> , for inferring gene coexpression network from expression correlation values. the hard-thresholding one, adopted by lrc and asc, keeps a link in the coexpression network as long as the coexpression value exceeds a predefined threshold . the soft-thresholding strategy, adopted by wgcna, keeps all possible links and raises the original coexpression values to a power 'beta' so that the high correlations are emphasized at the expense of low correlations . note that the coexpression value pair associated with the invisible link c-d in figure 1a are utilized in the wgcna dc formula . in effect, while the 'hard-thresholding' strategy dichotomizes the continuous correlation values to be coexpression and non-coexpression, it is robust to minor variations and meanwhile its sensitivity is impaired, as some small coexpression changes  are treated equally as large ones . on the other side, the 'soft-thresholding' strategy can be overly sensitive when using a low soft-threshold  since noisy variations are kept in its calculation. one way to get around this is to increase the power. another way, proposed here, is to devise a novel "half-thresholding" strategy.

with the "half-thresholding" strategy, we keep a link in both coexpression networks if at least one of the two coexpression values exceeds the threshold. in this way, we ignore minor variations of 'non-informative links' whose correlation values in both networks are below the threshold, but thoroughly examine the possibly meaningful coexpression changes of links remaining in the two coexpression networks. starting with this strategy, we come up with two novel methods for identifying differentially coexpressed genes and/or links from the pair of coexpression networks .

the 'differential coexpression profile' method 
we consider two gene expression datasets under two different conditions. for each dataset, we calculate the pearson correlation coefficients  between the expression profiles of all gene pairs. for gene i and gene j, let xij and yij denote their pccs under the two conditions. then the two datasets are encoded into a set of paired correlations cp = {} over all gene pairs. we then filter out non-informative correlation pairs using the half-thresholding strategy. specifically, a pair is kept if any of the two pccs has a q-value lower than a cutoff, say 25%, where the q-value is a false discovery rate estimated from the p-value of pcc using the benjamini-hochberg method  <cit> . this results in a subset of correlation pairs, which are equivalent to two coexpression networks with identical structure but different link weights .

for gene i, the pccs between it and its n neighbors in the filtered set form two vectors, x =  and y =  for the two conditions, which are referred to as 'coexpression profiles'. we define the differential coexpression  of gene i with eq.  <dig>    

this measure captures the average coexpression change between a gene and its neighbors. as this method is based on the differential coexpression profiles, it is denoted as dcp. an example calculation of dcp dc is shown in figure 1b.

the dc value can be used to rank genes. to evaluate the statistical significance of dc, we perform a permutation test, in which we randomly permute the disease and normal conditions of the samples, calculate new pccs, filter gene pairs based on the new pccs, and calculate the dc statistics. the sample permutation is repeated  <dig> times, and a large number of permutation dc statistics form an empirical null distribution. the p-value for each gene can then be estimated.

the major steps of the dcp algorithm is outlined in the upper box of figure  <dig> 

the 'differential coexpression enrichment' method 
while dcp takes advantage of the coexpression changes of individual gene links, its final goal is to identify differentially coexpression genes . to extend the findings from dcgs to differentially coexpressed links , we devise another method, 'differential coexpression enrichment', which first identifies dcls, and then identifies dcgs. as the method is based on enrichment of dcls, it is named dce.

the filtered correlation set  represents the beginning links to be screened for dcls. for a link or a pair of correlation values, we first determine the maximum  correlation and the log  correlation ratio. if the two correlation values of a link are same signed, we intuitively propose that the log correlation ratio may serve as a basic measure for the link's differential coexpression; in contrast, if the link has two differently signed correlation values, its differential coexpression is more likely to be reflected by the maximum correlation. we then separately deal with the same signed links and the differently signed links using the limit fold change  model  <cit> . lfc is a robust statistical method originally proposed for selecting differentially expressed genes , by modeling the relationship between maximum expression and log expression ratio of genes. in coexpression analysis, we instead model the relationship between maximum coexpression and log coexpression ratio of links.

for the same signed links, as is illustrated in figure 3a, we categorize them into bins according to their maximum coexpression values, and within each bin, select a fraction δ of links with highest log fold changes, and fit a curve y = a +  over the boundary links. links lying above the fitted curve are considered as dcls. in most experiments of this work, we set δ =  <dig> , but the effect of tuning δ was tested in the following simulation study.

among the differently signed links, those with both pccs surpassing the cutoff ρ of correlation values or qth of the q-values are directly taken out as dcls, specifically, correlation-reversal dcls. in parallel to the same signed case, lfc model is applied to the remaining differently signed links with the roles of maximum coexpression and log coexpression ratio flipped due to our foresaid consideration . again, links above the fitted curve are considered as dcls.

suppose there are n links in each filtered coexpression network, from which we have determined k dcls using the procedures above. for gene i with ni links of which ki are dcls, the p-value is calculated based on a binomial probability model . the obtained p-value can be regarded as the dc measure of a gene, with a smaller value indicating a higher degree of differential coexpression. the enrichment step of dce method is also illustrated in figure 1b.   

the major steps of the dce algorithm is outlined in the lower box of figure  <dig> 

comparing different dcea methods in simulation experiments
in a simulation experiment, we first define two gene regulation networks, which are overall similar but have differences in a small portion of regulation relationships , then simulate two gene expression datasets based on the two networks, respectively. the predefined discrepant regulations are termed differentially regulated links  and the associated genes are differentially regulated genes . we evaluated dcp and dce in terms of their capability to retrieve the predetermined drgs and drls from the simulated data. also included in the comparative evaluation were three representative dcea methods that we reviewed in the background: lrc  <cit> , asc  <cit> , and wgcna  <cit> . note that the wgcna has evolved into two slightly different versions, the 'signed' and the 'unsigned', and here we adopted the signed version and set its parameter beta at the default  <dig> 

we first analyzed a pair of simulated datasets  from a published study  <cit> , which were generated based on two yeast signaling networks using syntren  <cit> . a total of seven genes, pho <dig>  flo <dig>  mbp1_swi <dig>  flo <dig>  trp <dig>  clb <dig> and clb <dig>  were involved in the altered interconnection  <cit> , therefore taken as drgs. as table  <dig> shows, the dcp dc score ranked all seven drgs exclusively at the top, while the dce p-value ranked six at the top and the other one at the 8th position; both methods had better performances than the other three methods. it was noticeable that swi <dig>  a gene falsely detected in the original study  <cit> , puzzled wgcna and asc , but not dcp and dce .

the proteins are sorted by the dcp ranks. bold refers to the truly differentially regulated genes  in the simulation.

additionally, we used syntren to simulate three groups of dataset pairs  based on a predefined e.coli gene regulatory network of a total of  <dig> genes  <cit> . specifically, we selected a sub-network of  <dig> genes as the original network, and exerted artificial perturbation on 10% of its links as if it was from a different condition. the three groups had different perturbation types. for group a, we used regulation-elimination . for group b, we used regulation-switch . for group c, we applied half regulation-elimination and half regulation-switch. for each group, we generated five dataset pairs, one simulated from the original network and the other from the perturbed network.

we applied every dcea method on every dataset pair and plotted the receiver-operating-characteristic  curves to show the balance of the five methods between sensitivity and specificity in identifying drgs . dataset group a, simulating regulation-elimination, seemed a tough problem for all methods, as none of the roc curves was obviously far away from the diagonal line representing random assortment . nevertheless dcp performed better than the others. the advantage of dcp and dce over the other methods was increased on group b which simulated regulation-switch, while the performances of asc and lrc were not significantly different from a random guess . on dataset group c with both regulation-elimination and regulation-switch included, dcp and dce still outperformed other methods . in all, dcp and dce did better in retrieving drgs, especially on data involving switched regulation relationships. the wgcna method, which utilizes the continuous expression correlation values as dcp and dce do, ranked immediately after dcp and dce, ahead of lrc and asc.

since the signed wgcna performed better than the other existing methods asc and lrc and it actually gains more acknowledgement from users, we additionally performed a more comprehensive comparison of wgcna against the novel methods, with different settings of the key parameter beta of wgcna taken into account. it turned out that in general the signed wgcna was more powerful than the unsigned wgcna, but yet both were incomparable to dcp and dce regardless of the choices of the parameter beta . we also found that the wgcna methods' performances deteriorate with the beta value, especially when beta exceeded eight, and that the wgcna methods were relatively more competent for the regulation-elimination scenario .

as all these dcea methods except wgcna involve a gene link filtering step, or a correlation value thresholding process, we repeated the performance comparison on various qth values ; additionally, as the perturbation rate of 10% was set arbitrarily, we also tried another two levels, 20% and 30%. it proved that dcp and dce consistently outperformed the other three with dcp doing better than dce in most situations . we also found that for perturbation rates 10% and 20%, algorithm performances generally increased with more stringent qth values, and they dropped a little when the perturbation rate reached 30%. finally, we tested the sensitivity of algorithms to sample sizes of datasets. at sample size five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, fifteen and twenty, it was shown that the performances of all algorithms were basically stable, and that dcp and dce were better than the others .

finally, we compared the only two methods, dce and asc, which have the potential to retrieve dcls, with respect to their capability to retrieve drls. it was found that, in three simulated dataset pairs , drls always accounted for a tiny fraction of identified dcls, but dce outperformed asc in enriching drls in dcls . as gene coexpression changes may spread from the perturbed links to adjacent ones, we took drls and their one-step adjacent links as 'extended drls'. likewise, dce enriched the extended drls , which was statistically significant according to tests against empirical distribution of randomly sampled links . in an actual practice of dce, in order to narrow down the identified dcls for a follow-up examination, one can raise coexpression value cutoffs  or lower outlier fractions . we found that raising ρ refined correlation-reversed dcls efficiently, while lowering δ not only cut down the number of dcls of the other two types  but improved the accuracy of identified dcgs . besides, the identified dcls could also be sifted according to their relevance with a selected gene list, for example, dcgs.

i, ii, and iii denote three dataset pairs from the data groups a, b, and c, respectively.

in summary, the results from simulation studies indicate that reasonably designed dcea methods can retrieve pre-set differentially regulated genes and links from expression datasets. that is, based on the results from a series of rigorously designed simulation experiments, we provide a preliminary support to the anticipation that dcea methods are capable of deciphering differential regulation or differential networking underpinning diseases  <cit> .

uniqueness of dcp and dce compared to existing dcea methods
we attributed the improved performance of dcp and dce mainly to the exploitation of the linkwise quantitative coexpression changes, which starts with our 'half-thresholding' strategy in coexpression network construction, and continues with the dc measures reflecting the linkwise coexpression changes . capturing the linkwise coexpression changes is much more reasonable than merely extracting the connectivity and/or neighbor identity, or getting the summed correlation values. that is why dcp and dce outperformed existing methods lrc, asc, and wgcna in simulation studies.

we tried designing our methods based on coexpression changes of all possible links, i.e., discarding the half-thresholding, but found the performance was not comparable to the current version of dcp and dce . this suggests the necessity of the link prescreening step. however, it is not easy to determine the optimal coexpression threshold for each specific study, and further investigation on optimizing our half-thresholding procedure is necessary.

it is noticeable that dcp and dce are especially good at identifying a special type of coexpression change, the coexpression reversal between positive and negative, which is why they have the greatest advantage in the simulated datasets involving regulation-switches. in previous studies, negative correlation values were often flipped to positive values  <cit> , set to zero  <cit> , or crushed to a very narrow region on the right of zero <cit> , and these operations hindered coexpression reversals from emerging. in reality, coexpression reversal probably has biological significance. taking the coexpression of p <dig> and klf <dig> as an example, it was recently reported that the positive or negative correlation between these two genes determines the outcome of dna damage - dna repair or apoptosis  <cit> . we believe our attention to this special coexpression change will help to explore subtle mechanisms involved in tuning of molecular balances between opposite factors.

re-analyzing a t2d dataset from the perspective of differential coexpression
for an application of the novel dcea methods, we downloaded dataset gse <dig> from the gene expression omnibus  database. gse <dig> was designed to study type  <dig> diabetes  in rats. it involves  <dig>  probesets interrogating  <dig>  genes, and the twenty samples herein were divided equally into a t2d group and a normal group. details on preprocessing this dataset are in "additional file 4: preprocessing gse3068".

we applied dcp to gse <dig> to identify differentially expressed genes  and obtained  <dig>  dcgs out of  <dig> genes. we listed the  <dig> dcgs in "additional file 5:  <dig> dcgs identified by dcp" regarding their dc scores, log fold changes, and potential relevance with t2d . the dcgs with t2d relevance deserving more attention were selected and shown in table  <dig> 

included genes appeared in at least one of the following sources: kegg t2d-related pathways ; a self-compiled set of  <dig> t2d-related genes in rat; a list of  <dig> t2d-associated genes. the lists of "t2d-related" genes and "t2d-associated" genes are provided in "additional file 6:  <dig> t2d-associated genes &  <dig> rat t2d-related genes".

we then identified dcls using dce methods, and narrowed them down to  <dig> dcls that were connected with the  <dig> dcgs . as we believed that correlation-reversal was a noteworthy but neglected type of differential correlation, we took a close-up look at those correlation-reversed dcls. out of a total of  <dig> reversed dcls ,  <dig> were connected with the  <dig> dcgs. figure  <dig> shows three subnetwork modules organized solely by reversed links. subnetwork a  and b  included quite a number of previously reported t2d-related genes: tcf <dig> and dcc  <cit> ; cd3d  <cit> , uts2r  <cit>  and map2k <dig>  <cit> . subnetwork c  was the largest reversed dcl-organized module and it contained an interesting four-gene-circuit  of consistent negative-to-positive correlation reversal. although not being previously reported to be related with t2d, the genes and reversed links included in figure 5c, as well as other novel cases reported in the supplementary tables of dcgs and dcls , should receive adequate attention for their distinct traits from the perspective of differential coexpression. further studies on the transcriptional mechanisms and functional consequences involved in these dcgs and dcls would be helpful for elucidating how the changed coordination contributes to the pathogenesis of t2d.

since gse <dig> had been thoroughly analyzed from the differential expression perspective  <cit> , we investigated the relationship between the two gene expression properties, differential expression  and differential coexpression  in this dataset. we first examined the consistency between the dcp-identified  <dig> dcgs and the  <dig> previously reported degs, of which  <dig> could be corrected by oral administration of vanadyl sulfate . it was found that the overlapping of dcgs with the  <dig> degs was not significant , but that with the  <dig> vs-corrected degs was significant . this indicates that differential expression and differential coexpression are somewhat related to each other at least in the t2d context.

we then looked at the disagreement between dcgs and degs. a previous differential coexpression analysis on human cancer using the asc method reported a quite low level of overlapping between dcea and dea results   <cit> . in our case, dcgs and degs had only 3%  or  <dig> %  in common, with the rest majority genes in disagreement. for instance, both pparg and tspan <dig> had been found to play key roles in t2d pathogenesis  <cit> , but they were identified by dcea and dea respectively. pparg had an expression fold change of  <dig>  in the gse <dig> dataset , so its relevance with t2d was not discerned by dea. from the perspective of dc, however, it stood out since its dc value  was ranked 28th of all  <dig> genes. on the contrary, tspan <dig>  with a large expression change  but a minor coexpression change , was identified as a deg but not a dcg.

according to our brief comparison at the gene level, dea and dcea are both powerful techniques to find out useful information from expression data. they are significantly related and mutually complementary. similar conclusion was made at the pathway level based on the observed interplay of gene differential expression and gene differential coexpression in mouse mammary gland tumor  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we pointed out the critical weakness of current popular differential coexpression analysis methods, and developed two novel link-based algorithms, dcp and dce. dcp and dce differ from previous methods primarily in that they are designed to make use of link-specific correlation change values directly while previous methods mainly focuses on the gene connectivity. a novel strategy to filter links in coexpression networks, the half-thresholding strategy, is also proposed as a necessary pre-processing step of the two novel methods.

based on the results from a series of rigorously designed simulation experiments, we proved that reasonably designed dcea methods were able to discriminate pre-set differentially regulated genes and links; in another word, we provided a preliminary support to the anticipation that dcea methods are capable of deciphering differential regulation or differential networking underpinning diseases  <cit> . of the five dcea methods we surveyed, we proved the overall performances of our dcp and dce against three existing algorithms, and identified wgcna as the best of the existing three. it is noticeable that while the existing methods were somewhat comparable to link-based methods in case of pure regulation-elimination perturbations, they were significantly outperformed when regulation-switch perturbations were introduced. regulation-switch is believed to be an relevant phenomenon in fine-tuning of signal transduction  <cit> .

applying dcp and dce to a real expression dataset designed for t2d study, we identified  <dig> dcgs and their associated  <dig> dcls, which may serve as a useful resource for identification and characterization of t2d relevant genes. we also analyzed the relationship between dea and dcea in this example, and pointed out that dea and dcea are significantly related and mutually complementary techniques to make discoveries from expression data.

recently, differential coexpression analysis is being appreciated as a significant step towards the differential networking analysis of complex diseases  <cit> , and the area of dcea is undergoing rapid development as various solutions to set-wise differential coexpression problems are being proposed  <cit> . we believe that our methodological improvement will benefit the development of dcea and help extend it to a broader spectrum of biomedical studies.

authors' contributions
hy came up with the main frameworks of the methods, participated in the computational testing and drafted the manuscript. bhl was in charge of the computational coding and testing, and helped drafting the manuscript. zqy participated in the method design and helped drafting the manuscript. cl supervised the statistical parts of the methods and modified the manuscript. yyl and yxl conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination and modified the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

links
the gene expression omnibus database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/

the dcgl package http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dcgl/index.html

supplementary material
additional file 1
more parameter testing for gene-level evaluation.

click here for file

 additional file 2
significance in link-level evaluation.

click here for file

 additional file 3
reducing dcl scales.

click here for file

 additional file 4
preprocessing gse <dig> 

click here for file

 additional file 5
 <dig> dcgs identified by dcp.

click here for file

 additional file 6
 <dig> t2d-associated genes &  <dig> rat t2d-related genes.

click here for file

 additional file 7
dcls identified by dce.

click here for file

 additional file 8
network modules organized by solely correlation reversal.

click here for file

 acknowledgements and funding
we thank dr. christian herder from german diabetes center at heinrich heine university duesseldorf and dr. harald grallert from institute of epidemiology, helmholtz zentrum münchen for they compiling the list of  <dig> t2d-associated genes. we also thank prof. michael brent from washington university in st. louis for helpful discussions.

this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china , national key technologies r&d program , shanghai pujiang program , and platform program of chinese academy of sciences .
