BACKGROUND
addison's disease, also referred to as chronic adrenal insufficiency or hypoadrenocorticism, has been reported in many individual dogs. although mixed breeds present as the "breed" most frequently diagnosed with addison's, certain pure-breds, including the great dane, rottweiler, standard poodle, portuguese water dog, west highland white terrier, and wheaton terrier, experience a disproportionate level of prevalence of the disease  <cit> . the defining characteristic in addison's disease is the failure of the adrenal cortex to produce sufficient quantities of steroid hormones. addison's can be characterized as either primary or secondary depending upon the site of impairment, with primary being most common in dogs  <cit> . the symptoms associated with addison's are often diffuse reflecting the general metabolic influence of the hormones produced by the adrenal cortex. symptoms include lethargy, vomiting, inappetence, depression, and weight loss,  <cit> .

addison's disease in humans has long been characterized as an inherited trait  <cit>  induced by autoimmune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex. similar to the human, the majority of dogs present with primary addison's disease in which the adrenal cortex exhibits severe deterioration mediated by an autoimmune reaction  <cit> . an inherited susceptibility for addison's has been proposed for more than  <dig> dog breeds  <cit> . yet even though canine addison's is well documented to run in families  <cit> , the mode of inheritance is unclear. one breed, the standard poodle, exhibits the presence of a single major autosomal locus affecting expression  <cit> , while another breed, the bearded collie, has a less definitive mode of inheritance for addison's  <cit> . we undertook genetic analysis to characterize the inheritance of addison's in a third breed having a low genetic relationship to the standard poodle  <cit>  to clarify whether unrelated breeds demonstrate unique modes of inheritance for addison's as has been demonstrated for other disorders such as blood clotting  <cit> . in particular, the heritability and mode of inheritance have not been defined for the portuguese water dog although breeders recognize that addison's is a concern in the breed . knowledge of a genetic influence on the expression of addison's in the portuguese water dog would assist breeders in making breeding decisions that would decrease the incidence of addison's in their breed. in this study, the heritability and the mode of inheritance, as determined by complex segregation analysis, are reported for the portuguese water dog.

RESULTS
heritability
complex segregation analysis
of the total dogs in this study,  <dig> dogs were inbred; their average inbreeding coefficient was  <dig> . there were as many as seven overlapping generations included in the families under study and not all dogs within the study had equivalent number of generations evaluated. nevertheless, with an eye toward making simple recommendations to breeders, the relationship between inbreeding and the risk for addison's disease should be evaluated. while the data set does not permit computation of the level of inbreeding of portuguese water dogs as a whole, the relationship between addison's and inbreeding can be assessed. classifying affected and unaffected dogs by their inbreeding coefficient can reveal a simple relationship between level of inbreeding and the presence of disease. in the present study, among dogs with an inbreeding coefficient between zero  and  <dig> ,  <dig> of  <dig> dogs  were recorded as affected by addison's. however, as the level of inbreeding increased, the risk of addison's disease increased with it. specifically, for portuguese water dogs with an inbreeding coefficient between  <dig>  and  <dig>  there were  <dig> affected dogs among a total of  <dig> dogs . for those dogs with an inbreeding coefficient between  <dig>  and  <dig>  there were  <dig> of  <dig>  dogs affected by addison's. though a small sample, among dogs with an inbreeding coefficient greater than  <dig>  there were  <dig> affected dogs among a total of  <dig> . this result is consistent with the results of table  <dig> in that inbreeding increases homozygosity, and a disease that is strongly influenced by a segregating recessive locus should see an increased incidence among a cluster of inbred animals.

discussion
the objective of this study was to assess the genetic contribution to the expression of addison's disease in the portuguese water dog. the results provide sufficient and convincing evidence that addison's disease in the portuguese water dog is an inherited disorder. the mode of inheritance, determined in the present data set, is consistent with a single, autosomal recessive locus. this finding should be helpful to breeders as they struggle to reduce the prevalence of this disorder in the breed. unfortunately, given the relatively late onset of illness, the evaluation of dogs at risk for expressing addison's disease, or identification of carriers, is not straightforward. however, the evidence for the contributions of a single locus  suggests that a genome scan for the putative disease-causing allele is advisable. identification of the allelic mutation would enable the identification of dogs at risk or carriers prior to their contribution to the gene pool.

comparison of tables  <dig> and  <dig> also demonstrates a basic equivalence in estimates of the narrow sense heritability across the two computational approaches. that is, the complex segregation analysis also provides an estimate of a polygenic contribution to disease. the estimate of the mean of the posterior density for the polygenic variance component was  <dig> , implying an estimate of heritability of the polygenic component as  <dig>  =  <dig> /; a value well within the margins of error for the heritability estimate in table  <dig>  note that the 95% hdr for the polygenic variance does not include  <dig>  but the interval does indicate that the polygenic contribution could be very small. this suggests that the putative major locus for addison's disease is not likely to be the sole determinant of the disease expression. the genetic contributions of the polygenic component may reflect other genes influencing the progression of the disorder. alternatively, inclusion of dogs as "unaffected" in the statistical analyses when in fact the dogs have not yet expressed the disease may influence our estimate of the posterior density of the polygenic variance. this in turn may disturb our estimates of the limits for the 95% hdr affecting our conclusions on the potential for a polygenic contribution to addison's disease over and above that of the putative major locus. an additional caution must be exercised concerning dogs that are designated addisonian when in fact they may not be due to iatrogenic adrenal suppression  <cit>  or other instances of adrenal insufficiency. accurate diagnosis of the disorder is critical to any genetic transmission study due to artificially inflated statistical significance if inaccurately diagnosed dogs are incorrectly classified. while these uncertainties remain, in the present study, the consistency of transmission of addison's disease  and the reliance upon veterinarian diagnoses should mitigate those concerns.

though not presented in table  <dig> for the sake of brevity, several models were fit in the complex segregation analysis. specifically, fitting these models are intended to reduce the probability of a false detection of a major locus  <cit> ; models in which the assumption of mendelian transmission of the alleles of the putative major locus are relaxed. the null model is mendelian transmission, and this model should be a significant improvement for the likelihood over the no-major locus model if we are to draw the conclusion that a major locus is segregating in this population of dogs. "improvement", when working in the bayesian framework provided by ibay  <cit> , is reliant upon the examination of the 95% hdr. in our examination of addison's disease in the portuguese water dog, allowing for non-mendelian transmission of the putative major alleles did not improve the fit: the 95% hdr for the transmission probabilities demonstrated considerable overlap with the mendelian transmission values. for this reason we accept the conclusion of the simplest null model that of the major locus model with alleles moving from parent to offspring with the typically expected probabilities.

though complex segregation analysis is fraught with challenging statistical issues, the estimate of the allele frequency for the putative disease allele in the base population is  <dig>  . accordingly, for our suggested major locus model one would predict that 24% of dogs would be affected with addison's disease in a randomly mating population. the observed incidence in the data set is considerably lower with  <dig> affected dogs out of  <dig> , suggesting that breeders may be selecting parents so as to reduce the risk of disease. such a high expected prevalence of addison's greatly increases the power of identifying linkage by facilitating the detection of segregating markers in a genome-wide scan. in an effort to simply assess whether the portuguese water dog family in the present study offers the power to detect genetic linkage with the addison's phenotype, we simulated a recessive locus perfectly linked with addison's in a subset of the larger portuguese water dog family and computed expected lod scores in a linkage analysis. the predicted lod score of a marker within  <dig> cm of the addisonian locus in a small subset family of  <dig> dogs was  <dig>  using the crimap analysis program  <cit>  giving support to the concept that the family under study offers the power to detect genetic linkage with the addison's phenotype.

as in a similar analysis of the standard poodle  <cit> , there is no evidence for a sex difference in risk of addison's disease for portuguese water dogs. this suggests that the literature reports of a greater prevalence among females may represent an artifact of the sample populations evaluated: dogs referred to teaching hospitals rather than dogs evaluated by all veterinarians  <cit> . the results of the present study also are consistent with the published evidence of the mode of inheritance for addison's disease in the standard poodle  <cit> . in both the portuguese water dog and the standard poodle, the data support the view that the disease is inherited as a single autosomal recessive trait. in contrast, although highly heritable, the mode of inheritance of addison's disease in the bearded collie is less clear  <cit> . this disparity in the mode of inheritance predictions possibly stems from the variability in the onset of the disorder and the classification of dogs as "unaffected" in the statistical analyses when in fact the dogs have not yet expressed the disease. the consistency of high heritability for the addisonian phenotype across these different breeds supports the possibility that addison's may have a common mode of inheritance for dogs in general. this concept is supported given the high incidence among mixed breeds  <cit>  and the recent determination that large haplotype regions are shared across multiple dog breeds suggesting that genetic liability predisposition may likewise be shared  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
until early clinical detection of addisonian status exists or genetic tests are available to identify dogs at risk for developing addison's disease or those dogs that are carriers of the mutant allele, breeders of portuguese water dogs should consider the genetic contribution to the expression of addison's disease. although the present study cannot confirm the mode of inheritance, the putative mode of inheritance as an autosomal recessive disorder suggests that breeders could actively select against generating affected dogs in their breeding programs.

