BACKGROUND
the key postulate that one gene encodes one polypeptide chain  has been overhauled with the discovery that one gene can generate multiple rna transcripts  through a process referred to as alternative mrna processing  <cit> . alternative processing defines a range of events, including alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation, which result in distinct mrna species. recent deep sequencing studies indicate that 94% of all protein coding genes generate multiple mrna transcripts  <cit>  and mutations affecting mrna splicing are responsible for an estimated 15-60% of human genetic diseases  <cit> . functional consequences of alternative processing have been shown across a wide variety of biological processes  including drug metabolism, stem cell renewal, neurologic disease, autoimmune disease, and especially cancer. despite the importance of alternative processing in cancer, current understanding of its global regulation remains sparse  <cit>  and limits the ability to fully harness alternative processing as a tool in cancer prognosis, diagnosis, and treatment.

attempts to obtain a genome scale understanding of alternative processing in cancer have focused on large-scale characterizations of changes in alternative processing between normal tissue and cancer. bioinformatic analyses have identified a large number of transcript isoforms found only within cancer tissue  <cit> . the recent use of splicing sensitive microarrays has allowed quantification of changes in alternative processing between individual samples . these arrays have been used to detect changes in alternative processing between normal human tissues and in breast, brain, colon, prostate, and bladder carcinomas  <cit>  using various splicing algorithms . large scale clinical analyses of changes in alternative processing; however, remain sparse, and there are no high-throughput analyses of changes in mrna processing associated with poor patient prognosis. such studies require years of patient follow-up and have not been reported using the new splicing arrays.

in contrast, public repositories such as the gene expression omnibus  currently contain conventional gene expression data from hundreds of thousands of unique biological or clinical samples . data previously generated by the microarray community provide an untapped source of potential insight to the regulation of alternative mrna processing in human cancer. although the exact value of these data is not known, it is likely that well over a billion dollars have been invested in reagents, facility, and personnel costs over the past two decades.

the first commercially available high-density gene expression microarrays were invented three decades ago by affymetrix  <cit>  to quantify expression changes in tens of thousands of genes in a single experiment, but were not intended to detect isoform specific mrna changes resulting from alternative processing. two of the most commonly used human expression microarrays, the affymetrix u <dig> and u <dig> series, use individual probesets to report expression of many genes. each probeset is composed of  <dig> individual  <dig> nt oligomers that interrogate a subsequence of the target gene. both platforms, however, contain thousands of genes whose expression is assayed by more than one probeset. the use of multiple probesets, which often interrogate non-overlapping regions of the target gene, was originally intended to provide a robust assay of gene expression. we and others have previously observed that discrepancies between fold-changes in probesets interrogating the same gene can represent isoform-specific changes in mrna levels  <cit> . such isoform changes can result from alternative transcription start sites, alternative mrna processing, or changes in mrna isoform stability.

methods that detect isoform-specific mrna changes have been developed for splicing microarrays such as the affymetrix human exon  <dig>  st , but have not been developed for or applied to conventional gene expression microarrays. in fact, it has been suggested in such reviews that "detection of disease-relevant splicing differences may be entirely missed in gene-level expression profiling studies"  <cit> . although it may be possible in theory to apply such methods to conventional gene expression microarrays, to our knowledge this has not been done. to fully investigate the potential to detect isoform-specific mrna changes in conventional gene expression microarray data, we elected to develop a novel method, splicerav, which we have applied to conventional affymetrix gene expression microarray data.

for the affymetrix genechip human u <dig> plus  <dig>  arrays,  <dig>  genes, which represent 57% of uniquely annotated genes assayed by the array, are interrogated by multiple probesets and can therefore be queried for mrna isoform changes, with an average of  <dig>  probesets interrogating these genes . for the u133a arrays, 36% are interrogated by multiple probesets, with an average of  <dig>  probesets per gene for a total of  <dig>  genes. the u <dig> series of array platforms are among the most commonly used platforms within geo  and have the potential to detect isoform changes in thousands of genes.

splicerav is a program created to systematically assess the likelihood of changes in alternative processing evidenced by discrepancies in probeset behavior using a gaussian mixture model of mrna transcript regulation. a beta version of this program, which lacked biological modifiers and the ability to generate estimates of statistical significance, was initially used to identify differential regulation of transcript isoforms by tcerg <dig>  <cit> . splicerav can be applied to any expression microarray platform with multiple probesets interrogating the same gene, without the need for detailed transcript annotation. the program provides a non-computationally intensive algorithm capable of analyzing probeset-summary level datasets for evidence of changes in alternative mrna processing. we provide here a description of splicerav, which has been developed to provide a rigorous statistical model and incorporate biologically motivated modifications with the goal of assisting biologists in identifying alternative processing events most amenable for in-depth study from conventional gene expression microarray data.

in this study splicerav's unique value in detecting previously overlooked changes in mrna processing is demonstrated using publicly available affymetrix u <dig> gene expression datasets. splicerav was used to uncover previously uncharacterized isoform specific changes in epidermal growth factor receptor  caused by in vitro hras over-expression  <cit> . in a separate analysis, splicerav was used to identify changes in alternative mrna processing associated with poor patient prognosis in over  <dig> breast tumors. here we demonstrate splicerav's ability to examine archival data, performing the largest analysis of alternative mrna processing in human cancer to date and the only high-throughput analysis of changes in alternative mrna processing associated with human cancer prognosis.

RESULTS
splicerav algorithm
there are two main steps in the splicerav analysis. the first step summarizes individual probeset changes in expression between a user defined group of control and treatment observations. the second step evaluates these probeset level summaries for evidence of changes in alternative processing using a gaussian mixture model .

in the first step, changes in probeset expression levels are summarized by calculating their average log2fold changes and corresponding t-statistics. these metrics were taken from conventional gene expression analysis. probesets targeting the same gene are then grouped together and each probeset is assigned a weight. individual probeset weights are calculated using a combination of that probeset's t-statistic, number of observations, and comparison with other probesets targeting the same gene .

once these weights are assigned, each gene is evaluated for evidence of alternative processing using a gaussian mixture model. in the gaussian mixture model used by splicerav, probesets interrogating a transcriptionally activated gene are predicted to detect the same proportional increase in expression. for example, probesets targeting an mrna that doubles in abundance would be expected to double in intensity . conversely, probesets targeting an mrna which is down-regulated by half would be expected to be reduced by half figure 1c). multiple probesets targeting a gene that is alternatively processed or undergoes isoform specific mrna regulation would be expected to report discordant changes in probeset intensities .

plotting the same aforementioned hypothetical data as log <dig> fold-changes emphasizes that in alternatively processed mrnas, summarized probeset behavior clusters into discrete groups . splicerav assesses this grouping mathematically assuming a gaussian mixture model, which compares fitting the data using one vs. two gaussian distributions. fitting the probeset expression data with a single gaussian curve equates to a biological model in which the gene is regulated as one expression unit . fitting the data with a two gaussian model equates to a biological model in which the gene is regulated as two or more expression units, corresponding to changes in isoform specific regulation. comparing the ratio of how well each model fits the summarized probeset data gives a maximum likelihood ratio, or mlr, which gives an indication of how well the summarized probeset data are described by changes in alternative processing relative to whole transcript regulation. the lowest possible log mlr for a gene is zero, which indicates that all probesets change proportionally and suggests no evidence of alternative processing. log mlrs greater than zero indicate discrepancy in the expression changes in the probesets, which can be caused by an alternative processing event. the greater the value of the log mlr the more likely a gene is to be alternatively processed .   

splicerav uses the chip annotation file  to determine which probesets interrogate the same gene. for most microarray platforms the gene symbol provides an appropriate annotation scheme, however any provided annotation  can be used.

probeset annotation & filtering
our analyses used the default probeset annotation provided by affymetrix. this annotation contains probesets that in some cases target multiple exons or are poorly annotated  <cit> . re-defining probeset definition, for example using exon-based definitions of probesets, may improve the ability of splicerav to detect changes in mrna processing  <cit> . however, using the standard annotation provided by affymetrix makes our findings here directly comparable to the vast majority of expression analyses conducted using the u <dig> series of arrays, allowing reference to specific probeset ids and enabling us to directly analyze summarized expression datasets deposited in geo. additionally, many affymetrix microarray expression datasets deposited in geo do not contain cel files  <cit>  and cannot be re-analyzed using custom annotation.

the use of standard affymetrix annotation also allows us to make presence/absence probeset detection calls using previously validated methods  <cit> . as described above, splicerav detects discrepancies in fold changes between probesets targeting the same gene, using these discrepancies to infer changes in alternative mrna processing. nevertheless, such discrepancies can also reflect the presence of negative strand matching probesets  or probesets that do not produce signal above background, which can be caused by low transcript levels or non-functional probes. nsmps hybridize or detect rnas transcribed in the opposite direction of the annotated gene; they do not reflect the expression of the target transcript and are identified and removed by splicerav using information available in standard affymetrix annotation files  <cit> . probesets that do not produce signal can also falsely suggest isoform specific mrna changes. these probesets are removed by splicerav if they are not expressed above background  in either treatment or control groups using the presence-absence calls with negative probesets  algorithm  <cit> .

biological modifiers
the original motivation for splicerav was to identify statistically significant changes in alternative processing that would also provide ideal targets for further experimental validation and study. to this end, we incorporated additional, user-modifiable parameters, which can preferentially rank events expected to be more amenable to experimental investigation. there are three biological modifiers applied to the mlr to generate the final splice score: a multiple probeset correction to adjust for total possible paired groupings of probesets, an expression cutoff modifier to specify the minimum change required between isoforms, and a centering modifier to preferentially rank genes whose probeset expression levels change in opposite directions. all modifiers are normalized by the average number of paired control and treatment observations for all probesets within a gene , so that large samples with higher statistical power will be as influenced by the modifiers as smaller samples, providing parameters that can be applied with consistent effects across varying sample sizes .   

these modifiers do not affect the p-value generated by splicerav, but allow the program to preferentially rank predicted changes in alternative processing that generate less complicated hypotheses, are larger in magnitude, reflect changes in expression which are qualitatively different, and are less likely to reflect probesets targeting non-transcribed regions or probesets that do not linearly reflect changes in transcript abundance. genes that exhibit statistically significant discordant probeset behavior and are given a positive splice score represent ideal candidates for experimental investigation of isoform specific regulation.

splicerav generates several additional outputs with each file. these include a file containing assessment of statistically significant expression changes for all probesets, a log file containing all user set parameters and comparisons made, as well as a fasta file for each gene. these fasta files contain the target sequences of all probesets targeting that gene, allowing quick and easy mapping to known and predicted mrna sequences using the ucsc genome browser http://genome.ucsc.edu <cit> . all genomic analyses in this study were performed using the march  <dig> release of the human genome .

splicerav index generation
to perform analyses of isoform changes within individual samples we derived an index of relative isoform abundance predicted by splicerav. high-throughput analyses of alternative processing have previously defined "splice index" as a quantitative measure to compare isoform abundances between individual samples. the splice index of a probeset equals its expression relative to other probesets targeting the same gene  <cit> . using splicerav we defined a modified version of the splice index, referred to as the splicerav index. splicerav assumes a gaussian mixture model, whereby all probesets are classified as belonging to one of two groups based on similarity of expression changes. the group of probesets exhibiting the largest increases in expression are referred to as the "a"  group and the group of probesets exhibiting the largest decreases in expression are referred to as the "b"  group . the splicerav index of a probeset equals its expression relative to the average expression of probesets in the opposite group. for example, the splicerav index of a probeset in the "a" group would be calculated by subtracting the average expression of the "b" group from that probeset's log <dig> expression value. in our analysis, splicerav indexes of probesets in the "a" group were defined as increased in aggressive cancers, while indexes of probesets in the "b" group were defined as decreased in aggressive cancers. pre-specified hypotheses generated in training datasets made unidirectional significance tests appropriate in independent validation datasets.

splicerav implementation
splicerav was implemented in perl, with a typical run time of 3- <dig> minutes on a standard personal computer and has not been tested using other operating systems. the program will only assess changes in alternative mrna processing for genes interrogated by multiple probesets, which varies widely by microarray platform. to explore the potential for splicerav to identify novel changes in mrna isform abundance in breast cancer, we applied splicerav to several publicly available, archival affymetrix hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  datasets.

splicerav predicts oncogene induced changes in alternative processing of splicing factors
studies of src  <cit> , hras  <cit> , and e2f family binding sites  <cit>  have demonstrated isolated roles of these oncogenes in affecting alternative mrna processing. nonetheless, prior to this study no large-scale examination of changes in alternative mrna processing had been undertaken for any of these oncogenes. we examined an oncogene over-expression microarray dataset published by nevins and colleagues  <cit>   to demonstrate splicerav's ability to detect oncogene driven changes in alternative processing. in this experiment, activated hras, src, e2f <dig>  activated β-catenin , myc, or green fluorescent protein  was over-expressed in human primary mammary epithelial cells. the affymetrix u <dig> plus  <dig>  microarray platform was used to assay gene expression in seven to ten replicates of each condition. probeset level intensities were estimated using the robust multichip averaging  procedure  <cit> .

splicerav compared changes in probeset expression between gfp and over-expression of the hras, src, e2f <dig>  ctnnb <dig>  or myc oncogenes . roughly  <dig>  genes were expressed above background in either gfp or oncogene over-expression, depending on the oncogene . more than  <dig>  of these genes were interrogated by multiple probesets, and could therefore be examined by splicerav for evidence of changes in alternative mrna processing . more than a hundred isoform specific changes were predicted for each oncogene . hras over-expression caused  <dig> significant isoform changes, suggesting hras-induced changes in alternative processing in nearly a tenth of all expressed genes. the median relative fold change between isoforms was  <dig>  , with  <dig>  of these genes predicted to undergo a greater than two fold change in relative isoform abundance .

complement med immunity 
g-protein mediated signaling 
mesoderm development 
cell structure and motility 
pre-mrna splicing 
the total number of unique genes expressed above background, targeted by multiple probesets, predicted to undergo changes in alternative processing, or those predicted to undergo ideal changes are shown in their respective columns for each oncogene . significantly enriched  biological processes or molecular functions of these genes are shown in order of decreasing significance. the number of genes in each go category is shown in parentheses.

gene isoform changes receiving both a significant p-value and a positive splice score indicate ideal candidates for further experimental study . hras and src over-expression resulted in  <dig> and  <dig> such events, while myc over-expression resulted in only  <dig> . one gene, programmed cell death protein  <dig> , underwent the same change in alternative processing upon over-expression of each of the five oncogenes . pdcd <dig> switched from an alternative isoform  to the major isoform , which codes  <dig> isoform specific c-terminal amino acids required for pdcd <dig> nuclear entry & activation of apoptosis  <cit> . gene ontology  analysis of isoform specific changes revealed a common selection for genes involved in mrna splicing . over-expression of all oncogenes other than myc each resulted in significant  enrichment of isoform specific changes in mrna splicing, pre-mrna splicing, or mrna processing factors . hras and src over-expression resulted in predicted isoform changes in  <dig>  and seven  factors involved in mrna splicing, respectively. both hras and e2f <dig> isoform specific changes were enriched for g-protein mediated signaling  and roles in immune function . sixty-seven genes were predicted to undergo isoform changes in common between two or more oncogenes. messenger rna processing factors  and mrna splicing factors  were the most significant molecular function and biological process represented by these genes.

hras over-expression results in isoform specific egfr mrna regulation
epidermal growth factor receptor  was the top ranked gene prediction in hras over-expression . egfr expression was interrogated by seven probesets, providing an ideal opportunity to examine the behavior of multiple probesets targeting different regions of the same gene. depending on the egfr region being interrogated, probesets reported either a significant increase or decrease in expression upon hras over-expression . four main mrna isoforms of egfr are annotated in the ncbi database, labeled a, b, c, and d. isoform a encodes the full length membrane bound tyrosine kinase receptor  <cit> . variants of isoform a have been observed with either long  or short  3'utrs . isoforms b and d encode truncated intracellular domains  and isoform c  encodes an egfr variant that lacks a trans-membrane domain and is expected to be soluble  <cit> .

probesets  <dig> and  <dig>  which target a region common to all four isoforms, reported highly concordant  expression levels across all  <dig> samples in the dataset . probesets targeting different transcript regions  reported poor or even inversely correlated expression levels, . due to this "outlier" behavior these probesets would be discarded during conventional microarray expression analysis  <cit> , however, splicerav data suggest that this behavior reflects isoform-specific regulation of egfr expression

egfr isoform a  appeared to be the primary transcript upregulated by hras over-expression, as evidenced by highly correlated expression of the probesets targeting the common and ashort isoforms . hras over-expression caused a robust decrease in the probeset targeting the long 3'utr of egfr  that was not correlated with expression of the common transcript region . in contrast, common and along expression levels were well correlated in non-hras samples . these data suggest a hras-specific shortening of the isoform a 3'utr.

we hypothesize that these hras-induced isoform changes promoted egfr activation via several mechanisms. hras increased overall isoform a transcript levels, as evidenced by significant increases in probesets interrogating common regions of the gene . at the same time, hras over-expression resulted in selection of a shorter 3' utr, which removes known mirna binding sites present in the along utr and likely increased translation of egfr mrnas  <cit> . widespread 3'utr shortening to escape mirna regulation has been observed previously in proliferating cells  <cit> . egfr isoforms b & d code for a truncated intracellular domain, which if translated could dimerize with and inhibit activation of both egfr and her <dig>  <cit> . the observed down-regulation of these isoforms is predicted to promote egfr <dig> and her <dig> activation  <cit> . it should be noted, however, that the corresponding truncated receptors have not been observed. soluble isoforms composed of the extracellular domain occur naturally and suppress ligand-dependent egfr signaling and oncogenic transformation in a dominant negative manner  <cit> . our data indirectly address expression levels of the soluble isoforms, which appear to be unchanged.

our data suggest that hras acts through several isoform-specific mechanisms to promote egfr family signaling. egfr signaling plays known roles in cell survival, proliferation, adhesion, migration, and differentiation  <cit> . both egfr and her <dig> are currently therapeutic targets in breast cancer  <cit> . our analysis here suggests that modified regulation of alternative mrna processing could be used as a novel means of egfr inhibition, similar to that shown recently for her <dig> using splice site switching oligonucleotides  <cit> .

splicerav predicted isoform changes exhibit low overlap with gene expression changes
using the same gene expression dataset, splicerav was able to predict a number of previously unappreciated changes in isoform specific mrna regulation. genes predicted to undergo isoform changes exhibited small overlap with genes predicted to undergo expression changes by conventional analysis, consistent with previous findings in the field  <cit> . hras and src over-expression resulted in the largest changes in both gene expression and isoform changes. of the <dig> genes predicted to undergo ideal isoform changes  in hras over-expression, only  <dig> genes  were also among the top  <dig> most significant changes by conventional expression analysis . of the top  <dig> predicted isoform changes in src over-expression, none were in the top  <dig> most significant expression changes. this low degree of overlap suggests that the results obtained via splicerav are largely orthogonal to that of conventional gene expression analyses. this low degree of overlap provides the potential for combining traditional gene expression signatures with splicerav isoform-based signatures to improve signature performance.

splicerav predicts isoform changes in high vs. low grade breast tumors
our analysis of oncogene regulated isoform expression demonstrated the ability to generate novel insights into cancer biology. we next determined if similar insights could be obtained from the analysis of alternative processing in clinical tumor samples. breast cancer has been extensively studied using high-throughput analyses of gene expression at the transcriptome level . in contrast, high-throughput analysis of alternative mrna processing in breast cancer has been addressed in only a handful of studies  <cit> . we explored the ability of splicerav to detect changes in alternative processing between low and high grade breast tumors in archival expression data.

sotiriou and colleagues profiled  <dig> tamoxifen treated, estrogen receptor  positive tumors obtained from guys hospital, london  using the affymetrix hg-u <dig> plus <dig> genechip™ <cit>  . using this dataset, we examined changes in probeset expression between low grade  and high grade  breast tumors. analysis was limited to probesets present on either the u133a or u133b arrays in order to validate changes in two independent data sets discussed in the next section.  <dig>  unique genes were expressed above background in either the low or high grade tumor samples. among the  <dig>  genes interrogated by multiple probesets, splicerav predicted that  <dig> genes underwent significant isoform changes between aggressive and non-aggressive breast tumors . removing genes with negative splice scores yielded a refined list of  <dig> genes. go analyses of these  <dig> genes revealed significant  enrichment for several molecular functions including guanyl-nucleotide exchange factors , metalloprotease inhibitors , ubiquitin-protein ligases , and mrna processing factors .

splicerav predicted isoform changes are associated with breast cancer survival
splicerav probeset groupings of genes identified in the guyt training set were used to create individual sample level indexes of relative isoform abundance. we tested an association of these splicerav indexes in two independent validation datasets to examine whether specific isoform changes observed in high grade tumors were also associated with poor patient prognosis . previous datasets generated by miller  <cit>   and pawitan  <cit>   have independently profiled breast tumor gene expression using the affymetrix u <dig> a and b microarrays . these studies include patient outcome, providing the opportunity to test for an association of isoform changes with survival in er positive tumors.

we generated  <dig> splicerav indexes from the  <dig> genes identified in the guyt training set and calculated their value for each tumor sample in the validation sets. for each splicerav index, tumors were sorted into the top and bottom 50th percentile of tumors. high and low splicerav index groups were then tested for a difference in survival. the guyt training set had previously determined whether a splicerav index was predicted to be increased or decreased in aggressive cancer . this pre-specified association with aggressive cancer was used to conduct one-sided logrank tests  for an association with breast cancer survival for each splicerav index in the validation datasets. failure in the miller dataset was defined as death from any cause and failure in the pawitan dataset was defined as death from breast cancer . of the  <dig> genes tested,  <dig> genes possessed indexes that were significantly associated with survival in both datasets . guanyl-nucleotide exchange factors  and mrna processing factors were both enriched among the original  <dig> genes tested. interestingly, these go categories were both represented among the  <dig> validated genes including arhgef <dig>  a guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor, and sfpq, an mrna processing factor.

†for genes possessing multiple significant splicerav indices, only one isoform is shown.

*significant association with survival , one sided log rank test

** significant association with survival , one sided log rank test

few studies have performed high-throughput examination of alternative processing in clinical tumor samples  <cit>  and to our knowledge no prior studies have examined changes in alternative mrna processing directly associated with cancer patient survival. this study examined isoform specific mrna levels in over  <dig> human clinical samples, providing support for the use of changes in alternative processing as potential prognostic markers in cancer.

arhgef <dig> &eif4e <dig> isoform changes are associated with breast cancer survival
a splicerav index for rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor  <dig>  was decreased in high vs. low grade tumors within the guyt dataset, and was significantly associated with survival in both the miller  and pawitan  datasets. arhgef <dig> expression was assayed by three annotated probesets, providing an opportunity to compare associations of survival with either splicerav index or individual probeset expression. the splicerav index for arhgef <dig> compared the ratio of a decreasing  probeset located in the 3'utr of arhgef <dig> to that of two increasing  probesets located in shorter transcripts . we compared the arhgef <dig> splicerav index and each individual probeset for an association with breast cancer survival and noted that the splicerav index outperformed individual probeset in both datasets .

a splicerav index for eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e family member  <dig>  was increased in high vs. low grade tumors within the guyt dataset, and was significantly associated with survival in both the miller  and pawitan  datasets. the splicerav index for eif4e <dig> compared the ratio of an increasing "up" probeset targeting a coding region to that of a decreasing "down" probeset located in the 3'utr of the longest transcript . for eif4e <dig>  survival could be predicted by an increase in the "up" probeset alone . low levels of the "down" probeset were only significantly associated with poor survival in the pawitan cohort .

whether or not individual probesets could demonstrate a consistent association with survival differed by gene. although individual probeset behavior may represent an alternative processing event, only through comparison with other probesets for that gene can splicerav uncover these relevant and predictive isoforms that would go unnoticed in conventional analyses.

combining isoform changes from multiple genes improves prediction of breast cancer survival
we chose a subset of the  <dig> validated isoform changes to examine the potential for generating an isoform signature that combined information from multiple isoform changes to improve prognostic accuracy. we initially chose the six genes, eif4e <dig>  arhgef <dig>  slc28a <dig>  pdxk, tncrna, and mapkap <dig>  that produced the clearest separation between good and poor survival in individual prognostic analyses . stratifying patients by splicerav index for each gene demonstrated the expected association with survival . the number of poor prognostic events was tallied for each patient. survival was then plotted for individuals with low , intermediate , or high  numbers of poor prognostic events . this stratification of patients by total poor prognostic events demonstrated highly significant associations with survival in both the miller  and pawitan  cohorts. the combined isoform signature demonstrated prognostic value beyond that of any individual isoform or probeset change.

similar to our in vitro analyses of oncogene over-expression, we observed low overlap between gene expression and splicerav changes. of the  <dig> isoform changes predicted by splicerav in the guyt training set that were later tested for an association with poor prognosis, only one gene , btd, was also among the top  <dig> differentially expressed genes. the orthogonality of candidate gene lists identified by splicerav and conventional methods suggests that these two methods detect different biological processes and may provide independent value in generating molecular classifiers. splicerav can generate both conventional and isoform specific gene expression analyses, and therefore provides two non-redundant datasets from one experiment.

general discussion
traditional analyses of gene expression data have considered the probeset as the basic unit of expression. under this paradigm, the presence of multiple probesets has been viewed largely as a nuisance. current approaches dealing with the issue of multiple probesets have used either probeset location or the mean, median, or largest probeset expression change to distill multiple probesets into a single gene level expression value. each of these approaches would have yielded a different readout of egfr expression changes in hras over-expression, making conventional interpretation inadequate for such genes. software has even been developed whose sole purpose is the removal of discordant probeset expression values for probesets targeting the same gene  <cit> .

we propose that for genes with multiple probesets, isoform specific expression changes may be a more appropriate means of interpreting standard microarray expression data than the current one gene = one probeset paradigm. previous algorithms  <cit>  have examined the possibility of investigating changes in alternative processing using single probeset level data. these methods have relied on custom chips, or would not have detected events predicted by splicerav in this paper because such methods do not examine events spanning multiple probesets. splicerav provides a systematic means by which to detect and interpret inconsistent probeset behavior within the same gene, a situation where an oversimplified perspective may be obscuring relevant and important biological changes.

this study marks the first en masse analysis of mrna isoform changes in existing conventional expression microarray data. we have shown here that re-analyzing such data using a different paradigm can uncover novel biological insights and potential prognostic markers.

CONCLUSIONS
the combination of material, personnel, and clinical costs of obtaining gene expression microarray data has resulted in a massive archive of these data accumulated over the past two decades. many previously created datasets, particularly clinical datasets, are unique and cannot be reproduced. numerous private and public repositories of microarray expression data exist, with the largest public repository, gene expression omnibus, containing over  <dig>  data samples from the affymetrix u <dig> and u <dig> series alone. in this paper we demonstrate the utility of spicerav, the first program used to analyze this existing data en masse for isoform specific changes that can result from alternative mrna processing.

