BACKGROUND
expression of gfp-fusion proteins in live cells revolutionized cell biology by allowing for visualization and tracking of proteins of interest in real time at high spatio-temporal resolution. a few years ago, encouraged by the successful use of gfp and of other fluorescent proteins, several laboratories began to develop photoactivatable and photoconvertible fluorescent proteins , which typically undergo a pronounced increase or shift in their spectral emission properties in response to uv-violet  or, in case of dendra <dig> also intense blue light  illumination  <cit> . monomeric anthozoa-derived green-to-red photoconvertible fluorescent proteins  showed particular promise for improved methods of tracking the dynamics of discrete protein pools within cells  <cit> . in the dark, these proteins mature to a green fluorescent state with a half-time of about  <dig> minutes at 37°c  <cit> , while irradiation with uv-violet light  results in their irreversible transition into a very photostable, bright-red fluorescent state that can be tracked for hours and days without significant photobleaching on a fluorescence microscope  <cit> .

protein kinetics and rates of protein exchange are typically determined through the use of techniques such as fluorescence recovery after photobleaching  or fluorescence loss in photobleaching . however, these techniques are limited in that photobleached protein populations may not be tracked beyond the point of photobleaching. obviously, photoconversion offers a distinct advantage over photobleaching, if continuous tracking of subpopulations of tagged proteins is desired.

over the past decade, we have used green fluorescent protein  fusions and other color variants to track the dynamics of gap junction  channels in living cells, including by frap and flip techniques  <cit> . gj channels assemble from hexamers of the four-pass transmembrane proteins called connexins  that cluster together into so-called "plaques" in the lateral plasma membranes of cells to provide direct cell-to-cell communication and physical cell-cell coupling . gj plaques can be aligned in two principal orientations: perpendicular to the image plane, providing a view onto their edge ; or horizontally, if cells grow partially on top of each other, providing a view onto their surface  . a typical gj plaque can consist of hundreds to thousands of densely packed individual channels. gjs are surprisingly dynamic membrane structures. their structural connexin proteins have been found to turn over with a half-life of only  <dig> to  <dig> hours  <cit> . tagging of cx-proteins with tetrameric photoconvertible fluorescent proteins, such as dsred was found not to be feasible, probably due to the disruption of appropriate cx-oligomerization by the tetrameric fp tag  <cit> . however, monomeric fluorescent protein tags such as gfp, mcherry, meos <dig>  or dendra <dig> are tolerated by many different proteins without detectable interference with their function, including cxs  <cit> . we report an efficient technique that makes photoconversion and tracking of discrete protein pools feasible on simpler, less expensive mercury arc-based fluorescence microscopes equipped with standard fluorescence filter sets that complements previously published more sophisticated laser scanning confocal microscope-based techniques  <cit> . we demonstrate the feasibility of this technique using dendra2-tagged histone h2b , connexin <dig> , α-tubulin , and clathrin light chain  as examples of proteins exhibiting a wide array of dynamic properties. a detailed step-by-step photoconversion protocol is provided.

RESULTS
to demonstrate the feasibility of photoconverting and tracking discrete subcellular pafp-tagged protein pools on a wide-field fluorescence microscope, we generated and used cdna constructs in which dendra <dig> or meos <dig>  two available comparable monomeric pafps, were fused to the c-terminus of the gj protein cx <dig>  or to the n-termini of histone h2b, α-tubulin and clathrin light chain  <cit> . in transiently transfected hela cells, we observed expression, assembly, trafficking and localization of all four fusion-protein constructs similar to untagged, or gfp-tagged fusion constructs as reported previously  <cit>  . using 450- <dig> nm mercury arc lamp illumination , significantly attenuated by neutral density filters , we were able to visualize and image green dendra2- and meos2-fluorescence without unintentionally photoconverting these pafps from green to red fluorescence .

dendra2/meos <dig> fusion-protein pools underwent precise and selective photoconversion by moving the target areas to the center of the visible field, closing the field diaphragm to pinhole size , and exposing the areas to full, 330- <dig> nm illumination  for 5- <dig> seconds. use of a dapi-filter cube with  <dig> nm long-pass emission filter  allowed to observe and manipulate the photoconversion process in real time. following photoconversion, filters were switched to the red fluorescence filter cube , the field diaphragm was re-opened completely, and the red photoconverted dendra <dig> signal was detected and imaged using the red filter cube. depending on exposure time, up to 90% of the green dendra2/meos <dig> fluorescence in the target area was photoconverted into red fluorescence within a few seconds . green fluorescence outside the target area was not converted . subsequent to photoconversion, cells were imaged repeatedly in both green  and red channels at indicated time intervals for up to  <dig> hours .

over a 5-hour period, in live cells expressing cx43-dendra <dig>  we observed a significant loss of red fluorescence from the target area and recovery of the green fluorescence signal , indicating the continuous removal of older, red photoconverted cx43-dendra2-based gj channels and delivery of newly synthesized, green cx43-dendra <dig> channels to gj plaques , as observed previously for gjs using other fluorescence based techniques  <cit> . to confirm that photoconversion was irreversible and stable, and we were not observing theoretical auto-recovery of green dendra2-fluorescence, we fixed cx43-dendra <dig> expressing cells in formaldehyde following photoconversion. no recovery of green fluorescence was observed hours, or even days post conversion .

to track accrual of new channels to gj plaques, a  <dig> μm diameter region  encircling two cx43-dendra <dig> gj plaques was photoconverted from green to red fluorescence  and imaged every  <dig> minutes for  <dig> hours. after  <dig> hour, a distinct rim of newly accrued  channels had appeared along the edges of the photoconverted  gj plaques  that became wider and more intense over time , indicating that new channels are indeed accrued along the outer edges of gj plaques, while older channels are simultaneously removed from plaque centers as schematically shown in figure 1d and in references  <cit> . these findings are consistent with what has previously been reported for channel accrual to gj plaques using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching  and successive flash and reash labeling techniques  <cit> .

to investigate whether this technique would allow estimation of protein turnover kinetics, a portion of a perpendicular oriented cx43-dendra <dig> gj plaque was photoconverted from green to red fluorescence as described above  and imaged every  <dig> minutes. over time, we detected red fluorescent puncta in the cytoplasm adjacent to photoconverted plaques that accumulated over the  <dig> min time period . the red fluorescent puncta we recognized as degradative endocytic vesicles that were released from the photoconverted gj plaque area and later were degraded by lysosomal pathways  <cit>  . these red fluorescent vesicles were not detected immediately post-photoconversion , suggesting that they were not already present in the cytoplasm at the time of photonversion. calculating surface areas of released vesicles revealed a half-life of ~ <dig>  hours   <cit>  that falls within the estimated half-life of 1- <dig> hours reported previously for gjs  <cit> . while certainly possible on wide-field microscopes, quantitative photoconversion experiments depending on the target, may however better be performed on confocal microscope systems, that allow to precisely restrict the photoconversion laser beam to the target area without potentially photoconverting unintentionally other structures, that are also located within the circular wide-field microscope photoconversion area  <cit> .

histones h2a, h2b, h <dig>  and h <dig> are the core protein components of nucleosomes and are known to be bound stably to interphase chromatin; and this was confirmed by the appearance of the photoconverted red dendra2-histone-h2b fluorescence that stayed locally unchanged over time in the cell nuclei of living, dendra2-histone-h2b-expressing hela cells imaged before, immediately after, and  <dig> hour after photoconversion .

in contrast, clathrin and tubulin are known to be highly dynamic cellular proteins and this was confirmed in our photoconversion experiments. microtubules are assembled from α/β-tubulin dimers and both populations, assembled microtubules as well as unassembled cytoplasmically located tubulin dimers , are visible in living dendra2-α-tubulin expressing hela cells . in addition, microtubules are known to constantly grow and shrink, resulting in a dynamic exchange of subunits in an assembled microtubule. within a few minutes after a distal portion of a dendra2-α-tubulin expressing hela cell was partially photoconverted , red photoconverted and remaining green α-tubulin pools were observed to intermix, consistent with the known dynamic growth behavior of microtubules, and the mobility of unassembled subunits in the cytoplasm. tubulin dynamics resulted in a diffusion of red fluorescence away from the distal, photoconverted area and an increasing re-occurrence of unconverted green α-tubulin in the distal cell area within several minutes after photoconversion .

clathrin triskelions consisting of three light and three heavy chains assemble into flat, and curved lattices on the plasma membrane to build the coats of endocytic vesicles. numerous such vesicles are visible in living hela cells expressing meos2-clathrin light chain . within  <dig> minutes after a distal portion of this vesicle pool in a cell was successfully photoconverted , red photoconverted and remaining green vesicles were observed to move laterally and to intermix with each other, consistent with the dynamic nature of these vesicles that are trafficked throughout the cell along microtubules .

while several studies have described photoconversion of pafps using laser scanning confocal microscopy  <cit> , we describe here pafp-photoconversion of discrete protein pools using a simpler, less expensive mercury arc-based microscope system. as such, there are restrictions presented by photoconverting pafps on a standard wide-field fluorescence microscope as opposed to a laser scanning confocal microscope system. first, the smallest region that can be photoconverted is limited in size and shape to a circular area of about  <dig> μm  that is defined by the minimal remaining opening of the field diaphragm. however, aftermarket  <dig> μm diameter pinhole- and slit-sliders are available to partially overcome this limitation .

since photon emission of mercury arc bulbs is less intense compared to lasers, photoconversion on mercury-arc lamp based microscope systems takes longer , and photoconversion might remain incomplete . prolonged exposure to short-wavelength light can be detrimental to living cells that may react by inducing apoptosis in response to toxic short-wavelength illumination . thus, the addition of hepes-buffer and oxyrase  to the cell-culture medium to degrade toxic oxygen radicals generated during short-wavelength excitation is recommended. also, dendra <dig> and meos2's major photoconversion wavelength is  <dig> nm  <cit>  and optical filters allowing specific excitation at this red-shifted, less harmful wavelength are commercially available . on the other hand, due to the less intense mercury arc lamp illumination, photobleaching instead of photoconversion that will occur on confocal microscope systems if laser power is set too high is not problematic. furthermore, dendra <dig>  has a second less efficient photoconversion peak at  <dig> nm  <cit>  that renders green dendra <dig> sensitive to intense blue light; and allows dendra <dig>  to be photoconverted on standard argon-helium/neon laser-equipped confocal microscopes. thus, when imaging green dendra <dig>  illumination attenuated by a neutral density filter  is required to avoid inadvertent photoconversion. however, if phototoxicity due to uv-violet illumination should be a problem, less efficient, but marginally toxic un-attenuated fitc-filter illumination  can be used to photoconvert dendra <dig>  instead of using the dapi filter set.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate here efficient and irreversible photoconversion of discrete subcellular protein pools of cells grown in culture on wide-field fluorescence microscopes, equipped with standard filter cubes and mercury arc-lamp illumination, using several dendra2- and meos2-tagged proteins with a wide variety of dynamic properties as examples. dendra <dig> and meos <dig> behaved comparable in respect of time required for photoconversion , and conversion efficiency . photobleaching during photoconversion, and afterwards during repeated imaging, was not observed as being problematic. the advantage of this method is its greater simplicity requiring easier to use, less expensive microscope systems that makes this technique especially appealing to less well equipped institutions, for instructional and teaching purposes, and to applications where defining a region of interest of specific size or shape  is not required. disadvantages to laser scanning confocal microscope-based photoconversion techniques include the limited control of the region to be photoconverted , and longer, potentially more toxic uv-violet photoconversion times. together with previously described laser scanning confocal microscope-based photoconversion methods, this technique promises to further increase the general usability of photoconvertible pafps to track the dynamic movement of cells and proteins over time. this technique may also be applicable to locally un-cage fluorescent probes, activate pagfp, or to study the effects of locally induced photo-damage.

