BACKGROUND
the extremely high biodiversity at the two global coral reef hotspots – the indo-malay archipelago  in the indo-pacific, and the greater caribbean  region in the atlantic – has long intrigued marine biologists  <cit> . two primary hypotheses have been proposed to explain such richness and the corresponding biodiversity gradients moving away from those regions: the center of origin  hypothesis, introduced by darwin as "centers of creation"  <cit> , proposes that species originate in the center and disperse to the periphery, and the high central diversity arises through in-situ speciation  <cit> . according to briggs, the most prominent contemporary supporter of this hypothesis, centers of diversity "act as centers of evolutionary radiation and supply species to other areas that are less effective in an evolutionary sense"  <cit> . evidence from recent phylogenetic  <cit>  and species-distribution surveys  <cit>  support the co model for the ima. in contrast, the center of accumulation  hypothesis proposes that diversity centers accumulate species that originated elsewhere. the ima lies on the western boundary of the pacific and westward flowing ocean currents could transport the pelagic larvae of species originating anywhere in the pacific to the ima  <cit> . a recent analysis of reef fish and coral distributions in the indian and pacific oceans concluded that deviations from a random species-richness pattern predicted by a mid-domain model are consistent with this hypothesis  <cit> .

genetic surveys of sea urchins, marine gastropods and cowries in the indo-pacific indicate that species formation has occurred throughout the region  <cit> , both inside the center of diversity  and outside the ima . likewise, the reef fish genera thalassoma and halichoeres display no clear pattern, as ancient and recent species occur both in the ima and elsewhere in the pacific  <cit> . these and other studies have led to the proposition that both origin and accumulation of species contribute to the high diversity of the ima  <cit> .

patterns of genetic variation within widely distributed species can offer clues that may indicate how origin and accumulation contribute to a center of diversity  <cit> . there are four ways in which intra-specific genetic variation can contribute pertinent information:  resolution of the geographic locations of both phylogenetically ancestral or basal dna sequences  and recent or derived haplotypes. under a co scenario, basal lineages should be found at the center of diversity. in contrast, the restriction of ancestral haplotypes to peripheral populations would support the ca model.  patterns of variation in genetic diversity throughout the species range could also be informative. under the co hypothesis, higher haplotype and nucleotide diversities should occur in the diversity centers, but away from the center under the ca hypothesis. note, however, that the value of such evidence is limited because at equilibrium, the largest population will have the highest diversity, regardless of age. further,  mismatch distributions and population genetic analyses may offer other useful clues about the geography of origination and subsequent dispersal: in old, widely distributed species, basal haplotypes  and derived haplotypes  may occur in all populations. however, if the species recently expanded its range the younger populations would be less variable, may exhibit star-like parsimony networks with a few very common haplotypes and many rare haplotypes, and would have a poisson-like mismatch distribution  <cit> . finally,  direction of migration can also be informative: gene flow away from the center to the periphery would support the co hypothesis whereas the reverse flow would favor ca  <cit> .

while attention has been focused on evolutionary mechanisms producing the indo-pacific center of diversity, the co and ca hypotheses have never been tested in the tropical atlantic ocean. the tropical atlantic is an appropriate forum for such a test because geographically and oceanographically it is a much simpler system than the western pacific, and, due to its isolation from the indo-pacific, allows independent tests of the proposed mechanisms of diversity production. this area comprises four tropical biogeographic provinces: the greater caribbean ; brazil ; the mid-atlantic ridge , and the tropical eastern atlantic   <cit>  . geologically the mid-atlantic ridge includes st. paul's rocks  as well as ascension and st. helena. however, effects of geographic proximity mandate that the shore fishes of st. paul's are more closely related to the brazilian fauna  <cit> .

the biogeographic barriers separating these provinces include vast geographic and oceanic distances lacking suitable habitat: the northeastern south american coast is heavily influenced by freshwater outflow, and there is no coral reef development in the  <dig>  km wide area between the amazon's mouth and trinidad & tobago; the eastern and western atlantic, as well as the central atlantic islands, are separated from the other provinces by thousands of kilometers of deep open ocean  <cit> . previous mtdna surveys of reef fishes and sea urchins have revealed deep phylogenetic breaks among these four tropical biogeographic provinces  <cit> , as well as the existence of some species that can apparently transcend some of the barriers through dispersal of pelagic larval and juvenile stages  <cit> .

here we analyze patterns of genetic diversity based on mtdna sequences in a common, widespread atlantic reef fish – the brown chromis  across all four tropical atlantic biogeographic provinces. the combination of this transatlantic distribution and the lack of a marked genetic break between populations in the two western atlantic provinces  makes it a good candidate to study the roles of origin versus accumulation in explaining high species diversity in the greater caribbean. additionally, we re-evaluated data from four species groups, published in two previous studies of atlantic reef fishes  <cit>  that reported genetic lineages shared by brazil and the caribbean. our main objectives were: 1) to search for signatures of origin vs. accumulation of genetic diversity in the greater caribbean, which is the atlantic center of diversity for tropical reef organisms; and 2) to assess how the barriers between major biogeographic provinces influence the population structure of c. multilineata, a widely distributed reef fish with a relatively short pelagic larval stage.

RESULTS
an  <dig> bp segment from the cytochrome b gene was analyzed for  <dig> individuals obtained from ten locations  spanning the entire geographical range of chromis multilineata on both sides of the tropical atlantic. a total of  <dig> polymorphic sites distributed among  <dig> haplotypes were identified for those individuals. mean nucleotide frequencies were a =  <dig> , c =  <dig> , g =  <dig> , t =  <dig> . the transition – transversion ratio was  <dig> : <dig>  average pairwise distances between populations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mean nucleotide substitutions  within the western/central atlantic, and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mean nucleotide substitutions  between the eastern atlantic and the other three provinces. haplotype diversity  in c. multilineata was very high, with unique haplotypes present in  <dig> % of the individuals. populations in caribbean, in brazil and in the central atlantic each had slightly higher haplotype diversity , than the tropical eastern atlantic populations , although those differences are not statistically significant. nucleotide diversity  was low in all populations, but highest  in the caribbean .

sample size , number of haplotypes , haplotype diversity , nucleotide diversity , mean number of pairwise differences within populations , fu's fs and ramos-onsins and rozas' r <dig> tests followed by their respective p-values , τ , θ <dig> , θ <dig>  for all populations surveyed. asterisks  indicate significance at a 95% confidence interval.

within each of the four biogeographical provinces, pairwise population differentiation  values are very close to zero and not significant indicating extensive gene flow among locations . significant population separations  were observed between caribbean and south atlantic  populations, whereas no significant differences were observed between the brazilian and central atlantic provinces. interestingly, connections between the southern caribbean locations  and the south atlantic were stronger than those between st. croix  and the south atlantic . all comparisons between east and west/central atlantic populations were significant , reflecting an evolutionary genetic partition . amova analysis  shows that divergence between the e atlantic and the remaining provinces accounted for  <dig> % of the total molecular variance. phylogenetic analyses indicate that the ancestral mtdna lineages are located in the caribbean .

asterisks  indicate significance at a 99% confidence interval. significance  is the probability of finding a variance component and f-statistic that are grater than or equal to the observed values and was tested using a non-parametric approach , with at least  <dig>  permutations of the dataset.

two groups were defined, western atlantic, comprising the combination of the brazilian, caribbean and central atlantic island populations, and eastern atlantic, composed of cape verde and sao tome. fixation indices are fct: genetic variation between regions; fsc: genetic variation among populations within regions; and fst: genetic variation among all populations. significance  is the probability of finding a variance component and f-statistic that are greater than or equal to the observed values and was tested using a non-parametric approach , with at least  <dig>  permutations of the dataset.

demographic history was assessed through analysis of pairwise mismatch distributions of all populations . caribbean populations have the wider mismatch distributions , followed by the brazilian/central atlantic populations , then the eastern atlantic populations . pairwise mismatch distributions  were not significantly different from values expected under a model of population expansion  <cit> , except for the population at st. paul's rocks. fu's fs and the ramos-onsins and rozas's r <dig> also yield a significant signal for population expansion at all locations except st. paul's rocks . the coalescence analysis revealed that mutational time  values were similar for western and central atlantic populations and lower for the eastern atlantic. population sizes greater than zero before expansion  were only observed in the caribbean , possibly indicating an older age for this population.

due to the lack of genetic differences among each of the three brazilian samples , among each of the three caribbean samples , between the two mid-atlantic locations , and between the two eastern atlantic locations , data from each group were combined to calculate bidirectional migration rates among the four provinces. our analysis shows much migration from both brazil and the central atlantic to the gc, but little in the reverse direction, and virtually none between the western/central atlantic and eastern atlantic .

in addition to the chromis multilineata analysis, we built maximum parsimony networks  using previously published data from the reef fish genera halichoeres  <cit>  and sparisoma  <cit> . in fig. 6a, the network of h. bivittatus indicates migration from brazil to the caribbean. in fig. 6b, individuals of h. radiatus from the brazilian oceanic islands are derived from the caribbean group, indicating migration in the reverse direction, with the caribbean becoming a center of origin. the two sparisoma networks  show that populations and species restricted to the se corner of the caribbean are closely related to the brazilian form.

discussion
phylogeography of the brown chromis
previous genetic surveys of reef organisms in the tropical atlantic have produced a mosaic of outcomes in terms of the levels of separation among different provinces, with virtually every conceivable pattern being evident  <cit> . the short-spined sea urchin , the red lip blenny , and some wrasses of the genera thalassoma and halichoeres show deep genetic breaks  that correspond to the four major tropical atlantic biogeographic provinces  <cit> . in the ocean surgeonfish , gc populations are separated from those in brazil and the central atlantic by an mtdna sequence divergence of d =  <dig> %, but no difference is observed between populations at brazil and the mid-atlantic islands  <cit> . other species show little differentiation throughout the tropical w atlantic , or even throughout the entire tropical atlantic . in contrast, at the lower end of the spatial scale, some species of wrasses  and cleaner gobies  show deep genetic breaks and reciprocally monophyletic groups on a scale of tens of km within the gc  <cit> .

in c. multilineata, three levels of genetic diversity were observed: first, the tropical eastern atlantic populations formed a monophyletic group, separated from all other populations by at least seven diagnostic mutations. second, there was a significant shift in haplotype frequencies between the gc and the south atlantic  indicating population breaks between the gc and those two provinces . third, there was no detectable genetic difference between the brazilian and central atlantic populations. the pattern that emerges from most atlantic phylogeography studies is that when deep divergences are present, they generally correspond to the major biogeographic provinces, although there are notable instances of strong within-province differentiation .

in the brown chromis and other reef organisms, the divergence between the eastern atlantic and the remaining populations  may be explained by  <dig>  km or more  of unsuitable open-ocean distances, combined with the general east to west direction of prevailing currents at low latitudes. while low but significant pairwise comparisons were observed between the two provinces of the south atlantic  and the caribbean, separated by no more than  <dig>  km, no difference was observed between brazil and the central atlantic islands, separated by  <dig>  km.

low genetic structure, such as that seen in c multilineata might be expected in organisms with a long pelagic larval stage  <cit>  and a similar signal has been observed in the long-spined sea urchin, genus diadema with a ~ <dig> week larval stage  <cit>  and the ocean surgeonfish, acanthurus bahianus, which has a larval duration of ~ <dig> days  <cit> . c. multilineata, however, has a relatively short pelagic larval stage averaging  <dig> days , which is substantially less than the average time  to cross from brazil to the mid-atlantic  <cit> . however, juvenile c. multilineata have been observed in association with floating debris in belize , and juvenile chromis atrilobata  have been observed in open water under floating objects  <cit> ; d. r. robertson pers. obs.). thus, young c. multilineata juveniles survive in the open ocean long after transforming from the larval stage, and relatively strong tropical currents connecting the mid-atlantic islands and brazil may transport juvenile chromis between those locations  <cit> . transport from the western and central atlantic to the eastern atlantic evidently has been much less frequent, probably due to larger distances involved in direct transport from w to e atlantic and smaller source populations for dispersal from the tiny central atlantic islands  to the eastern atlantic.

the mismatch distribution analysis , ramos-onsins and rozas's r <dig> test for recent population expansion and fu's fs neutrality test  indicate that all populations have undergone a recent expansion, except for that at the diminutive st. paul's rocks. this expansion was probably caused by the ~ <dig> fold increase in suitable shallow reef habitat associated with the sea-level rise of ~ <dig> m since the last glacial maximum  <cit> . st. paul's rocks is an exception: because there is no shelf at that island, which is a pillar rising vertically from deep water  <cit> , available habitat probably hasn't increased with sea-level rise. thus the lack of an expansion signal may reflect a relatively constant population size due to stability in habitat availability. the lower number of pairwise differences, and haplotype and nucleotide diversities observed at cape verde and sao tome in the eastern atlantic, indicate a more recent expansion at those locations than in the western and central atlantic. in addition to lower sea-levels and corresponding reduced habitat available during the last glacial period in the eastern atlantic, water temperatures in that area were lowered more than in the western and central atlantic by enhanced coastal upwelling  <cit> , a stress on tropical species that may have caused strong fluctuations or reductions in population size.

migration patterns among populations  are consistent with the general direction of surface current flows : the highest rates are from the south atlantic to the caribbean  and from brazil to the mid-atlantic islands . in accordance with the phylogenetic results, migration between western and eastern atlantic  was effectively zero.

the greater caribbean hotspot: center of origin and center of accumulation
our phylogeographic analysis of c. multilineata provides two lines of evidence relevant to the mechanism that produced the gc hotspot of diversity. first, supporting accumulation, the short  branches are mostly in brazil and the central atlantic islands . however, the short branches also include a few caribbean haplotypes , indicating that the lineages diversified in the south atlantic, and that individuals carrying those haplotypes recently arrived in the caribbean. this south to north pattern of dispersal is consistent with the pattern of oceanic current flow  and migration rates , and indicates that the hotspot of diversity in the caribbean has acted recently as a ca.

similarly to what we describe here for c. multilineata, the panamanian sample of the wrasse halichoeres bivittatus has one individual  with a haplotype that is more similar to those found in brazil than those in other caribbean locations , indicating the recent arrival of a haplotype of south atlantic origin  <cit> . additionally, in the goby genus gnatholepis, and the angelfish genus centropyge, the atlantic species are recently derived from much more diverse indo-pacific groups, and apparently only recently arrived in the gc from the indian ocean via the south atlantic  <cit> , supporting accumulation of species at the gc hotspot.

the phylogeny of parrotfishes  also supports accumulation at the caribbean . the parrotfish s. axillare is abundant and widely distributed throughout the brazilian coast, but known only from se venezuela in the caribbean, indicating that the population there is probably a result of recent dispersal from brazil. likewise, the parrotfish s. griseorubra is restricted to the southern caribbean  and its sister species is s. frondosum , indicating that s. griseorubra likely originated from ancient dispersal by the ancestor of the s. frondosum/s. griseorubra lineage. the splitting of s. frondosum and s. griseorubra alternatively could be explained by sympatric speciation in the caribbean  followed by dispersal towards brazil. however, speciation with gene flow in reef fishes has only been inferred when there are strong ecological gradients  <cit> , or where the fish are strictly associated with coral hosts  <cit> . as this is not the case for sparisoma, this alternative is less likely than an allopatric split between brazil and the caribbean after dispersal northwards by a brazilian lineage.

supporting origin at the caribbean, almost all basal haplotypes of the c. multilineata tree are observed only in caribbean individuals , which indicates that populations at the three other regions are derived from a caribbean ancestor. moreover, the caribbean samples  have the widest mismatch distributions  indicating that this region hosts the oldest and most stable population. we can also infer that, because all eastern atlantic haplotypes apparently have a single origin , they most likely originated from a single colonization event  on the order of two hundred thousand years ago . the recent finding of centropyge aurantonotus in the eastern atlantic  and the general direction of trans-atlantic range expansion in the gold spot goby  <cit>  support this rare west to east colonization route.

lending further support to the co hypothesis, populations of the wrasse h. radiatus in brazilian oceanic islands are much more closely related to caribbean h. radiatus than to populations of h. brasiliensis  in the adjacent coast line, indicating that these islands were colonized by migrants of caribbean origin . a similar pattern of southward dispersal from the gc to the offshore brazilian islands has been observed in gobies of the genus bathygobius  <cit> . colonization outward from the caribbean must be a rare event because it goes against prevailing currents, but as our analysis indicates, it has happened and can lead to the establishment of new populations, supporting the co hypothesis.

support for origin of diversity in the gc comes from other recent phylogenetic and biogeographic analyses. a survey of seven-spined gobies  <cit>  shows that two peripheral species of elacatinus  are older species whereas the  <dig> newest  elacatinus species are found only in the caribbean biodiversity hotspot. that is, recent speciation that produced 83% of the species in this genus occurred within the gc. likewise, the diverse families chaenopsidae and labrisomidae are represented in the gc by  <dig> species each, but elsewhere in the atlantic there are only four and  <dig> atlantic species in each of these families respectively  <cit> . hamlets  include as many as a dozen or more closely related "species" and are restricted entirely to the gc  <cit> . thus, speciation leading to considerable faunal enrichment most likely occurred in situ within the gc in those four taxa.

recent phylogenetic analyses of large reef fish groups also provide useful information to this debate. among wrasses , the caribbean and eastern pacific halichoeres are for the most part monophyletic, indicating that they diversified in situ and supporting co in a recent time scale, but at the same time their diverse group of ancestors is composed of indo-pacific species  <cit>  supporting ca deeper in time, on a scale of tens of millions of years. similarly to the wrasses, the caribbean groupers of the genera epinephelus and mycteroperca are monophyletic groups derived from indo-pacific ancestors  <cit> , supporting both ancient ca and more recent co. the caribbean butterflyfishes are mostly a paraphyletic assemblage of lineages derived from more diverse indo-pacific groups, supporting ca  <cit> . within the damselfishes, the caribbean  species abudefduf saxatilis seems to be a recent arrival from the indo-pacific , also supporting ca  <cit> . even though these large scale phylogenies are useful, most lack peripheral  endemics, making their contribution to this debate limited. however they provide an excellent framework that, with the addition of a few key species, may become an important piece in the tropical biodiversity puzzle.

CONCLUSIONS
our data indicates that the greater caribbean is both a center of origin and accumulation for genetic lineages within species  and for sister species within genera . such bidirectional dispersal is also reflected in the geographic distributions of tropical atlantic fishes and invertebrates: several species that are widely distributed in the brazilian coast are also recorded in the southeastern corner of the caribbean  <cit> . likewise some widely distributed caribbean species also occur in northern brazil, sometimes on only a few reefs south of the amazon outflow, evidence of recent southward dispersal  <cit> .

we conclude, on the basis of multiple lines of evidence, that the gc marine biodiversity hotspot did not arise through the action of a single mode of microevolutionary change. this diversity is the product of a more complex and idiosyncratic process in different taxa, and it is clear from the accumulating data that several mechanisms have contributed. the hypotheses of center of origin and center of accumulation are not mutually exclusive, and acting in concert, as they have done in the gc, origin and accumulation can generate more diversity than either process acting alone.

in closing we note that the ima is a much larger hotspot than the gc, in terms of both geography and biodiversity. the ima hotspot is flanked on both sides by the numerous archipelagos of the pacific and indian oceans, a feature nearly absent for the gc hotspot. moreover, the gc is marked by a turbulent history involving extinctions of many reef-associated organisms in the past few million years  <cit> , a feature not yet detected at the ima. we suggest that the larger size and greater stability of the ima, combined with its extensive halo of peripheral habitats, serves to strengthen the biodiversity feedback between hotspots and other areas, and contribute to the global center biodiversity in the ima. finally, it remains to be seen whether the principles of origin and accumulation apply to terrestrial biodiversity, or whether these evolutionary mechanisms are restricted to high-dispersal media, the exclusive domain of the world's oceans.

