BACKGROUND
the ability to detect the presence of gmo is pivotal for consumers to be able to exercise their lifestyle choice of whether to consume, or not, food containing gmos. though the detection and quantification of gmo proteins using immunoassay has been reported  <cit> , denaturation of the protein during processing makes the method unsuitable for gmo testing and quantification of food. the durability of dna makes it a better substrate for testing and its amplification by pcr is the method of choice, as recommended by the ec , for detection and quantification of gmo in samples.

an alternative dna amplification method was described by notomi and coworkers  <cit>  called 'loop mediated isothermal amplification' . the lamp assay relies on the design of a set of primers that generate stem looped  structures during the early stage of dna synthesis. the hairpin structures form because two of the primers used contain, at their 5' end, a reverse complement of a sequence that is present in the target further downstream of the initial binding site. displacement primers help the formation of these hairpins at the ends of the dna strands and once formed, these structures can be copied into a series of dna fragments containing multiple units of the target sequence under isothermal conditions utilizing the displacement properties of bst polymerase . although lamp was first described using a set of four primers, enhanced sensitivity was reported using an additional pair of loop primers  <cit> . as the reactions are performed at a single temperature, lamp assays can be performed very quickly since there are no separate denaturation, annealing and extension steps, and as such, reactions do not require thermalcyclers. here we assess the lamp protocol for the detection of gmos using primers that target event-specific sequences for transgenic ms <dig> and rf <dig> oilseed rape  and generic gmo sequences such as the cauliflower mosaic virus 35s promoter  and the promoter and terminator for the nopaline synthase gene  from agrobacterium spp.

RESULTS
specificty of lamp
the lamp technique relies on the design of an inter-related set of primers. the orientation and positions are important for self-priming through stem-looped products that drive and perpetuate the reaction.

the osr events ms <dig> and rf <dig> arise from the insertion of two closely related transgenes from the plasmids, pthw <dig> and pthw <dig>  respectively  <cit> . the former encodes the barnase gene that give rise to male sterility, which is replaced in the latter by the barstar gene which restores fertility: both also have the selectable marker bar which confers tolerance to the herbicide glufosinate ammonium. though the left border of the rf <dig> insert has undergone rearrangement in the form of duplication and inversion  <cit> , the right borders of both events are relatively intact .

even though the insertions of the transgenes have different breakpoints from the plasmids, they are very close so it was possible to design assays for the rf <dig> and ms <dig> events utilizing a common set of primers within the transgenes . when used in conjunction with primers for the plant sequence at the border of each event, they are able to detect each event . since they have 50% of primers in common, it was important to determine whether there was any cross reaction between the assays. specificity of the two assays was tested using plasmid dna for each event. no cross-reaction between the two targets was observed .

lamp sensitivity
the sensitivity of the lamp reaction was assessed in two ways: copy number detection and background in which  <dig> copies of the target could be detected. copy number detection was measured by serial dilutions of known amounts of dna containing the target sequences, either as genomic or plasmid dna . reactions fail in both assays at dna molecule number of less than  <dig> which is consistent with the stochastic probability of a target being present  <cit> .

we note that sometimes non-specific amplification can also take place, especially where the target dna is absent  and there is low amounts of dna present in the reaction . these do not form the specific banding patterns representing the different multimeric lamp products that are characteristic for each assay and thus can be easily distinguished on a gel. alternative banding patterns have been observed, also for low template reactions; analyses of these products show that they are formed by interactions of the primers used  <cit> , to form lamp equivalents of primer-dimers. two factors seem to be important: in the absence of target, low background dna may aid the formation of non-specific products that go on to be amplified; and freeze-thaw repetitions may induce damage to the primers to permit the formation of 'primer intermediates' which can then be amplified. since lamp is capable of non-specific amplification, techniques that rely on the detection of by-products of dna synthesis, e.g., the use of magnesium pyrophosphate precipitation  <cit>  or the use of sybr green dye  <cit>  may not be able to distinguish between real and false positives. lamp can still be useful as a quick primary gel-free screen, where 'positives' can then undergo a second screening such as gel electrophoresis.

the sensitivity of the lamp assay and its suitability for practical gmo detection was tested using assays for commonly-used sequence motifs, the camv 35s promoter  and the agrobacterium promoter and terminator for the nopaline synthase gene . these sequences are commonly used in constructs used to create approved gm events . roundup ready™ soya construct contains both p-35s and t-nos so provided convenient template for testing the assays. we used a sample where the copy number of the gm has been well characterized and thus control the number of template in each reaction.

lamp sensitivity was assessed by the detection of ten roundup ready™ gmo targets in a background of  <dig> ng of genomic oilseed rape dna . since the c value of both species is approximately  <dig> pg  <cit> , this background dna represents a gmo level of  <dig> % for both t-nos and p-35s assays. osr dna was used because we did not have any soya dna free from roundup ready™. dna extracted from our 0% crm was shown to contain  <dig> % gmo  <cit> . the use of  <dig> ng of this sample would be equivalent to adding  <dig> copies of the transgene sequence, considerably more than the experimental input of  <dig> copies. we believe the use of osr dna to be a valid substitute since none of the primer sequences for either assay will be present in non-transgenic soya or oilseed rape.

we have tested the upper limits of dna that lamp reactions can tolerate and found that up to  <dig> ng dna in a  <dig> μl reaction, positive detection is reproducible. above this dna level, reactions become unreliable .

we have found that denaturation of template was a pre-requisite step prior to amplification, unlike results found by nagamine and co-workers  <cit> . this can be explained by the fact that we do not use a base pair destabiliser, such as betaine, in the reaction buffer. since we are detecting down to near single copies of templates, our results suggest no benefit to the sensitivity of the assay by their inclusion. the consistent amplification within all dilutions showed that lamp is an 'all or nothing' reaction, with little of the tailing off effect that is often observed in pcrs with diluting templates. this makes it easy to identify positive reactions. together with specificity and the speed at which reactions can be performed, lamp is an excellent method for diagnostics  <cit> .

the use of camv 35s promoter sequence in lamp has previously been reported as a screening method  <cit> . here we demonstrate the sensitivity and reliability of the lamp method for gmo detection, both with generic and gmo-specific assays. the ability to perform reactions in a simple heated block or water bath without the need for thermal cycling makes testing using lamp more accessible.

CONCLUSIONS
that lamp is able to detect very small amounts of target and do that even in high amounts of background dna makes it ideal for gmo detection. gmo testing can be performed in steps: routine screening for the presence of gmos using generic assays such as for 35s promoters and t-nos; and if required, identification of specific events can be performed using event-specific assays. equally, direct screening using event-specific assays is also feasible. the levels of sensitivity are orders of magnitude below the permissible threshold for gmo in food and feed , ensuring the detection of the presence of gmos at acceptable levels and the reliable detection of any presence of unauthorised gm events, for which at present there is no legally acceptable lower limit .

