BACKGROUND
mammary neoplasms are the most common proliferative lesions among female dogs  <cit> , representing approximately 52% of all neoplasms. the malignant ratio of these tumours is variable, with an average of 50%  <cit> . canines between seven and eleven years of age are the most commonly affected  <cit> .

among malignant canine mammary tumours, carcinomas in benign mixed tumours  are the most common histological type in the authors’ experiences  <cit> . these tumours originate from a malignant transformation of the epithelial component of a benign mixed tumour. this carcinomatous proliferation may occur as in situ or infiltrative growth, as demonstrated either by a loss in continuity of the myoepithelial and basal layers associated with the neoplastic cells invading the stroma or by complete replacement of the pre-existing benign lesion at the time of histopathological examination  <cit> .

since the 1970s, authors have defended the malignant progression hypothesis in benign canine mammary mixed tumours  <cit> . more recently, protein alterations that may contribute to the transformation of benign mixed tumours have been observed, such as the loss of p <dig>  Δnp <dig>  e-cadherin, β-catenin and egfr overexpression  <cit> .

genetic factors that result in the malignization process are still relatively unknown. however, phenotypic evaluations of myoepithelial cells and extracellular matrix components have been performed in the attempt to clarify the mechanisms involved in the biological behaviour of these tumours  <cit> .

among the extracellular matrix components, the proteoglycan versican has caught the attention of researchers  <cit> . versican is produced by stromal cells in a wide range of mature tissues, including smooth muscles, cartilage, and skin  <cit> . some studies also suggest that versican is involved in cancer development and progression  <cit>  because higher expression levels have been associated with local invasion and angiogenesis in breast cancer in women  <cit> .

elevated versican expression in peritumoural stromal tissues has also been associated with histological grade and may be a strong factor in predicting disease relapse in lymph node negative breast cancer patients  <cit> . the mechanisms that alter the expression of this proteoglycan are still poorly understood; however, its role in modulating the loss of adhesion and cell motility has also been recognised in cases of breast cancer metastasis  <cit> .

researchers have demonstrated that in canine mammary tumours, versican is highly expressed in proliferating fusiform cells and in myxoid areas of the mixed tumours  <cit> . versican accumulation in myoepithelial tumours is related to the early differentiation of the myxoid matrix to cartilage. in prior studies, these same authors observed increased versican expression in areas of tumour infiltration  <cit> .

considering that cbmts can serve as research models for tumour progression  <cit> , the analysis of versican expression in these tumours can contribute to the understanding of the transformation and progression mechanisms in malignant mammary tumours. in this context, the present work aims to evaluate the expression of the proteoglycan versican in in situ and invasive carcinomatous areas in canine cbmts and to verify its association with other prognostic factors and overall survival.

RESULTS
versican expression in peritumoural stroma
proteoglycan versican immunoreactivity in areas adjacent to the in situ carcinomatous regions were less intense  compared to the areas adjacent to the invasive regions , which were characterized by more extensive areas of strong versican expression .

group  <dig>  represented by cases with low versican expression; and group  <dig>  represented by cases with versican overexpression.

wilcoxon test.

clinical and pathological features
the present study demonstrated a higher incidence of the disease among poodles , followed by mongrel dogs  and doberman pinschers . the age of the dogs varied from  <dig>  to  <dig> years, with a mean age of  <dig>  years. comparative analyses of the clinical and pathological characteristics among these groups are presented in table  <dig> 

group  <dig>  represented by cases with low versican expression; and group  <dig>  represented by cases with versican overexpression.

student’s t- test was used for parametric data .

fisher’s exact test used for categorical variables .

invasion, loss of adhesion, and proliferation index
the evaluation of the myoepithelial cell layer integrity was performed through analysis of p <dig> and α-sma immunoreactivity . the in situ areas were defined through the observation of epithelial cells that were in a tubular arrangement with basal membrane integrity shown by he staining and cells that were double-positive for p <dig> and α-sma.
d. microinvasion area in carcinoma in benign mixed tumour . he, 60×. e. discontinuous basement membrane . pas, 60×.
f. absence of p <dig> and α-sma expression , 60×.

invasion was considered when suspicious he-stained areas revealed a total loss of immunoreactivity for α-sma and p <dig>  thus denoting a loss of myoepithelial cells in gaps corresponding to a three-cell space  <cit> . these results are represented in table  <dig> 

group  <dig>  represented by cases with low versican expression; and group  <dig>  represented by cases with versican overexpression.

significant differences at p <  <dig>  between in situ and invasive areas in p <dig>  α-sma, and e-cadherin using the wilcoxon test.

rupture of the basal membrane, which is associated with the observation of malignant epithelial cells in the adjacent stroma, was also observed by pas staining .

evaluation of p <dig> and α-sma staining in carcinomas with invasion areas showed that there was a loss of, or weak staining for, at least one marker in the remaining myoepithelial cells, which differs from observations in in situ areas, in which double-positive staining was notable. a significant difference was observed in p <dig> and α-sma expression between in situ and invasive areas, with p <  <dig>  .

e-cadherin, an adhesion molecule, expression in in situ and invasive areas  was evaluated to investigate its possible relationship with versican. in situ carcinomatous areas revealed strong and diffuse immunoreactivity for e-cadherin, whereas invasive areas showed weak or absent staining. in tumours with low  and high  versican expression, a significant difference in the expression of e-cadherin was observed between the in situ and invasive areas, with p <  <dig>  . however, no statistically significant correlation could be observed between versican and e-cadherin expression.

survival curves
considering only versican expression, overall survival was found to be longer in female dogs with low immunostaining for this proteoglycan than in dogs with high immunostaining; however, no statistically significant difference was observed  .

overall survival was analysed in  <dig> cases. thirty-two  dogs remained alive at the end of the study, four  dogs died during the study and four  were censored due to loss of follow-up or death unrelated to the tumour.

discussion
the proteoglycan versican is one of the most studied components of the extracellular matrix associated with human breast cancer  <cit> . versican is synthesized mainly by stromal cells and possesses anti-adhesive properties that interfere with cell motility  <cit> . this property appears to be related to the association of versican with hyaluronic acid, which exhibits altered expression in neoplastic conditions  <cit> .

the most important criteria for the diagnosis of invasion in mammary carcinomas is the absence of myoepithelial cells surrounding neoplastic proliferations associated with basal layer rupture  <cit> . nevertheless, the recognition of these areas based solely on he staining evaluation can be quite difficult. therefore, staining for p <dig>  α-sma and pas was implemented to aid in the evaluation of invasive regions.

in this study, myoepithelial cells revealed a progressive loss of immunoreactivity for both p <dig> and α-sma from in situ to invasive areas. in in situ areas, the aberrant expression of these molecules suggests that myoepithelial cells have suffered dedifferentiation and no longer express important functional and characterization molecules  <cit> . in sites suspected of invasion, the absence of p <dig> and α-sma staining denotes a flaw in the myoepithelial layer, which in association with the discontinuity of the basal membrane, confirms the lesion. in such sites, double-staining immunohistochemistry is useful for evaluating these areas.

once areas with infiltration of neoplastic cells in the adjacent stroma were confirmed, the presence of versican was evaluated. versican expression differed significantly between in situ and invasive areas , both in cases of low and of high versican expression. there was also statistically significant difference  in the versican immunoreactivity in the in situ areas between the two groups . in addition, a significant difference was observed when comparing versican immunoreactivity in invasive and in situ areas , suggesting a direct relationship between versican and invasion.

researchers have previously analysed versican expression in areas adjacent to in situ and invasive carcinomatous areas in human breast cancer  <cit> . the mechanisms involved in cell and stromal interaction are believed to lead to the development of invasive lesions from in situ mammary lesions. furthermore, elements typically expressed in the invasive stroma, such as versican, suggest that pre-invasive lesions can acquire some characteristics commonly attributed to invasive areas, most likely contributing to the progression of neoplastic processes.

many authors have also shown that extracellular matrix components, including the proteoglycan versican, play a critical role in facilitating the progression and dissemination of malignant neoplastic cells  <cit> . mukaratirwa and colleagues  observed a significant correlation between stromal immunoreactivity intensity for versican and invasion in colorectal carcinomas in dogs, suggesting that this proteoglycan supports tumour progression  <cit> . the carcinomatous cells that invade the stroma are believed to be capable of stimulating fibroblasts to produce versican, which in turn plays a crucial role in tumour progression.

in this study, the possible association between versican expression and clinico-pathological factors was evaluated to verify the biological significance and prognostic value of versican. however, no statistically significant relationship was observed between the evaluated prognostic factors and high or low expression of versican or between the prognostic factors and versican staining in in situ and invasive areas. these results may be explained by the fact that the studied cases mostly represented low grade, nonaggressive tumours associated with a good prognosis, suggesting that our samples were somewhat homogenous. furthermore, no association was found between the evaluated biological factors and the immunohistochemical expression of versican in human pharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas  <cit> . in non-small cell lung cancer, versican has been shown to be associated with an unfavourable prognosis but is not considered to be an independent indicator of patient survival  <cit> . finally, in ovarian cancer, versican expression does not appear to have prognostic significance, despite the finding that high stromal staining is related to poor disease-free survival  <cit> .

versican has also been linked to neoplastic cell adhesion and proliferation  <cit> . a potential significant role for the g <dig> versican domain, with its egf-like motif, in influencing tumour cell viability, proliferation and local tumour growth has been suggested  <cit> . some studies also suggest that versican expression is involved in an increase in cell proliferation, apoptosis-resistance and the regulation of the cadherin family protein expression, inducing mesenchymal-epithelial transitions  <cit> . versican isoforms v <dig> and v <dig> seem to play distinct roles in cell proliferation functions that are mediated by the gag-α and gag-β domains, respectively  <cit> . it has been shown that the gagβ domain is responsible for activation, whereas the gagα domain plays a role in the suppression of epidermal growth factor receptor  expression and its downstream signaling pathway  <cit> . the extracellular environment might become favourable for cell proliferation and survival when v <dig> expression is increased, as in the case of tissue development and tumour formation  <cit> .

in canine mammary tumours, the mechanisms that regulate the signal pathways and the role of the different isoforms remain poorly elucidated. in this study, no difference regarding the proliferation index was observed between low and high versican expression groups. thus, ki- <dig> expression did not indicate a relationship between proteoglycan overexpression and tumour proliferation in cbmts.

studies indicating a relationship between versican and e-cadherin expression in epithelial tumours are scarce. therefore, one goal of this study was to investigate the association between versican and e-cadherin. however, despite the existence of statistically significant differences between both e-cadherin and versican expression in in situ and invasive areas, no relationship between the two molecules was observed in cbmts. this finding most likely indicates that versican expression interferes in carcinomatous cell adhesion through other mechanisms that are not yet understood.

CONCLUSIONS
our data reveal that in cbmts, versican expression differs significantly between invasive and in situ areas, suggesting a role for this molecule in tumour progression. however, no associations between the proteoglycan and prognostic factors could be observed. therefore, although a direct relationship exists between versican expression and invasiveness, our results indicate that isolated evaluation of this proteoglycan does not represent an independent prognostic factor for canine cbmts.

