BACKGROUND
the arginine deiminase pathway  catalyzes a conversion of arginine to ornithine, ammonium, and carbon dioxide, while generating atp from adp and phosphate. the enzymes involved in the three steps of the pathway are arginine deiminase , ornithine transcarbamylase , and carbamate kinase . the first reaction, catalyzed by adi, is the deamination of arginine to yield citrulline and nh4
+. otc then catalyzes the conversion of citrulline and inorganic phosphate into carbamoyl-phosphate and ornithine. finally, ck catalyzes the hydrolysis of carbamoyl phosphate to form co <dig> and nh4
+, while the phosphate group is used to regenerate atp from adp.

the adi pathway is widely distributed among bacteria, where it is often a major means of energy production  <cit> . however, the ammonium produced by this pathway has also been implicated in protecting some bacteria from the harmful effects of acidic environments  <cit> . the pathway has been also described in archaea  <cit> . this pathway has only been characterized in a few species of anaerobic eukaryotes namely the parabasalids trichomonas vaginalis  <cit>  and tritrichomonas foetus  <cit> , and the diplomonads giardia intestinalis  <cit> , hexamita inflata  <cit> , and spironucleus salmonicida  <cit> . all these species belong to metamonada , a clade of anaerobic protists with substantially modified mitochondria designated as hydrogenosomes or mitosomes. metamonada consists of three lineages – fornicata , parabasalia , and finally preaxostyla   <cit> . currently, there is no information about the adi pathway in preaxostyla.

in trichomonas vaginalis the adi pathway generates up to 10 % of the energy produced by glucose fermentation  <cit> . otc and ck were shown to be cytosolic, while adi was described as membrane-associated in both trichomonas vaginalis and tritrichomonas foetus  <cit> . the adi of trichomonas vaginalis was later shown to be localized in hydrogenosomes and an in situ ph buffering function has been proposed  <cit> . the adi pathway of giardia intestinalis is completely cytosolic and produces up to  <dig> times more atp than sugar metabolism  <cit> . besides this energy-producing function, it has been proposed that the enzymes play an important role in the pathogenesis of giardia intestinalis and trichomonas vaginalis. the protists secrete adi and otc from their cells causing arginine depletion thus reducing the ability of the infected tissue to produce antimicrobial nitric oxide  <cit> . other known effects of these parasite's adi pathway enzymes include growth arrest of intestinal epithelial cells  <cit> , inhibition of t cell proliferation  <cit> , and alteration of the phenotype and cytokine production of dendritic cells  <cit> . another diplomonad with a characterized adi pathway, the free-living hexamita inflata, inhabits environments with varying levels of dissolved oxygen. it has been suggested that the adi pathway may contribute to the metabolic flexibility of this organism, producing a significant amount of atp under oxygen-limited conditions, while glycolysis is the main energy source under oxic or microoxic conditions, however the oxygen relationship might be incidental or secondary  <cit> .

of the three enzymes, only adi itself is considered to be specific to the adi pathway. ck has an additional role in purine and nitrogen metabolism and otc may catalyze synthesis of citrulline as a nitrogen reservoir in plants  <cit>  or be a part of ornithine-urea cycle in animals, diatoms and dinoflagellates  <cit> . therefore, the presence of adi in organisms where no adi pathway is known is intriguing and deserves further investigation. for example, within the chlorophytes the adi gene was found in three species of chlorella  <cit>  and chlamydomonas reinhardtii  <cit>  and adi activity has been reported in multiple species of chlorodendrophyceae, trebouxiophyceae, chlorophyceae, and ulvophyceae  <cit> , that is, in all classes of the “crown group” of chlorophyta  <cit> .

the first known sequence of a eukaryotic adi, from giardia intestinalis, showed no specific relationship to any bacterial or archaeal clade  <cit> . later analyses included sequences from trichomonas vaginalis, spironucleus vortens, sp. barkhanus, and sp. salmonicida , euglena gracilis and 'seculamonas' sp. , chlamydomonas reinhardtii and chlorella sp. , and mastigamoeba balamuthi and dictyostelium discoideum . all the eukaryotic sequences formed a well-supported clade related to archaea, consistent with a single origin of adi in the eukaryotic domain  <cit> .

due to its involvement in other pathways, it is not surprising that otc is more widespread among eukaryotes compared to the other adi pathway enzymes. the phylogenetic analysis of otc by zúñiga et al.  <cit>  recovered two distinct eukaryotic clades branching in different positions among bacteria, one comprising sequences from embryophyta and other composed of metazoan and fungal sequences. the only eukaryote outside these two clades was giardia intestinalis, which was also the only one with a characterized adi pathway. the sequence from giardia intestinalis branched among bacterial sequences without close relationship to any other eukaryotic clade. later analyses demonstrated that spironucleus salmonicida and trichomonas vaginalis otc sequences formed a well-supported clade with giardia intestinalis  <cit> , suggesting the existence of a third independent group of eukaryotic otcs present in metamonada and potentially involved in the adi pathway. the same analysis also showed two stramenopile sequences branching clearly inside the metazoa-fungi group.

sequences of ck from giardia intestinalis, hexamita sp., and trichomonas vaginalis formed a relatively well-supported clade not closely related to any bacterial or archaeal sequences  <cit> . the monophyly of eukaryotic cks was later questioned after adding sequences from spironucleus salmonicida and carpediemonas membranifera, with the trichomonas vaginalis sequence branching separately from other eukaryotes, although statistical support for this topology was very low  <cit> .

in summary, the complete set of adi pathway enzymes has been found in representatives of two out of three major lineages of metamonada: parabasalia and fornicata. all the metamonad enzymes appear to be closely related to each other. this raises several questions about the evolutionary history of the pathway among eukaryotes. is it present also in the third and least investigated lineage of metamonads, preaxostyla? was it present in the common ancestor of the metamonada? do representatives of other eukaryotic lineages possess the adi pathway as well? if so, do all the eukaryotic enzymes involved in the adi pathway originate from the same source or do they represent independent acquisitions?

here, we take advantage of the recent progress in genome and transcriptome sequencing of less studied protists to perform an up-to-date survey and phylogenetic analysis of adis, otcs, and cks. this survey focuses on elucidating the evolutionary history of the arginine deiminase pathway in eukaryotes, with special emphasis on metamonada. in addition to phylogenetic studies, we determine the subcellular localization of these enzymes in two members of preaxostyla, paratrimastix pyriformis and oxymonad monocercomonoides sp. pa <dig> 

RESULTS
distribution of adi, otc, and ck across eukaryotes
our survey revealed the presence of adi, otc, and ck in the three main eukaryotic clades defined by adl et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  . the first and presumably the most specific enzyme of the pathway, i.e. without any role outside the adi pathway reported so far, is adi itself. this was found in  <dig> taxa, as shown on the schematic tree in fig.  <dig>  and these taxa represent most eukaryotic supergroups . of these,  <dig> species  encoded all three enzymes, while the other species encoded only one or two enzymes. adi was not detected in any representative of the clades metazoa, fungi, embryophyta, cryptophyta, and haptophyta, nor in sar  <cit> , with the single questionable exception of gregarina niphandrodes . otc was the most widespread enzyme, being found in  <dig> taxa including the major multicellular groups of metazoa, fungi, and embryophyta. ck was detected in all the investigated metamonads, multiple bacillariophyceae, dinoflagellata and  <dig> other species. please note that the given numbers do not represent the actual quantity of eukaryotic species with the particular gene since several groups, e.g. metazoa, bacillariophyceae, are represented by only a limited number of randomly selected sequences.fig.  <dig> distribution of enzymes of the arginine deiminase pathway across eukaryotic diversity. arginine deiminase , ornithine transcarbamylase , carbamate kinase . taxon names in boldface indicate lineages containing at least one representative with a sequenced nuclear genome. numbers in brackets indicate number of sequences from the given taxon included in our analyses. colored rectangles indicate major eukaryotic groups as follows: dark
brown – metamonada; light
brown – discoba; violet – opisthokonta; blue – amoebozoa; cyan – breviatea, green – archaeplastida; orange – cryptophyta; yellow – haptophyta; red – sar. excavata, amorphea, and diaphoretickes are names of the  <dig> putative largest clades of eukaryotes as proposed in adl et al., 2012; relationships between them are not resolved




phylogenetic analyses
arginine deiminase
compared to the previous analyses we present a more robust analysis including  <dig> eukaryotic species . the phylogenetic tree  shows two clearly separated  clans of adis, one comprising all bacteria and one isolated eukaryote, gregarina niphandrodes, in a highly nested but poorly resolved position, and the second composed of clans of archaea plus a few bacteria  and eukaryota . the topology within the eukaryotic branch is poorly resolved overall, however, a few clades of lower-than-supergroup rank were recovered with strong support . these are parabasalia, diplomonadida, oxymonadida, chlorophyta, and dictyosteliida.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic tree of adi sequences. the tree based on a  <dig> positions long protein alignment of  <dig> sequences was constructed in raxml using the lg4x + Γ model of substitution. eukaryotic taxa are highlighted in different colors according to the major group they belong to. the color code is the same as in fig.  <dig>  the values at nodes represent raxml bootstrap support/iq-tree bootstrap support. only values above 50 % are shown. black circles indicate support of 100 %/100 %. vertical black bars indicate well-supported eukaryotic clades: pa – parabasalia; di – dictyosteliida; ch – chlorophyta; ox – oxymonadida; dip – diplomonadida. species with multiple sequences included: euglena gracilis  <dig> – gi 109790819; euglena gracilis  <dig> – gi 109784514; eutreptiella gymnastica-like  <dig> – campep 0200414012; eutreptiella gymnastica-like  <dig> – campep 0200422928; trichomonas vaginalis  <dig> – tvag 183850; trichomonas vaginalis  <dig> – tvag  <dig>  the tree is unrooted




ornithine transcarbamylase
our analysis included sequences from selected representatives of metazoa, fungi, and embryophyta and  <dig> sequences from  <dig> other eukaryotes . several bacterial sequences of aspartate transcarbamylase, a protein closely related to otc, were included to provide an outgroup for rooting the tree. our analysis of otc phylogeny  supports the existence of three large groups and two separately-branching eukaryotic otcs.

the first large clade is strongly supported  and contains metazoa, fungi, oomycota, bacillariophyceae , a few lineages of other stramenopiles , the holozoan capsaspora, and one single excavate, the trypanosomatid herpetomonas muscarum, which branches among fungi.

the second eukaryotic group, already indicated in the analysis by andersson et al.  <cit> , is well supported  and includes all metamonada, harpagon shusteri, naegleria gruberi, reticulomyxa filosa, pygsuia biforma, mastigamoeba balamuthi, and many representatives of autotrophic groups, namely dinoflagellates, cryptophytes, euglenophytes, chlorarachniophytes, and stramenopiles like aureococcus, aureoumbra, pelagococcus, pelagomonas, and pseudopedinella. the monophyly of parabasalia is well supported. a sequence from a recently described archaeon lokiarchaeum sp. is also included in this group, however at an unsupported position.

the third group is composed of euglenophytes, green algae with green plants, red algae, and haptophytes, with haptophytes branching inside red algae. a clade of mostly desulfobacteraceae bacterial sequences branches inside this group of eukaryotic sequences.

the only two eukaryotes outside these three large clades are the choanoflagellate salpingoeca rosetta , which branches as sister to microgenomates bacterium , and the rhizarian paulinella chromatophora  inside cyanobacteria with good statistical support . since the paulinella sequence originates from the genome of the chromatophore, not the paulinella nucleus, it actually represents a cyanobacterial otc.

carbamate kinase
we have included  <dig> sequences from  <dig> eukaryotic species in our analysis . our tree  shows eukaryotes falling into several separate clusters. one of two substantial groups is an unsupported clan of fornicata, parabasalia, harpagon schusteri, pygsuia biforma, and mastigamoeba balamuthi. a well-supported preaxostyla clade  branches at a different place among bacteria, as a sister group to hadesarchaea archaeon and anaerolineae bacterium . the second large eukaryotic clan  is composed of all the dinoflagellate sequences, as well as sequences from diatoms, pedinella and aureococcus. dinoflagellata form a well-supported group within this clan. three sequences from diatoms do not branch together with other ochrophytes , and instead form a separate well-supported clan  among bacteria. this may represent a second form of the enzyme, since thalassiosira pseudonana appears in both diatom groups. the only two known cks from green plants  branch together  but separated from other eukaryotes. the reticulomyxa ck sequence is also isolated from the rest of eukaryotes.

concatenation
we also performed a phylogenetic analysis of a concatenation of all three enzymes. in the first step, we have prepared an alignment supermatrix in which we have included all eukaryotes and representatives of prokaryotes that contain a complete set of the three enzymes, and may use the adi pathway. in order to detect potential incongruities between gene partitions caused by lateral gene transfer we have performed a phylogenetic analyses of the individual gene partitions from this supermatrix. based on these gene trees  we removed taxon-gene sequences that branched with bootstrap support higher than 50 % within a clan of sequences outside its own domain  from the concatenated alignment – namely cks from monocercomonoides sp., pyrsonympha sp., chlorella variabilis, and coccomyxa subelipsoidea. we also removed otcs from chlorella variabilis, and coccomyxa subelipsoidea because in the large single gene tree  they branch within a clade which is sister to chlorobi bacteria with 100 % iq-tree bootstrap support.

the analysis performed on the alignment after removal of these sequences  revealed a strong bipartition  grouping eukaryota and archaea to the exclusion of bacteria and within this part of the tree the eukaryotes formed a well-supported  clan sister to the archaeon candidatus korarchaeum cryptofilum. in order to recover the relationships within the eukaryota–archaea group without the disturbing long branch of bacteria we repeated the analysis without the bacterial sequences . in this unrooted tree eukaryota are grouped with candidatus korarchaeum cryptofilum to the exclusion of the rest of archaea with high support . we also performed a eukaryota-only analysis of the concatenated dataset for the purpose of hypotheses testing .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic tree of concatenated adi, otc, and ck sequences with bacteria removed. the tree based on a  <dig> positions long protein alignment of  <dig> sequences was constructed in raxml using lg4x + Γ model. eukaryotic taxa are highlighted in different colors according to the major group they belong to. the color code is the same as in fig.  <dig>  the values at nodes represent raxml bootstrap support/iq-tree bootstrap support. only values above 50 % are shown. black circles indicate support 100 %/100 %. the tree is unrooted




hypotheses testing
we used approximately unbiased  and expected likelihood weight  tests to assess whether the inferred phylogenies are in a significant conflict with the monophyly of eukaryotes, metamonads and with the expected eukaryotic species tree. the results are summarized in table  <dig>  the au tests rejected monophyly of metamonads in the otc and ck trees and monophyly of expected eukaryotic phylogeny in concatenation. the elw tests rejected the monophyly of metamonads in the otc tree, the monophyly of both clades in the ck and monophyly of metamonads and the expected eukaryotic phylogeny in the concatenation tree.table  <dig> results of approximately unbiased  and expected likelihood weights  tests

the tests were performed for  <dig> sets of taxa – adi: adi dataset , otc: otc dataset , ck: ck dataset , euk. conc.: concatenation dataset without prokaryotic sequences 




localization of adi pathway enzymes in preaxostyla
another aim of this work was to infer the subcellular localization of adi pathway enzymes in members of the poorly studied preaxostyla clade. genomic and transcriptomic projects have revealed the presence of all three enzymes in monocercomonoides sp. and pyrsonympha sp., while only otc and ck enzymes were detected in trimastix marina and paratrimastix pyriformis. we have chosen monocercomonoides sp. pa <dig> and paratrimastix pyriformis for further study.

we investigated the presence of mitochondrion-targeting signals in the enzymes of interest  using the signal prediction software targetp  <dig>   <cit>  and mitoprot ii v <dig>   <cit> . targetp did not predict any targeting signals. mitoprot ii predicted a single mitochondrion-targeting signal, for the otc sequence of paratrimastix pyriformis.

to validate the results of mitochondrion-targeting signal prediction we used the trichomonas vaginalis t <dig> heterologous expression system, with the assumption that an undetected mitochondrion-targeting signal may nonetheless be recognized by the trichomonas hydrogenosomal import machinery. we transfected trichomonas vaginalis cells with plasmids containing ha-tagged otc and ck from paratrimastix pyriformis and adi, otc, and ck from monocercomonoides sp. in all cases fluorescence microscopy showed that the heterologously expressed proteins do not co-localize with the signal from the hydrogenosomal marker protein , but instead formed a diffuse pattern all over the cell . this demonstrates that the inserted proteins are not recognized as hydrogenosomal-import targets in trichomonas vaginalis. the results of these experiments are consistent with the fact that most adi pathway enzymes in eukaryotes are localized in the cytosol.fig.  <dig> localisation of monocercomonoides and paratrimastix enzymes in trichomonas vaginalis cells. immunofluorescence micrographs of trichomonas vaginalis, in which the ha-tagged versions of enzymes were expressed. green signal from anti-ha antibody does not localize to hydrogenosomes of trichomonas vaginalis, which are marked by red anti-malic enzyme antibody. blue signal indicates dapi-stained nuclei. abbreviations: pa <dig> – monocercomonoides sp. pa203; pp – paratrimastix pyriformis; adi – arginine deiminase; otc – ornithine transcarbamylase; ck – carbamate kinase




discussion
adi pathway enzymes are widespread in eukaryotes
before this study, only two closely related lineages of eukaryotes had been conclusively shown to possess a complete adi pathway. these were parabasalia and diplomonadida, both being members of metamonada, a subgroup of excavata. our survey has shown the presence of all three enzymes in ten other eukaryotic species. among these are other members of metamonada – including free-living members of fornicata related to the predominantly parasitic diplomonads , and members of the third metamonad lineage, preaxostyla . the adi pathway was also identified in non-metamonads including the heterolobosean harpagon schusteri, the amoebozoan mastigamoeba balamuthi, the breviate pygsuia biforma, and the green algae chlorella variabilis and coccomyxa subelipsoidea. further functional studies are needed to determine whether these enzymes function within an adi pathway in these species. it is possible that the possession of the complete pathway is connected with their anaerobic lifestyle since most of these organisms are anaerobes, microaerophiles or aerobes able to live for long periods under anaerobic conditions .

many investigated eukaryotes possessed incomplete sets of adi pathway enzymes. the presence of otc or ck on their own is not surprising, as they are known to be involved in other biochemical processes including the ornithine-urea cycle or purine biosynthesis. the presence of adi on its own was unexpected, yet we identified adi in a broad spectrum of eukaryotic lineages without complete pathway. the apparent absence of otc or ck may be due to the incompleteness of transcriptome or genome data, nevertheless, our observation suggests that adi may also function outside the context of the adi pathway in some eukaryotes.

phylogenetic histories of enzymes
none of the enzyme phylogenies is completely consistent with the expected species relationships. in single gene trees, eukaryotes are always dispersed in multiple clades, suggesting complicated evolutionary histories. the backbone topologies were generally weakly supported, and many of these incongruences are probably the result of low phylogenetic signal. nevertheless, some conflicts with species phylogeny are better supported and some were confirmed by phylogenetic tests. these can potentially be attributed to lateral gene transfers  or endosymbiotic gene transfers . the sister relationship of preaxostyla and spirochaeta in the ck tree, and the position of gregarina within bacteria in the adi tree are two such examples of potential lgt, albeit the latter may also represent a contamination. since haptophytes are known to harbor secondary plastids of potentially red algal origin  <cit> , the position of haptophytes within a red algal clade in the otc analysis, might represent a potential egt. conversely, many moderately and robustly supported eukaryotic clades are taxonomically reasonable, indicating the important role of vertical inheritance.

the taxon sampling in the concatenation analyses was lower, because the analyses included only those taxa that may utilize the arginine deiminase pathway and not those that use individual enzymes for other purposes. the resolution of the concatenation tree was higher than the individual gene trees and strongly supported the monophyly of eukaryotes  and their close relationship to archaea. the clade of eukaryotes branched with archaea  as a sister to candidatus korarcheum cryptophylum. increased support of these nodes should partly be ascribed to the lower number of taxa but it also suggests that the phylogenetic signal regarding these deep nodes for this narrow set of taxa and after exclusion of obvious cases of lgt is largely congruent.

adi pathway is ancestral in metamonada
the presence of the complete adi pathway is widespread in metamonads, protists that specifically inhabit low-oxygen environments. in most of the phylogenies, metamonad taxa branch close to each other, but they never form an exclusive clade. in ck trees there is a well-supported relationship between preaxostyla  sequences and a prokaryotic clan of hadesarchaea archaeon and anaerolineae bacterium. metamonada do not appear monophyletic even in the concatenation trees and their monophyly was rejected by elw test. taking together all this information we propose that the complete arginine deiminase pathway was present already in the common ancestor of metamonada and was vertically inherited by the extant metamonad lineages, with a few exceptions. the exceptions are the putative losses of adi in trimastix marina and paratrimastix pyriformis and the putative replacement by a bacterial ck in the preaxostyla. it is also possible that some enzymes or the whole pathway were laterally transferred from metamonads to other eukaryotes, which would disrupt the monophyly of metamonada on trees.

our localization experiments suggest that all enzymes in both paratrimastix pyriformis and monocercomonoides sp. are localized in the cytosol, like the enzymes in giardia intestinalis but unlike the adi in trichomonas vaginalis. we therefore conclude that cytosolic localization of the pathway is an ancestral trait of all metamonads. it should be noted, however, that the cytosolic localization of adi in monocercomonoides sp. may not be informative, since this protist does not contain mitochondrion  <cit> . paratrimastix pyriformis harbors an organelle similar to the hydrogenosome, but no adi-coding gene has been found in its transcriptome to test its localization.

adi pathways in other eukaryotes
besides metamonada, five other species contain a complete adi pathway and all branch within the eukaryotic clade on the concatenation tree . these represent four different supergroups of eukaryotes; only harpagon is from the same supergroup as metamonada , and even then it belongs to a different sub-branch . moreover, excavata are likely not monophyletic at all  <cit>  and the root of eukaryotes may be situated inside the group. harpagon, mastigamoeba, and pygsuia adi pathway enzymes branch close to metamonada in all three gene trees, and so it is very probable that the pathway in these three species was derived from the same source as the pathway in metamonada.

the situation in chlorella variabilis and coccomyxa subelipsoidea is less clear. these organisms are the only green algae known to contain all three adi pathway enzymes. their adis and otcs branch together with other green algae and plants in the individual gene trees , supporting the presence of the complete set in the last common ancestor of chlorophyta. however, chlorophyta did not branch in a common eukaryotic clade with metamonada, harpagon, mastigamoeba and pygsuia in otc and ck phylogenies, suggesting that these two enzymes in chlorophyta may have independent origins. in the concatenation tree, chlorella variabilis and coccomyxa subelipsoidea represented only by adi sequences branch together with other eukaryotes. presence of the adi pathway in the last common ancestor of chlorophyta would be consistent with the adi enzymatic activity previously reported from members of chlorodendrophyceae, trebouxiophyceae, chlorophyceae, and ulvophyceae  <cit> . however, the function of the other enzymes in a typical adi pathway is questionable, since the otcs from chlorella autotrophica, chlorella saccharophila , and dunaliella tertiolecta  were found to have no measurable activity in the direction of the adi pathway, i.e. conversion of citrulline to ornithine  <cit> . it is therefore possible that the two chlorophyta species with all three enzymes nonetheless do not use the adi pathway.

origin of the eukaryotic adi pathway
the simplest explanation of the fact that the complete sets of adi pathway enzymes from several eukaryotic lineages are related is that they are inherited from their common ancestors. the taxonomic composition of the eukaryotic clade in the concatenation tree is so broad that their common ancestor must have been either the last eukaryotic common ancestor  or its close descendant. this assumption is reasonable even if we would not consider chlorella and coccomyxa. an alternative explanation for the close relationships of adi pathways would be that the genes were acquired more recently by one eukaryotic lineage , and then spread from this lineage into others via eukaryote-to-eukaryote lateral gene transfers.

based on our data we are unable to decide which alternative is more likely. vertical inheritance of the adi pathway from leca would be consistent with the sisterhood of the eukaryotic clade and the archaeon candidatus korarchaeum cryptofilum in the concatenation tree , since recent studies indicate korarchaeota are indeed closely related to the eukaryotes  <cit> . moreover, otc sequences from lokiarchaeum sp., which is the closest known relative to eukaryotes  <cit> , are related to the metamonada-containing eukaryotic clade. ck sequence of this archaeon branches outside eukaryotes sister to a proteobacterium desulphobacula toluolica , but nodes separating these two from metamonada did not receive strong support. adi sequence from lokiarcheum is not available, and so this organism was not included in the concatenation analysis. we must also take into account that the position of the root of the eukaryotic tree is still an unresolved question  <cit> . if the root falls outside amorphea + discoba , then our results do not necessarily uncover the condition of leca.

the later acquisition of the pathway by metamonada and its spread to unrelated eukaryotes by eukaryote-to-eukaryote transfer is supported by the fact that the concatenation trees are incongruent with the expected relationships of taxa.

CONCLUSIONS
our broad survey of the arginine deiminase pathway enzymes has shown that they are present in representatives of all major lineages of eukaryotes. sixteen protists  contain the complete set of the three enzymes, while other organisms contain incomplete sets. the enzyme adi is present in several species without the complete arginine deiminase pathway, suggesting its involvement in other cellular processes. the topology of individual gene trees is generally not very well supported and particularly in otc and ck trees the eukaryotic enzymes form multiple clearly unrelated clades consisting of mixtures of eukaryotic supergroups. this indicates that multiple prokaryote-to-eukaryote and eukaryote-to-eukaryote lgt events took place in the history of these enzymes. it is possible that in some groups the enzyme acquisition was connected with its involvement in novel biochemical processes like the ornithine-urea cycle.

based on the presence of the complete pathway in most metamonads and based on the phylogenetic affinity of metamonad enzymes, we conclude that the ancestor of metamonads already possessed this pathway. the concatenation analyses suggest that eukaryotes with the complete adi pathway, including metamonads, harpagon, mastigamoeba and pygsuia , may have acquired the genes from a single, archaeon-related source. one intriguing possibility is that the acquisition of the pathway may date back as deep as to leca, but other scenarios involving lgt events are also plausible. to resolve the last issue, it will be necessary to obtain data from a more diverse set of prokaryotes and eukaryotes, especially those branching close to the root of the eukaryotic tree and close to the root of major eukaryotic lineages.

