BACKGROUND
the growing human-induced extinction crisis  <cit>  has added additional urgency to the development of theory related to extinction dynamics in natural populations. in the short term, some organisms can resist the effects of environmental change by behavioural changes, physiological acclimation, or migration  <cit> . however, in response to major, long-term environmental change, populations must evolve to avoid extinction  <cit> . recent research showing that rapid evolution is common  <cit>  and that it can affect the dynamics of species interactions  <cit>  underscores the need to consider evolutionary responses to changing environments.

theory concerned with the effects of evolutionary processes on community dynamics dates back several decades  <cit> , but interest in eco-evolutionary dynamics has intensified dramatically over the last several years  <cit> . the results of these studies show that community dynamics certainly depend upon the details of evolutionary change in the interacting species. however, firm general results are difficult to obtain  <cit> , as they depend upon a number of evolutionary parameters, such as details of inheritance and mutation, patterns of migration, and the nature of selection  <cit> . thus, there is a need for more theoretical and especially empirical work. furthermore, the implications of these models, which have focused mainly on static environments, with respect to extinction dynamics are not always transparent. for example, coevolution is expected to produce a geographic mosaic of maladaptation  <cit> , and anthropogenic insults might be expected to disrupt coevolved ecological interactions  <cit> . intuitively, these scenarios suggest that coevolution is a key factor in species persistence. however, it is not entirely clear under what circumstances coevolutionary dynamics increase or decrease probabilities of extinction. because most studies of coevolution in ecological communities have focused on static environments  <cit> , the study of coevolution in changing environments promises to produce interesting, complementary insights.

several quantitative genetic studies of species persistence in changing environments have been conducted, but they did not consider species interactions. these single-species models of quantitative trait evolution and extinction show that a species' persistence time depends mainly upon the level of additive genetic variance for the ecologically relevant trait, the rate at which the environment changes, and the strength of selection  <cit> . the single-species models have been enlightening, but the dynamics of extinction in natural systems almost certainly depend on the nature of species interactions  <cit> . the single-species models cannot simply be extrapolated to predict how multi-species communities will respond to environmental change. this question calls for formal coevolutionary models. thus, my goal was to extend single-species models of population persistence to communities consisting of two interacting species. here i focus on negative ecological interactions, because a priori such interactions seem to have the most serious conservation implications  <cit> . in this brief report, i address one major question: what are the effects of negative ecological interactions on expected times to extinction in two-species communities evolving in response to a changing environment?

RESULTS
the results of the quantitative genetic model of species interactions and environmental change provide some insights into how negative ecological interactions might impact extinction dynamics. the most interesting result of this study is the counterintuitive observation that under a very wide range of conditions the presence of a negative ecological interaction actually increases the expected time to extinction for one or both species involved in the interaction. this effect is most pronounced in the predator-prey model. figure  <dig> shows the mean persistence times of the predator and prey under different rates of environmental change and strengths of selection. when stabilizing selection is relatively weak , a situation that is probably common in nature  <cit> , the prey species always persists longer when it is preyed upon . the time to extinction for the predator is also usually higher when it is interacting with the prey than when it is simply evolving in response to the moving optimum . only when the optimum is moving very quickly does the benefit of the interaction to the predator evaporate. similarly, across a wide range of strengths of selection, both the predator and the prey benefit from their interaction .

the cause of the increase in expected times to extinction can be seen by examining some of the mechanistic details of the model. figure  <dig> shows the dynamics of lag of the phenotypic mean relative to the optimum in control  and experimental  runs of the predator-prey model. the most striking result is that the lag increases much more rapidly in the control run  than in the experimental run . the reason that the presence of a predator-prey interaction decreases the lag is that the predator culls the individuals in the population that are least well adapted to the new phenotypic optimum, because they are closest in phenotype to the individuals that the predator evolved to prey upon. effectively, predation increases the strength of selection on the phenotype and pushes the phenotypic mean of the prey to keep up with the moving optimum. the predator similarly benefits, because  the predators that are closest to the moving optimum will also be the most effective predators on the evolving prey. the predators far from the moving optimum will be poor predators and will fail to catch enough prey to reproduce. thus, the presence of an evolving prey population also increases the intensity of selection on the predator in the direction of the moving optimum. a similar explanation applies for the competition model. the competitor lagging least far behind the optimum is pushed to keep up with the optimum by its competitor, because competition tends to kill off the individuals that are least well adapted to the new optimum each generation. this phenomenon obviously decreases the lag, which increases the time to extinction.

the final mechanistic detail of interest, illustrated by figure 4c, is that the tendency for the predators to eat the least well-adapted individuals is an intrinsic evolutionary outcome of a predator-prey system responding to a moving optimum. this model uses a gape-limited predator, so predator gape size evolves to be larger than the mean prey body size in the absence of a moving optimum. as the optimum begins to move  the mean predator gape size lags behind the mean prey body size, and consequently the predators prey more heavily on the smaller, maladapted individuals. regardless of the exact details of the predator-prey interaction , predators generally should evolve to prey upon individuals near the phenotypic mean of the prey species in an unchanging environment  <cit> . hence, a move of the prey optimum, coupled with the lag of the predator's phenotype relative the prey's phenotype, should typically result in a situation in which predators prey upon maladapted individuals in changing environments.

parameters other than the strength of selection and the rate of environmental change also affect mean extinction times. for example, the mutation rate, the distribution of allelic effects, the carrying capacity, and the birth rate can affect times to extinction in this model. however, the effects of these parameters have been examined in detail in the single-species model  <cit> , and the conclusions of the single-species model also apply to the two-species models that i investigated. for instance, larger carrying capacities and birth rates increase expected times to extinction in the multi-species model as they do in the single-species model. regardless of the exact values of these parameters, however, predation and competition still produce a positive effect on extinction times for one or both species involved in the species interaction under many rates of environmental change and strengths of selection. thus, the result that negative ecological interactions often increase times to extinction appears to be robust to changes in most of the parameters of the model.

while additional work on the phenomena documented here is warranted, this study does carry potential management implications. for example, one possible reaction to a predator preying upon a species at risk of extinction might be to somehow protect the prey from the predator. whether or not this move would benefit the species of interest depends upon the consequences of the species interaction. in a changing environment, if the predator removes individuals closer to the moving optimum relative to the mean phenotype, then the predator is harming the species of concern. however, if the predator is removing maladapted individuals, then predation may actually be delaying extinction of the declining species. similar arguments apply for competitive species interactions. thus, a complete management strategy should attempt to model the demographic and evolutionary effects of species interactions with models parameterized for the species of interest.

both competition and predation of the type considered in this study appear to occur with high enough frequency in natural populations to be important. in addition, the generality of the phenomenon observed in this model implies that other types of negative ecological interactions will likely produce the same positive results on species persistence times. several important studies have found evidence for reciprocal selection in predator-prey systems. for example, red crossbills exert a directional selective pressure on lodgepole pine, while lodgepole pine cone shape causes stabilizing selection on bill size  <cit> . in addition, the classic example of toxic newts and their garter snake predators represents another system that appears to have the necessary elements for predator-prey coevolution  <cit> . in either of these cases, evolution of the prey  would result in selection on the predator and could produce the type of situation that occurs in the present model. similar examples of competition appear in the literature. for example, competition for seeds in darwin's finches is analogous to the type of competition that i model here. coexisting species exhibit ecological character displacement for beak characteristics  <cit> , and changes in the distribution of seeds in the environment results in strong directional selection on the finches  <cit> . the prediction of the present model would be that adaptation of the species with beak characteristics best matched to the changing food supply would be facilitated by the presence of a less well adapted competitor.

my analysis is an initial attempt to address the effects of species interactions on extinction times in changing environments, but it raises a number of questions that would be worthy of additional research. the most limiting assumption of the current study is that the same trait that mediates the species interaction also changes in response to the environment. future work should address cases in which the trait involved in the species interaction is distinct, but possibly genetically correlated, with the trait responding to environmental change. the present study would then be a special case in which the genetic correlation is unity. thus, with high genetic correlations among traits, results would be similar to those reported here. however, the dynamics of systems with weak or negative correlations among traits would certainly be of interest.

another possible limitation of the current analysis concerns the assumption that the optimum moves unidirectionally at a constant rate. this limitation could be partially corrected by including stochasticity in the movement of the optimum, a situation that would almost certainly decrease mean species persistence times  <cit> . however, the effects of the species interaction would likely still be present in such a model. future work should consider species interactions in multivariate models in which the optima of suites of traits move in response to environmental change. the challenge in such models will be to relate theoretical models of the movement of the multivariate optimum to realistic expectations for actual organisms. this latter point brings up another limitation of the present study, which is that it is entirely theoretical. future work should apply similar models to real negative species interactions that have been studied sufficiently to produce empirical estimates of parameter values for the model. before generalities regarding management practices can be drawn, some real case studies should be investigated in detail.

CONCLUSIONS
if the generality of this model can be confirmed with additional research and empirical examples, then the phenomena documented here may be important from a conservation standpoint. one important result is that it should be possible to determine empirically which negative species interactions should be retained and which should be halted in particular managed ecological communities. if the predator or competitor is causing the deaths of individuals that are poorly adapted to the changing environment, then the species interaction probably will facilitate adaptation. on the other hand, if the species interaction is causing the demise of the individuals that are best adapted to the new environment, then the species interaction will hinder adaptation and should be dealt with from a management standpoint. even though this model only applies to changing environments, it is important to keep in mind that the major conservation concern of our generation, anthropogenic extirpation of species, is by definition caused by human-induced environmental change, so the findings of this model are likely to be relevant for a broad spectrum of conservation crises. the bottom line is that this preliminary analysis clearly shows that even so-called "negative" species interactions need to be carefully examined from a management and evolutionary standpoint.

