BACKGROUND
generalized absence seizures, mainly seen in childhood, are characterized by loss of consciousness associated with bursts of bilaterally synchronous spike and wave discharges . the genetic absence epilepsy rat from strasbourg   <cit>  is recognized as a valid tool for investigating the human disorder. these rats develop spontaneous absence seizures at about postnatal day  <dig> that persist throughout life. as in the human disease, the swds in gaers are generated in a cortico-thalamic loop involving reciprocal glutamatergic projections and gamma amino butyric acid  inter-neurons  <cit> . several electrophysiological and pharmacological studies have suggested the involvement of gaba and glutamate  in the initiation and spreading of swds  <cit> , with a predominant role of gaba. although no obvious anatomical differences in these two systems have been reported in gaers compared to non-epileptic control  rats, increased extracellular gaba levels in the thalamus and cortex  <cit>  and reduced gaba uptake in thalamic synaptosomes  <cit>  have been reported in gaers. as regards the glutamatergic system, we previously observed deregulation of the metabolism of glu and its membrane transporters in the cortex and/or thalamus of young gaers before the occurrence of seizures  <cit> , suggesting an early impairment of the glu neuro-circuitry, which may be involved in the genesis of the pathology. in adult rats, electrophysiological studies have demonstrated an increased response to nmda and non-nmda glutamatergic receptor activation in the cortex of gaers compared to nec rats  <cit> , which may play a major role in the control of absence seizures in the thalamus  <cit> . furthermore, we, and others found deregulation of glu metabolism  <cit>  and perturbation of membrane transporter gene expression  <cit>  in the cortex. however, the in vivo consequences of these perturbations on basal levels of glu and its clearance from the extracellular space are not known.

in order to understand the involvement of glu in the genesis of swds, we measured basal extracellular glu and gaba levels in gaers and nec rats. we also evaluated glu transport capacity using an in vivo microdialysis approach in awake animals. furthermore, we investigated possible alterations in glutamatergic terminals in the gaers cortex and thalamus by studying the expression of the neuronal glu vesicular transporters vglut <dig> and vglut <dig>  <cit> , and of synaptophysin, one of the most abundant proteins in synaptic vesicles, used as a marker of terminals  <cit> .

RESULTS
microdialysis experiments
the microdialysate values  obtained when no exogenous glu or gaba was perfused through the probe did not differ between nec rats and gaers in either the thalamus or cortex . the true extracellular concentrations , which reflect in vivo release and uptake processes, were also determined using the no-net flux method. in the two structures studied no difference between nec rats and gaers was seen for glu and gaba . however, a difference in the variance  of glu values have been observed in the cortex between gaers, and nec, suggesting a possible instability of excitation only present in the cortex of epileptic rats.

number of rats per group in brackets

estimation of glu uptake using exogenous radioactive glu
in the cortex, glu uptake was lower in gaers than in nec rats  when a mixed solution of labeled man and glu was perfused . in the presence of  <dig> mmol/l tha, a glu uptake blocker, glu uptake was reduced and the difference between the two strains disappeared . when the same experiment was carried out in the thalamus, no difference was seen between gaers and nec rats either in the presence or absence of uptake inhibitor .

western blot analysis
vglut <dig> expression
quantification of the immunolabeled band at the expected molecular weight of about  <dig> kda revealed no difference in protein levels in either the thalamus or cortex between gaers and nec rats .

vglut <dig> expression
when the immunolabeled band at the expected molecular weight of about  <dig> kda was quantified, an increase in protein levels  was seen in the cortex, but not the in thalamus, in gaers compared to nec rats .

synaptophysin expression
when the immunolabeled band found at the expected molecular weight of about  <dig> kda was quantified, a significant increase  was seen in the cortex, but not in the thalamus, in gaers compared to nec rats .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the identification of the biochemical and anatomical targets impaired in absence epilepsy is crucial to the understanding of the genesis of the disease and for focusing therapy. the present work provides biochemical data suggesting an alteration in glu transmission, restricted to the cortex of gaers. these data are in accordance with previous studies demonstrating: a) a primary role of corticothalamic neurons in the synchronized excitation of thalamic relay and reticular neurons in gaers  <cit> , b) initiation of the paroxysmal oscillation by a cortical focus in wag/rij rats, another model of absence epilepsy  <cit> , and, c) immediate cessation of swd on applying the anti-absence drug, ethosuximide, to a focalized zone in the cortex, but not the thalamus, in gaers  <cit> .

using an in vivo approach, we demonstrated decreased glu uptake in the cortex of unrestrained awake adult gaers. in contrast, quantitative in vivo microdialysis failed to show any significant change in basal gaba or glu extracellular levels in gaers in the two structures involved in swd . however, the variances for the glu values were larger in the cortex of gaers, but not in the thalamus, suggesting, an instability in glutamate excitation restricted to the cortex in epileptic rats. however, swds were present in some of the time intervals in which the microdialysis samples were collected, but not in others, which might increase the variability of the glu. further studies taking into account this experimental aspect by performing sub-minute sampling during brain microdialysis will be of interest to more precisely describe alterations in extracellular glu in the cortex of gaers.

the lower in vivo glu uptake in the cortex of gaers may be due to an impairment of glu transporters in astrocytes. these cells are a major contributor to the clearance of extracellular glu via two main glial transporters, glast and glt <dig>  which are situated in the vicinity of the synaptic cleft and play a crucial physiological role in the normal functioning of neurons  <cit> . in a previous study  <cit> , we found decreased levels of glast mrna in the cortex of adult gaers, without a similar change in protein expression. this could reflect impairment of the transcription and/or turnover of glast protein, leading to the lower level of glu uptake seen in the present study by in vivo microdialysis. from a physiological point of view, this lack of glu reuptake could favor spillover of the neurotransmitter outside the synaptic cleft and this could be involved in the neuronal synchronization and firing amplification giving rise to swds.

the second main finding of the present work was increased vglut <dig> expression in the cortex of adult gaers, but not in the thalamus, while vglut <dig> expression appeared normal. interestingly in normal adult rat brain, vglut <dig> protein expression is mainly restricted to lamina iv of the neo-cortex, while its mrna is found in the thalamus  <cit> . in contrast, vglut <dig> is expressed in all layers  <cit>  and probably originates from cortico-cortical projections, as pyramidal neurons express vglut <dig> mrna  <cit> . thus, the increased vglut <dig> expression in the cortex of gaers strengthens the idea of a glutamatergic alteration in the cortex and suggests that this may involve a glutamatergic thalamocortical input. finally, since vglut <dig> levels are high at birth and rapidly reach adult values  <cit> , one may hypothesize that the higher vglut <dig> expression seen in the cortex in adult gaers, together with the higher levels of synaptophysin, a marker of synaptic plasticity, might correspond to a developmental process that leads to functional synaptic alterations. however, further studies to determine changes in vglut expression during the development of gaers, especially in young animals before the onset of swd, are needed to explore this hypothesis. such work will be of interest given the important role of glu in the regulation of cns development  <cit> , especially in the induction or elimination of synapses and synapse plasticity  <cit> , and the developmental cortical morphological alterations described in the wag/rij epilepsy model  <cit> .

together, these observations of alterations in the cortical glutamatergic system in adult gaers linked to impairment of cortical astrocytic function in terms of glu reuptake and metabolism are in line with the cortical focus theory of absence epilepsy.

