BACKGROUND
pre-eclampsia  is the leading cause of maternal and foetal morbidity and mortality. it is a pregnancy complication, predominantly occurring after 20-weeks of gestation, as well as in labour, and it is characterized by multiple organ dysfunction syndromes, including the dysfunction of the kidneys, liver, vascular and nervous systems, and the foetoplacental complex  <cit> . the general clinical symptoms of pe are oedema, proteinuria and hypertension. the clinical outcome of pe may not always be predictable. either form of pe can be extremely insidious, rapidly progressing, and, even in the absence of one of its general symptoms, may lead to life threatening complications for the mother and foetus  <cit> . in 70-80% of cases, pe is secondary to an underlying disease  <cit> . pre-eclampsia risk factors include cardiovascular diseases , kidney, liver and gastrointestinal tract diseases, endocrine disorders , and autoimmune diseases   <cit> . according to meta-analysis data, women with a history of pe have  <dig>  times the risk of venous thromboembolism,  <dig>  times the risk of stroke,  <dig>  times the risk of ischemic heart disease and  <dig>  times the risk of hypertensive disease, compared with women without pe  <cit> . thus far, it remains unclear whether the presence of pathological processes before pregnancy predisposes one to pe, or whether defects in multiple organs and systems, induced by pe, are responsible for the development of extragenital diseases in the future. such joint manifestations of diseases are called comorbidities  <cit>  or syntropies  <cit> . likewise, inversely comorbid  <cit>  or dystropic  <cit>  diseases statistically rare co-occur in patients as compared with co-occurrence that can be expected by chance. previously, for asthma, tuberculosis, certain cancers and neurodegenerative diseases, we have shown that inversely comorbid diseases are more closely related to each other at the molecular level in comparison with randomly chosen pairs of diseases  <cit> .

in recent years, bioinformatics methods have been widely used for modelling different pathological processes, analysing the molecular mechanisms of their development, identifying possible markers, and systematizing available data. ample evidence regarding the influence of genetics on comorbidities has accumulated in the literature. computer-based, text-mining methods were developed for efficient extraction of knowledge from the scientific literature. at the present time, coremine and meshops, which analyse the co-occurrence of biomedical terms  <cit> , and string  <cit>  and the medscan system, which are based on the parsing of natural language texts  <cit> , are widely used.

we have developed the andsystem, which was designed for the automated extraction of knowledge from natural language texts regarding the properties of molecular biological objects and their interactions in living systems  <cit> . using this system, we have reconstructed protein-protein networks for proteins that are associated with water-salt metabolism and sodium deposition processes in healthy volunteers  <cit> , as well as protein-protein interaction networks for helicobacter pylori, which are associated with the functional divergence of h. pylori, isolated from patients with early gastric cancer  <cit> . we have also reconstructed associative networks representing molecular genetic interactions between proteins, genes, metabolites and molecular processes associated with myopia and glaucoma  <cit> , and with cardiovascular diseases  <cit> .

in the current study, we used the andsystem for the reconstruction of associative networks  representing molecular genetic interactions between genes associated with pe, diabetes mellitus , gestational diabetes  and obesity . we conducted an analysis of these networks to reveal differential and common risk factors for these diseases.

finding pathways common to the indicated multifactorial diseases would contribute to a better understanding of the characteristic features of pre-eclampsia pathogenesis, as well as to the development of new diagnostic, preventative and therapeutic methods.

RESULTS
pre-eclampsia: its association, via comorbid genes, with diabetes mellitus, obesity and gestational diabetes
the main goal of the current study was to identify comorbid genes whose dysfunction or mutation represent common risk factors for diseases that are concurrent with pe. to this end, we relied on published data  <cit>  regarding the four most significant and widespread pathologies concurrent with pe: dm, ob, gd and pyelonephritis. furthermore, using the andsystem and pathway studio software, we reconstructed associative networks  comprising interactions between the above diseases via their associated genes. subsequently, reduction was achieved by eliminating pyelonephritis, as genes associated with nephritis were not associated with pe and the other analysed disorders. using the andsystem, we identified  <dig>  proteins/genes associated with pe, ob, dm and/or gd. using pathway studio,  <dig>  proteins/genes were identified. the results of both programs were in good agreement regarding the number of genes in groups associated with particular diseases . unfortunately, we were not able to use string for the reconstruction of such networks, as this program does not provide information about protein/gene-disease associations.

the number of proteins/genes common to different combinations of the examined diseases is shown in figure  <dig>  we assumed that comorbid diseases are more closely interrelated, via the common proteins/genes associated with them, as compared with randomly chosen disease pairs. to test this assumption, we calculated the distribution of three relation indices of random disease-protein/gene-disease networks built for random disease pairs: iab , jab  and mab . all three disease pairs  were significantly connected by the iab and jab indices at p <  <dig>  . only pe & dm pair was significantly different by mab index  from randomly generated pairs of diseases. thus, pe and dm were found to be the most significantly associated disease pair for all three relation indices.

next, we tested the hypothesis whether comorbid proteins/genes common to comorbid disease pairs interact more closely compared to a set of randomly chosen proteins/genes. comparison of the associative molecular genetic networks with random ones demonstrated that the networks that describe the interactions between the comorbid proteins/genes for all three disease pairs  exhibited significantly greater connectivities than those of the random networks .

of particular interest was an appended analysis of the associative molecular genetic networks built for proteins associated concurrently with four comorbid diseases . the three programs used to build this network were the andsystem, pathway studio and string . as figure 3a shows, the andsystem network comprised  <dig> objects:  <dig> proteins and  <dig> genes, as well as  <dig> interactions. the andsystem has an advantageous feature: an object pair can also be associated concurrently with links of several types. for this reason, the number of associated object pairs,  <dig>  was smaller than the number of links. the andsystem represented cases of the regulation of protein activity , including up-regulation  and down-regulation  of protein activity; gene expression regulation , including up-regulation  and down-regulation ; protein-protein interactions ; protein transport regulation ; catalysis ; expression  and association . to compare the andsystem network with those of the string and pathway studio, the andsystem network was transformed into a protein-protein interaction network, with links from the genes assigned to their respective proteins, while links from genes as separate vertices were deleted from the network. such a network contained  <dig> interconnected protein pairs.

the string network  contained  <dig> proteins/genes, and  <dig> gene pairs connected by  <dig> links, including five different types: activation , expression with inhibition , binding , post-translational modification , and functional links . the functional links in string were determined on the basis of neighbourhood in the genome, gene fusions, co-occurrence across genomes, co-expression, experimental/biochemical data, association in curated databases, and co-mentioned in pubmed abstracts  <cit> .

the network built by pathway studio  contained  <dig> proteins/genes, and  <dig> pairs of genes connected by  <dig> links, including six different types: binding , expression , molecular transport , promoter binding , protein modification  and regulation .

there was a significant difference between the comorbid and random networks , not only for disease pairs, but also for the associative molecular genetic networks that describe the interactions between proteins/genes associated concurrently with all four diseases  . these results demonstrated that comorbid proteins/genes are presumably involved in shared biological processes. this can explain the increased number of interactions between proteins/genes, as compared with those for associative molecular genetic networks of randomly chosen proteins/genes. confirmation of this hypothesis would shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the interactions between comorbid diseases.

analysis of overrepresentation of gene ontology  processes
overrepresentation of go biological processes was analysed for the group of proteins/genes associated with single diseases  and pairs of diseases , as well as concurrently with all four diseases. in each of these cases, more than  <dig>  overrepresented processes were found . among these were a high number of quite general processes for which thousands of genes have been annotated. the connectivity rate  was calculated for each process listed in additional file  <dig> to check how closely the proteins/genes, which caused an overrepresentation of processes, interacted. after ranking the overrepresented biological processes according to the crs,  <dig> processes had the highest cr  . just as expected, generalized, nonspecific biological processes had smaller cr values in the majority of cases as compared with specialized processes involving a relatively small number of genes.

among the overrepresented biological processes with a maximum cr were positive regulation of monooxygenase activity, regulation of fat cell differentiation, regulation of lipid metabolic process, nitric oxide and carbon monoxide metabolism, regulation of protein kinase b signalling cascade, regulation of nf-kappa b transcription factor activity, regulation of glucose metabolism and transport, regulation of cellular response to oxidative stress, regulation of cytokine production, regulation of cell cycle process and others. thus, the use of the cr index in the go enrichment analysis revealed the specific go processes and lower the rank of less informative general processes.

reconstruction of associative pathways describing potential molecular mechanisms via comorbid genes involved in overrepresented go biological processes
the next step of the current study was to reconstruct the molecular pathways connecting pe with dm, ob, and gd, via interactions between the specific and comorbid genes. the pathway discovery module of the andvisio software was used to trace separate pathways in the network of molecular genetic interactions associated concurrently with all four pathologies. the pathway discovery module was used to search for pathways in the network using patterns set by the user.

the patterns were of the following type: <pe> - <any protein/gene specific to pe> - <any comorbid protein/gene> - <any protein/gene specific to ob or gd, or dm> - <ob or gd, or dm>. the program chose all the pathways meeting the pattern's criteria: the starting link was pe; the second link of the chain should be one of the proteins/genes associated with pe, exceptions were proteins/genes comorbid for all four diseases ; the third link should be one of the 4-comorbid proteins/genes ; the fourth link should be one of the proteins specific to ob, gd, or dm, with the exception of 4-comorbid proteins/genes. the last link should be one of the diseases . the total number of identified pathways was more than  <dig>  these were combined into a single pathway network .

common, as well as specific, risk factors were distinguished for the following combinations of diseases: pe and dm; pe and ob; pe and dm, ob; pe and dm, ob, gd; . the largest number of connections was obtained for the tnfa, tgfb <dig> and ins genes, which revealed specialized go processes with maximum crs, such as: «positive regulation of protein kinase b signalling», «cascade regulation of nf-kappa b transcription factor activity», «regulation of mitosis», «regulation of nuclear division», «regulation of protein secretion mapk cascade», «positive regulation of protein transport», «regulation of protein complex assembly», «positive regulation of cell migration», «positive regulation of secretion», «positive regulation of cellular component movement», «positive regulation of organelle organization», «regulation of mitotic cell cycle», «regulation of immune effector process», «intracellular protein kinase cascade», «regulation of cellular component biogenesis», «regulation of cell cycle process», «regulation of organelle organization», «regulation of cell cycle» .

an associative pathway network connecting pe, via the plat, adipoq, lepr, tgfb <dig>  tnfa, ins, igfbp <dig>  ace and esr <dig> genes, with dm, ob and gd incorporated  <dig> genes with  <dig> connections . most of these connections  corresponded to the "association" type . sixty-nine of them could be referred to "expression regulation" types and  <dig> as "co-expression" ; eight comprised "down regulation", "degradation regulation", and "degradation downregulation" .

the differential network of pe risk factors included seven genes , endothelial  no-synthase, heat shock  <dig> kda protein  <dig> , apolipoprotein j  and  <dig> -methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase .

thus, whereas all the identified pe risk factors might be treated as potential markers of this disease, the most probable molecular mechanism underlying pe, dm, ob and gd includes the pathway starting from the tgfb <dig>  tnfa, ins and ace genes, through the il1b, nos <dig>  hspa <dig> , clu and mthfr genes, and eventually to pe.

thus, the probable chains of molecular events on the way to combined pe, in this context, are as follows: tgfb <dig> or tnfa - il1b - pe; tnfa or ins - nos <dig> - pe; ins - hspa <dig> or clu - pe; ace - mthfr - pe.

discussion
the associative networks analysed in this work  appeared to be significant for the understanding of the nature of pe, thereby supporting the hypothesis that pe represents a stable complex of clinical manifestations  <cit> . the key players in the reconstructed networks are comorbid genes which, on the one hand, contribute to the development of pe and its pathogenically related disorders, and, on the other hand, may play the role of "triggers" in the presence of other pre-eclampsia-promoting factors . comorbid genes are characteristic of many multifactorial diseases  <cit> . moreover, many comorbid diseases may involve various pathophysiological mechanisms  <cit> , and the construction of associative networks makes it possible to understand their molecular interrelations.

an analysis of reconstructed associative networks, which describe interactions between comorbid proteins/genes associated with different pair combinations of pe with dm, ob, and gd, demonstrated that comorbid diseases differ in a statistically significant manner from random disease pairs. the differences concern both the number of common genes associated with the diseases and the interactions between such genes. the number of vertices in the comorbid networks, as well as the number of interactions between the vertices, exceeded those of random disease pairs. at the same time, the density of connections in the associative molecular genetic network describing the interactions between proteins/genes associated concurrently with all four diseases also differed significantly from those of the random networks formed by random sets of proteins/genes. interestingly, we also observed the same regularity for inversely comorbid diseases  <cit> . it has been shown that the associative networks reconstructed for pairs of inversely comorbid diseases, including bronchial asthma and pulmonary tuberculosis, as well as nine pairs formed by neurodegenerative  and cancer diseases , significantly differed from the networks that describe interactions between random diseases. an example of the mutual arrangement of inversely comorbid  and comorbid diseases is shown in figure  <dig> 

our current results are in many respects consistent with those of epidemiological studies worldwide. it has been amply demonstrated that the common risk factors of pe were dm, ob and gd  <cit> . in most studies, dm is a leading risk factor, as it occurs in more than half of the women with pe  <cit> . furthermore, dm is more strongly associated with a late-onset of the disease, which prevails among all the cases  <cit> . a study of twin gestations supports our reasoning. in this study, an evaluation of associated factors in pe gestations and a comparison of the incidence of pregnancy complications among twins with and without pe demonstrated that a high pregnancy body mass index  and diabetes were associated with pe  <cit> .

we identified  <dig> genes encoding shared proteins in the molecular network, built using the literature- and database-mining , that simultaneously connected with pe, dm, gd and ob. most shared genes determined in this study encode proteins controlling energy metabolism, and are associated with the immune response and inflammation.

an analysis of the associations of these genes with pe and dm, gd and ob obtained in case-control, family-based, and meta-analyses studies, which we conducted using the huge navigator, revealed that  <dig> of the  <dig> shared genes were associated with at least one of the diseases . two genes  had never been shown to be associated with pe and dm, gd and ob. four shared genes  were found to be associated with all the diseases.

the number of associations determined by case-control, family-based and meta-analysis studies are shown.

we believe that the identification of these genes in the current study is of importance because they encode proteins important for the development of diseases, as confirmed by experimental studies .

angiotensin-converting enzyme  plays a key role in regulating blood pressure by influencing vascular tone by activating the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii and inactivating the vasodilatory peptide bradykinin. inter-individual differences in blood ace levels are at least in part explained by the presence of an insertion/deletion  polymorphism in intron  <dig> of the ace gene, with higher ace levels observed in d allele carriers. the results of many studies confirmed the association of ace polymorphism with pe  <cit> . other studies have indicated that the ace gene is a factor that contributes to the manifestation of gd  <cit> , diabetic nephropathy and ob  <cit> .

it has been shown that polymorphisms in the adiponectin gene  modulate the circulating concentration of adiponectin. abnormal adiponectin levels, as well as adipoq polymorphisms, have been associated with pe  <cit> . some variants of this gene are associated with the occurrence of gd  <cit> , while other polymorphisms may contribute to type  <dig> dm risk  <cit>  and ob in adults  <cit> .

mannose-binding lectin  is involved in the maintenance of an inflammatory environment in the uterus. high mbl levels have been associated with successful pregnancies, whereas low levels are involved in pe development. association between polymorphisms in the structural and promoter regions of the mbl <dig> gene and pe have been evaluated  <cit> . mbl gene polymorphisms are associated with gd and with type  <dig> dm  <cit> ; in addition, mbl deficiency may confer a risk of ob and insulin resistance  <cit> .

tumour necrosis factor-alpha  participates in the immune response and inflammation. many studies have showed that there is an association between the tnfa gene and pe among europeans  <cit> . the - <dig> g-->a polymorphism of the tnfa promoter gene is involved in the pathophysiology of insulin resistance and gd  <cit> . the same polymorphism is a genetic risk factor for the development of type  <dig> dm  <cit> . individuals who carry the -308a tnfa gene variant have a 23% greater risk of developing obesity compared with controls, and they showed significantly higher systolic arterial blood pressure and plasma insulin levels, supporting the hypothesis that the tnfa gene is involved in the pathogenesis of the metabolic syndrome  <cit> .

the pe associome contains more links than each of the individual networks. the identified, shared genes have been classified according to go. such a network was needed for a go overrepresentation analysis. the presence of processes identified by the go analysis in the pathogenesis of pe is not surprising. the central hypothesis of our understanding of pe is that it results from ischaemia of the placenta, which in turn releases factors into the maternal circulation that are capable of inducing the clinical manifestations of the disease  <cit> . multiple pathogenetic mechanisms have been implicated in this disorder, including an imbalance between angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors, autoantibodies to the type- <dig> angiotensin ii receptor, platelet and thrombin activation, defective deep placentation, intravascular inflammation, endothelial cell activation and/or dysfunction, and oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress that promote the differentiation of trophoblasts from a proliferative to an invasive phenotype, regulate cell homeostasis through their involvement in post-translational modifications and protein folding, and induce the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. other mechanisms include hypoxia and trophoblast invasion, which down-regulate the expression of transforming growth factor β <dig>  and hypoxia-inducible factors   <cit> . these results indicated the contribution of common, non-specific, pathological processes to the development of pe, dg, gd and ob.

in addition to the identification of common proteins/genes associated with different pathological processes, another goal of the study was to find unique markers for pe. to do so, we reconstructed potential mechanisms of molecular interactions using the andsystem software, a program that allows the identification of the largest number of links . although the central network core of these pathways contained only nine common genes , it incorporated  <dig> genes with  <dig> connections between them, and differential factor risks of pe were identified: the il1b, nos <dig>  hspa <dig>  clu and mthfr genes. the contributions of many of these genes to the pathogenesis of pe has been confirmed by numerous studies  <cit> . here, we showed for the first time that these genes can be specifically involved in the pathogenesis of pe. however, it is not yet clear why these genes have a greater involvement in pe. the possible trigger mechanisms of combined pe are linked to the processes that are carried out by the products of the identified genes, namely, inflammation , endothelial dysfunction , heat shock and stress , stabilizing cell membranes at diverse fluid-tissue interfaces and protecting the vascular endothelium from an attack by some factors in plasma, such as active complement complexes , and homocysteine metabolism .

in addition, the results are of particular importance in regard to the theory of confounding assumptions as false mechanisms of genetic association when the factor is associated with a confound, but not the phenotype, and a confound, in turn, is associated with the phenotype  <cit> . the identified genes can act as such a confound.

CONCLUSIONS
the current results broaden our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of the interactions between comorbid diseases. this reconstruction of associative molecular genetic networks that describe interactions between pe and comorbid diseases  differed significantly from partner networks built for random disease pairs. networks between pe and comorbid diseases had a larger number of genes and links between them. with this in mind, it is of interest that similar features of associative network structure have been observed for inversely comorbid diseases  <cit> . it can be suggested that comorbid and inversely comorbid relationships between diseases involve larger sets of closely interrelated genes larger than those for random pairs of diseases. in the future, we intend to perform a scale analysis that connects different disease pairs to detect potential comorbid/inversely comorbid diseases for all the possible disease pairs via which these diseases can interact. reconstruction and analysis of the pe associome is useful for revealing the genetic factors involved in the pathogenesis of the disease and for identifying its differential risk factors, as well as for modelling the theoretical mechanisms of pe development in pregnant women with underlying diseases, such as db, ob or gd.

