BACKGROUND
the study of early embryonic development continues to pose formidable technical challenges due in large part to the limited amounts of sample material. however, high-throughput high-fidelity amplification of nucleic acid is making the macromolecular study of embryonic physiology more accessible. microarray platforms, and more recently rnaseq, have made studying the early embryo transcriptome almost routine. our group has been developing bovine and porcine microarrays based on transcriptomic platforms that include standardized sample preparation procedures and a complete user-friendly software suite for data normalization and analysis, allowing efficient processing of samples from extraction through to the generation of publishable graphs
 <cit> . transcriptomic platforms have been used to study how early embryos of many different species interact with their immediate microenvironment
. although very useful, the transcriptome has not allowed us to determine whether or not deviant gene expression, that is observed in embryos, is a transient adaptation to surrounding conditions that later yields to normal expression without any long-term impact on development. in order to provide a more complete picture of embryo adaptation and its potential long-term consequences, study of the epigenome is necessary
 <cit> . the epigenome is the sum of all epigenetic information
 <cit>  and refers more precisely to the complete description of chemical changes to dna and histones
 <cit> , including histone tail modifications, chromatin remodelling proteins, and ncrna. epigenomics and transcriptomics are closely interrelated in terms of gene function and regulation
 <cit>  and together modulate gene expression.

among epigenomic effectors, dna methylation is believed to be a strong primary molecular mark having a major impact on intergenerational gene silencing
 <cit> . dna methylation patterns are known to be relatively stable and established in a tissue-specific manner
 <cit> . however, following fertilization and during mammalian pre-implantation development, the dna methylation pattern is dynamic and undergoes reprogramming in the form of a wave of genome-wide de-methylation and re-methylation
, thus putting the embryo at risk of programming errors
 <cit> . furthermore, the study of how the dna methylome can be modified by changes in the embryo microenvironment such as in vivo/vitro culture, uterine conditions, or maternal nutritional regimen has represented a major challenge and continues to do so, due mainly to sample scarcity offering input dna well below minimal recommendations.

numerous platforms already exist to study methylation of targeted loci or to obtain genome-wide methylation profiles. for the study of very small samples, determining dna methylation at targeted loci has so far been more successful than genome-wide approaches
 <cit> . the main advantages of general survey are the possibility of describing physiological responses at the genome-wide scale and the potential for novel discovery.

the aim of the present work was to develop a technological platform that is complementary to existing platforms, in order to provide a whole-genome view of dna methylation in bovine early embryos. since a diploid mammalian nucleus contains about  <dig>  picograms of dna  and the expanded blastocyst of large mammalian species is composed of about  <dig> cells, a single bovine blastocyst contains approximately 1 ng of dna. the current benchmark for minimal sample size is around 10 ng, therefore corresponding to a pool of  <dig> expanded blastocysts. the other criterion is ease of use, at both the sample handling and data processing steps. we thus sought to identify an existing methodological approach which would be best suited to analyze very small samples of dna. the platform was tested and validated using experimental samples.

RESULTS
platform design
the embryogene  dna methylation analysis  platform was designed for high-throughput methylation profiling of bovine genome using limited amounts of input material. it combines four independent methodological principles: i) restriction endonuclease-based   genomic dna fragmentation; ii) targeting methylated regions using a cocktail of methyl-sensitive restriction endonucleases; iii) amplification of methylated  fragments using ligation-mediated pcr; and iv) identification of the amplified methylated fragments using a microarray. the edma workflow is presented in figure 
 <dig> figure  <dig> 
sequence of steps involved in the generation of methylome and transcriptome data from the same sample using edma platform. a quality control step prior to lm-pcr allows evaluation of the efficiency of cleavage by msres for methylome analysis. edma: embryogene dna methylation analysis platform, elma: embryogene lims and microarray analysis, embv3: embryogene bovine transcriptomics microarray version  <dig>  lm-pcr: ligation-mediated pcr, msre: methyl-sensitive restriction endonuclease, re: restriction endonuclease .



sample treatment protocol and microarray design were optimized in parallel. our laboratory has previously conducted a survey of dna methylation in bovine embryos using various reduced representation approaches
 <cit> . this allowed us to identify a collection of loci at which dna methylation varies in association with early development. these loci included cpg islands, gene bodies, intergenic regions and repetitive elements. the oligo design accounted for the sample preparation steps in which genomic dna was fragmented using the msei restriction enzyme, which recognizes 5′-t/taa-3’, thus avoiding methylated cytosine residues. in silico digestion of the bovine genome shows that msei yields fragments averaging 160 bp in length . a second layer of in silico analysis located the methyl-sensitive restriction endonucleases  restriction sites, namely c/cgg , gc/gc  and c/cgc . distribution of common and unique msre sites within msei fragments is shown in additional file
1: figure s <dig> b. furthermore, the information regarding the number of cpg sites per restriction fragments and the number of msres restriction sites per restriction fragments are provided in additional file
1: figure s <dig> a-d. the 60-mer oligo design was based, in part, on a collection of msei fragments containing msre sites within the genomic loci that we previously found to bear methylation or hydroxymethylation marks in early bovine embryos
 <cit> , to which were added cpg islands determined by in silico analysis. additional oligos were designed by tiling the msei fragments adjacent to this initial set of targets until the capacity of a single microarray slide was reached . preliminary hybridizations allowed selection of a subset of 400 k oligos that performed well, based on sequence specificity and signal strength variations across the set of test hybridizations . the final probe collection queries a variety of different genomic features not limited to cpg islands. a summary of the genomic targets surveyed by the microarray is shown in figure 
 <dig> and additional file
2: table s2- <dig>  as illustrated for two bovine imprinted genes  in figure 
 <dig>  the edma probes were distributed across various genomic features .figure  <dig> 
the characteristics of edma array.  gene region coverage by the probes. the single greatest proportion  corresponds to intronic regions.  probe distribution based on proximity to cpg islands as well as cpg islands-related enrichments. more than half of the probes target fragments in the open-sea region.  proportions of different classes of bovine repetitive elements detectable by the edma platform.
snapshots from the ucsc genomic web-browser describing the genomic locations of two bovine imprinted genes , positioning of the probes  and other associated bovine genomic features.
msei recognition sites on genomic dna result in msei-msei fragments. cpg islands may be absent  or present . edma probes may target ctcf binding sites , which may be proximal  or within  the gene body. other edma probes  also may overlap with probes the transcriptomic  array or cover cpg islands or non-cpg islands. probes  may also cover intronic or exonic portions of the genome .



since the platform uses a cocktail of msres to target genomic locations bearing methylation marks, the extent of cleavage is a critical factor. incomplete cleavage will lead to false positive results. for quality control purposes, control dna templates were designed to account for extent of cleavage both by msei and the msres cocktail. a pair of dna templates was designed for each msre . all spiked-in controls had internal msei sites at their ends, and for each pair, one template was methylated in vitro for protection against msre activity. the controls were thus subjected to the same cleavage conditions as the sample. following genomic fragmentation, adaptor ligation and msre treatment, sample quality was determined using qpcr, with calculation of the extent of cleavage for each msre. the difference in threshold cycle  between protected  and unprotected  control templates can be calculated, while sample uniformity can be visualized from the amplification curves . only samples displaying uniformity with the other samples cleaved > 97% in the same cohort were retained for downstream treatment. insufficiently cleaved samples were in some cases subjected to a second treatment with additional msre digestion.figure  <dig> 
the feature of edma spiked-in controls and the quality control process of msres digestion assessment.  location of sites cleaved by endonucleases within exogeous control dna.  difference in pcr threshold cycle  between un-cleaved  and cleaved samples.  plot of residual number of copies and corresponding efficiency of cleavage by msre versus pcr cycle number, indicating that satisfactory cleavage  is reached at the end of five pcr cycles.



in edma platform, after hybridization on the microarray and data analysis there are two types of quality control  plots which the examples are shown in figure 
 <dig>  the first plot, which assesses the completeness of the genomic digestion, shows nearly complete cleavage by msei, with most control probes showing signal below the background noise . the second quality control assess the quality of detected signals. the plot uses signals from probes corresponding to the spiked-in controls, and confirms that unprotected templates led to low signals and vice versa for protected fragments .figure  <dig> 
the two types of quality control  plots generating after edma microarray hybridization and data analysis.  signal intensity of control probes designed to overlap an msei site. probes corresponded to loci distributed throughout the bovine genome. the dashed horizontal line represents the limit of detection . intensities below this line indicate successful genomic fragmentation by msei.  cleavage of synthetic spiked-in control dna pairs by msre, based on microarray signal. signals from unprotected  fragments  are near background values.



the analysis pipeline
for each dye-swaps microarray hybridization, the quantification of methylation measurements are based on m values  which further normalized  and statistical analysis is performed as described in methods. this means larger values represented more evidence of relative methylation similar to other microarray-based genome-wide dna methylation analysis platforms
 <cit> . to support data mining, an extensive analysis pipeline was designed with the goal to sort the data according to defined structural characteristics . we designed a user-friendly and comprehensive bioinformatics data analysis pipeline to complement our developed platform . a complete schematic of our data analysis pipeline is shown in figure 
 <dig>  the data analysis pipeline was designed to be compatible with results obtaining from our array-based gene expression platform
 <cit> . it enables to identify alterations of dna methylation in bovine genomic regions under various enrichment outputs in parallel to deviations in transcription. the pipeline comprises several analysis steps for data qc and differential analysis, generating a list of dmrs as well as downstream sequence-based enrichment analyses, hot spot detection and concordant analysis in search of loci where both transcriptomic and dna methylation are affected. the information is binned according to the set of annotations given to every genomic locus . typical enrichment analysis account for cpg islands neighbourhood both in length and density, gene body structures  and classes of bovine repetitive elements . since edma is not based on bisulfite conversion and sequencing, it does not provide a relative value of the extent of dna methylation. this information needs to be determined by targeted pyrosequening of the regions of interest.the data analysis pipeline output is a large contingent of plots that serve five different objectives : i) to document the quality of the samples through the quality control plots ; ii) to provide visual aid to determine where the msre-protected fragments were found for each sample type; iii) to provide an overall perspective of the extent of the differences in methylation between the samples; iv) to mine differentially methylated regions  data according to genomic features; v) and lastly, the circos plot which can be used to integrate the epigenomic and transcriptomic data .figure  <dig> 
the edma dna methylation analysis pipeline. this genome-wide methylome analysis pipeline was designed to provide a comprehensive set of plots to ease interpretation of both methylome and transcriptome raw data generated from the same sample. information is binned according to known functions or genetic features.
list of the graphs generated by edma analytical pipeline.




dna methylation profiles of bovine sperm and early embryos
genome-wide overview of dna methylation profiles.



platform performance was evaluated on the basis of the contrast in genomic dna methylation patterns between bovine sperm and blastocysts. similar amounts of input dna from both sample types were processed, and microarray data was analyzed using the pipeline described above. using a predetermined significance criterion i.e. fold-change > 2^ <dig> , p-value <  <dig> ,  <dig> dmrs were identified, most of which  were due to hypermethylation in sperm . large numbers of the methylated loci found in the embryo genome were also found in sperm dna. differences can also be observed using the genome-wide view provided by circos plot, which shows a prevalence of hypomethylation in the sperm for chromosome x compared to blastocysts dna. nearly all  of the top  <dig> identified differentially methylated regions  were found to be hypermethylated in sperm dna . this reveals that the majority of dmr genes in bovine sperm dna lose their methylation after fertilization and during early embryo development, at least until the blastocyst stage.figure  <dig> 
volcano plot of genome-wide dna methylation. this plot shows clearly that bovine sperm dna was more methylated than embryo dna.
the circos plot showing the genome-wide dna methylation profile of bovine sperm dna and the blastocyst genome, by chromosome. the mean p-values of  <dig> m bp windows are displayed along with the  <dig> most significant dmrs. positive fold-changes represent hypermethylation in sperm while negative fold-changes represent hypermethylation in blastocysts. the inner circle depicts probe mean values across treatments to show the completeness of the coverage generated from the microarray signals.



characteristics of differentially methylated regions .



our data revealed that sperm dna shows a tendency to hypermethylation compared to blastocysts in all types of promoter, intronic and exonic regions, non-cpg islands regions  and cpg islands with low-to-intermediate cpg density and small-to-intermediate length . only in high-density cpg islands in the blastocyst genome demonstrated a tendency to hypermethylation compared to sperm. amongst dmrs containing repetitive elements, bovine sperm dna tended to be hypermethylated in the majority of the repetitive element classes, in particular long-terminal-repeat  retrotransposons, line and sine. however, low-complexity repetitive elements showed more hypermethylated in the blastocyst genome.figure  <dig> 
the comparative analysis of differentially methylated regions  enrichments between bovine sperm and blastocysts. this figure shows the log <dig> enrichment ratios between the numbers of the dmrs found to be hypermethylated in bovine sperm compared to the number of dmrs found to be hypermethylated in bovine blastocysts, broken down by different types of genomic features. the majority of the dmrs showed hypermethylation in bovine sperm dna.



dmr validation
seven candidate dmr loci from different regions of the bovine genome were selected and primers were designed  for measurement of dna methylation levels by pyrosequencing. these results confirmed those obtained using our platform and showed very high levels of methylation with high reproducibility in sperm dna compared to the blastocyst genome . however, as expected there was not any linear correlation between the edma fold changes for the selected dmrs and their corresponding measured fold changes after the pyrosequencing confirmation .figure  <dig> 
validation of the selected dmrs by pyrosequencing.




discussion
development of edma
the study of the epigenome has become a prime focus in the effort to understand the expression of complex phenotypes such as obesity, diabetes
 <cit> , mental disorders
 <cit>  and cancers
. vast epigenetic erasure and reprogramming events during early embryogenesis make this phase of development a window for perturbations, potentially having long-term impact on phenotype in adulthood. methods for monitoring candidate loci using as little as single cell
 <cit> , one oocyte
 <cit>  or single cell blastomere
 <cit>  have been developed. the aim of the present work is to develop a robust technological platform to study genome-wide dna methylation, suitable for the small amount of sample material obtainable from early embryos and to complement this platform with a comprehensive suite of tools for quality control and data analysis. the embryogene dna methylation analysis  platform was developed for compatibility with our previously published transcriptome analysis platform
 <cit>  with the aim of integrating data of both types from the same sample.

among the three sample treatment options currently employed to study genomic dna methylation
 <cit> , we opted for methyl-sensitive restriction enzymes  over bisulfite conversion and affinity selection because it allowed for robust processing of dna input of a few nanograms as well as a more straightforward data processing based on the well-established tools dedicated to microarray data analysis. an optimal procedure was sought for isolating intact genomic dna for subsequent specific fragmentation by nucleases, which offers better repeatability than mechanical shearing . the selection of methylated fragments thus obtained is performed by means of successive pcr reactions, while amplicon identification is achieved using a microarray, which brings the added benefit of mature data processing and analysis procedures. in addition, each microarray slide is composed of two arrays that hold two samples each , allowing for the necessary inclusion of biological replicates in the experimental design. all platforms must include biological replication, since the extent of dna methylation is naturally variable among samples of similar origin.

the procedures involved in edma, namely restriction endonuclease genomic fragmentation, adaptor ligation, cleavage by msres, selection of protected fragments by pcr and identification of fragments by microarray, are essentially those proposed for nanohelp and for array-comparative genomic hybridization, which have been applied successfully to inputs of respectively 10 ng and a single cell
 <cit> . ten nanograms is the approximate quantity of dna obtainable from  <dig> expanded blastocysts. comparing 1 μg and 10 ng genomic dna input, oda and colleagues demonstrated that the smaller input provided higher reproducibility , due probably to more complete cleavage, suggesting that low input of genomic dna would likely be more suitable for msre-based platforms
 <cit> . sample processing used in edma was tested with lower gdna inputs as low as  <dig> cells and genomic coverage was measured using the 50 k bovine snp chip which showed important loss of information due to allele drop-out when input were lower than 1 ng . when dealing with single cell dna methylation analysis, partial sample loss is often observed. this loss may not be problematic when aiming for targeted loci but is definitely problematic for genome-wide profiling. as such, 10 ng was set the minimal input leading to a robust dna methylation profiling.

in order to prevent the introduction of false positives that would arise from incomplete cleavage of sample dna
 <cit> , spiked-in controls were designed to account for extent of cleavage both during the initial msei fragmentation and by msres. samples were tested before fragment amplification by pcr to ensure that cleavage was sufficient. when cleavage is incomplete, the msres treatment can be repeated. for each msre, a pair of synthetic dna controls was designed, one of which was methylated in vitro and used as a control for fragment protection, while the unprotected counterpart acted as the cleavage target.

one of the main concerns with any genome-wide approach is the actual genomic coverage. since the msei recognition site is t/taa, cpg dinucleotides are left intact and most cpg islands are conserved
 <cit> . these sites are very abundant throughout the genome, resulting in small fragments well suited for lm-pcr
 <cit> . by fragmenting the entire genome in this manner, methylation status outside cpg islands can be queried. this provides valuable information, since evidence is mounting for potential important roles for 5mc in non-cpg islands, which have been found more dynamic than cpg islands with respect to methylation-based regulation
 <cit> . this is potentially even more important in early embryos where overall demethylation just occurred.

since detection based on restriction enzymes is limited to fragments bearing the recognition sites
 <cit> , adequate genomic coverage by msre requires a combination of nucleases
 <cit> . in silico analysis showed that compared to hpaii alone, the combination of hpaii, hinp1i and aci1i increased the coverage of cpgs sites in the probes designed for edma from  <dig> % to  <dig> % and genomic coverage from  <dig> % to  <dig> % . this coverage accounts for a little more than  <dig>  m cpg sites, which corresponds to about 10% of all cpg sites in the bovine genome. similar coverage is obtained using reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing , which has been shown to be efficient with small dna input
 <cit> . both edma and rrbs have several steps in common, including genomic fragmentation by restriction enzyme, adaptor ligation and pcr amplification. the main benefits of reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing are that it allows quantitative evaluation of methylation at single-base resolution and is applicable to all species since it is based on dna sequencing, which does not require a priori knowledge of the genome
 <cit> . however, edma similar to any other msres enrichment-based approaches generate a list of dmrs ranked in order of significance but does not provide information regarding the extent of dna methylation which must be determined by targeted pyrosequencing. furthermore, enrichment-based approaches using antibody or methyl-binding proteins have not been thoroughly tested with samples containing only a few ng of dna. with larger dna input, these methods have been shown to provide moderate resolution, since the capture depends on fragment methylation density
 <cit> .

while epigenome-wide association studies and the development of technological platforms suitable for low input dna are broadening in scope, improvement to the standardization of experimental assays across samples and to data analysis and interpretation remains slow
 <cit> . although amplicons obtained by lm-pcr could be processed into sequencing libraries, we opted for microarray-based identification, which is more restrictive  but has the major benefit of compatibility with an established, robust and user-friendly data analysis pipeline. these features may limit genomic coverage but definitely increase sample turnover rate by decreasing the time required to interpret data.

in comparison to gene expression, which is most often limited to the study of protein encoded transcribed elements which account for little more than 1% of the eukaryote genome, profiling overall dna methylation considers a vastly more complex diversity of sequences, which in turn complicate data analysis. we therefore sought to support data interpretation by binning the information according to genomic features. such an approach increases the statistical power to identify subtle alterations in genome regions by avoiding p value dilution, through multiple-testing corrections that include the vast majority of regions considered a priori unlikely to be differentially methylated
 <cit> . the data analysis pipeline built in to our platform accounts for: i) site specificity , ii) region  and iii) sequence composition . this is in accordance with recent recommendations for epigenome-wide association studies
 <cit> .

the enrichment categorization implemented in the data analysis pipeline is based on previous studies
 and provides a full complement of graphic outputs. even though the graphs might not all be relevant to all users, depending on the experimental design and biological hypothesis, are all produced automatically at no additional cost in time or resources on the part of the user. overall, edma was developed as a cost-effective standardized platform that robustly profiles dna methylation across the entire bovine genome. this sample processing platform is also complemented with bioinformatics supports for data analysis with the specific aim to aid data interpretation.

the importance of genome-scale parallel analysis of the dna methylome and transcriptome
current technological advances and the exponential growth of epigenetics studies in the past few years, in particular genome-wide studies, are advancing our knowledge and providing more evidence for the interdependence of epigenetic and genetic variations
 <cit> . by providing genome-wide parallel survey of the dna methylome and the transcriptome for the same sample, edma offers a powerful tool for revealing highly relevant targets and potential associations between the dna methylome and the transcriptome. in addition, overlaying methylomic and transcriptomic data has been shown to provide complementary information
 <cit> .

genome-wide profiles of bovine sperm and blastocyst dna methylomes
as proof of concept, we compared the dna methylation profiles of bovine sperm and blastocysts and performed validation by pyrosequencing on selected dmrs. all selected candidates were found to be substantially more highly methylated in sperm dna, corroborating the results obtained with edma. physiologically relevant data were also generated and compared to the current literature. the sperm genome was found hyper-methylated compared to the embryo, which is consistent with the de-methylation process known to occur after fertilization in bovine
 <cit>  and other species such as mouse
 <cit>  and zebra fish
 <cit> . the data also indicated that large numbers of loci methylated in bovine embryos are also methylated in sperm dna, which also corroborates a previous report
 <cit> . as previously observed in mice
 <cit> , we found that from the dmrs enrichment, that short length/low density cpg islands showed a higher tendency to changes  than other regions. the direction of change is predominantly toward hypermethylation in sperm, but not always. in addition, we observed a high level of methylation in many repetitive elements, which is also in agreement with the patterns observed in mice
 <cit> .

we observed marked differences  in the extent of methylation in long-terminal-repeat  retrotransposon, similar to previous findings with mice
 <cit> . furthermore, it has been shown that the sperm contributed dmrs in pre-implantation embryos at ltrs were associated with reduction of dna methylation and the most drastic methylation changes  in the sperm-to-zygote transition observed in some families of line and ltr retrotransposon
 <cit> . in our previous report, we also observed a transition in dna methylation in ltr during bovine embryo development from day  <dig> to day 12
 <cit> .

the reason for the observed large difference in ltr methylation during early development and, as shown specifically in this study, between sperm and blastocysts is not yet clear, although these differences might reflect the importance of de novo establishment of genome-wide methylation in the bovine early embryo. in this regard, robust ltr retrotransposon up-regulation has been shown during activation of the bovine embryo genome
 <cit>  and found to be a general requirement for progression through to the cleavage stage in mouse embryos
 <cit> . however, the nature of its role in mammalian early development remains elusive. furthermore, it has been suggested that ltr re-methylation occurs in the early, rather than late, pre-implantation mouse embryo
 <cit> . furthermore, the observation that a higher number of dmrs are present in low-complexity simple repeats in bovine blastocysts, in comparison with sperm, might represent notable dynamic changes in  <dig> mc in these specific class of repetitive elements during bovine early embryo development and differentiation
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
by developing edma, we are providing a unified and reliable approach to analyze small amounts of genomic dna, one that offers a good balance between genomic coverage and data turnaround time. the use of a microarray for fragment identification is robust, efficiently minimizing sample-to-data time. the built-in data analysis pipeline provides efficient means for data interpretation. the integrated data analysis pipeline could be a good option for researchers with limited bioinformatics resources. the platform is at the present time specific for the bovine genome, but a similar approach could be adapted easily to any species of which the entire genome is known. such platforms enable the study of the potential epigenetic risks associated with assisted reproductive technologies  or to highlight the sequence of events occurring during the establishment of embryonic cell lines.

