BACKGROUND
fast evolving dna sequences are used for answering a broad range of biological questions relative to population processes and phylogeography , species diversification , conservation biology  <cit>  and also genome or phenotype mapping . however, due to the very same intrinsic quality for which they are looked for, i.e. their high evolutionary rate, fast evolving dna sequences display "lineage specific" changes and therefore require de novo development each time a new group of non-model organisms is being investigated. despite various methodologies targeted toward the isolation of unspecific polymorphic dna fragments  the identification and the isolation of fast evolving dna sequences in non-model organisms is still laborious and expensive, making it a major impediment to the routine analysis of multiple loci on many taxa.

the isolation of fast evolving genes has gained new motivation and attention as genes involved in several actively investigated processes display high substitution rates: the evolution of species specific traits such as the human brain , speciation genes , reproduction genes  or genes governing the evolution of adaptive traits . theoretical approaches suggest that adaptation genes should be fast evolving so that selection could have a substrate on which to act  <cit> . furthermore, speciation genes, those that are directly or indirectly involved in the establishment of the genetic barrier between closely related species, consistently displayed high divergence rates  <cit> . at present, fast evolving genes which often evolve under positive selection can be identified either through large genomic comparisons which are feasible only for model organisms like drosophila species  or human-chimpanzee comparisons  <cit>  or via long term experimental approaches such as in the discovery of the hybrid inviability gene hmr in drosophila  <cit> . the increasing interest in biological mechanisms driven by fast evolving genes appeals to the development of a more efficient and cost effective method for the isolation of such genes across closely related species and which would not imply the prior knowledge of genetic or genomic information.

here we describe a simple and efficient experimental approach for enriching a cdna library in fast evolving transcript fragments. our method, named inter-specific selective hybridization  is based primarily on the principles of the widely used subtractive hybridization  procedure developed more than two decades ago for isolating cdnas of differentially expressed genes  <cit> . in the original sh protocol, the hybridization of cdnas versus mrnas of different cell lines belonging to the same organism distinguishes transcripts that are equally expressed in both cell lines from those that are uniquely or differentially expressed in the cell line of interest. in the issh approach , the transcriptome of the species of interest  is reverse transcribed into single stranded  cdna and then hybridized against the biotinylated mrna pool of a distinct yet close relative . during hybridization, three populations of transcripts of the species of interest can be found:  transcripts that never find their selector counterparts due to differential expression or gene loss;  fast evolving transcripts that find their homologous counterparts but the resulting heteroduplexes are unstable due to numerous nucleotide mispairings; and  conserved transcripts that form stable heteroduplexes. the second population of transcripts is in fact composed by sequences of varying divergence. the transcripts of interest are those that disanneal at the lowest stringencies and are therefore rescued for constructing the cdna library enriched in fast evolving transcripts. the issh method was applied for isolating fast evolving transcript fragments of the non-model catfish species ancistrus temminckii . we used the zebrafish genome as a reference for assessing the sequence divergence of the isolated transcripts and for transcript annotation and characterization.

RESULTS
experimental design
the issh method  confronts in solution complementary transcriptomes of two closely related species with the aim of rescuing transcripts of fast evolving genes. the property of evolving fast implies that such transcripts will disanneal at low stringencies from the heteroduplexes formed by homologous complementary sequences of the two species. our method was applied to build a cdna library enriched in fast evolving transcript fragments of brain tissue of the catfish ancistrus temminckii. we used as the selector species its close relative ancistrus dolichopterus. to assess the efficiency of the issh method we prepared a non-enriched control cdna library of brain tissue of a. temminckii using standard protocols. the two libraries were sequenced with the flx genome sequencer technology . we then "blasted" the enriched and control libraries against the complete genome of the zebrafish and analyzed the differences. we also annotated the transcripts producing significant matches and examined their characteristics to highlight the effectiveness of our method. as the zebrafish is not a close relative to our catfish and because the sequences of interest display high sequence divergence, a substantial proportion of the enriched library yielded no significant blast matches. therefore, we prepared an est library of a close catfish relative, hypostomus gr. plecostomus, belonging to the same subfamily , for refining the analyses.

analysis of sequence divergence
high-throughput sequencing and reads assembly yielded  <dig> and  <dig> contigs for the enriched and control libraries respectively. we blasted the contigs against the zebrafish genome using parameters suitable for comparing divergent sequences. only blast results with e-values lower than 10e- <dig> were considered for the analyses; they represented  <dig> % and  <dig> % of all contigs of the enriched and control libraries, respectively. among the contigs producing non-significant blast matches about half were low-complexity sequences as indicated by repeatmasker and were excluded from further analyses . significant blast alignments were classified by size in order to produce a finer analysis of the differences that exist between the enriched and control libraries. the sequence divergence comparisons  consistently show that the enriched library displays more divergent sequences  than the control library using as reference the zebrafish genome. applying a mean t-test unambiguously indicates that the mean divergence per category is significantly higher in the enriched library than in the control library, and this for all size categories .

sequence divergence was corrected using the k2p model with  <dig> transitions per transversion.

when using the zebrafish genome as reference, the fastest evolving sequences may not find their homologous counterparts due to the distant evolutionary relationship between the zebrafish and our non-model catfish. thus, performing the same analysis yet using an evolutionary closer reference - our est database of the catfish hypostomus gr. plecostomus - may allow a better understanding of the efficiency of issh method. the sequence divergence comparisons  show again a systematic and significant enrichment in fast evolving sequences in the enriched library as compared to the control library. the difference between the two libraries is generally higher than when using the zebrafish as reference. this is likely explained by the inclusion of a set of faster evolving genes which can now find their homologues in the evolutionary closer hypostomus reference.

characteristics of the sequences retained by the issh method
in order to better assess the usefulness of the issh method we annotated the contigs of the enriched and control libraries according to the information collected from their translated best blast hit in the swissprot/uniprot database with a minimum threshold of e-score ≤ 10e- <dig>  in this way only  <dig> contigs were characterized in the enriched library  and  <dig> in the control library . the analysis of the annotated sequences will serve to test three predictions that have to be fulfilled if the method achieves its goal. first, as mitochondrial genes evolve significantly faster than the vast majority of nuclear genes they should be more numerous in the enriched library than in the control. the results indicate that mitochondrial genes represent  <dig> % versus  <dig> % of the annotated contigs of the enriched and control libraries, respectively, fulfilling the prediction. the second expectation concerns the overall correlation between the expression level and gene sequence conservation, where conserved genes are generally expressed at higher rates than fast evolving genes  <cit> . the expression level of the annotated contigs were approximated by using unigene database information on the expression level of their orthologous genes in nervous system tissues of the zebrafish or, alternatively, of the mouse or human when the data was not available. annotated contigs were classified into four categories of gene expression levels . we discarded here the mitochondrial genes which are fast evolving yet possess a high expression level. as expected, the enriched library is essentially composed by genes belonging to the category with the lowest expression-level . the enriched library also shows a depletion of genes in the highly expressed gene categories, which are generally the more conserved ones. the third prediction refers to the observation that genes with tissue-specific expression evolve generally faster than genes with ubiquitous expression, a category in which most housekeeping genes are found  <cit> . as predicted, our method resulted in an enrichment of non-ubiquitously expressed genes totaling 57% of the annotated contigs of the enriched library versus 35% in the control library. the non-ubiquitously expressed genes are defined as those expressed in less than four tissues according to unigene expression information.

in an attempt to better characterize the fast evolving transcripts isolated in ancistrus temminckii and which show a putative orthologous sequence in the hypostomus gr. plecostomus est dataset, we search for a tentative annotation by blastn comparisons against the mrna reference sequences  database of ncbi, limited to teleost sequences . in this way,  <dig> transcripts present in the catfishes ancistrus and hypostomus, as well as in the teleost mrna refseq database were annotated and their sequence divergence was calculated based on the overlapping region of the sequence alignment, allowing a direct comparison . the tentatively annotated transcript fragments show an overall high sequence divergence between the two hypostominae catfishes , not much different from the divergence between ancistrus and the closest teleost orthologous sequence of the mrna refseq database , which do not include catfish sequences. interestingly, about half of the transcript fragments encompasses coding sequence  . to estimate whether the sequence divergence is higher than in recognized fast evolving coding and non-coding dna markers, we calculated the sequence divergence of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxydase i gene , used by the barcode of life initiative for characterizing species http://www.dnabarcodes.org/, and the two introns of the reticulon  <dig>  gene, used to infer fish phylogenies at the specific level  <cit> . most of the tentatively annotated transcripts display higher sequence divergence between ancistrus temminckii and hypostomus gr. plecostomus, as compared to the two reference markers , validating once again the issh method. likewise, most of the transcripts show higher sequence divergence between ancistrus temminckii and danio rerio as compared to the coi sequence. however, the intronic sequences of the rtn <dig> are much more divergent than the annotated transcripts. this is likely explained by the frequent insertion/deletion events in non-coding sequences and which enhance drastically the sequence divergence between distantly related species.

sequence divergence was calculated using the alignment region with sequence in all species compared. divergences were corrected using the k2p model with  <dig> transitions per transversion. the lowest part of the table presents the sequence divergence of two published fast evolving markers used for characterizing species or genera. dr: danio rerio; ss:

salmo salar; a.: ancistrus; h.:hypostomus.

we emphasize that the sequences of the transcripts annotated using the mrna refseq database likely represent the most conserved regions of the isolated transcripts dataset, as faster evolving regions will not find their sequence counterparts in the refseq database, which comprises no closely related catfish sequences.

discussion
the isolation of fast evolving genes can be easily accomplished on model organisms for which abundant genomic and transcriptomic knowledge exist. bioinformatic routines and experimental procedures  are available for this purpose. at present, however, there is no efficient method for doing so in non-model organisms. the issh method presented here is a fast and cost-effective procedure for enriching a cdna library in fast evolving genes. the various tests we have performed resulted in a convincing demonstration of the efficiency of our method. we have shown that the overall sequence divergence was significantly increased in the enriched library as compared to the control when blasting these libraries against the zebrafish genome or against our hypostomus catfish est library. moreover, the results of the issh method fulfilled the three predictions made upon the knowledge of general properties of fast versus slowly evolving genes. briefly, the enriched library displayed  a higher proportion of fast evolving mitochondrial genes,  a higher fraction of genes with low expression level, and  proportionally more non-ubiquitously expressed genes. furthermore, the fast evolving transcripts with orthologous sequences in the two catfish species and in the mrna refseq fish database displayed generally higher sequence divergence than recognized fast evolving dna markers.

a complementary support of these results comes from the gene ontology  classification. the go annotation  showed that genes involved in metabolic processes were less abundant in the enriched library than in the control . this is consistent with the observation that the set of housekeeping genes is generally rich in metabolic genes, for example in human  <cit> . besides indicating that the enriched library is depleted in housekeeping genes, the go annotation also shows that this library is enriched in nervous system tissue-specific genes , highlighting once more the ability of the method in isolating genes with tissue-specific expression that generally evolve faster than ubiquitously expressed genes.

the proportion of annotated contigs via uniprot/swissprot comparisons is rather small, particularly in the enriched library. this can be explained firstly by the relatively poor representation of fish genes in the uniprot/swissprot database combined with the likely high sequence divergence between the genes of the non-fish organism in the database and our catfish. secondly, not all contigs may contain coding sequence; they may be composed mainly of utr sequence. however, the enriched library shows no marked bias toward utr sequences, which evolved generally faster than their contiguous coding sequences. indeed, about 68% of contigs longer that  <dig> bp display putative open reading frames  longer than  <dig> aa , and 51% of contigs longer that  <dig> bp display putative orfs longer than  <dig> aa  project), which corresponds to four and five times the calculated sequence length without stop codons in non-coding sequence using the same base frequencies, respectively. similar proportions are observed in the control library  indicating no strong enrichment in utr sequences. furthermore, a significant part of the isolated transcripts may be non-coding rnas. it has been shown, for instance, that non-coding rnas constitute more than half of the mammalian transcriptome  <cit> . as the annotation of the isolated fast evolving transcripts is difficult due to the lack of sequence similarity with distant reference species, we are unable for the moment to assess the proportion of fast evolving non-coding rnas in our dataset.

our method has the advantage of being theoretically very versatile in terms of evolutionary divergence relating the species of interest and its selector species. the faster evolving genes will already show detectable sequence divergence between closely related species while using a more distant selector species will allow the isolation of a wider set of fast evolving genes. likewise, one can modify the hybridization temperature to fine-tune the degree of sequence divergence one is looking for between the species of interest and the selector species. our method may also be applicable for screening intra-species gene-associated polymorphism. only in that objective the issh method may be compared with the in-gel competitive reassociation and est array hybridization method  <cit> , which exploits the property that the vast majority of rflp fragments between two strains or populations share the same electrophoretic size. deviation from this property generates false positives and, therefore, the method of gotoh and oishi  looses its interest if more distantly related groups are used.

interestingly, the issh method can also be used for isolating the fraction of highly conserved genes between species. this is achieved by rescuing the fraction of ss cdna that disanneal only at very stringent conditions, which guarantees an almost perfect complementation between the probed and selector pool of transcripts. moreover, the species from which the selector pool of mrna is extracted may be selected in order to increase the level of conservation of the enriched cdna library: the more evolutionary distant the selector species will be, the more conserved the isolated transcripts will be.

the issh method is not linked to a specific sequencing technology. in this study we used the long-read  <dig> flx technology  to ensure a minimum sequence length for downstream sequence analyses. however, this argument is currently less valid as the illumina short-read sequencing technology, which produces many more reads at a lower cost per base, has been recently shown to be useful and accurate in de novo transcriptome assembly of non-model organisms  <cit> . traditional sanger sequencing can also be used providing that the pcr amplified fast evolving transcripts are cloned before sequencing.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that the issh method efficiently enriches a cdna library in fast evolving genes. as this new method does not rely on the previous knowledge of sequence information, it can be performed on every non-model organism, and is therefore of wide use. although the improvements and reduced cost of next-generation sequencing technologies may lead to ever more complete transcriptomes assemblies, and may have the potential to be used for identifying fast evolving transcripts with bioinformatic tools, the issh method will still have and interesting role to play. first, the issh method is inexpensive, of little labor, and leads directly to the set of transcripts of interest. second, as the fast evolving genes are often expressed at low level, they may be hard to retrieve using next-generation sequencing technologies unless very deep sequence coverage is performed, at high cost. therefore, the issh method opens new possibilities in screening transcriptomes in search of genes involved in lineage specific processes and traits, a field of growing interest in evolutionary biology.

