BACKGROUND
polyploidy and hybridisation are regarded as important processes accompanying and contributing to plant diversification and speciation. allopolyploidy, which involves both of these processes, is regarded as a particularly important driving force of plant evolution. inferring the parental origin of allopolyploids is not a trivial task, particularly after long periods of hybrid domestication. recent technological advances and the common use of dna sequence data for phylogenetic reconstructions revolutionised this field and enabled the identification of the parental taxa of many allopolyploids  <cit> . most of the established allopolyploids are of biparental origin. there are very few reported cases of triparental polyploids, although well-known examples include common wheat, triticum aestivum, which is allohexaploid and of triparental origin  <cit>  and tetraploid damask roses  <cit> . most of the known allopolyploids are established on even-ploidy levels with very few consistently odd-ploidy level taxa persisting in nature   <cit> ).

triparental odd-ploidy plant allopolyploids have rarely been found. previous analyses of established and vegetatively propagating triploid allium × cornutum  suggested that it is one of the rare cases of allotriploid of triparental origin, and two parental taxa were suggested based on cytogenetic analyses of chromosome complements using gish   <cit> . the third parental taxon remained unknown. triploid onion allium × cornutum is traditionally cultivated in southern and coastal croatia under the name ‘ljutika’ , and it is very popular as a spice and condiment due to its tasty bulbs and leaves  <cit> . similar triploid onions are cultivated as garden crops in southeastern asia, europe, and other parts of the world  <cit> . triploid onion was first described as allium cepa l. var. viviparum . alef.  <cit> ; however, friesen < klaas  <cit>  suggested that this name is connected with the other viviparous onion a. × proliferum, and they proposed the use of the name allium cornutum clementi ex visiani  <cit> , which is the only name that is unambiguously connected with triploid onion  <cit> . however, taking into account its hybrid origin, the name was modified to allium × cornutum <cit> . this name was first used by visiani  <cit>  for a dalmatian bulbiferous taxon that was observed for the first time on rocks in dubrovnik  <cit> .

in contrast to most flowering alliums in which the leaves start to senesce during flowering, triploid onions are perennials; their leaves remain green throughout the entire year. the plants are sterile and propagate vegetatively by underground bulbs and bulbils formed from the inflorescence. phenotypically, triploid onions closely resemble a. cepa, and it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between these two types before the development of inflorescences. inflorescences of triploid onion are composed of fewer and slightly larger flowers than a. cepa inflorescences. during inflorescence maturation, small reproductive bulbils are formed, and the flowers gradually wilt. mature inflorescence may contain 20– <dig> small reproductive bulbils. other reliable characters that allow the distinction between triploid shallot and a. cepa are the morphological features of the underground bulbs, which are elongated and pear-shaped in triploid onions; 10– <dig> or more individual bulbs usually grow together. the triploid onion leaves are intermediate in shape between semicircular and round, and the stalk that bears the inflorescence is only slightly flattened at the bottom, whereas that of a. cepa is inflated at the base  <cit> .

the karyotype of a. × cornutum consists of 2n = 3x =  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> . the homology among the chromosomes is weak and occasional, and it is very difficult, if not impossible, to identify homologous chromosomes  <cit> . the most common meiotic chromosome associations of a. × cornutum are heterotrivalents, which suggests at least partial homology of the three genomes  <cit> . additionally, the frequent occurrence of complex multivalents was observed, suggesting that the triploid karyotype might be due to translocations and other chromosomal rearrangements during evolution  <cit> . mapping of the constitutive heterochromatin in a. × cornutum chromosomes by giemsa c-banding demonstrated its hybrid genome structure with only one set of eight chromosomes shown to carry the heterochromatic markers typical of a. cepa <cit> . previously, triploid viviparous onions were speculated to be either of an allotriploid   <cit>  or segmental allotriploid  origin  <cit> . several independent molecular studies pointed to allium cepa as one of putative parental species of a. × cornutum .

to determine the a. × cornutum origin, genomic in situ hybridisation  was applied  <cit> . friesen < klaas  <cit>  confirmed a. cepa as a parental species of the triploid onion and concluded that the majority of dna and chromosomes of a. × cornutum originated from a. cepa. puizina et al. <cit>  showed that the genomic dna of a. cepa and a. roylei each only or predominantly labelled only one chromosome set . the remaining chromosomes of the triploid karyotype were not labelled  by these two genomic probes. these gish results provided the first indication that triploid onion might be of complex triparental origin.

further progress in the identification of the parental species of a. × cornutum, an ‘enigmatic plant’  <cit> , was hampered by the lack of information on the phylogenetic relationships between common onion and its wild relatives . more recently, its sequences  of a large number of common onion relatives originating from central asia were deposited in genbank  <cit>  together with the sequences of the nts  of 5s rdna  <cit> .

its sequences have frequently been used as a first-choice marker for inferring the phylogenetic relationships between various wild plant groups and particularly for inferring the origins of diploid and polyploid hybrids . its  <dig> and  <dig> are parts of the 18s- <dig> s-26s nuclear ribosomal dna, which is present in each eukaryotic genome in high copy number as tandem repeats in one to many loci per haploid genome  <cit> . rdna units are prone to homogenisation via unequal crossing over and/or gene conversion  <cit> . parental rdna copies in hybrid organisms might evolve in various ways:  two parental rdna types can potentially be retained, evolve independently, and provide direct evidence for historical hybridisation with or without polyploidisation ;  only one parental rdna type might be retained in the genome of a hybrid, which typically can be achieved either by the conversion of all rdna types towards one parental genome rdna, or alternatively, rdna of one parental genome might be removed from the hybrid genome;  hybrids might evolve new types of rdna units that might  represent combinations of different parental rdna units .

another subfamily of rrna genes encompasses 5s rdna repeats that are arranged in long tandem arrays in one to several loci in the genome. the 5s rdna unit consists of a coding region  that is approximately 120 bp in length and a non-transcribed spacer , which in plants varies in length and base composition from approximately  <dig> to more than 700 bp  <cit> . the coding regions of 5s rna are highly conserved, whereas nts evolves much more rapidly. a high rate of base substitution of nts in some plant groups qualifies this region as highly informative for molecular phylogenetic analyses and often aids in the identification of parental taxa of diploid and polyploid hybrids  <cit> . 5s rdna does not undergo homogenisation, and unless physically deleted from chromosomes, all types of parental repeats can be detected in hybrids  <cit> . a lack of efficient homogenisation leads to considerable sequence heterogeneity among 5s rdna spacer regions within the individual arrays, which has been reported in several plant groups  <cit> .

in this paper, we infer the parental origin of allotriploid allium × cornutum using molecular phylogenetic analyses of internal transcribed spacers  of 35s rdna and the non-transcribed spacer  of the 5s rdna. the positions of these two classes of ribosomal genes have also been established in the somatic chromosomes of a. × cornutum, and the putative parental species were inferred from phylogenetic analyses . the triparental origin of a. × cornutum was confirmed using the genomic in situ hybridisation  technique. the newly obtained data are discussed in light of previously published data on genome origin, structure, and evolution of the triploid onion a. × cornutum.

RESULTS
molecular phylogenetic analysis of its and nts sequences
the length of the its1- <dig> s-its <dig> region in the four analysed a. ×cornutum individuals  ranged from  <dig> to 642 bps. the final its alignment of  <dig> sequences  of a. × cornutum had  <dig> constant characters;  <dig> were parsimony-uninformative, and  <dig> were parsimony-informative. in total,  <dig> distinct ribotypes were found with the most frequent ribotype  represented by  <dig> clones originating from all four individuals . the number of variable characters was  <dig> in the its <dig>  four in the  <dig> s rrna gene, and  <dig> in the its <dig> region .
cornutum 
obtained in this study

the plant material was collected from four different locations in croatia: dubrava, hvar, kastela, and vis.

the sequences of the its regions of a. × cornutum were aligned to other its sequence data for allium species of section cepa available in genbank . three distinct clades of its1- <dig> s-its <dig> sequences were identified within the a. × cornutum genome . most of the sequences  formed one large clade, which also included its sequences of the wild asian species a. pskemense and has therefore been designated xas clade p . a second clade, containing six its sequences of a. × cornutum, grouped with the sequences of a. roylei and has been designated as clade r . one sequence of a. ×cornutum  showed similarity to a. cepa and a. vavilovii sequences, and hence, the whole clade was designated as clade c  . the seven a. × cornutum its sequences consisting of clades r and c had a clearly distinguishable  <dig> base  insertion in the its <dig> region, which is shared by both a. cepa and a. roylei but absent in a. pskemense .

the exceptions are the sequences for the nts-5s genes of a. roylei, which were obtained in the present study.

the presence of different its1- <dig> s-its <dig> rdna repeat types within the a. × cornutum genome and their genetic similarity to their putative parental species a. pskemense, a. roylei, and a. cepa was confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. the phylogenetic algorithms maximum-likelihood  and bayesian inference  resulted in nearly the same tree topology. only the bi tree is shown , which summarises the topology and posterior probabilities  from bi plus bootstrap support  from the ml analysis. all the its sequences of a. × cornutum clustered into the three clades: p, r and c . the clades p and r were both strongly supported by both analyses . the clade c containing a single a. × cornutum sequence  and sequences from a. cepa, a. vavilovii and a. asarense was less strongly supported .

to analyse the variability of non-transcribed spacer  of the 5s rrna genes in a. × cornutum,  <dig> clones were obtained from three a. × cornutum individuals . the nts region showed higher sequence variation than the its <dig> and  <dig> regions. nearly all of the cloned sequences were unique. the length of the 5s rdna unit including the non-transcribed spacer  region ranged from  <dig> to 346 bps. the conserved 5s rrna coding region was excluded from further analyses. the nts region comprised 224– <dig> characters, of which  <dig> were constant and  <dig> were variable . in total,  <dig> positions in the alignment included gaps .

phylogenetic analyses of nts clones of a. × cornutum together with nts sequences of their potential close relatives retrieved from genbank  supported the grouping of the a. × cornutum nts sequences into the three well-supported clades . the largest clade consisted of  <dig> sequences and grouped with the nts sequences of allium pskemense, a. altaicum and a. × proliferum , and this clade has been designated as clade p. the second largest clade  consisted of five nts sequences of a. × cornutum, which grouped with a. roylei nts regions . the smallest clade  consisted of only three nts sequences of a. × cornutum, which were 99% identical to the nts sequences of a. cepa and a. vavilovii. the largest clade p, comprising  <dig> nts sequences of a. × cornutum, has been clearly separated from the nts sequences of its closest relatives, a. altaicum, a. ×proliferum, and a. pskemense .

chromosomal localisation of 5s rdna and 35s rdna genes and genomic in situ hybridisation
the number and localisation of 5s and 35s rdna loci were analysed in two clones of allium × cornutum  and in three putative parental diploid taxa that were identified in phylogenetic analyses: allium cepa, a. pskemense and a. roylei. allium cepa possessed two loci of 35s rdna in two satellite chromosome pairs and two 5s rdna loci, both localised on the short arm of chromosome  <dig> . the 35s rdna loci differed in the intensity . a. pskemense possessed one subterminal locus of 35s rdna located on one satellite chromosome pair and at most two loci of 5s rdna on chromosome  <dig> . one larger locus of 5s rdna was located interstitially in the short arm of chromosome  <dig> and the other, weaker locus was situated in the pericentric region of the long arm of the same chromosome. two homologous chromosomes carrying 5s rdna exhibited heterozygosity concerning the presence of a small 5s rdna signal in the pericentromeric region of the long chromosome arm . a. roylei possessed a single locus of 35s rdna on a satellite-bearing chromosome pair  and two 5s rdna loci of similar size in the small metacentric chromosome  <dig>  one of these 5s rdna loci was localised close to the pericentric region, and the other was localised more internally within the same arm .

in triploid a. × cornutum, two major subterminally localised signals of 35s rdna were detected in the short arms of the two subtelocentric satellite chromosomes. a third minor 35s rdna signal was detected on some spreads and was located in the subtelomeric region of one small sub-metacentric chromosome . the largest satellite chromosome  lacked a 35s rdna signal. each of the three 35s rdna signals differed in intensity and size, with the medium-sized chromosome carrying the strongest signal.

the 5s rrna genes were detected in three differently sized chromosomes in a. × cornutum . the largest chromosome carrying a 5s rdna signal resembled the typical a. cepa chromosome with two 5s rdna loci localised within the long arm of chromosome  <dig>  the medium sized chromosome carrying 5s rdna in a. × cornutum possessed two 5s rdna loci, which differed in size and intensity, with the stronger signal positioned interstitially within the short arm and the weaker signal corresponding to the pericentromeric region of the long chromosome arm. this chromosome bears resemblance to the 5s rdna-bearing a. pskemense chromosome. the smallest chromosome carrying 5s rdna in triploid allium possessed only one signal in the pericentromeric region of the short chromosome arm . this chromosome might represent a truncated and/or rearranged chromosome  <dig> of a. roylei .

the results of fish mapping of 5s rdna supported the inferences of the phylogenetic analyses of the 5s and 35s rdna of triparental origin of a. × cornutum triploids. the three chromosomes carrying 5s rdna genes in a. × cornutum likely originated from three different diploid allium species .

a combination of genomic in situ hybridisation  and fish was attempted to identify the genomic origin of 5s rdna-bearing chromosomes . a single chromosome carrying two 5s rdna loci  was clearly labelled with a. pskemense genomic dna, in contrast to the two other chromosomes carrying the 5s rdna signals , which remained unlabelled or were only weakly labelled . the hybridisation of the genomic dna of a. roylei to the incomplete metaphase plate of a. × cornutum in the presence of an excess of unlabelled a. cepa total genomic dna as blocking dna  allowed the labelling of six chromosomes of the triploid onion, which are marked by arrows. among the chromosomes labelled with a. roylei genomic dna, one chromosome carrying 5s rdna is indicated . this chromosome corresponds to the smallest 5s rdna-bearing chromosome, which is likely a truncated a. roylei-originating chromosome . with the aim to simultaneously discriminate between the three genomes of a. × cornutum , we performed genomic in situ hybridisation with two labelled parental dna sequences as probes , whereas the genomic dna of a. cepa remained unlabelled and was used as blocking dna . eight chromosomes were labelled predominantly with a. pskemense genomic dna ; furthermore, eight chromosomes hybridised predominantly with a. roylei genomic dna , and eight chromosomes remained nearly unlabelled . the chromosomes have subsequently been reprobed with 35s and 5s rdna probes. a comparison of figure 5b and c confirms that the three different 5s-bearing chromosomes of a. × cornutum belong to three different parental genomes.

discussion
triparental allopolyploid origin of a. × cornutum and the identification of its putative parental species
two contradictory studies have been published concerning the origin of the triploid onion a. × cornutum . the suggested triparental origin of a triploid has been proposed, but only two putative parental taxa were suggested , with the third parental taxon remaining unknown . the present study provides phylogenetic evidence for a triparental hybrid origin of a. × cornutum, supported by the mapping of the 5s and 35s rrna genes in the chromosomes of putative parental taxa and the hybrid. additionally, the third putative parental species, the wild asian species a. pskemense b. fedtsh., has been identified. these data support the complex hybrid origin of a. × cornutum and allow the rejection of previous hypotheses  <cit> , which postulated the origin of a. × cornutum as a derivative of a. cepa. the current study clearly demonstrates that a. × cornutum contains three types of both its and nts sequences, each grouping with one of three putative parental taxa, allium pskemense, a. roylei, and a. cepa.

gish allowed the detection of the three parental genomes in the hybrid, despite some level of cross-hybridisation. using a combination of gish and fish, 5s and 35s rdna-bearing chromosomes of the hybrid were shown to originate from the respective chromosomes of the putative parents.

its sequence variability and 35s rdna mapping
the phylogenetic analysis of the its region of a. × cornutum revealed three major its types denoted as p, r, and c. these types were recovered as separate clades in combined analyses and were shown to bear high sequence similarity to three diploid allium species/lineages: a. pskemense, a. roylei, and a. cepa/a. vavilovii. a. cepa and a. vavilovii are closely related, with a. cepa being known only as a cultivated taxon; a. vavilovii was inferred as its closest wild relative  <cit> .

concordantly, three 35s rdna loci were detected on three different chromosomes in triploid onion, in agreement with a previous report  <cit> , and could be assigned to the three putative parental genomes. our previous gish analysis  <cit>  showed that the medium-sized nor chromosome carrying the largest 35s rdna locus did not hybridise either with genomic probes of a. cepa or of a. roylei, thus being assigned to the unidentified x genome. the current study showed that this locus originates from a. pskemense and was the source of the majority of the cloned its sequence regions . the major 35s rdna locus originating from the a. cepa genome has either been lost during the evolution of the triploid genome or contains only very few copies that are below the detection limit of fish. the second  a. cepa locus, which has been detected in the triploid hybrid on the medium-sized submetacentric chromosome, contains a very small copy number and might be in the process of being lost. the single its sequence of the c-type  that was recovered from the triploid onion genome likely represents the a. cepa minor 35s rdna locus.

earlier analyses of the activity of the nor regions in triploid onion using silver staining indicated that all three 35s rdna loci were active with a maximum of three nucleoli detected in the interphase nuclei of all five croatian clones of a. × cornutum <cit> . in contrast, pran, the indian clone of triploid a. × cornutum, possessed only a single active nor on a medium–sized satellite chromosome  <cit> . such a result indicates ongoing evolution of the rdna in triploid onions over the whole species distribution range. multiple origins of this triploid hybrid taxon are currently excluded based on the unique genome size, isozyme, rapd and rflp patterns of pran, ljutika and other analysed clones of triploid onion  <cit> .

nts sequence variation and 5s rdna mapping
the divergence of the nts sequences in several well-documented allopolyploid systems proved very useful for the identification of the putative parent species: i.e., nicotiana tabacum <cit> , zingeria <cit> , anemone multifida and a. baldensis <cit> , and melampodium <cit> . the 5s rdna nts sequences of a. × cornutum clustered into the three main clades , which had high sequence homology to the three putative parental species a. cepa, a. pskemense, and a. roylei, respectively. whereas the clades c  and r  were well supported, the clade p  failed to form a single well-supported clade with its closest relatives, a. pskemense, a. altaicum, and a. × proliferum. this result could have been caused by significant intra-individual variability within the nts region  <cit>  as well as possible high genetic variation of 5s rdna within a. pskemense and its relatives across their wide geographical distribution.

the results of the nts sequence analysis were largely congruent with the cytogenetic mapping of 5s rdna in a. × cornutum, and 5s rdna loci were detected in different positions in three chromosomes of different morphology. the two larger 5s rdna-bearing chromosomes greatly resembled the putative parental chromosomes of a. cepa and a. pskemense. the 5s rdna-bearing chromosome having 5s rdna loci distributed in a similar manner as in a. pskemense has also been labelled with a. pskemense genomic dna in a gish experiment. the smallest 5s rdna-bearing chromosome of a. × cornutum has been shown to hybridise with genomic dna of a. roylei , thus confirming its origin from the r genome . this chromosome, however, differed from the parental 5s rdna-bearing chromosome of a. roylei and possessed only a single 5s rdna locus in the pericentromeric region of the short arm of the chromosome instead of two loci. at least two different scenarios can account for the observed truncation: i) the smallest 5s rdna-bearing chromosome and the entire r genome could have originated from a diploid ancestor closely related to a. roylei, which is characterised by smaller chromosomes and only a single 5s rdna locus; and ii) chromosomes of a. × cornutum originating from the r genome have undergone rearrangements after hybridisation and lost one of the 5s rdna signals in the process. based on our current understanding of genome restructuring after allopolyploidisation and a general trend of diploidisation of both the 5s and 35s rdna loci, the second hypothesis is more likely  <cit> , especially because the sequences of a. × cornutum in clade “r” are very similar to those of a. roylei. the triploid genome of a. × cornutum might have been subjected to additional genomic rearrangements such as inter-chromosomal translocation, deletions, and/or inversions.

fish mapping of 35s and 5s rrna genes in a. pskemense and a. roylei and inferences of the phylogenetic relationships in section cepa
although the phylogenetic relationships among  <dig> species of sections of cepa have been inferred from analyses of plastid regions and its  <cit> , the chromosomal positions of 35s and 5s rdna have so far been determined for only three species: a. cepa, a. fistulosum and a. altaicum <cit> . the two 5s rdna loci in a. cepa were located on the longer arm of chromosome  <dig> , whereas in a. fistulosum a single 5s rdna locus was detected interstitially in the short arm of chromosome  <dig>  in natural diploid homoploid hybrids of a. cepa and a. fistulosm, top onions  schrad. and allium wakegi araki , the two chromosomes carrying the 5s rdna signals corresponded to the 5s rdna-bearing chromosomes of the parental species  <cit> . in this study, 35s and 5s ribosomal genes were mapped for the first time in somatic chromosomes of diploid a. pskemense and a. roylei. these two species possessed an identical number of 35s rdna loci but differed in the positions of the 5s rdna loci on chromosome  <dig>  the localisation of 5s rdna in a. roylei chromosome  <dig> resembles more closely that of a. cepa, whereas a. pskemense is more similar to a. fistulosum and a. altaicum. this finding supports the hypothesis of son et al. <cit>  that a. pskemense is more closely related to a. fistulosum and a. altaicum. the number and position of the 5s rdna loci, therefore, proved to be evolutionarily informative in analysing the species of allium from section cepa.

CONCLUSIONS
the combined molecular phylogenetic and cytogenetic data obtained in this study provide evidence for a unique triparental origin of triploid onion a. × cornutum and identified all three putative diploid parental species, a. cepa, a. pskemense, and a. roylei. these results are in agreement with previously published data  <cit>  and provide new and stronger evidence for the origin of the distinct and complex odd-ploidy allopolyploid a. × cornutum. the sequence of events leading to the origin of the triploid onion and its phylogeography cannot yet be elucidated and will be addressed using other molecular approaches.

