BACKGROUND
the purple sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus, has been the focus of developmental and ecological studies for over a hundred years. its widespread distribution, large population sizes, active fishery, dramatic high energy habitat, ease of obtaining adults and gametes and hardiness as a laboratory study organism has contributed to this long term usage  <cit> . more recently, s. purpuratus was the first free-living, non-chordate marine invertebrate with a fully sequenced genome  <cit> , and the application of modern gene manipulation techniques to the early sea urchin embryo has reinvigorated its use in understanding the basic mechanisms of cell biology and development.

purple urchins develop through a feeding larval stage that, depending on latitude and food supply  <cit> , spends 1– <dig> months feeding on phytoplankton before settling to the sea floor and completing metamorphosis into a feeding juvenile. this complex life history determines the nature of dispersal from parental sites and recruitment patterns of juveniles into adult populations  <cit> . moreover, the transformation from a larva to a juvenile, in which the bilaterally symmetric larva transforms into the pentameral juvenile urchin, is a fascinating ontogenetic event unto itself.

in contrast to insects and amphibians, relatively little is known about the mechanisms of echinoderm metamorphosis in general, and purple urchin metamorphosis specifically . comparative morphology and functional studies in a phylogenetic context suggest that echinoderm metamorphosis evolved independently from that in insects and amphibians, and that many other marine invertebrate groups themselves likely evolved metamorphosis independently  <cit> . still, a more complete understanding of the mechanisms underlying echinoderm metamorphosis can shed new light on the origins of metamorphosis in general  <cit> . furthermore, a better mechanistic appreciation of echinoderm metamorphosis will provide insights into body plan evolution within the echinoderms and ultimately the deuterostomes  <cit> . finally, the metamorphic transition is notable as one in which multiple external environmental signals are integrated by the developing larvae to control the proper timing and location of settlement  <cit> , which subsequently impacts the successful recruitment of larvae into benthic populations. therefore, there is a fascinating interplay between ecology, evolution and development that occurs at the metamorphic transition in marine invertebrates that makes it an under-appreciated archetype for eco-evo-devo studies .

one impediment to using echinoderms as subjects for detailed metamorphic studies is the lack of an agreed upon, simple, yet appropriately detailed scheme for describing the stages of juvenile morphogenesis leading up to settlement . this information gap exists despite many careful studies over more than a hundred years into the ontogeny of the structures in echinoderm larvae that are fated to form the juvenile .

two explicit staging schemes have been proposed for echinoids that include the development of the juvenile rudiment through settlement: one for purple urchins  <cit> , the other encompassing three other regular echinoids  <cit> . unfortunately, these schemes provide little detail on the events of juvenile morphogenesis that occur after the onset of juvenile calcification, a period of complex ontogeny which represents approximately the last 1/ <dig> of the total larval phase, and during which most of the definitive structures of the juvenile first appear. indeed, these are the very stages where we expect to find species-specific differences in ontogeny underlying the substantial variation in juvenile morphology across echinoids  <cit> . furthermore, the proposed purple urchin staging scheme of smith et al.  <cit>  mixes larval and juvenile characters. this is a considerable shortcoming, as sea urchin larvae demonstrate marked phenotypic plasticity with respect to the timing of appearance of larval versus juvenile structures  <cit> .

in an effort to build on these existing schemes for sea urchin larval development, we here propose the first detailed staging scheme in any echinoid for the morphogenesis of juvenile structures alone, from rudiment invagination until settlement. we have divided our scheme into soft tissue and skeletogenic stages, in part for clarity, and in part due to our observations of variation within and among clutches in the timing of appearance of skeleton relative to our defined soft tissue stages. in fact, such heterochronies , occur commonly in the formation of different juvenile characters, and we have endeavored to take account of this variation in our proposed staging scheme. above all, we have only included characters that are readily visible in live larvae using even the most basic compound microscope equipped with cross-polarized light at about 100× total magnification. our intention is that this staging scheme will not only facilitate a broader range of studies into late larval development in purple sea urchins, but will also be the starting point for similar staging schemes across echinoids and other echinoderms.

RESULTS
staging scheme
in table  <dig> & figure  <dig>  and in table  <dig> & figure  <dig>  we present a new staging scheme for the development of juvenile structures in the purple sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus, beginning with the invagination of the larval epithelium that forms the juvenile ectoderm , and ending with well-developed tube foot end plates and the elongation of adult spines . this latter stage  is approximately the point at which larvae become competent to settle when reared in the laboratory under controlled conditions , and occurs at approximately  <dig> to  <dig>  weeks after fertilization at 14°c under abundant food conditions.

description and illustration of stages presented in the new staging scheme as well as approximate timing in days after fertilization at 14°c. note that roman numerals in the column “smith et al.  <cit> ” and the letters in the column “chino et al.  <cit> ” are the stages proposed in those studies  as they relate approximately to the stages used in our new soft tissue staging scheme here. question marks indicate ambiguities in the comparisons between staging schemes.

description and illustration of stages presented in the new staging scheme as well as approximate timing in days after fertilization at 14°c. note that roman numerals in the column “smith et al.  <cit> ” and the letters in the column “chino et al.  <cit> ” are the stage designations proposed in those studies  as they relate approximately to the stages used in our new skeletogenic staging scheme here. question marks indicate ambiguities in the comparison of staging schemes.

we have separated the proposed scheme into soft tissue stages  and skeletogenic stages , as we have noticed heterochronic variation among and within clutches in the soft tissue stage at which skeleton is first visible. we show representative images of the defining features of the various stages in figures  <dig> &  <dig>  and provide sketches of the same in tables  <dig> &  <dig> that are also shown in figures  <dig> &  <dig> as insets.

all of the features that we used to define the various stages are readily visible in whole mounts of live larvae with raised cover glass, and employing any compound microscope at approximately 100× total magnification. for this reason, we did not include any characters  that typically require histological analysis for their visualization – development of a companion histological staging analysis would be a useful expansion on the staging scheme presented here. by contrast, the use of cross-polarized light  results in birefringence of larval and juvenile skeleton, allowing for visualization of skeletal elements deep within the rudiment of live larvae.

several of our skeletogenic stages  include more than one defining character. for example, stage  <dig> is defined as having multibranched spicules and/or tube foot spicule dots present. the reason that we have combined characters in this way is because we have noted heterochronies in some larvae in the relative appearance of the two classes of characters. therefore, in this example, we score a larva as stage  <dig> if either one or more multibranched spicules or one or more tube foot spicule dots  are visible in that larva. if required for specific analyses, these characters can be easily analyzed in isolation.

although we examined juvenile skeletal structures that form both inside and outside of the juvenile rudiment, our staging scheme itself includes only juvenile skeletal structures  that form inside of the rudiment itself. the reason that we chose to exclude any extra-rudiment skeleton from our staging scheme is that their ontogenic progression was heterochronic with respect to the rudiment skeleton in different larvae, even within the same culture vessel . as such, the inclusion of extra-embryonic skeletal structures in our staging scheme would have been non-informative alongside the easily visible and characterizable rudiment skeleton that we did include. furthermore, as we demonstrate below, each of our stages as defined is non-ambiguous and well-spaced , and thus the characters we include seem sufficient in order for any researcher to quickly and repeatedly characterize the stage of live individual larvae examined in a standard compound microscope.

overview of the proposed scheme
a brief summary of all developmental stages is provided here, with details on each soft tissue and skeletogenic stage  provided in tables  <dig> &  <dig>  respectively. the juvenile rudiment begins to form with an ectodermal invagination  on the left side of the larva , which contacts  and then flattens against the left hydrocoel . soon thereafter, the rudiment shows the first signs of the adult pentameral symmetry as five bumps in the hydrocoel, pressed against the floor of the vestibule . as these five bumps continue to penetrate the overlying vestibule, the vestibular ectoderm itself begins to reveal a pentameral pattern . during subsequent days, the five bumps  lengthen , begin to curve in towards one another , and ultimately the tips of the primary podia touch one another .the first skeletal elements of the juvenile are visible in soft tissue stage vi or vii as small spicule dots usually visible near the esophagus/stomach border . these will develop into triradiate spicules , and then into multi-branched spicules , the first of which are ocular plate and interambulacral plate primordia. at this same stage, skeletal spicule dots appear at the tips of each of the primary podia, which then become tri-radiate spicules . these spicules then begin to elongate from two of the spicule arms  to begin to form the first ring of the tube foot end plates. at this same stage, 6-sided spicules appear , which are the primordia of the adult spines. these spicules elongate along the axis orthogonal to the original 6-sided spicule, forming the base of the incipient adult spine, at around the same time that the first tube foot skeletal rings are complete . in the next stage , the spine primordia continue to elongate into  <dig> parallel fronds lacking any cross hatches, while the second concentric tube foot skeletal ring begins to form. stage  <dig>  is characterized by the formation of the first cross hatch  in at least one of the adult spines. the final two stages are defined by tube foot skeleton where the second concentric ring is >1/ <dig> complete  and then complete .

developmental timing
by culturing individual larvae in well plates, and staging them at  <dig>   <dig> and in some cases 48 hours, we were able to make estimations of the length in hours for each of our skeletogenic stages . from these data, we plotted cumulative time through the ten skeletogenic stages in figure 3b.we caution readers that the data that we present in figure  <dig> are intended mainly for heuristic purposes; we note substantial variation among larvae  in the length of given stages. with that caveat in mind, figure 3a indicates that most of our proposed skeletogenic stages are approximately 24 hours in length at 14°c.

in order to test whether our temporary mounting methodology for viewing live larvae injured them, we compared developmental rates in mounted and unmounted larvae in a separate experiment in guelph. on average, mounted larvae progressed  <dig> stages  during the 48 hour period of the experiment. the skeletogenic stage for mounted larvae at the end of the 48 h period was 6 ±  <dig>   compared to 6 ±  <dig>   for un-mounted larvae. we detected no statistical difference between the two treatments using a 2-tailed independent sample t-test . converting these stage values into time  did not change this result .

robustness of the staging scheme
to test whether our proposed staging scheme is robust under a variety of environmental conditions, we repeated our well plate experiment with larvae that had been reared in natural  sea water, with lower food levels  and at a higher temperature  – and that derived from a different source population, widely separated from the california population of urchins studied in guelph. in this ‘seattle’ experiment, we repeated our well-plate individual larval rearing methodology at two temperatures: 12°c and 16°c.figure  <dig> shows a summary of the seattle experiment, plotted alongside our main  dataset. first, the range of rearing conditions and temperatures examined did not alter the relative progression of stages. second, lower temperature rearing  resulted in slower overall progression through the skeletogenic stages. and third, our 16°c seattle larvae progressed through their stages at a similar rate as did the guelph 14°c larvae. among other possible interpretations, this latter result might indicate that the higher food levels that we used in guelph compensated for the lower temperature, or that 15°c is the optimum rearing temperature, and that 14°c and 16°c lie on either side of that optimal development peak.

in addition to this seattle well plate experiment, we have reared multiple batches of sea urchin larvae through settlement in  <dig> different locations with different adult feeding and sea water conditions . during each of these rearings, we have tracked the stages of our developing larvae and have not noticed any variations from the staging scheme that we propose here.

spine growth
we are aware that the skeletogenic features that we have used in our staging scheme are more qualitative than quantitative in nature. nevertheless, there is one quantitative character that is easily scored in late stage larvae: the elongation of the growing spines. as the incipient spines increase in length, they increase the number of cross bars that form between the adjacent spine fronds in a step-wise, linear fashion . therefore, one can use the number of cross bars  present in a developing spine as a numerical proxy for spine length.

figure 5b shows the increase in the mean  and maximum  number of cross hatches in our larvae during the first and second 24 hours of development in our well plate set-up at 14°c . two conclusions are apparent from these data: 1) spines grew in our well plate experiment at a rate of about  <dig> cross hatches per day; and 2) there is no significant difference in the rate of spine growth when comparing the first and second 24 hours of our experiment . if anything, the results in figure 5b indicate a trend towards faster spine growth  in the second 24 hours.

discussion
metamorphosis is a widespread phenomenon across animals and non-animals alike  <cit> ; in the most extreme examples, the pre-metamorphic form  is so disparate from the post-metamorphic form  that biologists once classified them as being entirely unrelated . as such, metamorphosis is a period where complex ontogenetic processes occur in a relatively short time  <cit> , a phenomenon not unlike what occurs during embryogenesis.

many echinoderms  have life histories containing notable examples of such a radical metamorphosis, where their bilaterally-symmetric larva transforms in relatively short order to a pentameral adult, a process that has fascinated biologists for over a hundred years. despite this interest, we still lack a thorough mechanistic understanding of metamorphosis in any echinoderm, or indeed in any marine invertebrate. thus while the purple sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus, has progressed in recent years from being a useful subject for classical embryogenesis studies to revealing detailed molecular genetic mechanisms of development, a parallel advance in our understanding of its ‘second embryogenesis’  <cit>  –metamorphosis– has not materialized.

the lack of a clearly defined, sufficiently detailed, and broadly accepted staging scheme for commonly studied echinoderms  is one explanation for the lack of parallel progress in understanding their metamorphoses. we thus offer the purple urchin staging scheme described herein as a step to overcoming this deficit, and thus facilitating a broader range of investigations into sea urchin  metamorphosis. in this sense, our staging scheme was inspired by similar ones that remain widely used in drosophila <cit> , the sea hare aplysia californica <cit> , xenopus <cit>  and zebrafish  <cit> , and like ours, are focused on characters readily visible under the microscope in live individual embryos and larvae.

comparison with previous echinoid staging schemes
homologs of the characters that we focused on for the majority of our stages had been previously described in detail by macbride  <cit> , von ubisch  <cit>  and gordon  <cit>  among others in their classic histological studies of pre-settlement juvenile development in a variety of echinoid taxa. nevertheless, a treatment of these skeletal characters is largely absent from the purple urchin staging scheme of smith and colleagues  <cit> , and from the echinoid staging scheme of chino and colleagues  <cit>  as well. as such, both of these latter schemes compress the final 1/ <dig> of larval development  into 2– <dig> stages . this seems insufficient given that this period represents the bulk of juvenile morphogenesis in the larva, and is thus when the majority of adult structures first make their appearance during ontogeny. by contrast, many of our proposed rudiment soft tissue stages are similar to those proposed by smith and colleagues  <cit>  and chino and colleagues  <cit> , as we indicate in table  <dig>  for this reason, and because of the detailed histological descriptions of juvenile purple urchin morphogenesis in smith et al.  <cit> , we see our proposed staging scheme as broadly complementary to these previous efforts.

phenotypic plasticity and heterochronies
the biggest concern in proposing any staging scheme for echinoderm larvae is taking account of the substantial phenotypic plasticity in their ontogeny  <cit> . for this reason, we specifically avoided combining, in our proposed staging scheme, larval and juvenile characters, the developmental trajectories of which can vary substantially relative to one another depending on food and other rearing conditions  <cit> .

nevertheless, even when restricting our analysis to juvenile characters alone, we noted instances where different larvae exhibited heterochronies: namely, variation in the relative appearance of distinct characters. one example is the juvenile spines that develop on the right side of purple urchin larvae, outside of the rudiment proper ; another is the genital plates of the test, several of which form as bifurcations and proliferations off of larval skeletal rods . we left an analysis of those structures out of our staging scheme since we observed substantial heterochronic variation in their developmental trajectories relative to rudiment characters, and thus their inclusion would not be informative . we also noted much more subtle heterochronies in some of the characters that we did include; in such cases , we accounted for the variation by combining more than one character into a single stage. likewise, because we noticed heterochronic variation  in the soft tissue stage at which we first observed juvenile skeleton formation, we split our staging scheme into two sub-schemes: one for soft tissue characters, the other for skeletogenic characters.

to address the issue that variation in rearing conditions might likewise lead to heterochronic shifts in the ontogeny of different juvenile characters, we reared larvae under five conditions that differed in sea water chemistry , food level, temperature, method of culture mixing and source population. despite rearing larvae with these multiple sources of variance, we did not observe any heterochronies in our staging characters. therefore, we are confident that the broad outlines of our staging scheme should hold across s. purpuratus populations and in different rearing conditions.

applicability outside of s. purpuratus
one of the great advantages in studying echinoid larval development and metamorphosis is the great diversity in developmental modes, larval forms and adult habitats within a group having an excellent fossil record and robust phylogenetic hypotheses for their relationships  <cit> . this suite of features makes echinoids prime candidates for a wide range of comparative studies on larval development and ecology, metamorphosis and settlement, as well as juvenile form, function and behavior.

to encourage the use of echinoids in these ways, we envision our staging scheme as a template for the development of similar schemes across echinoids. over 120 years of research effort has been directed at descriptions of late larval and juvenile development across a wide range of echinoid species  <cit>  and from these studies it is clear that there is substantial variation across echinoids in what and when juvenile skeletal elements form during late larval development. for example, pedicellariae form before settlement in a widely divergent assemblage of species , whereas they form only after settlement in most taxa, including s. purpuratus. emlet  <cit>  undertook a comparison of the juvenile structures present shortly after settlement in a disparate group of  <dig> echinoid species, revealing substantial variation in early juvenile form, variation that must have been generated during late larval development. the staging scheme proposed here can be explicitly used to trace the ontogenetic basis for this variation.

specifically, we predict that such comparative studies will uncover both heterochronies  and heterotopies  in the formation of juvenile structures in late larvae, changes that might be hypothesized to be related to selection – or otherwise reveal constraints – on juvenile form and function. indeed, many of the descriptive studies cited have already indicated the existence of this kind of variation; with an explicit staging scheme to use for comparisons, such as the one developed here, such variation can be easily demonstrated.

we would also advocate that our general approach used herein be applied to non-echinoid echinoderms as well, enabling more precise comparisons among and between the different classes of echinoderms. such a broadening would help harness the power of the comparative approach for studies ranging from life history evolution to functional morphology of larvae and juveniles to the evolution of body plans in the remarkably diverse echinoderm phylum.

CONCLUSIONS
here we present a novel, detailed staging scheme for late larval development for the purple sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus. we conceived this scheme to allow sea urchin researchers to quickly and consistently identify the stage of live larvae during the period of rapid juvenile morphogenesis that occurs in the final weeks before settlement, using standard microscopy techniques. we offer a detailed comparison of our scheme to previous efforts, providing a side by side comparison of corresponding stages. this analysis reveals that our new staging scheme provides a more detailed picture of juvenile development using ontogenetically informative characters. inspired by widely used schemes in other organisms such as drosophila, zebrafish and xenopus, our proposed staging scheme provides both a useful method to study late larval development in the purple urchin, and a framework for developing similar staging schemes across echinoderms. such efforts will have a high impact on evolutionary developmental as well as larval ecology studies and facilitate research on this important deuterostome group.

