BACKGROUND
micrornas  were discovered as a class of small regulatory molecules ten years ago  <cit> . these ~ <dig> nucleotide , small rnas recognize partially complementary sequences on target mrnas  <cit> . following the initial discovery of mirnas, substantial effort has gone into characterization of the canonical mirna pathway  <cit>  and into mirna discovery; by identifying mirnas in more species and by adding to the list of known mirnas  <cit> . although cdna cloning and northern blotting techniques can be used to detect the most abundant mirnas, the advent of massively parallel sequencing technologies has propelled the mirna field, allowing for both discovery and quantification of all mirnas in a given sample  <cit> .

with the bulk of the mirnas revealed in commonly studied species, the next challenge lies in elucidating the biological processes in which mirnas play a role. current bioinformatic approaches rely on the identification of partially complementary sequences in mrnas to predict mirna targeting. yet these approaches still come with one limitation; the exact parameters governing targeting remain unknown. several prediction algorithms have been developed to overcome this difficulty by ascribing different weights to key parameters, such as binding energy between target and mirna, conservation of the target site, quality of the "seed pairing", et cetera  <cit> . still no single algorithm emerges as the best performer  <cit> , and most algorithms predict thousands of targets for each mirna  <cit> . combining different target prediction algorithms generates shorter list of targets by creating more stringent cut-offs. this can provide some enrichment in true positives, but at the cost of more false negatives  <cit> . in addition to bioinformatics prediction, several approaches to genome-wide experimental mirna target identification have been developed. these experiments utilize argonaute pull-down assays   <cit> , changes in mrna levels  <cit> , and protein expression after introduction or ablation of a specific mirna  <cit> . these studies support that mirnas indeed function by targeting hundreds of genes. still, it is a daunting task to derive a function for a mirna from these long lists of potential target genes. despite progress in systematic approaches to find sets of related gene that are enriched within these long target lists  <cit> , we are still far from satisfactory in silico prediction of mirna function.

alternatively, differential expression of a mirna is commonly used to infer its function  <cit> . identification of conditions where a specific mirna is expressed versus an opposing condition where it is not, offers some clues as to the potential action of the mirna. while this approach has been very successful in leading investigators to uncover mirna functions, it still requires direct experimentation to prove effects due to mirna activity beyond providing an only coincidental biomarker.

another approach to determine the function of a mirna is by knocking it down  <cit> , or knocking it out, of the genome of a model organism  <cit> . experimental knockdown of mirnas may confirm or invalidate predicted functions, but it requires prior knowledge where a mirna is expressed. even with this knowledge, sufficient knockdown to demonstrate an observable effect is not guaranteed. complete knockout delivers a clean result, but may not result in an obvious phenotype. adding to this challenge is the possibility that many mirnas may elicit only subtle changes or are redundant with other family members entirely. indeed, only a fraction of all c. elegans mirna families display pronounced abnormal phenotypes when deleted  <cit> . given these challenges, knocking out a mirna in mice or in a human cell line may often prove a fruitless endeavor.

in order to unravel the functions of specific mirnas, while overcoming much of the challenges discussed above, we proposed to introduce or overexpress mirnas in a system of interest. moreover, we argue that it is more efficient to examine the effect of any mirna for a predetermined phenotype, rather than blindly investigating one mirna at a time. such screens have been performed on different scales. most are based on transfection of mirna mimics  <cit> ; synthetic rnas that usually have a modified backbone. although this approach ensures the presence of the mature mirna in the target cells, a mirna mimic is not processed via the canonical mirna biogenesis pathway. this multi-cleavage process starts with the recognition of a hairpin in the primary transcript and ends with a mature mirna produced from one or both of the arms of the hairpin  <cit> . bypassing this physiological processing step has several implications. for instance, several variants of a mirna from the same primary transcript can arise due to variations in the processing pathway, such as arm switching, non-templated additions of adenines or uracils, and variations in the 3' and 5' cleavage sites  <cit> . besides the loss of mirna variants, the most-widely used mirna mimics have modified backbones to increase stability within the cell. consequently, they are not cleared naturally from the cells as endogenous mirnas. furthermore, it is possible that mirna mimic transfection achieves cellular concentrations beyond physiological relevance. on the other hand, loading into the risc complex, which is essential for biological activity, is not necessarily efficient for mimic transfection, as this process is known to be coupled to hairpin processing  <cit> . to express transcripts for endogenous processing into mature mirnas, plasmid  <cit>  or viral vectors  <cit>  can be employed. while the retroviral library described by agami and colleagues is a valuable tool for mirna functional screens in pooled format, the viral supernatants are not available as individual isolates amenable to arrayed high-throughput screens  <cit> .

here, we describe the construction and application of a lentiviral human mirna expression library. this library contains  <dig> annotated human mirnas and  <dig> candidate mirnas  <cit> . all are expressed from their genomic backbone, ensuring physiological processing of the mirnas. the library is organized for high-throughput screening to provide a resource for the systematic elucidation of mirna function. in addition, all lentiviral mirna expression constructs can be applied individually to evaluate primary results. lastly, we demonstrate the utility of this library in various types of screens to present the mirna expression library as a versatile tool to study mirna function.

RESULTS
approach and setup
we aimed for the construction of a mirna expression library that fulfills four criteria: 1) the library contains all human mirnas; 2) each mirna is represented in a separate stock to allow for arrayed screening; 3) the library can be used over a wide range of different cell types; 4) the mirnas are swiftly and stably overexpressed. the first two criteria will be discussed below. the third and fourth criteria were met by choosing a lentiviral expression system, employing the pcdh vector. the lentiviral particles express vsv-g, a glycoprotein that grants broad tropism  <cit> . the glycoprotein's receptor is a lipid component of the plasma membrane that occurs on most cell types over a wide range of species. lentiviruses integrate into the host genome  <cit> , but unlike other retroviruses, lentiviruses do not require cell division for genomic integration  <cit> . for instance, the lentivirus is able to transduce quiescent stem cells and terminally differentiated neurons  <cit> . by integrating into the host genome, the construct is retained through cell divisions and can be stably expressed for an indefinite period of time. we chose a lentiviral backbone with a puromycin-resistance cassette to be able to select for successfully transduced cells  <cit> .

to create a comprehensive library containing all human mirnas, we included all mirnas known at the time we started composing the library. we obtained genomic loci from the widely adopted mirbase mirna repository   <cit> . we also included a set of candidate mirnas from previous experiments  <cit> . although we did not update the library after viral particles for the entire library were produced, some of the candidate mirnas have since entered the registry. see additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> for a list of the current annotation of all mirnas in the library.

all mirna loci, containing the full-length hairpin and ~ <dig> nt flanking sequence on each side, were cloned into pcdh behind the cmv promoter. care was taken to clone each mirna separately, even when this mirna resides in close proximity to another mirna. after construction of the plasmid library, all constructs were packaged into lentiviral particles and portioned into individual tubes organized in ready-to-use 96-well format; the fact that tubes can be accessed separately adds versatility to the library. all virus supernatants were concentrated to titers of ~5* <dig> ifu/ml, in order to achieve efficient transduction with only small volumes of virus supernatant. this eliminates the need for infection under centrifugation or replacement of medium with virus-conditioned medium. while lentiviral particles were produced for all constructs individually, it should be mentioned the original plasmid library can also be applied in its own right. it can also be used for plasmid-based screens, recloning purposes, or to create a pool of constructs containing all or a subset of mirna constructs for generating mixed lentiviral stocks. figure  <dig> is a schematic of the library construction and its most important features.

library validation
the first step in the characterization of the library is the determination of transduction efficiency and optimal titration of the lentiviral particles. to this end, we used a variant of pcdh containing a gfp cassette in place of the puromycin-resistance cassette. we infected a <dig> melanoma cells with different virus concentrations, in combination with several concentrations of polybrene. while transduction efficiency reached over 90% under several conditions, increased amounts of virus led to brighter gfp expression within the population of cells . this indicates multiple copies are integrated per cell when using higher titers. gfp expression was higher at  <dig> hours after infection than after  <dig> hours. this implies  <dig> hours post infection is a more sensitive time point for determination of transduction efficiency, rather than earlier timepoints. we further optimized conditions for virus infection in a panel of seven cell lines . notably, this panel includes the diploid fetal lung fibroblast line imr-90; a non-transformed cell line  <cit> . optimal transduction efficiencies were reached between  <dig> and  <dig> ifu/ml.

as mentioned, lentivirus is a favorable vector for its ability to transduce cells that are hard to transfect, such as stem cells. we have successfully transduced primary human intestinal cells using a gfp-encoding vector. these cells were subsequently used to create intestinal organoids in vitro  <cit> . after prolonged culture, entire organoid bodies turned fluorescent, indicating the stem cells from which the organoids developed were also successfully transduced .

while ectopic expression of gfp is useful to determine transduction efficiency, it does not address whether mirnas are also successfully overexpressed. we used a panel of ten test mirnas to assess mirna overexpression in five human cell lines: pc- <dig> , mda-mb- <dig> , a <dig> , imr- <dig> , and mcf- <dig> . cells were infected with  <dig> * <dig> ifu/ml and subjected to puromycin selection from  <dig> hours after infection. rna was collected  <dig> hours ,  <dig> hours  or  <dig> hours after infection . relative mature mirna expression was measured by qpcr. values were standardized against the corresponding cell line infected with an empty vector control. we were able to overexpress all mirnas in all cell lines, with the exception of mir- <dig> in imr- <dig> cells . the fact that mir- <dig> is very effectively overexpressed in mcf <dig> indicates the expression construct is functional. besides, we were able to overexpress all other mirnas in imr- <dig>  the results with mir- <dig> can at least partially be ascribed to very high endogenous mir- <dig> levels in this cell line  and also suggest that overexpression of mirnas using our standard conditions remains within physiological levels.

next, we examined mirna expression kinetics after infection. to determine the optimal conditions for a screen, such as assay length and virus titer, it is important to know when and to what level the mirna will be expressed. we have tested this extensively for let-7a and mir- <dig> in a <dig> cells. while let-7a is abundant in these cells, mir- <dig> is barely detectable . both expression profiles show a quick surge of mirna expression within  <dig> hours after infection. the early source of these mirnas is unclear, but they may have been present in the virus supernatant, encapsidated within the virus, or processed intracellularly from the viral rna genome. mirna levels exhibit a slight drop, but are quickly overtaken by expression from integrated constructs  <dig> to  <dig> hours after infection. our data demonstrate that already after  <dig> hours, ectopic expression of mirnas reaches comparable levels of endogenously predominant mirnas, as evident from the expression relative to endogenous let-7a and u <dig> rna .

for long-term experiments, it is necessary for mirna expression to be sustained.  <dig> hours after infection with let-7a or mir- <dig>  we passaged a <dig> cells and cultured them either with or without puromycin selection. we examined mirna expression by mirna qpcr at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days after infection . a decline in mirna expression was observed with both mirnas between day  <dig> and day  <dig> after infection. this may be caused either by passaging or changed culture conditions, but it is also possible that it is a secondary effect of highly elevated mirna processing. this effect was markedly stronger in the let-7a-infected cells, which may indicate that there is a selection disadvantage for cells with high let-7a expression. despite the small drop after three days, overexpression of both mirnas stabilized and persisted for weeks. even after prolonged culture without puromycin selection, mirna overexpression was sustained. we conclude there is little or no genetic loss or epigenetic silencing of the integrated construct.

as the goal of the library is to identify biologically relevant functions of mirnas, we performed a proof-of-principle experiment by testing the well-documented effects of let-7a  <cit>  as an inhibitor of cell proliferation and mir- <dig>  <cit>  as a stimulator in five cell lines. the experiment was set up in the fashion of a high-content screen. cells were seeded in 384-well plates and infected after  <dig> hours.  <dig> hours after infection, cells were fixed and nuclei were stained with hoechst. the automated image analysis software not only counts the number of nuclei, but also detects aberrations in nuclear shape and condensed chromatin . although we did not find any novel effects of the mirnas on nuclear shape, we were able to confirm the expected effects of let-7a and mir- <dig> on proliferation in a high-content setup.

clonal screening
as a first use of the complete library we screened mirnas for their effect on a <dig> melanoma cell proliferation. we tested whether we could detect proliferation effects in a <dig> cells in a 96-well setup, again using let-7a and mir- <dig> as test mirnas. the effects were highly similar to those seen in figure  <dig> . every single well infected with either let-7a or mir- <dig> proved a statistical outlier compared to empty-vector transduced wells .

for the entire library, we performed an arrayed screen by mts assay, which measures the viability of cells in a well  <cit> . this measure is reported to correlate strongly with cell number. all samples were tested in duplicate, and for each replicate a b-score was calculated  <cit> . this method calculates how a mirna scores relative to the other mirnas on the same plate. it is a robust method as it is not sensitive to outliers. b-scores of replicates are shown in figure 5b. also shown are the measures for all let-7a constructs and mir- <dig>  the strong correlation between replicates indicates a high reproducibility of the assay. the effects of let-7a and mir- <dig> are similar as in the cell count assay. importantly, all let-7a constructs cluster together. since these constructs have different backbones but produce the same mature mirna, we surmise the observed effects are likely to be caused by the mature mirna. a confounding factor in short-term arrayed screens can be the range of virus titers of the different constructs. however, we saw no correlation between virus titer and cell viability . thus, with these experimental conditions, virus titers were not a significant factor contributing to toxicity.

pooled screening
some assays do not lend themselves to screening in 96-well format. in such cases the lentiviral library can be used for a pooled screen. there are two approaches: pool virus supernatant of several or all constructs together, or infect cells with the individual constructs and subsequently pool cells. the latter is generally favorable, because it precludes the possibility that two or more virus particles containing different mirnas infect a single cell. a puromycin selection step can be added to make certain each construct is represented in transduced cells and to reduce background caused by non-transduced cells. we applied this approach to the poorly invasive hct <dig> colorectal cell line. hct <dig> cells were individually infected, puromycin-selected, and pooled in groups of  <dig> constructs. a fraction of the pool was used for genomic dna isolation and the rest was subjected to two rounds of an invasion assay. cells that successfully transmigrated through extracellular matrix were subcultured and genomic dna was isolated. to identify the mirna constructs that were enriched in the transmigrated fraction, we took advantage of the fact that the constructs are integrated into the host genome. we pcr-amplified the constructs from the genomic dna using universal primers that anneal to the vector backbone . the pcr products were subjected to high-throughput sequencing. relative abundance of the various constructs was derived from the sequence reads mapping to them. hits were selected on the basis of a weighted score calculated from the enrichment and the number of sequence reads in the invasive fraction. we found evidence for  <dig> mirnas that may enhance the invasive capacity of hct <dig> cells .

in a pooled invasion screen, as performed above, the possibility exists that a portion of the hits can be "passenger hits" that do not impart invasive capacity, but are present in cells that trail the truly invasive cells as they make their way through the extracellular matrix. to distinguish these two types, we subjected each hit individually to an invasion assay. we were able to confirm  <dig> mirnas that increase invasiveness of hct <dig> cells .

CONCLUSIONS
we present a lentiviral mirna expression library that is optimized for use in arrayed screens. the library allows mirnas to be individually assessed in any gain-of-function screen. we envision the library being used in a wide range of functional screens. to name some possibilities: reporter-based assay screens, screens to study cell cycle, senescence, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. the broad tropism of the lentivirus makes it applicable to infect cells of different species. this may prove particularly valuable, since lentivirus can be directly used in vivo  <cit> . thus, the same lentivirus can be used to screen for a mirna function in vitro and verify this functionality in vivo.

we have demonstrated the transduction of stem cells that were subsequently used for in vitro organ culture. the ability to stably transduce stem cells opens up avenues for studying mirnas required for differentiation and stemness.

an arrayed library comes with several advantages. arrayed screening offers more sensitivity and faster results than pooled screening, without the need of data deconvolution. it also allows for the assessment of several more complex parameters, as is commonplace in high-content screens. assays that require long-term culture may not be amenable to arrayed screening and require pooling. still, infecting cells individually before pooling is likely to decrease false-negative results in pooled screens, suggesting that even for pooled screens an arrayed library may be preferred.

our library currently contains the majority of all human mirnas. however, the most recent update  of mirbase includes a large number of newly identified mirnas. while we do not wish to question their validity or understate their potential, we argue that most mirna functions will be covered by the most highly expressed or broadly conserved mirnas, which were already present in earlier versions of mirbase and thus represented in our library. by the same token, the merit of candidate mirnas in our library can be questioned. in anticipation of this, candidate mirnas were positioned on separate plates in the library, presenting researchers the choice to screen the entire library, only the annotated mirnas, or only the candidate mirnas.

expression of the mirnas from their native genomic background ensures the physiological processing of the mirna. not only the pre-mirna hairpin, but also the flanking sequence contributes to proper processing  <cit> . transcribing the mirna from an integrated construct enables expression of both arms and all isomirs that would naturally derive from the primary transcript. therefore, the library could be employed for further characterization and validation of the included mirnas. such experiments have been extensively done for mouse mirnas  <cit> , but not for human mirnas.

we have shown that ectopic expression of mirnas using a lentiviral vector can be used to screen for biologically relevant effects. while the library is widely applicable and can be used to study various aspects of biology, our primary focus is on cancer-related processes. a first screen assessing mirna-induced effects on melanoma cell growth demonstrated the value of the library in an arrayed screen. the next step is to perform such screens over a panel of cell lines to determine which mirnas may have a growth effect on specific cancer indications, and which mirnas have a general growth inhibitory or stimulatory function. these results will aid in finding mirnas suited for tumor-specific treatment. indeed, such therapeutic options have been successfully explored in a murine model of hepatocellular carcinoma  <cit> . with the mirna expression library, we offer a platform that facilitates the identification of mirnas with therapeutically relevant functions.

