BACKGROUND
dna sequences are used routinely to infer phylogenies  <cit> . the sequences within lineages  evolve independently over time by means of several evolutionary processes, including point replacements of nucleotides , and insertion and deletion  events. while base substitutions change the nucleotide composition of a given sequence, indels are likely to change the total length of the sequence. if indel events have occurred during the course of evolution of the molecular sequences being studied, it becomes necessary to align the corresponding homologous regions among the sequences for a proper site-by-site comparison among them, before phylogenetic analysis. in the process of alignment, gaps are introduced in the sequences to account for the indels. different methods have been devised for dealing with gapped sites during phylogenetic analysis, ranging from ignoring the gapped sites from the alignment to inferring or differentially coding the state at each gapped site, using a number of different methods . most of these treatment methods work reasonably well when the proportion of gapped sites in an alignment is small  <cit> .

there are many examples in the literature of studies that have used molecular sequences  with rather large gaps to infer phylogenies  <cit> . it appears logical to expect an inverse relationship between the proportion of gapped sites in an alignment and the accuracy of the inferred phylogeny, particularly if the gaps are not treated as reflective of distinct evolutionary events, and thus, containing distinct phylogenetic signal. however, the relationship between the extent of "gappiness" in the data resulting from indel events in the evolutionary history of the sequences on the one hand, and phylogenetic accuracy on the other, has not been studied by introducing and systematically varying the number of gaps in the alignments in a biologically realistic manner, even as the literature on alignment gaps in the phylogenetic context has increased of late  <cit> . for example, several studies investigating the relationship between the amount of alignment gap and phylogenetic accuracy have done so in the context of aligning sequence fragments such as ests , using computer simulation to first generate the alignments and then introduce gaps, such that the gaps do not contain any phylogenetic signal ; are in the context of only empirical data ; or where the emphasis was more on levels of divergence among the taxa . furthermore, the relative performance of the gap treatment methods that are common among inference methods has also not been compared in this context. for example, all inference methods allow gaps to be treated as missing data or "md" . it is not known how the data inferred under these criteria work in conjunction with each of the respective inference methods to influence the accuracy of phylogenetic inference, when the gaps reflect indel events in the alignment.

we obtained sequence alignments for this study by means of simulating non-coding dna sequence evolution, introducing nucleotide point substitutions  and insertion/deletion  events along a balanced  16-taxon model tree .  the simulations were done while systematically varying the values of different sequence and indel parameters. all the simulation parameters were varied to include biologically realistic values. for example, the rate of introduction of indels included the range seen in non-coding sequences  <cit> . similarly, the ratio of insertion to deletion events was also varied based on published results  <cit> . it was important to vary the ratio of insertions to deletions in order to determine if there was a differential effect on phylogenetic accuracy, since most of the commonly used gap treatment methods do not differentiate between gaps resulting from the two types of evolutionary events.

we assessed the accuracy of phylogenetic inference as the topological correctness of the inferred tree when compared to the model tree. our results show that overall, when the percentage of gapped sites  in the alignment is low , all the inference methods  perform well . on the other hand, when the number of gapped sites increases in the alignment, the probabilistic methods  are clearly more accurate, although at the highest gap levels, nj and mp are sometimes better. our results also show that gaps resulting from deletion events in the evolutionary history of the sequences appear to be harder to reconcile , leading to greater inaccuracies in phylogenetic inference, evidently because of the loss of the phylogenetic signal present in the sites deleted. when compared to md method of treating gaps, a much higher accuracy was seen in our study when the gaps were coded separately as in the bc  treatment in conjunction with the bayesian and mp methods, or as in the dnamlε package  <cit> .

RESULTS
we first describe the manner in which the alignment gaps were quantified in this study, and the effect of different simulation parameters on the number of gaps in the alignment.

quantification of alignment gaps
the amount of gap in an alignment was determined as a percentage, in the following manner. first, the number of gapped sites was determined for each sequence and then obtained as an average among all the sequences in the alignment.  in a given sequence, even if contiguous, is counted as three gapped sites in that sequence.) this was expressed as a percentage of the altered length  of the alignment. this percentage was then averaged across the replicates, for a given treatment, as a simple arithmetic mean . we refer to the gap percentage by the term g/s  throughout the paper. the gap percentages thus obtained  were used to compare the relative performances of the phylogenetic methods  under the different gap treatment methods .

finding the gap threshold
using the above measures of phylogenetic accuracy, it is possible to determine thresholds of gap percentages for given levels of phylogenetic accuracy. these thresholds are shown in figure  <dig>  which is arranged such that there are two panels for each inference method, one for the insertion-deletion rate ratio of 1: <dig> and the other for the ratio 1: <dig>  the horizontal and vertical axes in each panel reflect the rate of nucleotide substitution and rate of indel introduction, respectively. however, in order to relate to empirical phylogenetic analyses , the background in this figure has been color-coded based on the percentage of alignment gaps , and the contour lines of phylogenetic accuracy have been drawn against this background. thus, one can trace the level of accuracy of phylogenetic reconstruction based on the percentage of gaps in the alignment rather than on the rates of substitution or indel introduction. such a representation also makes it easier to determine gap thresholds for phylogenetic accuracy in empirical studies, to determine the expected level of accuracy given a certain percentage of gaps in an alignment.

in figure  <dig>  panels a and b show the level of phylogenetic accuracy for gap treatments in the nj analysis. these results are remarkable for several reasons. first, the contour lines of accuracy typically follow specific gap percentage ranges, as indicated by the color of the background. in other words, there appears to be a somewhat deterministic relationship between the number of gaps in an alignment and the level of phylogenetic accuracy one can expect in an nj analysis. this appears to be true in the case of phyml also . furthermore, both methods can be seen to be doing better in the 1: <dig> than in the 1: <dig> panels, showing that the relative proportions of insertions and deletions matter in determining the accuracy.

panels e and f show the results for mlε analysis. here, we see that the minimum accuracy is approximately 90% and 70% for the 1: <dig> and 1: <dig> cases, respectively. clearly, the mlε analysis has higher accuracy when compared to the md analysis in conjunction with any inference method. the integrated method incorporating both substitutions and indels, mlε appears to be equivalent in accuracy to the bc method in bayesian analysis, in the case of the 1: <dig> ratio of insertions and deletions. however, the accuracy of mlε is lower for datasets with larger deletion biases  and is in keeping with the other indel-coding methods .

the bayesian and mp analyses are shown in the panels, g, h, and i, j, respectively, with the dark red and white dotted contour lines within each panel representing the accuracy when the gaps are treated as missing data  and binary characters , respectively. as in the case of the other methods, the relationship between accuracy and g/s is clearly strong here too. furthermore, this apparent cause-and-effect relationship appears to hold, whether the treatment method is md or bc, especially at larger g/s values . it must, however, be noted that the actual relationship between the percentage of gaps in an alignment and the level of phylogenetic accuracy that can be expected is vastly different between the two gap treatment methods, md and bc. thus, even when the g/s value exceeds  <dig> percent of the length of the alignment , as much as  <dig> percent of the branches are reconstructed accurately by mp , and 90% by the bayesian method , when the gaps are treated as binary characters , and the insertion-deletion ratio is 1: <dig>  in contrast, only approximately  <dig> percent of the branches are accurately inferred in either analysis under the md treatment . the only case where the relationship between the percentage of gaps and phylogenetic accuracy is not as straightforward is at very high accuracy levels; the contour lines for  <dig> percent accuracy cross color  boundaries or are confined to small portions of the gap percentage range of 0– <dig> percent. the reconstruction accuracy for the bayesian and mp methods in alignments where the gaps are largely due to deletion events  is worse than when compared to alignments where there is equal contribution from insertions and deletions to the gaps . panels g and h  and i and j  show that there is a 10– <dig> percent difference in accuracy for a given level of gaps in an alignment between the two insertion-deletion ratios, whether for md or bc treatments. thus, when the gaps exceed  <dig> percent of the alignment length, the reconstruction accuracy is seen to be around  <dig> percent  and approximately  <dig> percent  when the insertion-deletion ratio is 1: <dig>  whereas it is less than  <dig> percent  and  <dig> percent  when the ratio is 1: <dig> .

increasing the sequence length does not appear to change the pattern of these results very much, except that there is greater accuracy when the sequence length is  <dig> nts. . this improvement in accuracy, however, is not uniform across the breadth of the gap percentage landscape, being higher at the low gap percentage levels. for example, when the sequence length is  <dig> nts., and the gaps are equal to or greater than  <dig> percent, the accuracy is approximately  <dig> percent . the corresponding accuracy when the sequence length is  <dig> nts., is approximately  <dig> percent – a 9–10% difference between the two lengths. sequence length is known to be an important determinant of phylogenetic accuracy  <cit>  and its influence is not being investigated in this study.

phylogenetic accuracy of different inference methods under varying gap percentages
we first compare the phylogenetic accuracy of all the inference methods, taken two at a time, for the md gap treatment since this is available for all the methods. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  in each panel in figure  <dig>  the average phylogenetic accuracy, , for one method is plotted against that of another, so that if identical, the two  values will lie on the diagonal. values above the diagonal refer to cases where the method plotted on the vertical axis has relatively higher  values and those below the diagonal to the cases where the method on the horizontal axis has the higher  values.

for each comparison between inference methods, the left panel shows the results for the insertion-deletion ratio 1: <dig>  and the right panel for the ratio 1: <dig>  in each panel, the graph is also color-coded to reflect the gap percentage  against which the  values have been measured, with the color ranging from light blue  to red . in general all the inference methods do rather poorly when g/s is extremely high and very well when g/s is very low. furthermore, as seen in figure  <dig>  all methods yield more accurate trees for a given g/s value when the gaps are caused by insertions and deletions in equal proportions , when compared to alignments where the gaps result from largely deletion events . this is evident by noting that the dots of a given color  are higher in the charts in the left panel and lower in the right, for any given pair of inference methods being compared. however, there are distinct differences among the methods too, and they are brought out in these pairwise comparisons. for instance, it is clear that, irrespective of whether the insertion-deletion ratio is 1: <dig> or 1: <dig>  in general, the bayesian, mp and phyml methods are somewhat comparable, while nj does the poorest in the presence of gaps, especially when g/s is large. however, comparing the relative performance of the methods from such graphs becomes subjective. therefore, we conducted the paired t-test  for each of the  <dig> data points  in each of the graphs. the results of the t-test are given by means of a letter that signifies if a particular method is statistically better than the other in a given comparison . we also determined which method was better, overall, in each of the panels, using the z test, and this is shown by the corresponding letter with an asterisk in the upper triangle.

thus, in the comparison between nj and phyml, we see that phyml shows a significantly greater overall accuracy , and that this difference is almost always statistically significant for the individual comparisons. the superiority of phyml over nj in the presence of gaps is very clear when the insertion-deletion ratio is 1: <dig> . when the ratio is 1: <dig>  again, phyml is better than nj almost all the time; nj is found to be significantly better only in two instances out of 110; two comparisons were not significant. the comparison between mp and nj also yields similar results, with mp being clearly superior most of the time  in the left panel. the result in favor of mp is more pronounced at higher g/s values, with the graph deviating away from the diagonal. in the comparison between mp and phyml, phyml is superior to the other in a majority of cases, irrespective of the insertion-deletion ratio. interestingly, mp superiority is seen only at very high g/s values, while phyml is better almost everywhere else. this is particularly evident in the right panel . in both panels, phyml is significantly better, overall .

in figure  <dig>  we show the results of the bayesian method under the md treatment compared to phyml, mp, and nj methods. the figure shows that, irrespective of the insertion-deletion rate ratio and the g/s value, the bayesian method is more accurate than mp, nj or phyml, overall . when compared individually, it is seen to be better than nj in all the genes in the left panel and all but one of the genes in the right panel. next, the bayesian method is seen to be better than phyml, overall, but it is statistically better   <dig> times , with phyml outperforming it  in  <dig> cases, with neither being better than the other in the remaining  <dig> genes, in the right panel. in the left panel  similar results were obtained, where phyml and bayesian were each statistically better  than other roughly equal number of times , with the two methods occupying different "niches" . when bayesian and mp methods are compared, the bayesian analysis is statistically better  in almost  <dig> cases, whereas mp is better almost never, irrespective of the insertion-deletion rate ratio.

it is important to note that the md treatment is different among the inference methods. , with sites in a given column being scored as a  <dig> if gapped and  <dig> if not. among the recent advances in the modeling of molecular sequence evolution is the integration of insertion and deletion events along with base substitution processes in a probabilistic framework for phylogenetic inference  <cit> . we have used this method for maximum likelihood analysis of our data, to compare this treatment  with the bc treatment in mp and bayesian analyses. these comparisons  are shown in figure  <dig> 

as in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  here too the average phylogenetic accuracy, , for one method is plotted against that of another in each panel , and the color-coding scheme is the same as well. figure  <dig> shows that the differences among the inference methods in accuracy in the presence of indel-induced gaps, is much more evident when gaps are included in the phylogenetic analysis and not treated as missing data . furthermore, the accuracy is generally much higher, even in the method with the lower accuracy . finally, it can be seen, just as in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  but in a more pronounced manner, that the accuracy of both methods is higher for a given g/s level when the gaps result from equal proportion of insertions and deletions , as opposed to when they are largely from deletion events , as evidenced by a comparison of the heights of the dots of a given color between the two panels, particularly at the mid to higher g/s values .

the different indel-coding methods are compared for their performance, in conjunction with the corresponding inference methods, in figure  <dig>  it is immediately obvious that accuracy is much higher  in all the left panels  for the probabilistic methods  when compared to the right side panels , providing a compelling case for the association between phylogenetic accuracy and evolutionary origin of alignment gaps  – at least for the probabilistic methods. this fact is even more obvious in the middle left panel where the two probabilistic methods are compared. when mp and mlε are compared , it is clear that mlε has a much higher accuracy in the medium to high range of g/s values when the insertion-deletion ratio is 1: <dig>  with mp doing better at low to medium g/s values. this difference between the two methods is much more pronounced in the right panel , where mlε is better only at the highest g/s values and mp clearly the better of the two elsewhere. the middle panels show that bayesian analysis produced more accurate trees when compared to mlε in  <dig>  and  <dig>  out of  <dig> comparisons. just as in the mp, mlε comparison , mlε again outperforms bayesian at the highest g/s values. the difference between the two panels is quite evident, with both methods varying in accuracy in a very tight range in the left panel . note that the distribution of  values is somewhat similar when the mp and bayesian methods are each compared to mlε , suggesting a similar pattern between mp and bayesian, under bc treatment of gaps, although the bayesian method appears to be doing better than mp against mlε. these two methods are compared in the bottom panels. as mentioned above, it is immediately apparent that the accuracy for the bayesian method in the left panel is much higher  when compared to the right panel. these panels also show that whenever the difference in accuracy between mp and the bayesian method is statistically significant , the latter is always better . furthermore, the "genes" where the difference in accuracy is statistically significant are mostly spread across medium to high g/s values. in summary, the bayesian method is superior to the mp and mlε methods under the gap coding approach, irrespective of the relative proportions of insertions and deletions in the alignment.

the results shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> have been obtained from our analyses of the alignments obtained from simulations done on the balanced  model tree . we also obtained sequence alignments from simulations done with 16-taxon random-branching and pectinate trees for a subset of parameter values that, however, spanned the range of parameter values used in this study . all the analyses shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> were done on these alignments as well , including the pairwise comparisons among the inference methods and the paired t-tests. the results in those analyses showed that while the inference methods compare among themselves for the random-branching tree just as they did for the balanced tree, there are some differences in the case of the pectinate tree. in the case of the md analysis, while bayesian was the better method overall, the performance of phyml in the case of the pectinate tree was glaringly different. in the case of the balanced tree, phyml showed greater accuracy than nj in essentially all the cases, irrespective of the insertion-deletion ratio. however, for the pectinate tree, the roles are exactly reversed, with nj better than phyml in essentially all the cases – again, irrespective of the insertion-deletion ratio. similarly, while phyml and mp were each better than the other roughly equal number of times in the case of the balanced tree, mp accuracy was superior for the pectinate tree in essentially all the genes studied, irrespective of the insertion-deletion rate ratio.

when indel coding was used, again, the random tree results are quite similar to those from the balanced tree. interestingly, the results from the pectinate tree were not glaringly different from those from the balanced tree, but rather, the two were largely similar, except that the overall accuracy was lower by about  <dig> percent.

discussion
we undertook this study to investigate the relationship between the number of gapped sites in a sequence alignment and the accuracy of phylogenetic inference, and furthermore, to understand the impact of different gap treatment methods, phylogenetic inference methods, the ratio of insertions to deletion events in the evolutionary history of the sequences, and other sequence parameters such as sequence length and the transition-transversion rate ratio, on this relationship. using the computer program, dawg version  <dig>   <cit>  we simulated dna evolution along a 16-taxon model tree , incorporating both nucleotide substitution events and insertion and deletion  events . the resulting dna alignments were then subjected to three gap treatment methods, namely, md, bc, and mlε, and the phylogenetic analysis was done using popular phylogenetic inference methods – distance , parsimony , likelihood  and bayesian analysis.

a remarkable result in this study is the strong, almost deterministic, dependence of the accuracy of phylogenetic inference on the percentage of gapped sites in the alignment, irrespective of the inference method, gap treatments, or insertion-deletion rate ratio, when the percentage of gapped sites was high . this made the assignment of gap thresholds for specific levels of phylogenetic accuracy fairly straightforward, without being necessarily concerned with other determinants of phylogenetic accuracy. it was only at lower gap levels that the relationship was not as straightforward, and other factors  began to play a part in directly influencing the accuracy of the inferred trees .

earlier studies that have compared gap treatment methods have been confined to comparing their relative performances within a given inference method, particularly mp  <cit> . therefore, this study was undertaken to provide users with a comparison of other commonly used inference methods as well. we find that the probabilistic methods are clearly superior to mp and nj, irrespective of whether gaps are treated as missing data or binary characters. treating gaps as binary characters implies the assignment of unambiguous phylogenetic signal to them in the evolutionary history of the sequences. therefore, the number of gaps has little bearing on the distortion of the phylogenetic signal under the bc method. on the other hand, the md method requires the inference of the missing state at each gapped site , a process that is bound to be strained with increasing number of gaps in the alignment. therefore, it is easy to understand the relative superiority of the bc gap treatment method. it must be noted, of course, that this method can only contribute to phylogenetic accuracy as long as the alignment gaps are known without error . thus, the importance of the accuracy of sequence alignment cannot be underestimated.

the mlε method performed well in our study, although the bayesian method was better, especially when the insertion-deletion ratio was 1: <dig> . when compared to mp analysis , mlε was much better when the number of gaps was high, irrespective of the insertion-deletion ratio. such methods hold the potential for more accurate reconstruction of phylogenies in the presence of large alignment gaps .

in addition to the md treatment and the gap-coding treatments such as bc, other treatment methods exist, although not widely used anymore. one of these is pairwise deletion, a gap treatment method that is meaningful only when sequences are compared in a pairwise fashion, as in distance methods of inference, such as nj. moreover, it is an extremely rapid method that is suited to the speed of nj. the other is complete deletion of entire columns of gapped sites from the alignment, which is a gap-treatment method that is applicable to any phylogenetic inference method. we did these analyses as well, because there is sometimes an uncertainty about which of these two methods is better  <cit> . the complete deletion of gaps posed a problem in our study as the number of sites that needed to be removed from the alignment, especially at higher substitution rates, caused the remaining sequence length to become so small that often at least one of the four nucleotides failed to be represented in the alignment. therefore, we used this method only when the substitution rate was very low , and when the alignment length  for each replicate of a given sequence combination was at least  <dig> nts.

since the complete deletion treatment could be used only for low substitution rates, the comparison between the two treatments is also made only across this range. furthermore, since the pairwise deletion method can only be used in conjunction with the nj method in this study, we compared the two methods only for nj. both methods are comparable at low to moderate gap percentages, but diverge thereafter in the accuracy of phylogenetic inference . it must also be noted that the gap percentage does not reach very high levels in the pairwise deletion as it does in the complete deletion method. thus, while for a given gap percentage, the two treatment methods may be comparable in terms of phylogenetic accuracy, the pairwise removal of gaps appears to be better since the gap percentage is much lower with this method.

a comprehensive list and analysis of gap treatment methods may be found in ogden and rosenberg  <cit>  and simmons muller and norton  <cit> . however, they did not compare among phylogenetic inference methods, even for those gap-treatment methods that were common to multiple inference methods. in this study, while we do compare among gap-treatment methods, our emphasis is also on comparing among inference methods, insertion-deletion ratios, and the effect of the amount of gap on phylogenetic accuracy under varying parameters.

in order to better understand the influence of the alignment gaps on phylogenetic accuracy, we performed the same simulations, but with only base substitutions and no indels. as there were no gaps in the alignments, the data were subjected to phylogenetic analysis without any processing by means of gap treatment methods. the results of this analysis showed that, as expected, maximum likelihood and bayesian analysis produced the most accurate trees, particularly at the highest substitution rates .

another notable finding in this study is the differential influence of insertions and deletions on phylogenetic accuracy. most of the commonly used gap treatment methods do not distinguish between insertions and deletions. our results show that phylogenetic accuracy was lower when the insertion-deletion ratio was 1: <dig>  even the probabilistic methods , which produced the most accurate trees when insertions and deletions were introduced in equal numbers, performed somewhat poorly when the ratio was 1: <dig> . it therefore, appears important to develop methods that first distinguish between insertion and deletion events in the evolutionary history of the sequences in an alignment, and then treat them separately to add distinct signals to the phylogenetic analysis.

in this study, the metric we have used to measure the accuracy against is the percentage of gaps in the alignment, and this in turn has been measured mainly as g/s. some studies have found that it is not the amount of data missing but rather the amount of data remaining that matters in determining the accuracy of the phylogeny being inferred  <cit> . in order to compare our results with the results from these studies, we show the accuracy, , the remaining number of nucleotides after the gaps are removed from the alignment, and the total length of the alignment resulting from the introduction of indels during the evolution of the sequences, all plotted as a function of g/s . the layout of figure  <dig> is the same as that of figure  <dig>  with the left and right columns referring to insertion-deletion ratios of 1: <dig> and 1: <dig>  respectively, and the inference methods arranged one below the other, in the same order, namely, nj, phyml, mlε, bayesian analysis and mp.

one of the first things that stand out in figure  <dig> is the general accuracy of the md method when the g/s is low and poor accuracy when g/s is high, irrespective of the inference method. interestingly, when the accuracy curve in each graph is compared to the curve of the remaining number of nucleotides, there seems to be little relationship between the two in the left panels , again, irrespective of the inference method. thus, even as the number of remaining nucleotides  continues to be high for large g/s values, the  value  plummets down to close to zero. this is because, although the remaining number of nucleotides is high, this is largely a consequence of insertion events having added nucleotides to the sequences. thus, although there is data, there is little phylogenetic information in it, since homology across sequences at these levels becomes nebulous, at best, leading to low accuracy. on the other hand, the curve of remaining nucleotides itself drops with increase in the g/s value in the right column panels  – a reflection of the greater proportion of deletion events. therefore, while the  values drop with increase in g/s in spite of an abundance of data in the left column panels, they do so in the right column panels evidently because of the loss of data as g/s increases . thus, while the remaining amount of data may be an important determinant of accuracy , this is true only when homology among the sequences in the alignment can be established in the remaining character data. if, however, the remaining character data is largely a result of insertion events, the relationship is unlikely to hold, as seen in the left panels.

on the other hand, if the gaps are coded separately , then the phylogenetic signal present in the gaps  increasingly becomes the only information for the inference method to rely on, as g/s increases. the loss of signal from the character data is reflected in the decreased phylogenetic accuracy at high g/s values . the greater loss of phylogenetic accuracy at medium g/s values in the right column panels of figure  <dig> can be attributed to fewer deletion events that are distinct and non-overlapping when compared to insertion events that are more likely to be distinct and non-overlapping, as the increase in the total length of the alignment with indel introduction will be much higher when the insertion-deletion rate ratio is 1: <dig> 

in this study, we also found that the alignments from the random-branching tree yielded essentially the same results as those from the balanced tree, while those from the pectinate tree were different . the analyses from the pectinate tree data in general showed lower accuracy than the corresponding analyses from the balanced tree datasets. furthermore, the relative performances of the different inference methods were not the same between the two model topologies. in particular, the relative performance of the phyml method was worse when the topology contained pectinate branching.

this is a simulation-based study and is confined to certain specific simulation parameters and methods of gap treatment and phylogenetic inference used in this study. however, the choices of the parameter values have been made based on empirical studies in the literature. this included the size distribution of indels as well  <cit> , which may not be a critical feature as far as the bc treatment is concerned, but may be important when the state is inferred at the gaps or coded. therefore, we believe that the results obtained in this study are sufficiently general to be useful to the community of molecular phylogeneticists. however, we must add a note of caution that while it is likely that the general results of this study will hold, the particulars may be dependent on the specific choices of simulation and other parameter values. finally, the relationships between phylogenetic accuracy and gap percentage in this study were derived based on two unlikely events in empirical studies – knowledge of the true tree and a perfect alignment. these certainly are sources of uncertainty and/or error in real data analysis, and must be accounted for, in empirical studies. however, the utility of simulation-based studies such as this is that they serve to provide an assessment and quantification of relationships in the absence of confounding factors.

CONCLUSIONS
the presence of gaps in molecular sequence alignments is common-place in the literature. our simulation-based results show that, when the alignment gaps reflect indel events without error, and the number of gapped sites per sequence is ≤ <dig> percent of the sequence length, all the inference methods used  perform well in accurately inferring the phylogeny. however, when the number of gaps is large , the bayesian method clearly outperforms the other inference methods when the gaps are treated as missing data , although it must be noted that since each inference method uses a different criterion in treating gaps as missing data, the higher accuracy for the bayesian and phyml method can perhaps also be attributed to a more accurate integration of the state at each of the gapped sites. within the mp and bayesian methods, the inference of the phylogeny was significantly more accurate when each gapped site was treated as a binary character state  than when the gaps were treated as md. when the sequences in an alignment contain a large number of gaps, as in the case of highly diverged sequences, coding gaps as in likelihood analysis  may be more efficient than bayesian or mp in combination with the bc method. finally, our results also show that it is more difficult to accurately infer the phylogeny from an alignment where a greater proportion of gaps reflect deletion events rather than insertion events in the evolutionary history of the sequences in the alignment.

