BACKGROUND
mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis, has infected billions of people worldwide. phagocytic cells are critical for host defense against infection by capturing invading pathogens and killing them inside the bactericidal milieu of lysosomes as well as in processing and presenting the pathogen derived antigens. based on the ability to infect and cause diseases, mycobacteria can be classified into species that cause tb in humans or in animals, including mtb and m. bovis, and species that are generally non-pathogenic, such as ms and m. vaccae. the survival of pathogenic mycobacteria within macrophages involves the inhibition of several host cell processes which allow them unlike non-pathogenic species to survive inside host cells. host processes manipulated by pathogenic mycobacteria include fusion of phagosomes with lysosomes, acidification of phagosomes and resistance to killing by oxygenated metabolites. antigen presentation, apoptosis and the stimulation of bactericidal responses due to the activation of pathways involving mitogen-activated protein kinases , interferon-γ  and calcium  signaling are also inhibited. the phagocytosis of pathogen is associated with an increase in cellular ca2+ and subsequent activation of ca2+ dependent events leading to destruction of invading bacilli  <cit> . pathogenic mycobacteria inhibit the ca2+ flux which is usually associated with phagocytosis  <cit> . ca2+ is required for the activation of certain isoforms of pkc and the calmodulin kinase pathways, which are both potential upstream activators of map kinases  <cit> .

modulation of host cellular pathways may be influenced by signal transduction molecules expressed by pathogenic bacteria. the mtb genome encodes  <dig> eukaryotic-like serine/threonine kinases  <cit> . various signal-transduction pathways utilize protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in regulating different cellular activities such as adaptation and differentiation, immune response and cell division. several studies have shown that macrophages infected with pathogenic mycobacteria show reduced activation of map kinases as compared with non-pathogenic mycobacteria resulting in the decreased production of nos <dig> and tnf-α in infected macrophages  <cit> .

recent studies have highlighted the role of protein kinases in the biology and pathogenesis of mycobacteria. pkng, a cytosolic protein of mtb, increases intracellular survival by inhibiting the fusion of mycobacterial phagosome with lysosome. deletion of this gene in bcg results in the lysosomal localization of mycobacteria. likewise ms expressing recombinant pkng is able to prevent the fusion of phagosome with lysosome  <cit> . the members of the pkc-family of proteins are classified in three groups, based on the mechanisms regulating their activation in response to different stimuli  <cit> . pkc has been implicated in various macrophage functions like phagocytosis, maturation of phagosome, immunity to infection, apoptosis and the productions of cytokines/chemokines/immune effector molecules  <cit> . pkc-α regulates phagocytosis and the biogenesis of phagolysosome by promoting the interaction of phagosome with late endososme and lysosomes  <cit> . pkc-α also plays important role in the killing of intracellular pathogens  <cit> , however its role in mycobacterial pathogenesis has never been described. in our earlier study, we have shown that macrophages infected with rv show decreased expression of pkc-α as compared to macrophages infected with ms, suggesting that difference in the intracellular survival of pathogenic and non-pathogenic mycobacteria may be related to their ability to downregulate pkc-α  <cit> . in present study, to understand the role of pkc-α in survival or killing of mycobacteria within macrophages, we selectively knocked-down pkc-α of macrophages and examined their ability to kill intracellular bacilli. we are first to report the  decrease in phagocytosis of mycobacteria by pkc-α deficient macrophages  knockdown of pkc-α results in increased survival of mycobacteria within macrophages  pkng from mtb selectively downregulates pkc-α during infection  expression of pkng in ms reduces the phagocytosis by macrophages and  the downregulation of pkc-α is mainly due to the proteolytic degradation by pkng.

RESULTS
downregulation of macrophage specific pkc-α by mycobacteria
previous studies suggest that rv, ra and bcg are less efficiently taken up by macrophages as compared to ms  <cit>  and have the ability to survive and multiply within macrophages. infection of rv but not ms inhibits macrophage pkc-α. the novel  and conventional  isoforms are not down regulated by rv infection of macrophages  <cit> . to know whether infection of macrophages with bcg and ra also results in the downregulation of pkc-α, we infected macrophages with mycobacteria and observed that infection of thp- <dig> cells with bcg and ra also decreased the expression  as well as the phosphorylation of pkc-α by  <dig>  and  <dig> fold respectively . regulation pkc-δ was similar by ms, bcg, ra and rv  suggesting that pathogenic mycobacteria selectively downregulate pkc-α. the downregulation of pkc-α was also evident in primary mouse peritoneal macrophages when incubated with rv .

decreased phagocytosis and increased survival of bcg and ms within pkc-α deficient thp- <dig> cells
our initial study has proven that regulation of macrophage pkc-α by mycobacteria is species dependent  <cit> . to study the effect of pkc-α knockdown on the survival/killing of mycobacteria, thp- <dig> cells were transfected with sirna targeting pkc-α. sirna specifically reduced the expression of pkc-α by 70-90% . infection of pkc-α deficient cells resulted in the significant  reduction in phagocytosis of bcg. data show that phagocytosis of bcg by pkc-α deficient cells was  <dig>  fold reduced when compared to control . intracellular survival of bcg was found to be increased in pkc-α deficient cells. since phagocytosis of bacilli by normal and by pkc-α deficient cells was different, we presented the survival of bcg as fold increase in the number of intracellular bacilli as compared to the initial phagocytosis . the specificity of pkc-α sirna was confirmed by transfecting mouse macrophage cell line, j774a. <dig> and showing that sirna blocked pkc-α, only in thp- <dig> cells .

to clearly understand the specific role of pkc-α in the phagocytosis and survival of mycobacteria, we used ms  for infection. knockdown of pkc-α resulted in the significant  decrease in the phagocytosis of ms by macrophages . results show that phagocytosis of ms is  <dig>  fold less in pkc-α deficient cells as compared to normal cells. inhibition of phagocytosis was specific to the inhibition of pkc-α as knockdown of pkc-δ did not inhibit the phagocytosis or survival . when survival of ms in macrophages deficient in pkc-α was compared with normal cells, we found that survival of ms was increased in the pkc-α deficient macrophages. since phagocytosis of ms by normal and pkc-α deficient cells was different, we expressed intracellular survival of ms as percentage of the initial bacilli uptake. in normal macrophages, only 25% of initial bacilli survived as contrast to 65% survival in pkc-α deficient cells . the results were confirmed with j774a. <dig> cells using go <dig>  which represented similar level of inhibition in phagocytosis .

detection of expression of pkng in different mycobacteria
pkng has been shown to inhibit phagosomal maturation  <cit> , a process that is promoted by pkc-α  <cit> , and which helps in survival of mycobacteria within macrophages. there seems to be an inverse relationship between pkng and pkc-α in terms of regulation of events involved in phagosomal maturation and intracellular survival of mycobacteria. this led us to think about some relationship between pkng and pkc-α in determining the intracellular survival of mycobacteria. to check the expression of pkng in mycobacteria, we cloned, expressed, purified protein  and raised antiserum. immunoblotting of mycobacterial lysates using anti-pkng serum shows that pkng is expressed in rv, ra and bcg but not in ms .

construction of recombinant ms expressing pkng
to underline the specific role of pkng in controlling pkc-α, the gene was expressed in ms. cloning of pkng in pmv <dig> vector was confirmed by restriction digestion . for expression, pmv361-pkng was electroporated into ms and resultant clones  were confirmed by pcr  and immunoblotting using anti-pkng serum .

recombinant ms downregulates macrophage pkc-α during infection
bcg and ra are laboratory produced avirulent strains that still infect and grow within mammalian hosts, though they do not lead to the chronic disease that their virulent counterparts do. however, bcg and ra are able to inhibit the maturation of phagosome which is consistent with their ability to downregulate pkc-α. pkng is expressed by rv, bcg, and ra  but pkng is not expressed in ms . this led us to speculate that pkng might contribute to the downregulation of pkc-α by mycobacteria and resulting in the increased intracellular survival. to test this hypothesis, we infected thp- <dig> cells with ms-g and studied the level of macrophage pkc-α. we found that thp- <dig> cells infected with ms-g show  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold decreased level of pkc-α when compared to control cells and cells infected with ms respectively . in the same experiment, expression of pkng mrna in rv was found to be increased by  <dig> fold . similar results were observed with j774a. <dig> cells. immunoprecipitation  as well as western blot analyses  of lysates from j774a. <dig> cells infected with mycobacteria confirmed downregulation of pkc-α by ms-g.

expression of pkng in ms mimics the effect of pkc-α knockdown
pkng down regulates pkc-α, resulting in the inhibition of phagocytosis and increased survival of mycobacteria within macrophages. this raised the possibility of impaired phagocytosis of ms-g in comparison to ms. to test this we infected thp- <dig> cells with ms and ms-g and compared the phagocytosis. we observed significantly reduced  phagocytosis of ms-g , which was comparable with the phagocytosis of ms by pkc-α deficient thp- <dig> cells . when phagocytosis of ms-g by normal and by pkc-α deficient macrophages was compared,  <dig> fold decrease  in phagocytosis of ms-g by pkc-α deficient cells was observed . in the same experiment, we also compared the survival of ms-g and ms in normal and in pkc-α deficient macrophages. we observed that survival of ms-g in normal macrophages was higher than ms but in pkc-α deficient macrophages, ms and ms-g survived equally which was higher than the survival of ms in normal macrophages . western blotting of samples at each time point confirmed the knockdown of pkc-α throughout the experiment .

direct inhibition of pkc-α by pkng
pkng expressing mycobacteria are able to downregulate the expression of pkc-α. whether downregulation of pkc-α require mere presence of pkng during infection or pkng regulate some cellular process which results in downregulation pkc-α. cellular process/target which is responsible for downregulation of pkc-α may be of mycobacterial or host origin. to explore whether pkng alone or with mycobacteria is required for the downregulation of pkc-α, pkng was cloned in pires2-egfp vector  and pires2-egfp-pkng was transfected into thp- <dig> cells. expression of pkng in transfected cells was confirmed by western blotting . expression of pkng in thp- <dig> cells resulted in the decreased level of pkc-α  suggesting that mere expression of pkng in macrophages without mycobacteria downregulates pkc-α. this also suggest that downregulation of pkc-α involves modulation of some host process. in order to dissect, whether this effect of pkng is a direct interaction or pathway mediated, we performed kinase activity of pkng. pkng undergoes autophosphorylation  and phosphorylates it's self cleavage product  but does not phosphorylate pkc-α  or histone . pkc-α phosphorylates histones  which confirms that pkc-α used in assay was active. to test if there is any possibility that pkng dephosphorylates pkc-α, the immunoprecipitated pkc-α  was treated with purified pkng. to our surprise, levels of pkc-α and phosphorylated pkc-α were reduced upon treatment with pkng suggesting degradation of pkc-α . this also suggests that the observed reduced level of phosphorylated form in earlier experiments was due to decrease in total pkc-α protein. however, pkng treatment did not affected pkc-δ  confirming the specificity of pkng for pkc-α rather than general protease activity . for better understanding of the direct effect of pkng on pkcα, we incubated macrophage lysate with purified pkng and observed degradation of pkc-α . to further look for the degradation of pkc-α in a time dependent manner, we treated purified pkc-α with pkng. the immunoblotting with pkc-α antibody showed that pkng cleaves pkc-α proteolytically and the resulting product was detectable with anti-pkc-α antibody .

discussion
the induction of various macrophage functional responses such as the oxidative burst, mhc class ii protein expression, interleukin 1-β production, tumoricidal activity, and phagocytosis are thought to be regulated at least in part via pkc dependent signaling  <cit> . pkc regulates igg mediated phagocytosis by human macrophages and is reported to translocate to the membrane before significant ingestion takes place. pkc inhibitors decreased phagocytosis in a dose dependent manner. phagosomal localization of pkc also increases during phagocytosis  <cit> . pkc-α promote fc-γ receptor mediated phagocytosis and signal transduction and inhibition of pkc-α results in inhibition of phagocytosis  <cit> . during phagocytosis, marcks, pkc-α and myosin  <dig> are recruited along with f-actin and talin in the cortical cytoplasm adjacent to forming phagocytic cups. after completion of particle ingestion, myosin i, f-actin, and talin dissociate from phagosomes. by contrast, marcks and pkc-α remain associated with the phagosome membrane until after acquisition of the lysosomal marker lamp- <dig>  phagocytosis results in rapid and sustained phosphorylation of marcks, suggesting pkc-α dependent phosphorylation is an early signal required for zymosan phagocytosis and that marcks and pkc-α have roles in phagosome maturation  <cit> . pkc-α has also been shown to promote phagosomal maturation by regulating the association of lamp- <dig> and flottilin- <dig> on phagosomal membrane and inhibition of pkc-α results in the impairment of phagosomal maturation  <cit> . when tubercular and non-tubercular bacilli interact with macrophages, pkc isoforms are regulated in different manner. we were first to report that rv and ms activate and phosphorylate novel pkc isoforms. pkc-α  was downregulated by rv but not by ms  <cit> . it was reported that macrophages derived from bcg resistant and bcg sensitive mice differ in their pkc activity and that macrophages from bcg resistant mice show increased pkc activity as compared to macrophages from bcg sensitive mice  <cit> . in present study our main objective has been to decipher the role of pkc-α in mycobacterial survival/killing. knockdown of pkc-α resulted in the decreased phagocytosis of bcg and ms by macrophages while their intracellular survival was increased . inhibition of pkc-δ did not affect phagocytosis or survival of ms . these data show important role of pkc-α in phagocytosis as well as in killing of mycobacteria and suggest that downregulation of pkc-α during infection is a strategy utilized by pathogenic mycobacteria which help them to avoid the lysosomal machinery and survive inside host cells. this idea is further supported by the observation that bcg, ra, and rv  can downregulate pkc-α while ms does not . previous studies with other organisms have also emphasized the role of pkc-α in phagocytosis and killing of pathogens. encapsulated streptococcus suis can survive and multiply inside macrophages while non-encapsulated s. suis does not. infection of j774a. <dig> macrophages with the non-encapsulated mutant of s. suis results in the enhanced activation of pkc-α, whereas the encapsulated strain showed reduced activation of pkc-α resulting in the reduced phagocytosis of bacteria  <cit> . inhibition of pkc-α by leishmania donovani lipophosphoglycan results in the decreased phagocytosis by murine macrophages as well as impaired recruitment of lamp- <dig> on the phagosomal membrane resulting in the arrest of phagosomal maturation  <cit> . survival of l. donovani promastigotes also involves inhibition of pkc-α. intracellular survival of a l. donovani mutant defective in lipophosphoglycan repeating units synthesis, which normally is rapidly degraded in phagolysosomes, was enhanced in dn pkc-α-over-expressing raw  <dig>  cells  <cit> . interestingly, a recent study has identified two mtb strains  among a bank of clinical isolates showing defect in phagocytosis when compared to strain erdman. despite reduced phagocytosis, ingested bacilli replicated at a faster rate than strain erdman  <cit> . these observations suggest that clinical spectrum of pathogenic mycobacteria also include strains capable of avoiding phagocytosis. saprophytic and opportunistic pathogenic mycobacteria are more readily ingested than are the members of the mtb family  <cit> . inhibition of pkc-α by bcg, ra and rv but not by ms  suggests that difference in the uptake and intracellular survival of pathogenic and non-pathogenic mycobacteria is related at least in part, to their ability to downregulate pkc-α. interestingly, mammalian pkc-α has similarity with mycobacterial pkng  <cit> . pkng has been shown to promote intracellular survival of mycobacteria by inhibiting the process of phagosomal maturation. pkng is secreted into the cytosol of infected macrophage suggesting the possibility that it may access host cell molecules. there is impaired recruitment of lamp- <dig> on phagosomes containing live mycobacteria expressing pkng  <cit> . phagosomes containing live pathogenic mycobacteria actively retain coronin  <dig>  which is generally released prior to fusion with lysosome  <cit> . in a further study, coronin  <dig> was shown to be required for activation of ca2+ dependent phosphatase calcineurin, thereby blocking the lysososmal delivery of mycobacteria  <cit> . pkc-α has been shown to phosphorylate p <dig>  and pkc mediated phosphorylation of p <dig> is required for its dissociation from phagosomes as well as for recruitment of lamp- <dig> to the phagosomes, an event necessary for the fusion of phagosomes with lysosomes  <cit> . pkng is expressed in bcg, ra and rv but not in ms  as referred earlier too  <cit> , led us to speculate that pkng enhances survival of mycobacteria by inhibiting pkc-α. when macrophages were infected with ms-g, expression of pkc-α was decreased as compared to uninfected and ms infected macrophages  confirming that pkng directs the downregulation of pkc-α by mycobacteria which supports our hypothesis that pkng mediated enhanced intracellular survival of mycobacteria involves inhibition of pkc-α. during rv infection, the levels of pkng transcripts were increased by  <dig> fold as compared to extracellular mycobacteria  which reiterates their ability to affect mycobacterial survival. in normal macrophages phagocytosis of ms-g was reduced in comparison to ms, which was similar with the reduced phagocytosis of ms by pkc-α deficient macrophages as compared to normal macrophages . phagocytosis of ms-g was further reduced in pkc-α deficient macrophages  suggesting that, once ms starts expressing pkng the behavior of ms-g, in terms of phagocytosis look similar in pattern with bcg . moreover, survival of ms-g in normal macrophages mimics the survival of ms in pkc-α deficient macrophages which was higher than the survival of ms in normal macrophages . ms-g survives equally in normal and in pkc-α deficient macrophages . these observations further support the view that intracellular survival of mycobacteria involves the inhibition of pkc-α by mycobacterial pkng. expression of pkc-α was decreased in macrophages expressing pkng  confirming that pkng mediated inhibition of pkc-α involves alteration with host cell pathway rather than mycobacterial pathway. pkng may modulate the host cell processes by phosphorylation of host cell molecule. in a study, level of pkc-α was shown to be decreased by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation resulting in the degradation of pkc-α suggesting that phosphorylation/dephosphorylation is also linked with the degradation of pkc-α  <cit> . thus pkng may contribute to the downregulation of pkc-α by directly phosphorylating it. pkng neither phosphorylated  nor dephosphorylated pkc-α  neglecting the possibility of involvement of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mediated pathway in downregulation of pkc-α. surprisingly, incubation of pkc-α but not pkc-δ with pkng resulted in the degradation of pkc-α . besides auto-phosphorylation  <cit> , pkng is reported to catalyse self cleavage  <cit>  which suggests the possibility of proteolytic degradation of pkc-α by pkng. pkc-δ was unaffected by pkng confirming the specificity of pkng for pkc-α. incubation of macrophage lysate with pkng also resulted in specific degradation of pkc-α which further supports that pkng mediated downregulation of pkc-α may be direct and possibly does not require host or mycobacterial mediators . when immunoprecipitated pkc-α was incubated with pkng, pkc-α was specifically degraded by pkng treatment  and this degradation may be due to the cleavage of pkc-α by pkng treatment as evident by detection of a low molecular weight protein by anti-pkc-α antibody . however, this cleavage product of pkc-α was not evident in earlier experiments when macrophages were infected with mycobacteria. we speculated that this could be either due to the lower level/less accumulation of pkng  in macrophages as compared to exogenous addition or may be the further degradation of cleaved products within the cell. therefore when the proteins were incubated in higher amounts the cleavage product could be seen. thus we concluded that the presence of pkng in macrophages either with mycobacteria or as a protein, precisely control pkc-α. moreover, when pathogenic mycobacteria reside in macrophages it raises the level of pkng  which strengthens the understanding that more inactivation of pkc-α may be possible. hence, this study is first to report that pkng downregulates pkc-α and their association discriminates the fates of pathogenic and nonpathogenic mycobacteria in macrophages. recently, l. donovani gp <dig> has been shown to proteolytically cleave many host proteins resulting in the inactivation of mapks  <cit>  suggesting that cleavage of host proteins is a defense strategy utilized by intracellular pathogens.

during tuberculosis, host defense may be determined, in part, by the capacity of macrophages to bind and ingest mtb. phagocytosis by macrophages represents the early step of the mycobacterial infection. it is governed both by the nature of the host receptors used and the ligands exposed on the bacteria as well as the environment where host cells encounter mycobacteria . final outcome of the infection is determined by cumulative effect of all these factors.

CONCLUSIONS
expression of pkng in bcg, ra and rv but not in ms represents an interesting example of evolution where pathogen has developed strategies for modulation of host molecule to avoid uptake and killing by the entities designed for their killing. interestingly, pkng directs the downregulation of pkcα and further negotiating the uptake and survival of mycobacteria. our data clearly and for the first time reveal that pathogenic mycobacteria downregulates pkcα predominantly to avoid phagocytosis and killing by macrophages. detailed understanding of the events leading to the downregulation of pkcα by pkng inside host cells open a new chapter which may further project to the identification of new therapeutic targets for mycobacterial infections.

