BACKGROUND
ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase  plays a key role in the photosynthetic calvin cycle as the carbon dioxide fixating enzyme  <cit> . the most common type of rubisco, form i rubisco, is found in viridiplantae, cyanobacteria , in most non-green algae, and some proteobacteria   <cit> . eight large subunits and an equal number of small subunits make up a functional holoenzyme of form i rubisco  <cit> . their genes, rbcl and rbcs, are plastid-encoded and co-transcribed in non-green algae, whereas in the viridiplantae, rbcs was transferred to the nucleus and evolved to a multi-gene family  <cit> . to compensate for its inefficient and slow catalytic mechanism, rubisco is usually expressed at high rates in plastids, making it "the most abundant protein in the world"  <cit> . surprisingly, in some colorless algae and holoparasitic land plants, functional rubisco was found  <cit> . one possible explanation for a function of rubisco outside of the calvin cycle was reported only recently. in developing brassica napus seeds, rubisco recycles co <dig> that was released in the pyruvate dehydrogenase step prior to fatty-acid biosynthesis  <cit> .

cryptophyte algae are flagellates with complex plastids originating from a secondary endosymbiosis between a phagotrophic host cell and a red alga  <cit> . the cryptophyte plastid consists of two nested compartments, each with its own genome   <cit> . cryptophytes of the genus cryptomonas thrive exclusively in freshwater habitats  <cit> . the leukoplast-bearing freshwater cryptophytes were formerly considered a separate genus chilomonas, but have been shown in phylogenetic analyses to be colorless cryptomonas cells; the diagnosis of the genus cryptomonas was emended accordingly  <cit> . in previous molecular phylogenetic analyses, accelerated evolutionary rates in either nuclear ribosomal dna  or nucleomorph ssu ribosomal dna sequences were found in three independently evolved colorless cryptomonas lineages and in closely related photosynthetic strains  <cit> .

accelerated evolutionary rates are usually considered indicative for relaxed selective constraints and were also found in rbcl genes of land plants  <cit> . previous studies have shown that relaxed selective constraints and different levels of gene expression in protein-coding genes correlate with biases in codon usage  <cit> . possibly, by preferring the so-called "major codons" in highly expressed genes, the efficiency of the translation process is increased  <cit> . the differences in codon usage between highly and lowly expressed genes are most obvious for two-fold degenerate nny codons, i.e. pairs of triplets that code for the same amino acid with either c or t at third positions. in highly expressed genes, nnc is preferred over nnt in most two-fold degenerate nny codons, whereas the codon preference reverses, if functional constraints are relaxed and expression levels decrease  <cit> . under neutral mutation, dna displays a strong bias towards increased a+t contents. such a genome compositional bias has been found also in endosymbiotic or organellar genomes  <cit> . thus, in two-fold degenerate nny codons, codon bias due to selection operates in opposite direction to genome compositional bias  <cit> .

in this study, we compare the phylogeny of the rbcl gene as a representative for the plastid genome to phylogenies of nuclear rdna  and nucleomorph ssu rdna. to obtain a congruent taxon sampling across the three genomes of all strains, twenty-three rbcl genes and fourteen nuclear ssu rdna genes were newly sequenced. as putative indicators for differences of functional constraints and expression levels in the rbcl genes, codon usages of two-fold degenerate nny codons were compared among photosynthetic and colorless cryptomonas species.

RESULTS
results of the phylogenetic analyses
both ribosomal data sets passed the chi-square test for homogeneity of base frequencies across taxa, whereas the rbcl data set failed the test . after exclusion of third codon positions, the rbcl data set passed the test, indicating that the heterogeneity of base frequencies was restricted to third codon positions. this became also obvious by separate computation of mean values and standard deviations of base frequencies for first, second and third codon positions across all twenty-three taxa. the second codon position was most homogeneous concerning standard deviations , the first codon position had an intermediate position , whereas the third codon position was most heterogeneous . phylogenetic analyses with bootstrap resampling under all optimality criteria and a bayesian analysis, however, showed that despite of an obvious bias, these positions contributed the most to the support of the clades in the rbcl data set. this was confirmed by separate phylogenetic analyses of first, second and third codon positions . the highly conserved rbcl protein sequences consistently failed to recover three clades that were otherwise highly supported in all dna sequence data sets , because phylogenetic information was predominantly based on synonymous substitutions. therefore, we used the rbcl gene tree with complete codon positions for a comparison with the nuclear and nucleomorph ribosomal dna phylogenies .

almost all cryptomonas clades were unequivocally recovered with significant or at least moderate support in nuclear, nucleomorph and plastid gene trees . this refers to c. curvata , c. marssonii , c. ovata , c. paramaecium , c. pyrenoidifera , and c. tetrapyrenoidosa . c. borealis  was significantly supported in nuclear and nucleomorph phylogenies but not in all phylogenetic analyses in the rbcl phylogeny . significant support for this clade, however, was found in the rbcl protein phylogeny apparently due to nonsynonymous substitutions . clade nopyr , otherwise highly supported in nuclear and nucleomorph phylogenies, could not be resolved in the rbcl phylogeny .

in all phylogenies, c. borealis, c. gyropyrenoidosa and c. lundii formed a "super-clade" together with the colorless c. paramaecium . only in the nucleomorph ssu rdna tree, however, convincing support for clade lb was found . in the nucleomorph ssu rdna and rbcl phylogenies, representing the two genomes of the complex plastid, evolutionary rates and topologies of the strains in clade lb resembled each other. in both phylogenies, evolutionary rates were extremely accelerated in clade lb, and the branching pattern was similar, except for the position of c. gyropyrenoidosa, which was a sister to c. lundii in the nucleomorph ssu rdna , but not in the rbcl phylogeny . in the nuclear-encoded ribosomal dna phylogeny, predominantly the strains of clade nopyr displayed increased evolutionary rates, whereas evolutionary rates were less pronounced in c. borealis and c. paramaecium of clade lb . in clade nopyr, an acceleration of evolutionary rates was also present to a lesser extent in the nucleomorph ssu rdna; in the rbcl phylogeny, however, branch lengths of this clade were inconspicuous .

in figure 1d, the phylogenetic trees of figure 1a to 1c were scaled to the same substitution rate and in figure  <dig>  the maximum likelihood distances of c. pyenoidifera strain m <dig> to the other taxa were plotted in a chart diagram for a direct comparison of genetic divergences. among the three data sets, the rbcl data displayed generally the highest substitution rates and genetic distances. in the nucleomorph ssu rdna, the evolutionary rates of c. gyropyrenoidosa, c. borealis and c. paramaecium were in an intermediate position. apparently, evolutionary rates in clade lb increased successively from host to nucleomorph to plastid genome.

codon usage analysis
in table  <dig>  the codon usages of the six amino acids with two-fold degenerate nny codons  are listed in absolute counts computed from the  <dig> codons that were included in the phylogenetic analyses. cysteine was exceptional in codon usage in that it mostly showed a preference for ugu over ugc, thus it will not be further discussed . for the remaining five amino acids, nnc codons were always preferred over nnu codons in c. marssonii, c. pyrenoidifera, c. tetrapyrenoidosa and in clade nopyr . in all strains of clade lb, on the other hand, indications for a change of codon usage were found, although to different extent. in almost all strains of c. paramaecium  and c. borealis  codon preferences were inversed from nnc to nnu for these amino acids . c. lundii and c. gyropyrenoidosa were in an intermediate position concerning codon usages. in c. lundii only in two amino acids, aspartate and tyrosine, codon usage was inversed to prefer gau over gac  and uau over uac , whereas in c. gyropyrenoidosa only one amino acid, aspartate, was affected . inversed codon usages were also found in two clades that were not part of lb, c. curvata  and c. ovata . in the three phylogenies, c. ovata displayed slightly increased evolutionary rates in nucleomorph ssu rdna and rbcl phylogenies, whereas c. curvata had slightly longer branches only in the nuclear ribosomal dna phylogeny .

the entries for the rbcl genes in table  <dig> refer to absolute counts per  <dig> amino acids . also for the guillardia theta rbcl gene only the corresponding  <dig> of the  <dig> codons were used. the plastid of g. theta contains genes for  <dig> trnas  <cit> . only the nnc codons  are served by an exactly matching trna. as a code table, the eubacterial/plastid code was used . bold face, changed codon usage from nnc to nnu = shift from selection bias to genome composition bias.

discussion
lineage-specific parallel evolution across three genomes in cryptomonas
most of the cryptomonas clades were recovered with high support values in phylogenies of the concatenated nuclear ribosomal dna sequences , of the nucleomorph ssu rdna and of the plastid-encoded rbcl gene, but obvious differences in evolutionary rates among the different clades and genomes were displayed.

in the "super-clade" lb, consisting of three photosynthetic  and one heterotrophic cryptomonas species , largely congruent branching patterns and extreme evolutionary rates in the nucleomorph and plastid gene phylogenies suggested coevolution under similar selective constraints, as if the two genomes of the complex plastid were a genetic unit in this clade. in the nuclear ribosomal dna phylogeny, an increase in evolutionary rates was in part also present but less pronounced. support for this clade was low in the nuclear ribosomal dna phylogeny, although several parts of the nuclear ribosomal operon were concatenated to improve resolution .

in a different clade, that also consists of photosynthetic and colorless cryptomonas taxa, clade nopyr, the situation was reversed; coevolution with increased evolutionary rates seemed to have taken place in the nuclear and nucleomorph genes  <cit> , whereas no acceleration of evolutionary rates could be observed in the rbcl gene phylogeny . we did not obtain an rbcl pcr product, however, from the colorless strains of clade nopyr .

cho et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that extremely accelerated evolutionary rates were present in three mitochondrial genes  in the flowering plant genus plantago, but not in plastid or nuclear genes of the same taxa. we chose two rna-coding genes and a protein-coding gene as representatives for three of the four genomes in cryptomonas. despite their differing functions, the phylogenetic trees suggested that at least two , or even all three genomes  may have evolved in parallel under similar selective constraints or by interacting with each other.

evidence for relaxed functional constraints on rna- or protein-coding genes
possible explanations for accelerated evolutionary rates of dna sequences include relaxation or loss of functional constraints due to either changes in mode of nutrition, adaptations to new environmental conditions, genetic bottlenecks or obligate asexuality  <cit> . endosymbiotic, parasitic and organellar genomes are notorious for high a+t contents in their genomes likely caused by biased substitution rates under neutral mutational pressure  <cit> . minimum amounts of g and c are required to maintain the codon information for a functional protein or to preserve the secondary structure of an rna. depending on the strengths of the functional constraints, the resulting selection bias may differ from the genome composition bias to varying degrees . thus, lineage-specific relaxed selective constraints may be identified by increases in a+t content.

this notion is supported by the observation that the nucleomorph ssu rrna genes in clade lb accumulate mononucleotide repeats of a and t in highly variable regions  <cit> . in functional protein-coding genes, the triplet structure constrains mutation rates by selection. synonymous substitutions do not replace amino acids, thus are more likely to occur than nonsynonymous substitutions. in previous studies, however, also synonymous substitutions were reported to be skewed towards specific codons in correlation with expression levels of the respective protein  <cit> . the codon biases were explained as a result of a competition between selection and genome compositional bias  <cit> . in highly expressed genes, codons with abundant or perfectly matching trnas  are apparently preferred over codons are translated by rare or "wobbling" trnas   <cit> . in plastid genomes, usually only  <dig> to  <dig> trnas are available to translate all  <dig> codons   <cit> . in two-fold degenerate nny codons, the preferred major codon in highly expressed genes is usually nnc, thus codon bias due to selection can be comparably easily distinguished from codon bias due to mutation drift  <cit> . among the six amino acids with two-fold degenerate codons , cysteine seems to be the sole exception .

in the rbcl genes of most cryptomonas clades, the major nnc codons for asparagine, aspartate, histidine, tyrosine, or phenylalanine were preferred over their nnu alternatives, however, codon preferences were reversed in several or all of these amino acids in clade lb . there was even a gradient of decreasing selective constraints and presumably also expression levels along the lb clade: in the early diverging c. gyropyrenoidosa and c. lundii, reversed codon usages were found in only one or two amino acids, whereas in the late diverging c. borealis and c. paramaecium in four or five nny-coded amino acids, nnu codons were preferred. morton and levin used the codon adaptation index  to compare codon usage of two-fold degenerate nny codons in psba genes among dicot and monocot plants, and discussed putatively decreasing selective constraints from basally to terminally diverging lineages  <cit> . however, no hemi- or holoparasitic angiosperm plants were included in their study.

in previous studies, convergent codon usage resulted in artificial tree topologies  <cit> . despite an obvious bias in codon usage, the rbcl phylogeny was largely confirmed by the nuclear and nucleomorph ribosomal dna phylogenies. it is likely that the rbcl genes examined in this study had not yet diverged enough to cause artifacts. it may have been different, though, if rbcl had been used to infer phylogenetic trees across cryptophyte genera. for higher level phylogenies, it may, thus, be a better option to use protein sequences instead.

potential causes for lineage-specific accelerated rates and relaxed functional constraints
one of the explanations for accelerated evolutionary rates and relaxed functional constraints in plastid genomes is loss of photosynthesis, since this usually results in large-scale degradation and compaction of plastomes leading to loss of almost all photosynthetic genes, except perhaps for rbcl  <cit> .

in the cryptophyte guillardia theta, photosynthesis genes are spread across plastid , nucleomorph  and nucleus   <cit> . thus, loss of photosynthesis is not an unlikely explanation for a parallel acceleration of evolutionary rates across three genomes in c. paramaecium. however, observations of elevated evolutionary rates in closely related photosynthetic taxa contradict this notion. instead of being the cause for increased substitution rates, loss of photosynthesis may rather be a result of an accelerated evolution that had started already in the photosynthetic ancestors of the colorless lineages . similar observations have been made in plastid gene phylogenies of hemi- and holoparasitic land plants  <cit> .

previous studies have shown that mutations in genes of dna repair or dna replication may result in overall increases of substitution rates in bacterial and eukaryotic genomes, e.g.  <cit> . many genes of the cryptophyte nucleomorph have been transferred to the host nucleus including dna polymerases  <cit> . thus, some potential mutator genes in cryptophytes can be expected to be nuclear-encoded. it is tempting to speculate that a spontaneous mutation in a nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted protein, for example in the proofreading subunit of a dna polymerase iii or in a dna repair enzyme, could have accelerated successively mutation rates in nuclear, nucleomorph and plastid dna in the photosynthetic ancestors of clade lb. accelerated mutation rates may have resulted in loss of photosynthesis in c. paramaecium, which in turn perhaps resulted in less functional constraints on the rbcl protein and, thus, in further increase of evolutionary rates.

another possible cause for accelerated evolutionary rates in clade lb was discussed previously  <cit> . the genus cryptomonas is dimorphic, a feature that usually correlates with sexual reproduction. final proof for sexual reproduction is still missing, but, however, in clade lb only strains with campylomorph cells were found <cit> . it may, thus, as well be possible that loss of sexual reproduction caused an increase in mutation rates by loss of recombination affecting also nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted proteins. however, the observed increase in evolutionary rates from host to nucleomorph to plastid genome suggests that the evolutionary processes may have started in the plastid genome.

CONCLUSIONS
an rbcl phylogeny of twenty-three cryptomonas strains was compared with phylogenetic trees inferred from nucleomorph and nuclear ribosomal dna sequences. in a super-clade comprising photosynthetic and colorless cryptomonas species, a congruent increase in evolutionary rates and a similar branching pattern were found in data sets representing the two genomes of the complex plastid, the nucleomorph ssu rdna and the rbcl data set. in both data sets, the colorless strains displayed the highest substitution rates. a direct comparison of the genetic distances across nuclear, nucleomorph and plastid data sets showed that the evolutionary rates in the long-branch super-clade were highest in the rbcl genes and lowest in the nuclear ribosomal dna. perhaps evolutionary rates first accelerated in the plastid genome, then in the nucleomorph genome. the increased evolutionary rates of nucleomorph ssu rdna and rbcl gene evolved in parallel with a gradual shift in codon usage of the rbcl gene towards a relax in functional constraints and decreasing expression levels. strongest evidence for relaxed functional constraints and decreased expression levels in rbcl were found in the terminally diverging photosynthetic species cryptomonas borealis and in the colorless species c. paramaecium. either loss of photosynthesis was a gradual at first hidden process starting already in pigmented ancestors of the colorless c. paramaecium strains or the accelerated evolutionary rates caused defects in the photosynthetic genes resulting in loss of photosynthesis.

