BACKGROUND
division of labor, a hallmark of advanced insect sociality, has long attracted attention from biologists, as these systems of polyphenism are some of the most elaborate in the animal kingdom  <cit> . the honey bee, for example, has queen and worker physical morphs, along with  <dig> physiologically-based worker castes  <cit> . great progress has been made in recent years towards unraveling how changes in the regulation of juvenile hormone and vitellogenin underlie these adaptively regulated differences in phenotype  <cit> . these successes have strengthened the view that changes to an insect groundplan  are central to eusocial evolution  <cit> .

although changes to an insect groundplan are undoubtedly a major force in eusocial evolution, it is likely that other mechanisms have also played a role in the evolution of distinctive eusocial traits. in particular, we hypothesize that the origin of eusociality may have involved novel genes. if so, many of these new genes would likely be taxonomically restricted genes , orphan sequences not found outside a species or only found in a particular taxonomic group  <cit> . trgs make up ~10-20% of the genes in every genome sequenced to date  <cit> . in drosophila melanogaster, the species with the most complete and accurate genome, trgs make up approximately  <dig> % of genes  <cit> . in addition to being abundant, trgs are important for generating lineage specific traits  <cit> . in drosophila, for example, novel courtship behavior was found to be partially dependent on a novel gene, sphinx  <cit> . likewise in hydra, changes in the expression of a trg are important for species specific differences in tentacle formation  <cit> . finally, species that rely on toxins for predatory behavior or defense possess specialized venoms with taxonomically restricted occurrence  <cit> .

here we explore for the first time, using comparative genomics, whether trgs could have played a broad role in eusocial evolution. honey bee biology allows for a simple test of this possibility. the honey bee queen is characterized by a sharp reduction in behavioral and morphological complexity  <cit> . the behavior of the queen is largely limited to fighting other queens and laying eggs, while her morphology is missing many traits present in the workers  <cit> . the workers, in contrast, exhibit highly derived lineage-specific behavior thought to have evolved since the origin of eusociality. workers, for example, feed the larvae a specialized secretion, build the complex nest, and forage cooperatively in a system dependent on advanced communication not seen in their solitary ancestors  <cit> . if trgs are important for generating the expansion of behavioral complexity associated with the evolution of eusociality, we predict that trgs limited to eusocial species should be disproportionately associated with the worker caste relative to the queen case.

this study has four goals. first, we test the hypothesis that trgs are associated with eusocial evolution by analyzing an extensive list of genes that are differentially expressed between honey bee castes  <cit> . second, we explore the frequency and characteristics of trgs in the honey bee genome. we classify each gene in the official gene set into a trg category and then determine basic characteristics of these genes, such as protein size, exon number, transcript support, and so forth. we then use interproscan  <cit>  to functionally annotate as many trgs as possible. we also reevaluate the nature of insect-specific proteins, incorporating data from several recently sequenced insect and arthropod genomes. third, we test whether trgs  are expressed in a gland known to be involved in a derived eusocial behavior. finally, we generate a list of candidate trgs potentially involved in eusocial evolution. these are trgs associated with the evolution of either queen/worker dimorphism, a gland specialized for a novel function, or division of labor amongst the workers.

RESULTS
trgs in the honey bee official gene set 2
the honey bee official gene set is biased towards conserved genes, as conservation was a factor in determining which gene predictions to include  <cit> . our purpose in this section is therefore not to quantify the absolute abundance of trgs in the honey bee genome, as this analysis awaits characterization of the many gene predictions that are not in the official gene set. our goals, in contrast, are to determine  if there are large numbers of trgs within the official gene set, and , to identify the characteristics and functions of these trgs. in short, we used blastp and tblastn along with the protein sets and genomes of  <dig> species  to search for homologs for each honey bee gene in each of the species, using an e value of 10- <dig> as the cutoff  <cit> . the results of this analysis were used to construct a database to which queries were made to identify trgs. genes identified as trgs were then blasted against the current ncbi nr protein database to ensure their correct homology classification. trgs were then interrogated with interproscan to functionally annotate as many as possible.

h-conserved stands for hymenoptera-conserved, while insect stands for insect-specific.

the mean size of orphans in the present study is larger than that found in many previous studies of orphans  <cit> , reflecting the probability that the official gene set is missing many orphans. there are additional reasons to suspect that the actual number of trgs  in the honey bee genome is significantly higher than that found within the official gene set. first, drosophila melanogaster, with a better assembled genome, and most other sequenced insects, have approximately 10-20% trgs  <cit> . second, inclusion in the honey bee official gene set was partly based on homology with other sequences. hence, thousands of gene predictions were not included in the official set, which is only  <dig>  genes . further, when we manually aligned ests from the brain cdna library used by grozinger et al  <cit>  to gene predictions not in the official gene set, we were able to unambiguously identify  <dig> genes. as the cdna libarary is from the brain alone, it is likely that many of the gene predictions not in the official gene set are real genes that will be annotated when more tissue specific gene expression studies are conducted in the honey bee.

as expected, few of the trgs in the highly restricted categories  have been the focus of experimental work  or could be characterized with interproscan . however, the functions of many of these genes are consistent with the hypothesis that highly restricted trgs are associated with lineage specific traits, including eusocial behavior. most of the named trgs fell into a few classes: venoms, cuticle proteins, silk proteins, immune genes, and odorant binding proteins. although these genes are likely associated with both lineage specific traits in general, and eusocial evolution, odorant binding  and immunity  are thought to be associated with unique selection pressures in the context of eusocial evolution  <cit> . that many trgs found only in the hymenoptera are involved in novel behavior is encouraging and suggests that the other trgs in these categories are interesting candidates for genes underlying lineage specific and or novel eusocial traits. table  <dig> lists all named or functionally annotated trgs.

insect specific proteins
we characterized  <dig> proteins as insect specific, found in all insects but in no other groups. zhang et al  <cit> , using different methods, identified a smaller number of such genes,  <dig>  there is nearly no overlap in the insect specific genes found in these two studies . there are three reasons for this difference. first, zhang et al required extensive coverage as well as a significant blast hit for homology. this is an unusual requirement that has not been used in other studies, probably because distant homologs, such as those between insects and mammals, often have low coverage scores even when they have extremely low e values. thus, most of the genes identified by zhang et al  <cit>  as insect specific were classified as metazoan specific in this study, as they had strong blast hits across all tested groups. second, because the previous study required a high coverage score for homology between insect genes, many genes that could be classified as homologs were left off of the list. hence, the list of insect specific genes in the present study is larger. finally, no arthropod genomes, other than those of insects, had been sequenced when the previous study was performed and many genes identified as insect specific were found to be arthropod specific, as they are found in arachnids  or crustaceans . cuticle proteins and hemocyanins are two classes of genes that fall into the category of arthropod specific. the interproscan analysis of the insect specific genes found in the present study, using honey bee genes as the queries, found that nearly half  are odorant binding proteins,  <dig> % are uncharacterized, with the rest falling into numerous categories .

role of gene duplications in generating hymenopteran trgs
gene duplication followed by rapid sequence divergence in one of the paralogs is a well explored mechanism for generating novel genes . a simple mechanism for identifying such cases is to blast a trg against all the genes within the same genome and determine whether any of the gene's paralogs are widely conserved . we conducted such an analysis with trgs in all categories to determine a minimum percentage of these genes that could have evolved via gene duplication. figure  <dig> shows that relatively few  of the trgs in the most taxonomically restricted categories  could be shown to have evolved by gene duplication. insect specific genes were much more likely to be part of a gene family with members that are homologous with genes found outside the insects . a list of all trgs with parent genes in the honey bee genome that are widely conserved is provided .

trgs in eusocial evolution
grozinger et al  <cit>  determined gene expression in  <dig> ests in the brains of queens and workers. after aligning these ests to genes, we identified  <dig> genes with higher expression in queens,  <dig> with higher expression in workers, and  <dig> that were not differentially expressed. we then determined the homology classification of each gene in all three sets. we found that homology status and differential gene expression were not independent . given that the largest percentage deviation came from trgs expressed in the worker caste , we conclude that trgs were overrepresented amongst genes with higher expression in workers relative to those that were not differentially expressed or had higher expression in queens. most of the orphans in all three groups  came from gene predictions not included in the official honey bee gene set. these genes, however, all have transcript support and are almost certainly real genes. we repeated this analysis with different cut-off p-values  and found that this pattern remains significant down to a p-value of  <dig>  . a table with these additional analyses is presented in the supplemental information .

we also looked for differences in the number of trgs differentially expressed in the brains of nurses and foragers  <cit> . although foragers have more complex behavior than nurses, a prediction is not straight forward because although nurse bee behavior is simple, it is also quite derived  <cit> . alaux et al  <cit>  determined gene expression in  <dig> ests in nurses and foragers. after aligning ests to genes from this study, we identified  <dig> genes with higher expression in nurses and  <dig> with higher expression in foragers. we found that trgs did not occur with different frequency between nurses and foragers .

three major innovations characterize eusocial evolution: division of labor, advanced communication systems, and an expanded task repertoire . we focused on the third innovation, which is poorly understood at the genetic level. we found that orphans are disproportionately associated with the worker caste relative to the queen caste. this suggests that novel genes may have been important in generating the lineage specific eusocial traits that characterize task repertoire expansion, because workers perform more derived and novel tasks than queens. this initial analysis is based on patterns of gene expression in the brain alone. future work on more tissues should shed light as to how widespread this pattern is in bees and other social insects. future work will also assess which of the novel genes are associated with lineage specific traits having little to do with eusocial evolution, and which are associated with novel eusocial tasks such as complex nest building, nestmate recognition, and pheromone production.

role of trgs in a gland specialized for a social function
the hypopharyngeal gland  is specialized for caste specific behavior in worker honey bees  <cit> . the genes expressed in this gland are therefore of interest for determining what role trgs may have played in eusocial evolution. the genes from a cdna library constructed from hpg ests supplied by the robinson lab, was therefore analyzed to search for candidate trgs potentially involved in lineage specific brood care, or other caste specific behaviors associated with this gland. overall,  <dig> orphans or trgs found only in the hymenoptera  are highly expressed in the hypopharyngeal gland. only one has a name, apisimin, an orphan known to be an important component of royal jelly  <cit> . a list of all those ests that could be aligned to genes from the hypopharyngeal gland are provided in the supplemental information along with the classification of each gene .

the analysis of the genes highly expressed in the hypopharyngeal gland showed that trgs make up a relatively small portion of expressed genes. however, many of the genes in the full list are clearly housekeeping genes and the important question concerns the genetic basis of the novel eusocial traits associated with this gland. the gland secretes a proteinacious brood food, and caste development signal, in nurse bees, and produces enzymes necessary for conversion of nectar to honey in older bees  <cit> . the nature of the brood food is well understood. most of the protein content of this secretion is composed of royal jelly proteins, derived members of the yellow protein family  <cit> . hence, the genetic basis of most of this gland's specialized secretion is not based on trgs. however, the number of royal jelly proteins in an insect genome is not conserved and the number in the honey bee could have expanded in response to selection for specialized brood food. the difficultly with this hypothesis is that nasonia, a solitary wasp, also has many royal jelly proteins. however, nasonia's royal jelly proteins appear to be closer in relationship to one another than to those of the honey bees, suggesting they have a different origin  <cit> . hence, novel genes  could have been central to the evolution of this case of specialization. finally, at least  <dig> orphan, apisimin, plays an important role in the hypopharyngeal gland, by interacting with the royal jelly proteins  <cit> . given that we identified several other trgs expressed in this gland, it is possible that trgs have also been important for this case of eusocial evolution.

candidate trgs involved in eusocial evolution
based on gene expression differences between workers and queens, nurses and foragers, and expression in the hp gland, we identified  <dig> trgs  that are candidates for playing a role in eusocial evolution .  <dig> trgs with bioinformatically inferred functions thought to be associated with eusocial evolution were found in this data set. one gene, apisimin, experimentally shown to be involved in eusocial evolution in the context of specialized brood care, is in this data set. this suggests that experimental characterization of the other candidates should be productive. perhaps the most interesting pattern is that three trgs associated with silk production in larva were found to differ in expression between adults.

silk proteins in the honey bee, like those in several other groups of insects, are highly diverged, and probably have an independent origin from other insect silks  <cit> . three of the five genes underlying silk production were found in the gene set of proteins differing between nurses and foragers . this is surprising, as silk is used by larva for cocoon construction. there are two possible solutions for this paradox. one, either the silk genes are not expressed in the brain, and are actually expressed in the labial glands, the glands that produce silk in the larva, or these genes have evolved radically different functions in the adult brain. micro-dissection of insect brains is not error free and it is known that contamination from the hypopharyngeal glands occurs  <cit> . although speculative, it is possible that material from the labial glands, which are also in the head capsule, are present in brain dissections. if so, then perhaps the silk proteins and silk glue could have evolved a function related to pheromone deposition or transmission, as the labial glands may be involved in pheromonal communication in adult honey bees  <cit> .

relationship to previous studies of eusocial evolution
the honey bee has been the subject of a number of studies seeking to understand the genetic basis of particular traits known to be important for eusocial evolution . viljakainen et al  found rapid evolution in immunity genes, for example, while bilikova et al  found a novel protein involved in brood care, apisimin. likewise, studies have found increases or decreases in gene families known to be involved in eusocial evolution . this study identified all of the previously discovered novel genes, along with many more candidates for future study. this work hence builds on previous research by suggesting how important novel genes may be across the genome. in the most relevant previous study, hunt et al  found that genes with higher expression in queens have higher evolutionary rates than genes with higher expression in workers. at first glance, this appears to contradict the results of the present study, which is that genes with higher expression in workers are more likely to be novel, or taxonomically restricted. however, a simple possible explanation for the difference between the two studies is that although queens do not exhibit novel traits, they do exhibit highly derived versions of ancestral traits . workers in contrast do novel things altogether. hence, we could expect derived versions of the same genes in queens and different genes altogether in workers. this hypothesis is speculative, of course, and will need to await verification in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
social insects have gained many new morphological and behavioral traits relative to their solitary ancestors . the task repertoire of an advanced social insect can be 40- <dig> tasks, about twice that of a solitary wasp or bee  <cit> . our work identifies trgs that may play a role in the evolution of such lineage specific traits. first, we found support for our hypothesis that highly restricted trgs should be disproportionately associated with the worker caste relative to the queen caste because workers exhibit the novel behavior of honey bees. second, our analysis of homology patterns of genes within the official gene set found about  <dig> orphans or trgs found only in the hymenoptera . many of those that have been the focus of experimental work are associated with novel eusocial traits. finally, we compiled an extensive list of candidate trgs that could be associated with the evolution of eusociality. this work should facilitate and encourage further work on the role played by trgs in eusocial evolution.

