BACKGROUND
artemisinin combination therapy  is recommended by the world health organization as the first-line treatment for falciparum malaria in all endemic regions  <cit> . the excellent effectiveness and tolerability of acts brought new enthusiasm into world-wide efforts to eliminate human malaria which until today accounts for  <dig> million cases of infection and  <dig>  deaths per annum  <cit> . the core components of acts - artemisinin and its derivatives, provide an important alternative to quinoline and antifolate-based compounds. resistance to these older compounds that emerged on the thai-cambodian border and subsequently spread across the world has severely compromised their use and contributed to a dramatic rise in malaria morbidity prior to introduction of the acts in the late 1990's  <cit> . learning from past mistakes, much effort is being invested in proper management of acts in order to sustain their efficacy and prevent the spread of resistance  <cit> .

in spite of these efforts, there have been sporadic reports of artemisinin resistance in-vivo and in-vitro for many years . although the biological and clinical significance of these reports were uncertain  <cit> , these early warning signs suggested a possibility of emergence of malaria parasites resistant to artemisinin  <cit> . recently, unequivocal evidence of reduced artemisinin susceptibility from western cambodia has been reported  <cit> . curiously, this was also the epicenter of chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance. dondorp et al.  documented markedly prolonged parasite clearance times  in pailin, western cambodia. this compares with a median pct of  <dig> hours  on the western border of thailand  <cit> . since this study, reports of delayed parasite clearance have emerged in other parts of the region, including the thai-myanmar border  <cit> . although it has yet to be established whether artemisinin resistance has spread westward, the possibility of the spread of resistant parasites through asia to africa would be disastrous.

the mechanism of artemisinin resistance is unknown. the resistant phenotype detected in western cambodia does not associate with any polymorphisms in the established drug resistance markers  <cit> . in vitro susceptibility testing of parasites which are cleared abnormally slowly in vivo, showed essentially no shift in ic <dig>  values in vitro  <cit> . this apparent discrepancy between the experimental and the clinical data may be explained by the reduced susceptibility of plasmodium parasites at only the ring stage  of its  <dig> hours intraerythrocytic developmental cycle   <cit> . another phenomenon that has been suggested to explain artemisinin resistance is an increased propensity for these parasites to form "dormant"  rings under artemisinin exposure  <cit> . however, this process, suggested by in vitro studies, is unlikely to explain the slow first order decline in parasitemia with time that was observed in western cambodian patients treated with artemisinin-based drugs  <cit> . the reduced artemisinin susceptibility phenotype of the resistant malaria parasites exhibits a heritable pattern suggesting that it has a genetic basis  <cit> . identifying the genetic determinants will be crucial for understanding the molecular basis of artemisinin resistance and will also provide an important molecular tool for epidemiological surveys.

here we carry out genome-wide gene expression analyses in order to identify key elements of a transcriptional profile underlining artemisinin resistance. we show that the p. falciparum parasites with slow clearance after artemisinin treatment exhibit reduced expression levels of generic metabolic  or cellular  pathways in the ring and trophozoite stages but strong increased expression of essentially all functionalities associated with protein synthesis, folding and trafficking in the schizont stages. this specific "tune-up" of the transcriptional pattern in these resistant p. falciparum isolates is associated with altered expression of a number of genes involved in cell cycle regulation, transcription regulation, chromatin remodeling as well as intracellular signaling. altogether these results provide the first set of testable genetic markers associated with artemisinin resistance.

RESULTS
gene expression associated with artemisinin resistance
the main purpose of these studies was to characterize the transcriptional profile associated with artemisinin resistance in field isolates of p. falciparum  <cit> . for this, we conducted dna microarray analyses of parasites collected from patients in pailin, western cambodia which had slow parasite clearance . for comparison we analyzed transcriptomes of additional southeast asian isolates collected from xepon, savannakhet province, laos , from mae sot, thailand , and one additional isolate from pailin  with normal clearance . at the time of collection, all isolates exhibited high synchronicity; ~100% parasites were at the ring stage . parasites were then cultured for up to  <dig> hours in vitro and total rna was isolated from samples harvested at regular intervals of 2- <dig> hours.

similar to previous experiments on in vitro-adapted isolates  <cit> , these ex vivo samples displayed extensive stage specificity in transcriptional regulation during their 48-hour idc . however, in contrast to the in vitro conditions, the assembled ex vivo transcriptional profiles indicate considerable differences in the rates of stage progression . using a spearman-rank/pearson correlation method, we identified a best fit of the "age" of each ex vivo experimental point based on peak correlation values using the previously generated p. falciparum idc transcriptome in vitro  <cit> . here we observed that while at the time of blood collection, all parasite populations correspond to the ring stages , the subsequent idc development was subjected to significant fluctuations .  <dig> out of the  <dig> isolates  exhibited an initial developmental arrest in the ring stage for 16- <dig> hours post collection . in spite of this initial arrest, these isolates reactivated their idc progression and developed unidirectionally through trophozoite and schizont stages. the progress of the ex vivo cultured p. falciparum isolates through these later stages was also uneven. the most extreme example is the lao isolate bmt <dig> that showed additional arrests in the trophozoite and early schizont stages at  <dig> to  <dig> hours post collection . overall, the developmental shifts in the idc progression do not correlate with the site of collection, thus excluding the possibility of experimental bias due to culturing techniques in each field laboratory. these data support the previous observation of lemiuex et al.  who showed that the ages of  <dig> p. falciparum isolates cultured ex vivo for  <dig> hours fell into a large interval of 20- <dig> hpi  <cit> . in addition, the correlation coefficients between the mrna profiles of field isolate time points and the in vitro control transcriptome are above  <dig>  which demonstrates a good synchronicity of the ex vivo cultures . taken together, these data show that careful assessment of the parasite stage of development  at any experimental time point using a reference dataset is essential in ex vivo analyses of plasmodium parasites.

to identify genes whose expression is associated with artemisinin resistance, we compared global transcription levels between the three artemisinin resistant isolates and the remaining sensitive isolates by analyzing steady state mrna levels in  <dig> developmental stages; ring , trophozoite  and schizont  . for that, we included the experimental time points that show highest correlation value to the in vitro reference transcriptome  <cit>  within these sampling intervals . overall, we identified  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes that are up-regulated and  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes that are down-regulated in the resistant parasites  at the ring, trophozoite and schizont stages, respectively . interestingly, the majority of the genes over-expressed in the ring stage of the resistant parasites correspond to trophozoite- specific genes  and the genes over-expressed in the schizont stages represent mainly ring and trophozoite specific transcripts . the genes up-regulated in the trophozoite stage are evenly distributed between ring and schizont specific transcripts. this indicates that the transcriptional up-regulations associated with artemisinin resistance constitute either accelerated timing of transcription of trophozoite and schizont genes at the ring stage, or prolonged expression of ring and trophozoite transcripts in the schizont stage. intriguingly, this pattern was not observed for down-regulated genes whose expression in artemisinin resistant parasites coincides with their expected stage specificity, albeit at lower levels than expected in the artemisinin sensitive isolates . taken together, these results suggest that artemisinin resistance is associated with specific modifications of the idc transcriptional cascade that involve a large number of genes and presumably alter the levels and temporal distributions of biological and cellular functions.

functional analysis of artemisinin resistance associated genes
to evaluate the physiological relevance of the identified differential gene expression, we utilized gene set enrichment analysis   <cit>  to explore functional assignments of genes associated with artemisinin resistance . we found that genes down-regulated at ring and trophozoite stages represent well established biochemical and cellular pathways such as glycolysis, pentose phosphate shunt, redox, nucleotide and glutathione synthesis, and the tca cycle . under normal growth, these pathways reach transcriptional peaks during the early stages of the idc, so down-regulation indicates reduced expression in young parasites. in addition, we observed a significant down-regulation of genes associated with dna replication and protein degradation in the trophozoite and schizont stages . this down-regulation may represent a delayed onset of expression that normally starts during at the ring/trophozoite transition. at the schizont stage, the artemisinin resistant parasites were characterized by marked over-expression of genes that belong to many pathways associated with protein synthesis, folding and trafficking . these include genes involved in ribosome assembly and maturation, chaperone-assisted protein folding, translational initiation and elongation . in addition, we observed up-regulation of several additional pathways such as rna metabolism and hemoglobin degradation, both of which could contribute to increased capacity of protein synthesis in these parasites by boosting global levels of rna transcripts and concentration of amino acids produced by the food vacuole . investigating individual genes in the affected pathways, we observed that while in some cases the differential expression affects most genes , in other pathways , only a fraction of genes exhibit differential expression . these latter genes may represent crucial regulatory or rate limiting steps in these biological processes.

in summary, our data suggest that the specific modulation of the idc transcriptional cascade observed in artemisinin resistant parasites has at least two major physiological implications that include: down-regulation of metabolic and cellular pathways in the first half of the idc  and prolonged transcription up-regulation of functionalities associated with protein synthesis and their supporting activities in the late stages . interestingly, this transcriptional program was observed in all three western cambodian isolates with the delayed clearance but not in the isolate collected in the same region  that had a normal clearance time . this suggests that the altered transcriptional pattern is not a simple reflection of geographical or other generic differences between p. falciparum isolates but is indeed associated with artemisinin resistance.

differential expression of regulatory proteins may contribute to artemisinin resistance
artemisinin resistance in western cambodia was shown to exhibit a genetically inheritable pattern  <cit> . thus it is feasible to speculate that the broad transcriptional changes associated with this phenotype may have resulted from a small number of genetic mutations in key regulatory proteins such as global transcription factors, chromatin remodeling-associated proteins or cell cycle regulators. we sought to explore the transcriptional data to find further clues for such underlying genetic determinants. for that, we inspected the genes whose expression was changed consistently in the three individual stages as these may be linked with a putative genetic variation . to identify such genes, we determined the rank product score for differentially expressed genes and classified them based on their differential expression in all  <dig> stages . interestingly, the rank distribution was skewed towards lower values where larger numbers of genes show lower than expected rank scores . this indicates that there are more genes consistently down-regulated in the artemisinin resistant parasites in all three stages compared to the up-regulated genes that tend to be over-expressed in only one or two of the idc developmental stages.

functional enrichment analyses of the top 5% of genes from both extremes of the distribution  did not uncover any additional functional groups compared to the stage-wise gsea , however, visual inspection of these gene groups identified  <dig> putative transcription regulators, of which  <dig> are under-expressed and  <dig> are over-expressed. these include transcription factors, rna binding proteins, cell cycle regulators, chromatin remodeling associated proteins, histone modification enzymes as well as histones . the most remarkable examples are strong down-regulation of genes coding for histone deacetylase  <dig> protein  , recently proposed to play a major role in the transcriptional regulation  <cit> , and cdk-activating kinase assembly factor  whose paralogue was shown be associated with hdac <dig> in p. falciparum  <cit> . also, the artemisinin resistant parasites show a considerable up-regulation of the ap <dig> containing transcription factor , bromo-domain containing protein , putative histone acetyltransferase , zinc finger protein , and the p. falciparum homologue of yeast histone chaperone rttp106-like transcriptional regulator . in addition to these dna interacting regulatory proteins, we identified  <dig> genes encoding the rna-recognition motif  that are involved in regulating mrna stability or translational repression. quantitative real-time pcr carried out with  <dig> of these genes  further confirmed that these genes are significantly differentially expressed between the resistant and sensitive isolates . differential expression of these genes encoding regulatory factors may contribute to the global changes in the transcriptome observed in the artemisinin resistant parasites.

copy number variations  and genotypes of artemisinin resistant isolates
several recent studies have demonstrated a frequent occurrence of gene copy number variants  in p. falciparum and linked these to differential gene expression in field isolates and laboratory strains  <cit> . this can contribute to the variability in drug sensitivities observed among isolates  <cit> . we carried out comparative genomic hybridizations with genomic dna of the four cambodian and two lao isolates and demonstrated that cnv profiles exhibit a clear segregation between these two groups . among the  <dig> genes occurring within the  <dig> cnv detected segments are histone  <dig>  gtp cyclohydrolase i , hyp4/ <dig> exported proteins, phist genes and maurer's cleft two transmembrane proteins   <cit> . increased copy number of pfgch <dig> has been previously linked with resistance to antifolate antimalarial drugs and its amplification in the cambodian isolates  may reflect the prolonged use of these drugs in this region  <cit> . other newly identified cnvs include several hypothetical genes; an autophagocytosis associated protein and zn2+/fe2+ permease . overall we observed strong similarities amongst the cambodian isolates, however none of the identified cnv could be associated with artemisinin resistance. this genetic coherence among the four cambodian isolates contrasts with their transcriptional heterogeneity and indicates that copy number differences are strongly associated with differentiation in geographical origins. more genetic studies with large number of isolates will be required to assess the role of cnvs in artemisinin resistance.

in addition to the cgh analysis, we carried out "standard" genotyping of genes coding for merozoite surface proteins: msp <dig>  msp <dig> and glutamate-rich protein: glurp together with sequencing of drug-resistant markers: multidrug resistant protein  <dig>  and dihydropteroate synthase . this analysis revealed that the four cambodian and two lao isolates are genetically distinct from each other carrying different alleles of the tested genes . of these, cp <dig> and cp <dig> appeared highly related, exhibiting identical msp <dig> and msp <dig> nested pcr products of ko <dig> and ic/3d <dig> alleles . however, these two isolates differ in  <dig> non-synonymous snps of codons k214q and k1181t and a synonymous snp in codon  <dig> in the pfmdr <dig> gene . in addition, cp <dig> and cp <dig> exhibit subtle differences in their cnv pattern as measured by cgh . interestingly, we found that none of the  <dig> isolates carry the n86y pfmdr <dig> mutation  whose presence is frequent in many southeast asian regions  <cit>  and which is commonly associated with chloroquine resistance and mefloquine hypersensitivity  <cit> . furthermore, we observed significant haplotype sharing amongst analyzed isolates such as cp <dig> and cp <dig> that share the "nefsnvd" haplotype of pfmdr <dig>  containing the non-synonymous y184f mutation. moreover, cp <dig>  cp <dig>  cp <dig>  cp <dig> and xpn <dig> share the iageaa haplotype of pfdhps with non-synonymous triple mutants s436a, g437a and k540e, which were previously linked to resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine  <cit> . the mutations in dhps may reflect the selection pressure as a result of an extensive antifolate drug use in this region over several decades. in summary, these genetic studies suggest that while the western cambodian isolates are not identical isogenic clones, they share a recent common ancestor that is evident from their cnv profiles. hence, the highly unique and also uniform cnv pattern identified in these parasites may represent a genetic background that contributes to development of artemisinin resistance and possibly other drug resistant phenotypes in this region.

discussion
mechanism of artemisinin resistance
artemisinin resistance of p. falciparum is a major threat to malaria control. understanding its molecular basis is thus essential for determining treatment strategies, mapping the spread of resistance and guiding elimination  <cit> . mutations or amplification of genes encoding transporters or target enzymes have been identified as resistance mechanisms to other antimalarial drugs. it is possible that resistance to artemisinin is unlike these classical mechanisms in vitro but instead results from a complex series of genetic and epigenetic events affecting multiple pathways. here we showed that artemisinin resistant parasites are characterized by a specific modulation of the idc transcriptome that affects a broad spectrum of genes and biological functions. first, we detected a specific down-regulation of many ring stage-specific metabolic pathways such as energy metabolism, nucleotide synthesis etc. second, the progress to mature schizont stages was marked by significant increase in transcription of genes associated with essentially all functionalities involved in protein metabolism . based on these two observations, we propose a plausible model for molecular basis of the artemisinin resistance observed in these cambodian isolates that is founded on two  events:  limited metabolic activity of the ring stages could lead to lower levels of hemoglobin digestion, less ferrous ions produced and thus reduced activation and conversion of artemisinin drugs to reactive intermediates  <cit> . this effect may be linked to the high prevalence of hemoglobinopathies, especially hemoglobin e and α-thalassemia in this area conferring increased oxidant stress  <cit> . this is possibly compounded by decades of unregulated artemisinin use in western cambodia which may select for parasites with greater resistance to oxidant stress during the ring form development. alternatively, the lower metabolic activities of the ring stages may be a prerequisite of the ability of the resistant parasite to become dormant under the artemisinin pressure as demonstrated by several in vitro analyses  <cit> . although this phenomenon is unlikely to be the major factor in artemisinin resistance, it is worth noting that the results obtained in our study are in agreement with the transcriptional analyses of the in vitro derived artemisinin tolerant parasites that include mrna levels of the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase , a cell cycle regulator  and a heat shock protein  <dig> kda    <cit> .  the increased activity of protein metabolism may contribute to the resistance by withstanding the damaging effects of artemisinin on parasite's proteins by increasing rates of protein turnover and synthesis and thus compensate for loss of active proteins. this is consistent with the presumed artemisinin mode of action in which the drug inflicts substantial damage to the parasite cell either by an oxidative stress  or by direct alkylation of a wide spectrum of cellular components such as proteins, heme, and lipids  <cit> .

transcriptional regulation and artemisinin resistance
it is important to note that the differences in mrna levels linked to artemisinin resistance were not the most dramatic transcriptional differences detected among the field isolates. functional enrichment analysis of genes that vary the most in their expression among the  <dig> field isolates irrespective of their artemisinin sensitivities, revealed a distinct set of functionalities that varied in gene expression amongst field isolates in general. these include mainly genes encoding proteins of host-parasite interactions, maurer's clefts proteins, invasion-related proteins, as well as factors of fatty acid metabolism, glycolysis and hemoglobin digestion . this indicates that the observed transcriptional differences between artemisinin resistant and sensitive strains may represent a new event in transcriptional differentiation of field isolates that does not occur in other parasite populations. although very little is known about molecular factors of transcriptional regulation in p. falciparum, a number of previous studies  <cit>  have indicated the existence of broad range regulatory mechanisms that affect large groups of genes controlling the progression of the plasmodium life cycle. although more studies that involve large epidemiological surveys followed by extensive molecular analyses will have to be carried out to support such putative mechanisms, here we explored genes whose expression was affected in all three developmental stages in the resistant western cambodian parasites. one of the most remarkable examples of consistently down-regulated genes is pfhdac <dig> and its putative interacting proteins partner cdk-activating kinase, both of which show dramatic down-regulation in all three developmental stages . in our recent study, we showed that hdac activities play a highly dynamic role in regulating the transcriptome of the plasmodium life cycle and that their inhibition leads to widespread transcriptional changes. intriguingly, the transcription profile of the resistant parasites is reminiscent of the effect of hdac inhibitors on the p. falciparum gene expression in which most gene induction represent accelerated transcription in the ring and trophozoite stages and prolonged mrna expression during the schizont stage  <cit> .

another gene whose differential expression is significant is histone  <dig> . histone  <dig> is the only nucleosomal subunit present as a single copy gene and thus its down-regulation could have severe implication on the nucleosomal assembly during the p. falciparum schizont stage. depletion of histone  <dig> in both yeast and human cells causes an arrest or dramatic delay in the progression of the s-phase, which is caused by insufficient nucleosomal assembly and subsequently inhibition of dna synthesis  <cit> . we observed a modest but statistically significant decrease of histone  <dig> in the artemisinin resistant p. falciparum parasites  that could analogously lead to a delayed onset of schizogony and thus prolonged expression of genes associated with the typical trophozoite functions such as protein synthesis and hemoglobin digestion . since the cnv profiles were similar among the four cambodian isolates regardless of their tolerance level to artemisinin, more studies will be needed to understand their role in regulating transcriptional levels in artemisinin resistant parasites. more importantly, the coherence of cnv profiles among the cambodian isolates indicates that the parasites in this region share a recent common ancestor. similar conclusion was made by an admixture study carried out in southeast asia that demonstrated a sub-group of recently expanded parasite populations in western cambodia  <cit> . this could be a result of intense administration of a successive number of antimalarials from chloroquine to mefloquine to sulfodoxine-pyrimethamine to treat malaria cases in the western cambodian region over the last  <dig> years. it is plausible that a population with a restricted genotype has emerged with a genetic background that has higher propensity to give rise to resistance of the p. falciparum parasites to artemisinin.

CONCLUSIONS
here we present the most comprehensive transcriptional analysis of the artemisinin tolerant malaria parasites collected at the site of its origin, western cambodia. although much more extensive research on multiple levels will be needed to elucidate the complete mechanism, the results from these studies provide the first testable hypotheses regarding both the global pattern of the transcriptional cascade and candidate genes involved in artemisinin resistance.

