BACKGROUND
recent efforts have completely unravelled also the human genome sequence  <cit> . since, attention has shifted towards the detailed understanding of gene functions in health and disease by analysing the structure, biological activities and dynamics of the encoded proteins. to this end, rna interference  has received much attention as a powerful tool for systematic loss-of-function genetic studies on a large scale  <cit> . however, for many functional genomics and proteomics applications including studies on protein subcellular localization  <cit> , protein structures  <cit> , protein functions in cell-based experiments  <cit> , analysis of protein-protein interactions  <cit> , and disease-related processes  <cit> , expression clones are indispensable. the clones of cdna collections  <cit>  are generally not ideal for immediate use in these experiments, as they contain 5'and 3'untranslated regions  of varying lengths. these interfere with the expression of the encoded proteins especially when coexpression of in-frame fusions with specific tags at either ends are anticipated. the 5'utrs may contain in-frame stop codons or lead to the inclusion of artificial amino acid sequences. the native stop codon that terminates any orf furthermore impedes the expression of c-terminal protein fusions. in consequence, the generation of clone collections that only contain the protein coding part of the genes  has become a key component for the comprehensive and systematic analysis of protein functions in many different systems. despite the availability of the human genome sequence, a respective full-orf clone collection is far from being complete  <cit> . this is in part due to the fact that the structures of many genes are still unclear, and thus require considerable manual and individual verification  <cit> . furthermore, the phenomenon of alternative splicing has not received much attention in orf clone collections yet. here, we report on the production of a full-length orf clone library of human genes and splice forms, using the recombination-based gateway cloning system   <cit> . we have developed a cloning approach applied to more than  <dig>  different orfs including  optimization and improvement of gene models, and of the orf amplification and cloning processes,  development of a cloning strategy to simultaneously generate gateway entry clones with and without stop codon,  establishment of a pipeline for orf sequence validation  programming and implementation of a sample tracking database. the generated entry clone resource currently comprises more than  <dig>  sequence-validated gateway clones for more than  <dig>  orfs, the coding sequences have an average size of greater  <dig> kb. as a member of the recently initiated international orfeome collaboration  <cit>  we significantly contribute to generating and providing orf clone resources for all human genes and their splice forms in a unique and flexible cloning system. the gateway entry clones have since been used to generate over  <dig>  different expression constructs that have been successfully exploited in functional profiling applications  <cit> . all entry clones are available through the international orfeome collaboration  <cit> .

RESULTS
gene structures and models
a number of automated software solutions have been implemented to annotate genomes and genes  <cit> . also then the quality of gene predictions is tightly associated with the availability and quality of cdna sequence information as most gene predictions are based on cdna sequences  <cit> . nevertheless, automated gene predictions are not perfect, and careful manual annotation is thus the method of choice in gene structure modeling  <cit> . we systematically performed manual annotation of genes and gene structures using available sequence information from mammalian species and computational gene predictions. the combined data was used to create gene models and virtual templates, to finally predict functional orfs for subsequent cloning and sequence validation. the german cdna consortium focuses on the orf cloning of genes not yet present in orf clone collections. thus far, some  <dig>  gene loci have been annotated, identifying more than  <dig>  full-orf variants of about  <dig>  genes. cdnas, either annotated as mrna or ests, were available for more than  <dig>  genes , while rt-pcr amplification was required for about  <dig> gene and orf-models. these covered mostly long and lowly expressed genes. figure  <dig> shows an example of a gene model for which three alternative transcript starts were predicted in our annotation, all of which have since been confirmed by sequencing of cloned rt-pcr products. cdnas were not available to amplify the orfs of that gene.

efficient orf amplification procedure
- tagging the orfs with gateway sites
for systematic cloning of the orfs, the recombination-based gateway technology  was used  <cit>  as it allows their functional exploitation in a broad range of expression systems in parallel. initially, the orfs had been amplified by a one-step pcr  <cit> . many orfs then failed to be amplified due to the length of the primer and the average success rate was <  <dig> % . this effect increased with increasing orf size, resulting in a >  <dig> % pcr failure rate for orfs >  <dig> kb . further, the error rate within the primer sites was unacceptably high in cloned products because of the difficulty to reliably generate long oligonucleotides. by the switch to a 2-step pcr strategy described in  <cit> , according to  <cit>  a clear increase in the pcr success rate of up to  <dig> % could be achieved, especially for orfs >  <dig> kb . in addition, this strategy permitted the use of only one universal primer set suitable for all second step pcrs, resulting in a reduction of costs for the shortened orf-specific primers. detailed protocols on this and the other procedures in the cloning process are available at  <cit> .

- primer quality and processivity and fidelity of dna polymerases
although the primer truncation strongly reduced the pcr failure rate, we still observed primer errors when sequencing the orf clones rendering the affected clones useless. the error rate could be further reduced by selecting the oligonucleotides with the highest sequence accuracy identified in a comparative test of three suppliers . whereas for two suppliers mostly frame-shift mutations caused by a high rate of n- <dig> primers, were observed, only  <dig> % of primers from a third supplier were incorrect . it should be noted, however, that the quality of suppliers is variable and that care should be taken to follow the success rate over time.

orfs with continuously increasing size have been cloned in the course of the project , now being  <dig>  kb on average. in this context, a high pcr failure and mutation rate was observed caused by the dna polymerase used. we tested two proofreading dna polymerases mixtures, that had ranked best in a comparative prescreen with ten different enzymes , and there the phusion high-fidelity dna polymerase  was identified as the enzyme possessing a high processivity  but a 30-fold higher fidelity compared to the second enzyme. hence this enzyme was used for all subsequent pcr reactions. it enhanced the success rate especially of orfs >  <dig> kb and orfs amplified from primary cdna up to  <dig> %  in combination with the addition of dmso, reported to reduce secondary structures particularly in gc-rich template stretches  <cit>  and the reduction of the extension temperature from  <dig> to 63°c  <cit> .

where a pcr fragment of expected size could not be obtained, a further round of reamplification was undertaken which was successful in  <dig> % of these cases . the failure rate was especially high when using primary cdnas . this concerned mainly large and lowly and/or only rarely expressed genes and even the pooling of cdnas from various tissues resulted only in few cases in a fragment of correct size.

a number of orfs with expected product size obtained by pcr.

b sucess rate of the respective reaction step.

c contribution of each step to the final pcr success rate .

d reamplification with slight modifications of the pcr protocol depending on result of first amplification.

e sum of orfs targeted per template type.

f total sum of orfs targeted

however, if the amplification was clone-based and the expected pcr product was not obtained, the template dna was sequence controlled. more than  <dig> % of all clones used did not contain the expected insert probably due to picking or annotation errors, or they did not contain the complete orfs. if available, the amplification was repeated with an alternative template which proved to be efficient for ≥  <dig> % of these orfs . where the amplification failed due to no priming or mispriming events, first-step primer redesign generated a pcr fragment in  <dig> % of the cases .

by the application of our pcr pipeline optimized by the combination of amplification step improvements up to  <dig> % of the orfs could be successfully amplified  and more than  <dig> % irrespective of the orf size  . we successfully generated amplicons for a total of  <dig> different orfs  which were subsequently subjected to bp cloning.

recombinatorial cloning of target orfs
when cloning the orfs into gateway entry donor vectors, we identified the dna purity as a critical parameter in the cloning process. unspecific side-products, often short contaminations which were particularly observed when the orfs had been amplified via rt-pcr, recombined during the bp reaction more efficiently than the desired pcr products. this effect increased with larger orf sizes. the recombination success rate could be improved by more than  <dig> % by gel-purification of the orfs, proved to be most advantageous, especially for orfs >  <dig> kb compared to ethanol precipitation or even column-purification .

in addition, the bp cloning was as more efficient as more balanced the molar ratio of pcr product and donor vector was , or even was shifted in favor of the pcr product. this turned out to be a challenge particularly for low yields of purified pcr products and for orfs >  <dig> kb being amplified from primary cdna, as uneven ratios resulted in only few clones mostly containing only the empty donor vector. pooling multiple pcr reactions prior to bp cloning improved the success rate by about  <dig> %  and was superior to raising the cycle number per reaction as this would have led to increased error rates. the bp cloning efficiency was further enhanced by replacing the gateway donor vector pdonr <dig> with the "second-generation" pdonr <dig>  reported to improve the recombination efficiency due to modifications of the attp <dig> and attp <dig> site  <cit> . in total, more than  <dig>  amplicons were successfully cloned , thus reaching a bp cloning success rate of  <dig> % .

a number of orfs with expected product size obtained by pcr.

b number of orfs with expected product size detected by colony-pcr of entry clones.

c orfs represented by at least one sequence verified entry clone with and without a stop codon.

d,e at least one sequence verified entry clone with or without a stop codon was obtained for these orfs.

f,g cumulative success rates of pcr reaction  and bp cloning 

simultaneous generation of orf clones with and without a stop codon
depending on the downstream applications the native stop codon of an orf is required to be present or to be omitted in the cloning process, to allow for n- and/or c-terminal fusions, respectively. localization studies employing fusion proteins with gfp have shown that proteins harbouring n-terminal leader sequences frequently mislocalize when they contain an n-terminal extension  <cit> . in contrast, expression of native proteins e.g. for protein structure determination  <cit>  requires the presence of the native stop codon. to circumvent the laborious and cost-intensive duplication of all processes during clone generation and quality control, we developed a cloning strategy that allows for the simultaneous generation of two variants of gateway entry clones, one containing a particular orf with and the other without the stop codon. this was achieved by exchanging the native stop codon with a degenerated triplet  at the 3'-end of the orf-specific sequence in the reverse pcr primer sequence leading to the inclusion of an a- or g-residue at the degenerated position during the pcr . the incorporation of an a-residue results in amplicons that contain a stop codon , the inclusion of a g changes it into a sense codon  for tryptophan. the primer design included the combination of that terminal triplet  with additional three bases resulting in a bamhi recognition sequence only if the g was present, whereas the inclusion of the a destroyed the bamhi site . for the nested pcr performed with a universal primer pair complementary exclusively to the overhangs  common to all first step primers, reverse primers containing either an a or a g at the degenerated position were purchased separately. they were mixed in a ratio of 1: <dig> to guarantee an equimolar ratio of the two primers in the tailed pcr.

for colony-pcr after e.coli transformation the nested pcr forward primer was used in combination with a reverse primer designed to anneal  <dig> bp downstream of the orf to the vector backbone . pcr products were digested with bamhi and the absence or presence of the stop codon was determined by agarose gel electrophoresis to distinguish the two species of entry clones. clones with an open configuration displayed an additional band of  <dig> bp and a corresponding size shift of the orf band in contrast to undigested clones containing a stop codon, as shown in fig. 6c.

in summary, with this straightforward cloning protocol entry clones containing specific orfs with and without a stop codon were obtained in parallel, while introducing only one additional working step, namely the bamhi digest of colony pcr products. the success rate was >  <dig> % when eight individual entry clones were analyzed for every orf. in few cases  only one of the two variants were found or no orf  was present in the clones. thus, the modification of the orf flanking region in the 3'-primer did not significantly influence the recombination efficiency of the bp reaction. this strategy has a high capacity for automation and can thus be applied in high-throughput. it enabled the distinction of clones already before entry clone sequencing, saving the laborious and costly sequencing of randomly selected clones that would otherwise be required to identify orf clones with as well as without a stop codon.

sequence validation of entry clones
four entry clones per orf scored positive by colony-pcr, two containing and two lacking a stop codon, were subjected to 5' and 3' sequencing using vector primers. the sequences were analysed for matching the target gene and for the integrity of the recombination sites to exclude clones containing primer or recombination errors. if the clones matched the target sequences the inserts were verified by complete sequencing using orf specific primers. entry clones were scored positive if the assembled sequences were identical to the expected sequences or if they contained base changes that were silent mutations or confirmed as snps. when base changes were observed that did result in amino acid substitutions they were evaluated as follows: if an alternative entry clones was present containing the correct orf this clone was further used. where amino acid substitutions were detected at different positions in the clones analysed, further clones were subjected to the sequencing process. if all clones contained the same amino acid substitutions cloning was repeated using an alternative template. clones containing either nonsense mutations leading to in-frame stop codons or base changes within the recombination sites which potentially impaired the subcloning efficiency, were rejected. in cases where the orf was not present or only partially cloned due to internal deletions or mispriming events or where introns were retained, the cloning was repeated. if the sequencing reaction failed new primers were designed.

thus far, more than  <dig>  entry clones have been sequence verified encoding more than  <dig>  different orfs , mostly represented by at least one entry clone with and one without a stop codon . the entry clone sequences are constantly submitted to the genbank database. the improvements of particular cloning steps cumulated to our optimized cloning pipeline thus generating a clone collection which covers >  <dig> % of the targeted orfs  thereby an efficiency >  <dig> was reached for orfs up to  <dig> kb. the clones are distributed via the orfeome collaboration  <cit>  and are made available through i.m.a.g.e. clone providers.

a sum of orfs encoded by targeted genes and splice variants.

b at least one sequence verified entry clone with and/or without a stop codon was obtained

database application for sample tracking, standardization and quality control
a database application has been developed as a prerequisite for the management and monitoring of a high number of orfs in parallel and for the tracking of individual products in the cloning process. the software has been designed to automatically generate and maintain a standardized nomenclature during all steps of the cloning process, utilizing unique and consistent identifiers for orfs, pcr reactions, colony-pcrs, entry- and expression clones . thus, possible errors and inconsistencies else likely introduced by manual typing could be avoided. new ids are generated by the database and subsequent cloning steps are only enabled after the previous step has been quality controlled and approved to having been successful . all ids contain a reference to the orf models that were named according to the template used: in case of cdna or est clones according to the clone name and in case of primary cdna according to the orf prediction. thus, the database implementation guarantees quality standards in the orf-clone resources and a full tracking of each product. working lists for the various experimental processes can be extracted to follow up on every particular orf during the procedure . as all cloning steps have been performed in 96-well format , the respective plates could be automatically assembled by the database application . this greatly facilitated the automation of the cloning procedure, as the pipetting sheets could be directly transferred to the robotic workstations. in consequence, this contributed significantly to a streamlined cloning procedure and increased the cloning throughput and success rate. furthermore, any functional data that are obtained with the orf clone resource  <cit>  and the corresponding expression constructs can be unambiguously tracked back to entry clones and the material they had derived from.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described the orf cloning pipeline of the german cdna consortium, where human full-length orfs are manually modelled and annotated, and subsequently efficiently amplified and cloned into gateway entry vectors. we have improved and streamlined protocols to circumvent possible size bias, to simultaneously generate orf constructs with and without stop codons, and to automate most of the processes. sops describing the orf cloning processes in detail are available at  <cit> . the german cdna consortium orfeome resource currently consists of more than  <dig>  sequence-verified entry clones for more than  <dig>  orf models, most of them cloned with and without a stop codon. these entry clones represent about  <dig>  genes,  <dig> splice variants were cloned representing  <dig> of these genes. the entry clones allow for a broad range of subsequent applications to functionally characterize the orf encoded proteins in multiple expression systems in parallel  <cit> . with this resource we significantly contribute to the international orfeome collaboration  <cit>  that aims at the generation and provision of a whole genome orfeome collection of gateway entry clones. the sequences are available at embl/genbank/ddbj databases and the clones are distributed via the orfeome collaboration and are made available through i.m.a.g.e. clone providers.

