BACKGROUND
molecular studies in a phylogeographic context provide insights into the evolutionary history of the taxon of interest, and as studies across taxa accumulate, inference of broader deterministic processes is possible. such studies are particularly valuable in understanding factors that impact complex, diverse communities as seen in freshwater aquatic systems. insects account for much of the diversity present in freshwater communities  <cit> . with a wide array of dispersal abilities and habitat tolerance  <cit> , aquatic insects provide researchers a host of candidate taxa for testing phylogeographic hypotheses at many scales  <cit> .

while aquatic insects have been reasonably well studied for many decades, relatively few molecular studies are conducted given the number of aquatic taxa. studies that do exist are often limited in geographic scale  <cit> . yet studies that have considered large geographic areas have provided powerful insights on the effect of historical climatic processes on genetic structure at the species and community level , as well as the importance of long-distance dispersal  <cit> .

a significant obstacle to conducting molecular studies in aquatic insects is the lack of genomic information for many taxa of interest. until recently, researchers have been confined to using markers available through universal or degenerate primers such as the “barcode” region of the mitochondrial dna  cytochrome oxidase i  gene  <cit> . for phylogenetic purposes, this may not be sufficient to produce a well-supported gene tree. the ability to generate large amounts of genomic data at ever decreasing costs through next-generation sequencing approaches makes it feasible for investigators to move past constraints on genomic information in the early stages of a research project; thus, enabling them to conduct more effective molecular studies in non-model groups.

here we present a phylogeographic study of the least salmonfly pteronarcella badia. this herbivorous stonefly is moderately sized and occurs in mid-elevation mountain streams across western north america. it is one of two members of the genus pteronarcella within the family pteronarcyidae . the species is readily identifiable in the field in its immature form and as an adult  in the pacific northwest, there the immature stages cannot be distinguished). when it is present it often occurs abundantly. the broad western north american distribution of p. badia makes it an effective organism to study phylogeographic patterns in this region, which has few studies of aquatic insects from a similar geographic scale to date . degenerate and barcode primers failed to amplify reliably across several sample localities in preliminary experiments with polymerase chain reaction , potentially because of mutations in primer-binding sites for this taxon. to generate mtdna primers for coi as well as for other rapidly evolving mtdna genes for which reliable primers were not available, we used  <dig> pyrosequencing to sequence the complete mitochondrial genome  in the early stages of the research. from the mt genome, we developed pcr primer pairs to amplify three fragments spanning portions of five protein coding mtdna genes: atp synthase subunit  <dig> , coi, cytochrome oxidase iii , cytochrome b , and nadh dehydrogenase  <dig> . we combined sequence data from these five mtdna genes with nuclear rdna 28s to form a dataset designed to address the following research questions:  what is the population structure of p. badia?  what are the dominant modes of dispersal in p. badia? we specifically test whether dispersal through hydrologic connectivity or overland movement  appears to be more important in determining genetic structure.  how have historical climate oscillations influenced population structure? we test for evidence of multiple glacial refugia, timing of interclade divergence, and patterns of demographic history to estimate the influence of historical climate cycles on the population structure of p. badia.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genome reconstruction
our  <dig> pyrosequencing produced six mtdna contigs that represented  <dig>  %  of the total genome. pcr-based sanger sequencing of the gaps yielded the remaining 569 bps with the majority  of the missing sequence coming from the a + t rich control region. nucleotide composition showed overall a + t richness that is typical in insect mt genomes  <cit>  with total a + t composition =  <dig>  %. sequence analysis in mosas identified  <dig> of the  <dig> genes expected to be present in the mt genome. alignment with the mt genome of pteronarcys princeps   <cit>  confirmed the location of trnaarg, the only gene unidentified by mosas. no mt genome rearrangements relative to the ancestral pancrustacean genome  <cit>  were present as all protein-coding, rrna, and trna genes occurred in the same relative genomic position as the “ancestral” genome based on comparison to drosophila yakuba  <cit> . the complete annotated sequence is available on genbank  <cit> , accession #ku <dig>  an annotated visualization of the complete genome is shown in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> annotated visualization of the p. badia mt genome. genes located outside the gray circle occur on the majority-coding strand , and genes inside the gray circle occur on the minority-coding strand . blue bars represent regions that were amplified in the present study for phylogenetic inference. accompanying labels indicate the primer pairs used for pcr amplification 



phylogenetic analysis and hypothesis testing
following alignment and trimming, our data set consisted of 2518 bp of mitochondrial and 880 bp of nuclear dna sequence. pcr amplification for one or more genes was unsuccessful in  <dig> of the  <dig> in-group individuals included in the analysis , so they were not included in the population genetic analyses. translation of mtdna sequence into amino acids did not reveal any unexpected stop codons. in scanning chromatograms for ambiguous bases, we observed at least one ambiguity in  <dig> of the approximately  <dig> mitochondrial sequences generated for this study . although a total of  <dig> ambiguities were observed in these  <dig> sequences, all but six ambiguities were due to low quality score bases positioned within  <dig> bases of the end amplified fragment, where calls were being made on a single  sequence. thus, we only found six ambiguities across all sequences for which both forward and reverse sequences showed the same ambiguous signal. given this result, we find it unlikely that our conclusions are being appreciably influenced by the presence of pseudogenes.

what is the population structure?
mitochondrial dna sequences showed high levels of variation with  <dig> polymorphic sites  and an overall nucleotide diversity of  <dig> . of the  <dig> individuals sampled,  <dig> unique haplotypes were present with an overall haplotypic diversity of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . tcs haplotype networks revealed very high levels of population structure with multiple sub-networks failing to connect with the connection limit set to  <dig> steps. high levels of population structure were also evidenced by an overall Φst of  <dig>  . the nuclear locus showed far less variability than the mtdna sequences, with only  <dig> genotypes present, and all individuals from  <dig> of the  <dig> sample localities sharing the same genotype . thirteen of the remaining genotypes were only present in six sample localities along the western edge of the species range from northern nevada to southern washington. the remaining genotype was from a single individual in wyoming.fig.  <dig> a tcs gene genealogy network of p. badia genotypes that was estimated using 880 bp 28s nuclear ribosomal rna. all genotypes sampled from the pacific northwest clade are colored to indicate geographic location, while the genotypes of all non-pacific northwest localities are shown in gray



tree reconstruction in raxml produced a topology with good to excellent nodal support for all major clades . six deeply divergent clades were present within the in-group which we labeled: old colorado plateau, old rio grande, western great basin, pacific northwest, northern rockies, and widespread .fig.  <dig> a map showing the distribution of sample localities for p. badia across portions western north america. clade membership  for all specimens at a given locality is represented by color. clade names are abbreviated as follows. widespread , northern rockies , western great basin , pacific northwest , old rio grande , and old colorado plateau 

fig.  <dig> a raxml maximum likelihood topology showing the relationships among p. badia based on a combined analysis 2518 bp of mitochondrial dna and 880 bp of 28s nuclear ribosomal across  <dig> search replicates. nodal support values shown at major nodes are based on a bootstrap analysis with  <dig> search replicates, redundant haplotypes were omitted prior to the analysis. each specimen name includes the byu code followed by a suffix that abbreviates the sample locality of the specimen . highly divergent clades are labeled and identified by color



the two clades that originate from the initial divergence in the p. badia phylogeny, the old rio grande and old colorado plateau clades, comprise haplotypes sampled from seven localities in the southeastern portion of the species range . despite being highly divergent at the mitochondrial locus , no changes separate these clades at the nuclear locus. the pacific northwest clade includes all individuals sampled from the western edge of the species’ range, from northern california to southern washington. we excluded thomas creek, ca from the full data set as only coi and cytb sequences were available for the single specimen from that locality. however, secondary analysis of coi and cytb placed this locality in the pacific northwest clade. for this reason we show thomas creek as belonging to the pacific northwest clade on the distribution map shown in fig.  <dig>  the pacific northwest clade is monophyletic with the western great basin clade, which contained all individuals sampled from a single locality in northern nevada. the pacific northwest and western great basin are the only clades supported by variation at the nuclear locus .

the northern rockies clade includes all individuals from all localities in montana and southern canada. three additional localities in canada obtained from museum specimens  were excluded from the analysis due to missing sequence data, however a separate analysis that included only sequences from coi and cytb showed that they also fall in the northern rockies clade . the last major clade to diverge in our topology, the widespread clade, contains haplotypes from all remaining sample localities, ranging from alaska to new mexico. two sample localities , both located on the colorado plateau, contained haplotypes from two different clades. all other sample localities only contained representatives from one of the six clades, without admixture. near identical haplotypes  were present at geographically distant localities in alaska , wyoming  and utah .

within the widespread and old rio grande clades, several moderate to well-supported subclades correlated with geographic locality were present. within the widespread clade, subclades include: all the haplotypes from rock creek , all haplotypes from the red river and pecos river in the southern rocky mountains , all haplotypes from deer creek, mammoth creek, parowan creek, and  <dig> haplotypes from salina creek , and all the alaskan localities . within the old rio grande clade, the salina creek haplotypes form a well-supported clade , as do all haplotypes from the chama river, conejos river, and sauguache creek .

comparison of the total evidence tree  to the topology produced using only coi  showed that while coi recovered the major clades present in the total evidence topology, relationships between clades were not identical and three of the six clades had less than 70 % bootstrap support in the coi topology.

importance of hydrologic connectivity vs. overland dispersal
amova results showed that  <dig>  % of genetic variation was explained by differences between drainage basin , differences between sample localities explained  <dig>  % of the genetic variation , and differences within localities explained  <dig>  % of the variation . each major clade, and several subclades contained localities from multiple drainage basins . near identical haplotypes were observed in localities without hydrologic connections in the widespread and northern rockies clades. in the widespread clade, near identical haplotypes  were present in the diamond fork river , the hoback river , and kisaralik river . in the northern rockies clade, near identical haplotypes  were observed in blodgett creek  and lee creek .

estimates of gene flow suggested that migration rates between localities in adjacent drainage boundaries may be comparable to, or higher than migration rates between geographically proximate localities with a direct hydrologic connection. the gene flow analysis is summarized in table  <dig> and presented graphically in fig.  <dig>  mantel tests for isolation by distance were not significant for the old colorado plateau , old rio grande , pacific northwest , and northern rockies  clades. isolation by distance was significant for the widespread clade when the alaskan samples were included , and also when they were excluded .table  <dig> summary of the migrate-n gene flow estimates  for p. badia


fig.  <dig> a graphical summary showing the results of three migrate-n gene flow analyses. each analysis includes three sample localities represented by green squares , yellow squares , and brown squares . pairwise gene flow estimates  are provided between each locality . localities containing direct hydrologic connection within the same drainage basin are connected by solid lines with the direction of river flow indicated by half arrows, while localities in adjacent drainage basins are connected by dotted lines. arrows indicate direction of gene flow for each estimate. an inset of fig.  <dig> is provided in the upper right corner with the geographic area of the present figure outlined in red



historical climate oscillations
divergence time estimates based on our beast analysis suggest that p. badia diverged from its sister species p. regularis approximately  <dig>  million ybp, near the end of the pliocene epoch . the clades forming the initial divergence within p. badia  dated to  <dig>  million ybp, or the middle pleistocene, with the latest diverging widespread clade beginning approximately  <dig>  ybp. the widespread subclade containing all localities from alaska is well supported within the widespread clade  and diverged approximately  <dig>  ybp, prior to the last two glacial maxima .

the bayesian skyline plot detected a change in effective population size in the late pleistocene, showing a slight decrease beginning ~ <dig>  ybp and continuing until ~  <dig>  ybp, followed by a rapid increase from ~ <dig>  ybp to present . fu’s fs was highly negative and statistically significant , also indicative of a rapid demographic expansion. a negative tajima’s d value further indicated recent expansion; however it was not statistically significant .fig.  <dig> a bayesian skyline plot showing the recent demographic history of p. badia, with time in millions of years ago shown along the x-axis and effective population size shown along the y-axis



discussion
hydrologic connectivity vs. overland dispersal
despite having a winged adult stage, some aquatic insects  <cit>  have been shown to exhibit patterns of population structure consistent with a stream hierarchy model  <cit>  in which the majority of genetic variation can be explained by differences between drainage basins. this pattern is expected in aquatic insects that have limited flight ability, or that exhibit high habitat fidelity to stream corridors  <cit> . our amova results suggest that p. badia does not fall into this category of aquatic insects as only  <dig>  %  of genetic variation was explained by differences in drainage basin. this result provides initial evidence that hydrologic connectivity is not a major determinant of genetic structure across broad geographic scales in p. badia.

we emphasize that the above stated conclusion, that hydrologic connectivity is not a primary driver in the genetic structure of this species, is scale dependent. our sampling density allowed us to test for dispersal across tens to hundreds of kilometers. at local levels , contemporary dispersal among networks of stream corridors likely results in high levels of connectivity. larger tracts of connectivity would be expected in regions of the landscape with a greater density of habitats meeting the ecological requirements of p. badia; however, connectivity across broad distances within drainages is not necessarily expected. for example, although high order, low-elevation streams provide a hydrologic connection between patches of mid-elevation habitat suitable for p. badia, these low elevation connecting rivers may not meet the ecological requirements of the species , thereby preventing in-stream dispersal of aquatic forms. low elevation regions may also be sufficiently expansive as to prevent dispersal of winged adults to opposite slopes of large drainages  <cit> .

thus, it may have been more biologically realistic to designate a priori groups according to sub-drainage. the geographic distribution of our sampling localities, however, did not allow us to designate a priori groups according to sub-basin across the study area, while retaining sufficient replicates for statistical analysis of all the groups. while it is possible that grouping according to sub-drainage basin would explain a greater percentage of mtdna diversity than our amova as presently organized, it is clear from the geographic distribution of the various clades  that dispersal events for this taxon are not exclusively dependent on hydrologic connections, as the widespread clade, northern rockies clade, and pnw clade all contain haplotypes from two or more major drainage basins.

the presently observed distribution of haplotypes in the widespread clade suggests that this lineage achieved overland connectivity from the southern rocky mountains to alaska in the relatively recent history of the species, as recently as  <dig>  ybp according to our dating analysis. this pattern would only be observed if overland dispersal across drainage boundaries were a dispersal mechanism in the group. the northern rockies clade provides what appears to be a recent example of inter-basin transfer with very closely related haplotypes being present in both the upper columbia , and hudson bay drainages . while post-glacial colonization into the upper columbia drainage  could have proceeded from populations residing at lower elevations in the same drainage, p. badia in the upper hudson bay drainage  either must have colonized by way of overland dispersal in the last ~ <dig>  years since the whole of the hudson bay drainage was glaciated during the last glacial maximum , or closely tracked the recession of periglacial lakes formed by the melting laurentide ice sheet. beyond the northern rockies clade however, all other clades except the western great basin  also show closely related haplotypes that span drainage boundaries. the results of our gene flow analysis provide empirical support to the observed patterns of inter-basin movement discussed above.

gene flow estimates were highest between localities in separate drainage basins in two of the three locality sets. this suggests that in certain areas of the species distribution, dispersal via overland flight across drainage boundaries may be more common than dispersal via overland flight  between distant localities  on the same river. while the geographic distribution of the clades and the gene flow analysis show that mtdna diversity for p. badia is not structured exclusively along drainage basin boundaries, as predicted for organisms that are extreme headwater specialists, the headwater model of dispersal  <cit>  appears to be an important mechanism in shaping the population structure of p. badia. we expect headwater dispersal to be of particular importance in areas where drainage basin boundaries fall within  the elevational distribution of the species, as observed for the boundary between the green river and hoback river localities. our analysis also found isolation by distance to be a dispersal related mechanism shaping genetic structure. while isolation by distance was non-significant for the northern rockies, old colorado plateau, old rio grande, and pacific northwest clades, a significant correlation was found in the widespread clade, which contains over half of the localities sampled in the present study, and has the largest geographical footprint. finally, although overland dispersal of the species is clearly evident, the very high overall Φst of  <dig>   indicates that dispersal events between geographically distinct localities are rare. this conclusion is also consistent with the presence of several well-supported subclades that are comprised of specimens from a single geographic locality, or multiple geographically proximate localities .

dates of divergence
our dating analysis places the divergence of p. badia from its sister species p. regularis at the end of the pliocene approximately  <dig>  million ybp. this divergence date is coincident with the of xerification of the columbia basin associated with the cascadian orogeny  <cit> , a vicariance event that corresponds with speciation events in many plant and animal species distributed in western north america  <cit> , including stoneflies of the great basin  <cit> . this finding provides evidence that our use of a general insect mtdna mutation rate  to calibrate our molecular clock has produced a plausible working hypothesis for divergence dates in p. badia. still, we note that the precision of the dates here discussed should be re-evaluated as more calibration data become available for pteronarcyid stoneflies.

historical climatic oscillations
several studies have shown pleistocene glacial cycles to be one of the main drivers in shaping genetic structure of various aquatic insect species across europe  <cit> . our data suggest that historical climate oscillations have been an important factor in shaping the current and past distribution of pteronarcella badia as well, and may have given rise to many of the presently observed patterns of genetic structure. the presence of several, highly differentiated mitochondrial lineages confined to discrete geographic regions corroborates evidence for multiple glacial refugia seen in other aquatic groups distributed across glaciated regions  <cit> . in particular, glacial refugia have likely been key in the differentiation of the pacific northwest and northern rockies clades, as refugia in the pacific northwest and bitterroot valley in montana are well documented in vertebrate and plant groups  <cit> .

additional evidence of past glacial cycles affecting present genetic patterns is our unexpected finding that all haplotypes from alaskan localities occur as a subclade within the widespread clade, despite their being geographically closer to the northern rockies and pacific northwest clades . our divergence dating analysis estimated that the clade of alaskan haplotypes diverged from the remaining members of the widespread clade from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ybp , suggesting at least intermittent connectivity of the widespread clade existed between alaska and the lower latitudes of the species distribution through the pleistocene. we hypothesize that connectivity of the widespread clade was interrupted during the most recent glacial periods, and certainly the lgm, as the cordilleran ice sheet pushed p. badia into northern  refugia  <cit>  and southern refugia. as the continental ice sheets retreated northward, our results show that post-glacial re-colonization expanded from refugial montana localities  <cit>  and not localities containing widespread clade haplotypes that were previously connected with the alaskan subclade, as evidenced by all haplotypes from the southern canadian sample localities falling in the northern rockies clade.fig.  <dig> a bi tree reconstruction based on 2518 bp of mtdna. pliocene and pleistocene epochs indicated with colored boxes and major clades are color coded in the same color scheme as fig.  <dig>  date of divergence is shown above node lines with posterior probabilities shown below node lines. error associated with estimated dates is shown by gray rectangles at each dated node. the clade containing the alaskan haplotypes is indicated by the red arrow



this raises the question: is there presently connectivity between the alaskan and southern groups? no evidence of present genetic connectivity exists. the canadian sample localities that are closest geographically to alaska contain haplotypes of the genetically distant northern rockies clade . further, we found no confirmed records of p. badia in northern british columbia and the yukon through extensive personal contacts with aquatic biologists in southeastern alaska, british columbia, yukon territories, or through a careful search of canadian stonefly checklists  <cit>  and the gbif database. we, therefore, conclude that it is likely that post-glacial expansion has not yet resulted in connectivity between the northern widespread subclade and southern refugial groups , resulting in an actual gap in the present species distribution.

although the presence of the cordilleran and laurentide ice sheets would have caused the distribution of p. badia to contract northward into the bering refugia, or into refugia south of the glacial ice sheets, in general our analysis of past population demographics with fu’s fs and bayesian skyline plot data  show evidence of recent demographic expansion roughly coincident with the lgm, a pattern that has been observed in other north american and european aquatic insect groups  <cit> . we hypothesize that the rapid increase in effective population size in the last  <dig>  years shown by our bayesian skyline plot is driven by fluctuating climate associated with the lgm. cooling global temperatures preceding the lgm would have likely resulted in southward expansion into lower latitudes. in addition to latitudinal shifts, distributions would have also shifted to lower elevations within un-glaciated drainages. this could result in longer tracts of habitat connectivity and p. badia being able to inhabit higher order streams and rivers than would be possible during interglacial periods. our sampling of haplotypes from the colorado plateau and southern rockies indeed show patterns consistent with a recent southward range expansion. the earliest diverging clades in our topology  occur in the southern most limits of the present species distribution. according to our divergence dating, these lineages in the southern great basin and rio grande drainages began differentiating in the early-middle pleistocene ~ <dig>  million ybp. however, haplotypes from the most recently diverged widespread clade are also abundant in the southern limits of the species distribution; and in three instances occur at the same localities as old colorado plateau and old rio grande haplotypes . this observation is consistent with recent southward expansion of the widespread clade resulting in secondary contact with the old colorado plateau and old rio grande lineages.

finally, while cooling patterns would have allowed for southern expansion, the retreat of the continental ice sheet following the lgm has resulted in a subsequent expansion of the northern rockies clade into formerly glaciated latitudes in canada. northern, post-lgm expansion of the old colorado plateau and old rio grande lineages is also an alternative explanation for the pattern of secondary contact between those clades and the widespread clade described in the previous paragraph. thus, both warming and cooling cycles associated with recent glacial maxima are likely drivers in the recent range expansion of the group.

presence of cryptic lineages
while our mitochondrial data reveal the presence of several highly divergent clades , the nuclear locus only shows distinctiveness in the pacific northwest and western great basin clades . this is interesting considering that the old colorado plateau and old rio grande mitochondrial clades showed earlier divergence dates, but lack variation at the nuclear locus. while this is unexpected, it is possible that the old colorado plateau and old rio grande clades have simply not yet accumulated changes at the locus we examined, but would show nuclear variation if other loci were examined. this lack of fixed variation could be due to having a larger effective population size than the pacific northwest lineage, and thus slower lineage sorting. an alternative explanation is that sufficient gene flow with other clades has occurred to degrade nuclear variation, but migrant mitochondrial haplotypes are sufficiently rare as to not be detected by our sampling. in contrast,  <dig> of the  <dig> individuals sampled from the pacific northwest and western great basin sample localities showed distinctiveness in at least one of six nucleotide positions in 28s, with many individuals showing substitutions at all six positions  . since we did not detect any haplotypes from the other five clades in the pacific northwest and western great basin clades, we suspect that the lack of fixation of these six sites in 28s is due to insufficient time passage to allow the fixation rather than a result of secondary contact with individuals from other clades. the lack of haplotypes from other clades being present in the pacific northwest also provides evidence that the pacific northwest clade remained in isolation through much of the pleistocene, despite the range expansions and contractions, which resulted in secondary contact between the old colorado plateau, old rio grande and widespread clades. additional analysis of morphological characters and molecular data from pacific northwest specimens is currently underway to explore the potential presence of a new candidate species. finally, our finding that the pacific northwest is a phylogeographically important region for p. badia is consistent with patterns seen in other western north american taxa  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our phylogeographic analysis of p. badia reveals a complex history of isolation and multiple invasions among some areas and a cryptic lineage in the pacific northwest. the study provides evidence of multiple glacial refugia and suggests that historical climatic oscillations have been important mechanisms in determining genetic structure of insects in western north america. our ability to generate a large mitochondrial data set through mitochondrial genome reconstruction greatly improved nodal support of our mitochondrial gene tree and allowed us to make stronger inference of relationships between lineages and timing of divergence events. we emphasize that due to the limited signal in the nuclear locus we examined, our findings are based almost entirely on mitochondrial data. as such, many of our findings will need to be re-evaluated when additional, informative, nuclear loci become available. this work adds to the ever-growing list of studies that highlight the potential of next-generation dna sequencing in a phylogenetic context to improve molecular data sets in understudied groups.

