BACKGROUND
new high-throughput methods, such as microarrays, allow generation of massive amounts of molecular biological data. these, mainly phenomenological, data are often difficult to relate with the activation/inhibition of particular signal transduction pathways and/or transcriptional regulators. gene expression changes in different cellular states measured by microarrays, in fact, reflect just an "echo" of real molecular processes in the cells. a way to facilitate data interpretation is to construct gene regulatory networks that include signal transduction mediators, transcriptional regulators and target genes. this is a complex task, not only because of the huge number of molecules involved, but also because of variations across tissues, developmental stages and physiological conditions. however, these networks hold the key to the understanding of the regulatory processes within a cell and, thus, to the majority of life processes in general.

changes of expression of genes encoding transcription factors , a class of key regulatory molecules, are often hard to reveal to be significantly up- or downregulated in microarray experiments since their expression changes are small and their activity is mainly regulated on the posttranscriptional level. analysis of promoters of co-expressed genes can provide one source of evidences on involvement of certain tfs in the regulation of the genes. several computational approaches have been developed in the past few years in order to reveal potential binding sites in the promoter regions of co-expressed genes. they applied various techniques ranging between simple pattern search and complex models such as hmms . the most widely used method is based on positional weight matrices  that are constructed from collections of known binding sites for given tf or tf family. one of the largest collections of tf binding sites  and corresponding pwms is the transfac® database  <cit> . the pwm approach was applied intensively in the last years for the analysis of regulatory regions of many different functional classes of genes, for instance, globin genes  <cit> , muscle- and liver-specific genes  <cit> , and cell cycle-dependent genes  <cit> . in recent approaches, in order to improve the site prediction quality, different authors have searched for combinations of tfbs – cis-regulatory modules  <cit>  and have applied comparative genomics approaches  <cit> . despite these efforts, understanding the full complexity of the gene regulatory regions remains a great challenge and it is still rather problematic to identify transcription factors involved in the regulation of genes under any particular cellular condition based on the promoter analysis alone.

another source of evidences on the key role of transcription factors in regulating cellular regulatory processes comes from analysis of signal transduction pathways. multiple signal transduction pathways of a cell transduce extracellular signals from receptors at the cellular membrane to the transcription factors in the nucleus where they regulate the transcription of genes. there are several databases that collect information about signal transduction pathways in different cells. among them, the transpath® database  <cit>  stores a large body of information on signaling pathways allowing computational search through the graph of signaling reactions. one aim of such searches is to find the key transcription factors that mediate the concerted changes in expression of specific components of the signal transduction network.

in this paper we report an attempt to integrate the two complementary approaches for identification of key tfs: 1) analysis of promoters of co-expressed genes and 2) analysis of networks of the differentially expressed components of the signal transduction pathways. we have developed two computational tools: f-match™ for revealing over- and underrepresented sites of promoters and arrayanalyzer™ for identification of key nodes in signal transduction networks. the developed integrated approach aims to reveal multiple evidences of positive feedback loops in signal transduction circuits through activation of pathway-specific transcription factors.

we demonstrated that promoters of genes encoding components of many known signal transduction pathways are enriched by binding sites of those transcription factors that are end-points of the considered pathways. application of the approach to the microarray gene expression data on tnf-alpha stimulated primary human endothelial cells  <cit>  helped to reveal novel key transcription factors that are potentially involved in the regulation of the signal transduction pathways of these cells.

RESULTS
tfbs in promoters of genes belonging to the same pathway
in order to evaluate the approach we applied the promoter analysis algorithm  to the promoters of genes encoding various known signal transduction pathways. promoter sequences were extracted from the transpro® database  <cit> . we were also testing a hypothesis that genes encoding components of the same signaling pathway are co-regulated by the "target transcription factors", i.e. tfs that receive the signal through the pathway in focus and, through that, provide multiple positive feedback loops in the pathway. we made this analysis for pathways and chains collected in the transpath® database. chains represent experimentally proven sequences of reactions and are utilized in the pathway search algorithm using nonlinear cost function .

we applied the match™ tool  <cit>  with default parameters  and searched for potential tfbs in promoters of the genes encoding components of signal transduction pathways . after that, we applied f-match to compare site frequency in promoters of each pathway compared to the promoters of all other pathways. we found overrepresented sites for target tfs in  <dig> pathways and  <dig> chains . in the cases where the chains constitute a part of the same pathway, the sites were grouped together. only  <dig> pathways and  <dig> chains exhibited underrepresented sites for their target tfs.

we exemplarily show the results for two pathways . sites for ap- <dig> factors have been found being over-represented in promoters of genes encoding components of jnk pathway. ap- <dig> sites were found in promoters of several genes encoding different variants of jnk kinases as well as other molecules upstream and downstream in the pathway leading to the activation and repression of the ap- <dig> transcription factors . such complex organization of the regulatory circuits clearly provides mechanisms for the autoregulation of the pathway. evidence for direct autoregulation was found also for the pathways and networks activating the following tfs: p <dig>  hif1-alpha, p <dig>  srf, c-jun, nf-at and dp <dig> 

in the case of t-cell antigen receptor pathway sites for transcription factors ets/elk- <dig> are overrepresented in the promoters of the genes of this pathway. most of the hits are located in the "upper" part of the pathway, e.g. molecules located in the pathway several steps upstream from the target transcription factors at the "bottom" . we speculate that such organization of feedback loops from regulated tfs to the topmost parts of the pathway can provide optimal autoregulation, and enhances the specificity of the transduced signal.

in the extreme case of the prolactin pathway, more than half of the genes in the pathway are probably regulated by the target tf fkhrl, including both the membrane receptor molecule and the target tfs stat5a and stat5b .

since the pwms used for identification of tfbs are relatively short, the chance that they can match with any dna sequence is very high. the essence of our method is therefore to estimate the statistical significance of over- or under-representation of the number of matches in a given set of promoters  as an indicator of potential functional involvement of tfs in the regulation of the corresponding genes. here, we did an evaluation of the statistical significance of overrepresentation of elk- <dig> sites found in the promoters of t-cell antigen receptor pathway. two datasets were built collecting human promoter sequences at random from the transpro® database, one with the same number as in the t-cell antigen receptor pathway , and another with as many promoters as in the control set . elk- <dig> sites were predicted in both sets using the match™ program, and their frequencies compared using f-match. this simulation experiment was repeated  <dig> times, and a distribution of the ratio of elk- <dig> site frequency in the query vs. control set was generated . the average ratio of this random promoters distribution is  <dig>  with a standard deviation of  <dig> . whereas, the ratio observed in the real set of promoters of t-cell antigen receptor pathway is  <dig>  , which is  <dig>  sd units away from the random expectation .

identification of key node tfs in the transpath® pathways
to evaluate whether the "pathway persistence" parameter h can help in identifying key tfs, we applied the pathway persistence algorithm described in the methods section to the t-cell antigen receptor pathway as it is presented in the transpath® database . as it can be seen from the diagram,  <dig> target transcription factors of this pathway are ap- <dig> , nf-at, nf-kappab , ikappab and elk- <dig>  out of  <dig> molecules belonging to this pathway we took  <dig> molecules whose gene promoters contain the elk- <dig> binding sites  identified at the previous step of analysis. we applied the key node search algorithm starting from these  <dig> molecules and searched downstream with parameters of the search: dmax =  <dig>  α =  <dig> ; h =  <dig> . the  <dig> top scoring transcription factors were: . as one can see, nf-kappab and components of ap- <dig> were among the top hits. figure  <dig> shows the automatically generated output for the search of key tfs of the pathway.

in order to evaluate the pathway persistence algorithm we made a series of random simulation experiments of the pathways analysis varying the parameters dmax  and h . for each pair of dmax and h, we randomly selected 10-times  <dig> molecules belonging to the t-cell antigen receptor pathway and performed the downstream search for the reachable tfs. we computed an average sensitivity  and specificity  of the search by counting the average number of true target tfs  that were reached in such downstream search , and by counting the average number of other tfs  that were also reached in the same search. then:



the results of the simulation experiments are shown on figure  <dig>  one can see that the use of the high values of persistence parameter h allows reaching sensitivity levels above 50% without significant decrease of specificity.

analysis of tnf-alpha gene expression data
we applied the f-match method  to analyze promoters of differentially expressed genes in primary human endothelial cells upon tnf-alpha stimulation  <cit> . we compared promoters of genes induced or repressed by at least a factor of  <dig>  with the promoters of genes whose expression did not change upon this treatment. in this analysis, we were able to identify several pwms whose hits are significantly over-represented or under-represented in the promoters in focus . we also compared results of identification of over- and under-represented sites taking different cut-offs of the expression fold change . we observed that most of the matrices identified at the fc cut-off  <dig> , were also identified under the higher cut-offs and often the over-representation ratio was increasing, which clearly indicates the correlation between the gene expression change and the frequency of the corresponding sites in promoters. some matrices have disappeared from the list of the significantly over- or under-represented sites  and several new matrices have appeared under the higher fc cut-offs . such matrices seem to be specific for a subgroup of promoters of the differentially expressed genes. we focus our further attention on the matrices that were identified under several fc cut-offs with increased stringency.

at the second step of the analysis we mapped all differentially expressed genes  onto the transpath® database and extracted  <dig> signaling molecules . mapped molecules include all components of signaling pathways, such as receptors, their ligands, adaptor proteins, kinases of various levels as well as tfs. we applied the pathway analysis algorithm described in the method section 12; h =  <dig> ) and obtained a list of key transcription factors  characterized with the maximal score si.

by comparison of the data in the table  <dig> and table  <dig> we can reveal tfs most probably involved in regulation of differential gene expression upon tnf-alpha stimulation. among them are, e.g., nf-kappab  and the components of ap- <dig> , the known targets of tnf signaling. it is interesting to observe that expression of genes encoding these two tfs has been changed in this experiment. for other factors such as foxo, creb, elk- <dig> , and e2f any significant change of their expression was not observed, but following the two independent sources of evidences, promoter analysis and pathway analysis, we conclude that they may play an important role in the regulation of gene expression in the considered system.

discussion
the approach demonstrated here allows identifying key tfs involved in the regulation of signaling pathways in the cell. the approach combines two algorithms, one is based on the analysis of promoter sequences and another on the analysis of the signal transduction pathway connectivity graph. as we demonstrated here, these two independent algorithms can often produce rather complementary or even similar results, pointing to the most important tfs involved in the regulation of the considered molecular processes.

the complementarity of the results of these two algorithms may suggest interesting dynamics of the considered pathways such as for the t-cell antigen receptor pathway analyzed above. first, we found an overrepresentation of sites for the ets domain factor elk- <dig> in the promoters of genes belonging to the pathway. next, starting from these genes and searching downstream in the signal transduction network we identified other target tfs: nf-kappab, ap- <dig> and nf-at. so, we can speculate, that first signals coming through this pathway activate the elk- <dig> factors, which in turn activates expression of many genes encoding components of the same pathway therefore enhancing the signal flow through this pathway. the amplified signals then activate other target transcription factors switching on the appropriate response in the cell.

a systematic analysis of many pathways reveals that sites for a total of  <dig> different tfs are overrepresented in the  <dig> pathways and chains, implying that different pathways share the same target tfs. we think that the fine-tune regulation of genes in overlapping or interconnected pathways might be achieved through the cooperative simultaneous regulation of many tfs, suggesting that a composite module analysis will further explain the differential regulation of these intersecting pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed a novel computational approach for revealing key transcription factors by knowledge-based analysis of gene expression data with the help of databases on gene transcription regulation and signal transduction networks, transfac® and transpath®. we demonstrated that promoters of genes encoding components of many known signal transduction pathways are enriched by binding sites for transcription factors that are endpoints of the considered pathways. the corresponding software and databases are available at .

