BACKGROUND
the foreseeable scarcity of fossil fuels promoted the development of innovative techniques for the generation of alternative energies in the last years. in this case, the utilization of renewable raw materials such as agricultural biomass or organic wastes represents an important cornerstone for the production of renewable energy.

in the last years, the investigation of microbial biocenoses responsible in biogas reactors for the production of methane-rich biogas became a matter of particular interest. several studies led to the conclusion that a uniform microbial community in biogas reactors does not exist and, in addition of it, there are still gaps of knowledge about the microflora in this environment  <cit> . to overcome this lack of knowledge the establishment of a fast and reproducible analytical tool for the specific detection of the metabolically active microorganisms in this environment is of high relevance.

beside gene based quantification techniques such as quantitative real-time pcr, the hybridization of microbial cells with 16s ribosomal rna  targeting fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides  and a subsequent microscopic cell counting is the method of choice for the quantification of microorganisms in environmental samples  <cit> . the benefit of this technique is the cell based quantification of microorganisms at different taxonomic levels depending on the degree of conservation of the probe target sequence  <cit> .

however, some potential pitfalls of fish are well known and should be noted  <cit> . one of the most critical steps is the fixation of samples. the fixative saves the cell morphology while simultaneously the cell membrane is permeabilized for the labeled oligonucleotides. in addition, this step prevents cell lysis during hybridization and subsequent storage. because of different characteristics of the cell membrane of gram-negative and gram-positive cells, different fixatives have to be used  <cit> . whereas fixation with cross-linking agent formaldehyde or paraformaldehyde is strengthen the cell wall of gram-negative prokaryotes, the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria will be damaged by these fixatives. therefore, it is recommended to fix gram-positive cells with ethanol.

besides fixation, the metabolic activity state of the analyzed cells has also a high impact on the fish results because most common fish probes target the 16s rrna molecules in prokaryotic cells. the number of ribosomes is strongly depending on the metabolic activity of the cell. prokaryotic cells with low metabolic activity or in a dormant state may have a low content of ribosomes and in consequence a low content of probe targets which results in hardly proven fluorescence signals  <cit> . nevertheless, for the analysis of the microbial community of biogas reactors the detection of active cells is of special interest because these cells are responsible for biogas generation from biomass.

the conventional fish approach is very time-consuming due to the essential number of technical and biological replicates that have to be performed. as an alternative method, flow cytometry allows high-throughput quantification and simultaneously the phenotypic separation of cell populations based on differences in surface characters of single cells  <cit> . recently, flow cytometry was successfully applied for the analyses of the microbial community structure in different environmental samples to generate cytometric fingerprints using dna-intercalating dyes such as 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole   <cit> .

however, staining with dna-intercalating fluorochromes may provide information on the amount of microbial cells in a given sample but not on their taxonomic identity  <cit> . this lack can be overcome by the combination of flow cytometry and fish. this approach is called flow-fish and was described for the first time by rufer and co-workers   <cit>  within the scope of the analysis of human lymphocytes. in respect to the analysis of microbial cells the flow-fish technique was firstly applied by friedrich and lenke   <cit> . since then, the flow-fish has already been applied successfully for the analysis of pure cultures  <cit>  as well as the analysis of mixed microbial populations  <cit> . furthermore, this technique was used for the monitoring of specific clostridial cells in an anaerobic semi-solid bio-hydrogen producing system  <cit> . in addition, flow-fish could be an innovative technique for microbiological analyses of biogas reactors samples.

however, the flow-fish based analysis of microbial communities in biogas reactors is strongly hampered by the high heterogeneity of the sample material due to the presence of organic  and inorganic particles which cause high background fluorescence signals. moreover, most of the process relevant microorganisms adhere on these particles and form complex biofilms or form dense cell clusters like methanosaeta spp. and methanosarcina spp.  <cit> . this hampers any cell counting attempt by microscopy as well as flow cytometry. in addition, some of these cell associations can reach a thickness that inhibits the penetration of fish probes into deeper layers of cell clusters. in consequence, only the surface cells are hybridized with fish probes and are detectable by flow-fish. hence, samples from this environment have to be pretreated to purify and to isolate all microbial cells of the whole biogas reactor biocenosis. despite the number of different pretreatment approaches developed for a variety of samples of different environmental origins  <cit> , up to now no procedures are published for the purification of samples from biogas reactors leading to preparations suited for the measurement of the microbial community by flow-fish.

to overcome these technical limitations, the aim of this study was to establish a high-throughput technique for the detection and the quantification of process relevant, active microorganisms in anaerobic digestion using the process liquor of an upflow anaerobic solid-state  biogas reactor as test material  <cit> . therefore, a purification technique was primarily optimized to fulfill the following requirements:  detachment of cells from organic and inorganic particles,  disbandment of cell aggregates,  no or low cell loss, and  a rapid implementation. furthermore, a modified flow-fish protocol based on different already published protocols  <cit>  was developed and tested regarding following influencing parameters:  type of fixative used for cell fixation directly after sampling,  possible cell losses by centrifugation during fish procedure, and  cell activity.

RESULTS
optimization of the purification technique
the application of flow cytometry for the analysis of the microbial community in biogas reactors requires previous sample purification due to its high content of organic and inorganic particles and the presence of huge cell aggregates and biofilms. the capillary within the flow cytometer could clog due to such large particles. moreover, the microbes bound in aggregates and biofilms are hardly detectable and countable with the flow-fish.

in this study, six purification procedures with in total  <dig> modifications were tested . these six purification strategies are based on the use of a detergent to dissolve cell aggregates and to detach cells from different surfaces in soils  <cit>  or turbid seawater  <cit> . a current method to increase the effect of detergent is the ultrasonic treatment  <cit>  and homogenization of the sample with a dispersion unit  <cit> . the concentration of the used detergent and the settings of ultrasound and homogenization should be adjusted because these treatments can also destroy the cell wall of microbes. therefore, cell numbers were determined by coulter counter system in order to control cell losses caused by sample pretreatment. however, due to the heterogeneity of sample material derived from biogas reactors a control of cell counts with the coulter counter system before and after purification procedures was not feasible. thus, a pure e. coli culture was used to control possible cell losses during the different procedures .

1)
2)
n.a. = not applied.

1)using the sonoplus gw <dig> .

2)using the dispersion unit vdi <dig> for  <dig>  -  <dig>  ml volumes .

c1- <dig>  h1- <dig>  s1- <dig> and f1- <dig> indicate variations of the original protocols tested for their eligibility on samples from pure cultures and the uass biogas reactor.

with exception of procedure 4-c <dig> and 5-c2-s2-h <dig>  the cell losses of control samples during purification were marginal. best results were obtained with procedure  <dig>  using sodium hexametaphosphate as detergent, and procedure  <dig>  with sodium pyrophosphate as detergent . to determine the presence and the size of cell aggregates as well as cells attached to debris, the differentially treated samples were examined visually by fluorescence microscopy .

1)
1) +++ = ≥ 52 μm2; ++ = ≥ 24 μm2; + = ≥ 6 μm2; - = no cell aggregates. the size of cell aggregates was determined by microscopic field analyses using an ocular micrometer at 630× magnification. one field covered an area of  <dig>  μm <dig> 

denomination of procedures is according to table  <dig>  the optimal combination is given in italics.

overall, the purification procedure  <dig> using the detergent sodium hexametaphosphate provided the best results concerning the disbandment of cell aggregates and biofilms and the elimination of organic and inorganic particles from the biogas reactor samples with a minimal cell loss during purification procedure. the final power of ultrasonic treatment and the sodium hexametaphosphate concentration for procedure  <dig> without filtration  was 60 w  and  <dig> % , respectively, which finally resulted in an almost complete recovery of cells from particles and disbandment of cell aggregates .

after repeated detergent and ultrasound treatment for a maximum of five times all supernatants were pooled and centrifuged at  <dig>  × g for 20 min to collect all cells in a pellet and subsequently re-suspended in one fold concentrated phosphate buffered saline . a microscopic validation of this cell suspension showed a contamination with plant fibers and other inorganic particles which were free of cells, but made the samples unusable for analysis by flow-fish. therefore a final vacuum filtration using a filter with a pore size of 12-15 μm was conducted. the cell loss resulting from filtration seemed to be negligible as the control experiment using e. coli cultures treated with procedure 1-c2-s2-h1-f <dig> revealed . figure  <dig> shows exemplary microscopic images of the application of purification procedure 1-c2-s2-h1-f <dig> using two different samples from the uass biogas reactor . the microbial cells were stained with dna-binding fluorescence dye 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole . before purification, small and large particles covered with cells as well as cell aggregates were observed in the uass samples . after application of purification procedure 1-c2-s2-h1-f <dig>  these large particles were no longer present in the samples . the microscopic analysis of residues on the filter  resulted in only few single cells and cell free particles. this confirmed the results of purification treatment shown in figure  <dig> .

in conclusion, the procedure 1-c2-s2-h1-f <dig> using  <dig> % sodium hexametaphosphate as detergent in combination of 60 w ultrasound treatment for  <dig> sec and a final filtration showed the best results and was subsequently used for the pretreatment of uass biogas reactor samples for microbial analysis by flow-fish. however, it must be noted that, depending on the actual grade of heterogeneity of the biogas reactor sample, the optimized purification procedure will require some time. figure  <dig> illustrates the different steps of the optimized purification procedure established in this study and the principle of the flow-fish technique.

establishment of a flow-fish protocol
flow cytometry is a rapid high-throughput technique for the examination of microbial cells and a process in which characteristics of single cells are measured in a fluid stream  <cit> . in combination with fish technique, so called flow-fish, the taxonomic identification of single microorganisms in microbial community and the cell quantification will be feasible simultaneously.

the application of conventional fish protocols according to amann et al.   <cit> , wallner et al.   <cit> , and grzonka   <cit>  for flow-fish technique resulted in high cell losses due to the centrifugation steps as part of the dehydration steps. with e. coli cultures, performing dehydration steps reduced the detected cell number by two to three log units . for uass reactor samples a lower cell loss of about one log unit was determined after performing dehydration steps . hence, to avoid high cell losses, dehydration and most centrifugation steps were abandoned in the new optimized fish protocol.

in this study, the effect of dehydration or non-dehydration, respectively, on the hybridization rate of fish probe eub <dig> was determined with two pure cultures, e. coli and p. fluorescens . in case of p. fluorescens no effect of dehydration on success of fish was obvious, whereas in case of e. coli, the flow-fish protocol including dehydration steps showed a quite higher hybridization rate. for purified uass biogas reactor samples no effect of omitted or performed dehydration on the hybridization rates was detected. to avoid false positive fluorescence signals caused by cell autofluorescence during measurement by flow cytometer, hybridizations without probes were performed  <cit> . these negative controls resulted in no fluorescence signals indicating the absence of microbial autofluorescence . the ethanol dehydration could support the cell membrane permeability of some prokaryotes for fish probes resulting in a higher hybridization rate. however, this effect may differ from organism to organism. therefore, every sample needs to be controlled for dehydration effects on cell counts and hybridization rates, especially in case of mixed cultures or environmental samples.

for the verification of a possible cross hybridization of the specific fish probe with non-target individuals the noneub <dig> probe was used standardly. this nonsense probe is reverse complementary to eub <dig> probe and has no known 16s rrna target. the test was conducted using a mixed culture of methanosarcina barkeri  and propionibacterium acne  . whereas hybridization of m. barkeri / p. acne mixed culture using the probe arch <dig> resulted in a high hybridization rate of about 80% of all cells, no fluorescence signal was determined with noneub <dig>  this indicates that the chosen hybridization conditions did not promote any cross hybridization of archaeal fish probe with bacterial cells in this culture. furthermore, fish without any probe was performed with the same sample to evaluate possible background fluorescence because it is well known that p. acne exposed a low red autofluorescence  <cit> . as expected, in this experiment the control sample of the mixed culture showed minor background fluorescence .

another factor influencing the result of flow-fish is the choice of the fixative for the necessary cell fixation immediately after sampling. because most environmental samples include both gram-negative and gram-positive prokaryotes, it is generally recommended to prepare both, formaldehyde- as well as ethanol-fixed samples. in this study, both fixation procedures were carried out with pure cultures of c. thermocellum, as a typical representative for gram-positive prokaryotes in biogas reactors, as well as samples of uass biogas reactor. in case of c. thermocellum, the fixation with 50% ethanol led to an increased hybridization rate when using the bacteria universal probe eub <dig> . in contrast, in case of the uass reactor sample, the fixation with  <dig> % formaldehyde resulted in better hybridization rates than obtained after ethanol fixation regardless of which fish probe was applied. the sum of archaea and bacteria cell counts in formaldehyde fixed samples achieved about 90% of total cell counts determined by flow cytometry . interestingly, the percentage of archaea, i.e. about 40% of total cell counts, is relatively high compared with previously published results  <cit> . on the other hand, fredriksson and co-worker   <cit>  studied the diversity and the dynamic of archaea community in different compartments of an activated sludge wastewater treatment plant  and determined an average percentage of archaea cells up to 75% using confocal laser scanning microscopy. because the negative control hybridizations with probe noneub <dig> and the subsequent measurements in flow cytometer did not show any fluorescent cells, the absence of cross hybridization effects for uass samples is indicated . the low hybridization rates observed for bacteria in uass samples and c. thermocellum could be caused by a lower metabolic activity of parts of these cells. microorganisms in the environment often do not grow at their optimal rate and could show different metabolically stages: active, inactive, starved, and dormant. generally, microbial cells with metabolic activity have a sufficient number of 16s rrna molecules which were usually used as targets for fluorescently labeled fish probes. in consequence, a sufficient number of 16s rrna molecules is required for strong fluorescence signals in flow cytometry or fluorescence microscopy, respectively  <cit> .

determination of the microbial metabolic state
because of the low hybridization rate partially observed for some samples , the metabolic cell activity was determined by examination of dehydrogenase activity visualized by 5-cyano- <dig> -ditolyl tetrazolium chloride  reduction in microbial cells. ctc is reduced to ctc formazan by electron transfer through respiratory activity and accumulates as red fluorescent crystals inside the cell  <cit> . this enables the detection of active cells by flow cytometry as well as by fluorescence microscopy. therefore, a regular sampling within 24 h from the uass biogas reactor as well as growth series of e. coli and c. thermocellum were performed.

at anaerobic conditions an abiotical reduction of ctc is possible  <cit> . hence, inactivated samples from the uass reactor as well as e. coli and c. thermocellum cultures were used as negative controls to exclude possible false positive fluorescence signals. no fluorescence signals could be detected from any inactivated samples after ctc incubation indicating that no abiotical reduction of ctc occurred at the apparent experimental conditions .

the evaluation of uass samples after ctc incubation was difficult. because it could not be ruled out that the ctc formazan crystals will be washed out of the cells during purification procedure as described above, we decided to pass on the sample pretreatment. hence, measurement by flow cytometry could not be conducted and cell counts in uass samples were estimated by microscopic field analysis. because of background fluorescence of unpurified uass samples a reliable quantification of total cell count as well as of ctc-formazan positive cells was not possible. in general, the activity of cells in uass reactor samples was low according to ctc-formazan staining. an example of analyzed uass reactor sample 3 h after supply with wheat straw as substrate is shown in figure  <dig>  about 43% to 60% of total cells showed a positive ctc-formazan fluorescence signal regardless of the time of sampling indicating active cells which were in consequence detectable by flow-fish.

because of the difficult conditions, as described above, for the evaluation of the metabolic activity of microorganisms in uass reactor samples, this experiment was also applied for growth series of e. coli and c. thermocellum pure cultures. photometric analyses of the growth state of pure cultures resulted in a typical growth curve of e. coli with an exponential growth phase in the first 12 h followed by a long stationary phase . the results of ctc incubation determined by flow cytometry showed that e. coli cells were highly active after a growth time of 3 h . this was also verified by confocal laser scanning microscopy . at growth time of 3 h the highest fluorescence signals of ctc-formazan were determined whereas the lowest cell number of e. coli was measured . furthermore, flow cytometry has shown that the cell number of e. coli pure culture increased during the first 12 h. overall, the cell number increased with increasing growth time but fluorescence signals of cells decreased simultaneously  which indicates that the cells reduced their metabolic activity during growth. in consequence the number of ribosomes and 16s rrna molecules in these cells was also decreased. delong and co-workers   <cit>  have shown that the fluorescence signal intensity is directly related to the physiological state of the cells. however, other studies have shown that slowly growing bacteria can possess high numbers of ribosomes or, in contrast, highly active microorganisms can have low numbers of ribosomes  <cit> .

in contrast, the growth curve from c. thermocellum showed a long lag phase of approximately 20 h followed by a weak exponential growth phase . due to the limitation on 36 h, the end of the exponential growth phase and the beginning of the stationary growth phase could not be determined during this experiment. furthermore, ctc-formazan fluorescence signals could only be determined after 22 h growth time. however, fluorescence signals before a growth time of 22 h were quite low . thus, the low hybridization rate of c. thermocellum detected by flow-fish could have been caused by a low metabolic cell activity and, consequently, by a low 16s rrna concentration in the cells. the results of both experiments are in accordance to further studies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, a protocol for purification of high heterogenic liquid samples from biogas reactors for the analysis of microbial community by flow cytometry was successfully developed. furthermore, a flow-fish protocol was established to detect process-relevant active microorganisms in biogas reactor samples.

the developed purification procedure  is based on the treatment with sodium hexametaphosphate and ultrasound treatment with a final filtration step. we demonstrated that cell aggregates could successfully be suspended and cells were successfully removed from organic or inorganic particles and that these particles were eliminated from the samples using this purification procedure. moreover, the cell loss due to purification was negligible.

furthermore, a modified flow-fish protocol for analysis of microbial community biogas reactors was successfully adapted in this study. the waiver of dehydration steps decreased the cell loss during procedure but this may also decrease the hybridization rate of some bacteria species. therefore, the benefit on cell counts by omission of dehydration should be decided from case to case. however, we have shown that the applied flow-fish protocol did not allow cross hybridization determined by use of the nonsense probe noneub <dig>  in addition, false positive fluorescence signals caused by background fluorescence or autofluorescence of microorganisms were also excluded by using control hybridizations without any fish probes.

the new developed purification technique in combination with a modified flow-fish protocol described in this paper enables for the first time a high throughput analysis of microbial communities in heterogenic samples from biogas reactors focused on the detection of process-relevant, metabolically active microorganisms.

