BACKGROUND
eggs contain a large variety of nutrients and are a source of balanced proteins with high nutritional value for humans. they are widely consumed throughout the world and are used in food processing for their technological properties. their hygienic quality is of major concern especially when used as a raw nutrient. an egg is sterile when laid in non-pathological conditions but after being laid, it can be contaminated despite its efficient protective barriers  <cit> . the egg is protected physically by the eggshell and chemically by antibodies, known as igys, mainly concentrated in the egg yolk  <cit>  and throughout the egg by numerous peptides and proteins possessing antimicrobial properties  <cit> . these molecules constitute an innate immunity and are secreted “preventively” by the hen ovary into the egg yolk to protect the embryo, and by the other oviduct segments into the other egg compartments . egg antimicrobial proteins and peptides operate via three main mechanisms:  sequestration of essential nutrients from bacteria by the chelation of minerals  or from vitamins  by proteins such as ovotransferrin and avidin, respectively  <cit> ;  inactivation of exogenous proteases necessary for microbial metabolism and invasion of host tissues   <cit> ;  direct lytic action on microorganisms by lysozyme or peptides belonging to the defensin family whose actions lead to the disruption of the bacterial cell wall  <cit> . the innate immunity of eggs is modulated by several parameters. among these, genetic control has been demonstrated as the anti-staphylocccus aureus and the anti-salmonella enteritidis activity of egg white have heritabilities  of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively  <cit> . hen physiology, in particular hen age  <cit>  or immune-stimulatory treatments  <cit>  have been reported to alter activities of some effectors of the egg innate chemical defence including lysozyme and anti-proteases. to our knowledge, there is no evidence demonstrating that antimicrobial peptide or protein concentrations and/or their activities might be modified by the exposure of the hen to pathogenic and/or non-pathogenic environmental microbes, as demonstrated for yolk antibodies  <cit> . this question is of interest since eu-directive 1999/ <dig> became effective at the beginning of  <dig>  conventional cage housing has been banned and only eggs issuing from alternative breeding systems are marketable. this major change in the hen breeding system has modified the hen microbial environment  <cit>  and might increase egg shell contamination, as suggested by some comparisons between cage and non-cage breeding systems  <cit> . therefore, we explored whether the microbial environment of the hen influences innate immunity by increasing the oviduct secretion of antimicrobial proteins into the egg white, and its antibacterial activity. any modification in egg antimicrobial molecules which are much less selective for specific pathogens compared to igy and are potentially active against a wide range of microbes including bacteria, viruses or parasites  <cit>  might positively impact on the hygienic quality of table eggs.

with this objective in mind, we studied three experimental models reflecting large differences in hen microbial environment and immunological status: germ-free animals , specific pathogen free animals , and conventional hens . germ-free  animals are reared in sterile conditions and show a wide range of defects in the development of their immune system and in antibody production, particularly intestine iga. in gf mice, the normal immune function is also impaired at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels in the absence of gut microbiota  <cit> . spf females are not subjected to any vaccination treatment and are bred in strictly controlled environments that are free of pathogens. in contrast, the conventional hens are vaccinated against highly virulent microorganisms and are reared in commercial facilities where environmental microbes are diverse and might even include pathogens.

in the present study, we have used these extreme breeding conditions to explore the impact of the hen microbial environment on the modulation of innate immunity in the egg, as reflected by egg white antibacterial activity.

RESULTS
maintaining germ-free, specific pathogen free and conventional hens
gf hens were bred in two isolators and strict conditions were applied to keep them in a sterile environment. the absence of bacteria in the isolators was checked twice a month throughout the experimental period using the referenced method  on fresh faeces directly sampled from the cloaca and inoculated into two cultivation media: thioglycolate resazurine broth and heart infusion broth. our strategy was partially successful as our analysis did not reveal the initial presence of any bacteria; however, a contamination by penicillium was detected when the hens were 18 weeks of age.

specific pathogen free hens  were kept in strict hygienic conditions and were certified free of pathogens as determined by the control procedure of the experimental infectiology platform . our conventional hens were issued from the same line and flock than spf hens but were reared with commercial laying hens at 16 weeks for 10 weeks before egg sampling. however, they have not been vaccinated against virulent microorganisms as carried out for commercial birds.

gene expression in jejunum and caecum by rt-qpcr
to better appreciate the immunological status of the three experimental groups, we first investigated the expression of interleukin- <dig> beta , interleukin- <dig>  and toll-like receptor- <dig>  genes in the jejunum and the cæcum, as presented in figure  <dig>  in the jejunum, there was a  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold increase in il-1β gene expression , in c  and spf groups , compared to gf. similarly, the il- <dig> gene  expression was  <dig>  and  <dig>  times higher in c and spf groups as compared to gf group . however, no statistically significant difference was observed between c and spf for both il-1β and il- <dig> in the jejunum. the tlr <dig> expression levels remained similar amongst the three experimental groups.

in the cæcum , il-1β was overexpressed in the c group by more than 6- and 13-fold as compared to spf  and gf , respectively. the mrna levels between these latter groups were similar. the il- <dig> gene expression was also higher in the c group as compared to both spf and gf groups. il- <dig> expression was higher in c hens by more than 19-fold  and 64-fold . the spf group demonstrated higher il- <dig> mrna levels  compared with gf . finally, the tlr <dig> gene expression was higher in conventional hens   as compared to gf hens, but not different from spf hens.

egg white antibacterial activity
the growth curves obtained after cultivating s. aureus, s. uberis, l. monocytogenes, s. enteritidis, s. gallinarum and e. coli in the presence of diluted egg white from c, spf and gf groups are shown in figure  <dig>  the mean values of the total growth  are reported in table  <dig>  the growth of s. aureus  was significantly lower by  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  respectively for the egg whites derived from c and spf groups, as compared to the gf hens. similarly, the growth of s. uberis  was lower by  <dig> % in the c group  and by  <dig> %  in spf as compared with gf hens. no difference was observed between c and spf hens when measuring the growth of s. aureus and s. uberis. on the other hand the growth of l. monocytogenes , s. enteritidis , s. gallinarum  and e. coli  in presence of egg white were similar for the three experimental treatments .

*mean areas under the growth curves ± standard deviation, n =  <dig> means with different letters are different . data were analysed using one-way anova followed by the bonferroni-dunn test.

**staphylococcus aureus d <dig>  <dig> , streptococcus uberis 3029c mc, listeria monocytogenes strain egde, salmonella gallinarum 229 k and salmonella enterica. enteritidis atcc  <dig> were provide d by inra  and avian escherichia coli cirmbp- <dig> was provided by the international center of microbial resources dedicated to pathogenic bacteria .

protein concentration and ph
protein concentration and ph mean values for c, spf and gf groups are shown in table  <dig> 

*values are mean ± standard deviation, n =  <dig>  means with different letters are different . the ph values were analysed using the kruskal-wallis test followed by the mann–whitney test; all other data were analysed using one-way anova followed by the bonferroni-dunn test.

the ph of gf hen albumen was lower compared to those from c and spf hens; the differences are  <dig>  unit higher in c compared with gf groups , and  <dig>  higher in spf egg white compared with gf eggs . the mean albumen ph values were similar between c and spf egg whites.

total protein quantification of egg whites did not reveal any statistically significant difference between gf, c and spf groups .

egg white lysozyme and protease inhibition activities
lysozyme is a muramidase responsible for the cleavage of the bond between the n-acetyl-muramic acid and n-acetyl-glucosamine. these two molecules are found in the peptidoglycan of bacterial cell wall. under our experimental conditions, lysozyme activities of the egg whites were similar for gf, spf and c groups, as shown in table  <dig> 

anti-proteases can impair bacterial invasion by inhibiting bacterial proteases which are major virulence factors. anti-papain and anti-trypsin activities showed no differences between the three experimental groups of hens . we detected, however, a trend for a higher anti-chymotrypsin activity in c and spf groups as compared to gf groups .

gene expression in the reproductive tract
we analysed in the three experimental groups the expression of genes encoding proteins whose function is to prevent bacterial growth either by direct lytic action, or by chelating nutrients or by inhibiting bacterial proteases . we also analysed the expression of genes encoding some cytokines and tlr <dig>  to gain insight into some regulators of the immune response in the oviduct. figure  <dig> shows the expression levels of lysozyme , avian beta defensin   <dig> , avbd <dig> , avbd <dig> , gallin , ovotransferrin , avidin , ovoinhibitor , cystatin , ovomucoid , il-1β , il- <dig>  and tlr <dig>  in the magnum tissue of the gf, spf and c groups. the magnum is the part of the oviduct which synthesizes and secretes egg white proteins. the expression of the genes coding for the proteins having direct lytic action on bacteria, lysozyme , avbd <dig> , avbd <dig> , avbd <dig>  and gallin  was similar in the magnum of the three experimental groups. ovotransferrin , avidin  are respectively iron and biotin chelators present in the egg white. their mrna expression in the magnum of gf, spf and c groups did not differ significantly. similarly, the gene expression of ovoinhibitor , cystatin  and ovomucoid  which are antiproteases was similar among the three groups. finally and in the same way, the expression of genes coding for il-1β, il- <dig> and tlr <dig> showed no difference between the three experimental groups.

discussion
the primary protection of the egg after being laid relies firstly on a physical defence  and secondly on chemical defences mainly present in the egg white, but also in other compartments. igy, igm and iga  <cit>  participate with numerous major proteins  <cit>  and newly identified minor proteins and peptides  <cit>  in the innate defences of the egg. while igy concentration have been shown to vary in egg yolk depending of the nature and degree of antigen exposure of hen  <cit> , no evidence in the literature explored whether the antimicrobial peptides/proteins of the egg are modulated by the microbial environment of the hen. the present study demonstrates the regulation of some egg white antimicrobial activities by microbial environment of the hen.

this investigation used an experimental design based on the comparison of three extreme conditions of rearing laying hens: germ-free , specific pathogen-free  and conventional  conditions. gf hens are characterized by the absence of microbiota at the intestinal level. this influences their metabolism and intestinal morphological parameters  <cit> . spf hens are raised in strictly hygienic conditions and are not vaccinated. due to the absence of any interactions with other pathogenic microorganisms, the spf model is frequently used to explore immunological responses to pathogenic or vaccine antigens  <cit> . in contrast, c laying hens are bred under commercial conditions and might occasionally be exposed to pathogens. these contrasting breeding conditions provide extremely wide qualitative and quantitative variations in terms of bacterial populations in contact with the hens: the absence or presence of surrounding microbes and gut microbiota, for the gf or c groups respectively, and an intermediate group, the spf hens, hosting a controlled microbiota in a pathogen-free environment. the maintenance of gf hens until they are sexually mature  and beyond requires efficient isolators, sterilized food and water, and qualified animal handlers. these constraints could partly explain why such an animal model has never been used before. in our attempt, the non-contamination of gf hens was not successfully achieved. an agent, penicilium, was detected at month four, in two independent isolators, but more importantly, in spite of this fungal contamination, the hens remained free of bacteria relevant to our initial objective.

the gf group definitively showed different immunological statuses compared to the c and spf groups, as reflected by higher expressions of il-1β, il- <dig> and tlr <dig> genes in the jejunum and cæcum of these groups, compared to the gf group. il-1β and il- <dig> are two pro-inflammatory cytokines which are often used as markers of inflammation  <cit> . tlr <dig> is a host cell membrane receptor that detects lipopolysaccharide from gram-negative bacteria and elicits innate immune response following bacterial infection. the difference in expression levels of il-1β, il- <dig> among the three groups was larger in the cæcum  than in the jejunum  in the spf and c groups as compared to the gf group. such expected differences are probably due to the bacterial load, which is much higher in the cæcum than in the jejunum  <cit> . in contrast, no differences in il-1β, il- <dig> and tlr <dig> gene expression were observed in the oviduct  between the experimental groups. under normal non-pathogenic conditions, the magnum and the other segments of the hen oviduct  constitute an aseptic environment in which the egg is formed in a 24 hour period  <cit> . these aseptic conditions are probably responsible for the absence of pro-inflammatory gene induction. altogether, these observations suggest that the presence or absence of microflora and associated stimuli, at the intestinal or oviduct levels respectively, directly influences the local inflammatory state and the tissue expression of il-1β, il- <dig> and tlr <dig> genes.

the egg white is the largest compartment of the egg in terms of variety and concentration of antimicrobial proteins. among the major egg white antimicrobial proteins are ovotransferrin and lysozyme, which are active against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . apart from these major egg white compounds, a number of minor molecules with potent antimicrobial activities have recently been identified and further characterized. of these, we characterized the antibacterial activities of two peptides of the beta-defensin family, namely gallin and the avian beta-defensin  <cit> . while gallin is active against e. coli, avbd <dig> possesses a broad spectrum of antibacterial activities against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, the ability of the hen to modulate these compounds in response to microbial environments has not been explored. egg whites of the c and spf groups had greater inhibitory activities on the growth of s. aureus and s. uberis  than those of the gf hens. in contrast, anti-salmonella , anti-e. coli and anti-l. monocytogenes activities were similar in the egg whites of all three experimental groups. our results demonstrated that the breeding conditions of hens have an impact on some of the antibacterial properties of their eggs, according to the degree of bacterial contamination of their environment. however, the response seemed specific to certain bacterial strains, suggesting that it might result from change in some antimicrobial egg molecules with a particular spectrum of activity, predominantly toward gram-positive bacteria in our study. in order to give some insight into the putative mechanisms at the origin of the increased egg white antibacterial activity against s. aureus and s. uberis observed in spf and c groups, we further analysed the level and/or activity of a panel of proteins representative of the main modes of action of egg antimicrobials . that was carried out by quantifying egg white activities or magnum gene expression of proteins representative of this diversity of antibacterial actions.

the main bacteriolytic molecule of the egg white is the lysozyme. this well-studied cationic protein is an enzyme catalysing the cleavage of peptidoglycan, a major compound of gram positive bacterial cell walls. no variation between gf, spf and c was observed for the lysozyme-mediated lytic activity of egg whites. this is in agreement with the lysozyme amounts, which appeared to be constant within all experimental groups, as assessed by western blot  and with previous findings showing the genetic stability of lysozyme concentration in the egg white  <cit> . in the opposite, hen age and acute administration of different immunostimulatory substances to hens modulate its activity  <cit> . however, our results were coherent with unmodified anti-l. monocytogenes activity. egg white exerts a potent bactericidal activity against l. monocytogenes and the main egg component possessing anti-listeria activities is the lysozyme. in contrast, l. monocytogenes, s. aureus and s. uberis seemed to be less sensitive to the egg white antimicrobial activities and grew in less diluted egg white. a number of s. aureus strains are known to develop resistance to lysozyme, whereas the activity of egg white lysozyme on s. uberis strains requires further study. the fact that no variation between gf, spf and c was observed for the lysozyme-mediated lytic activity of egg whites supports the hypothesis that enhanced anti-s. aureus and anti-s. uberis activities in spf and c egg white are not related to lysozyme, but most probably to additional compound. egg white contains numerous bactericidal molecules including the avian defensins. these cationic peptides can disrupt the bacterial membrane, resulting in the cell lysis  <cit> . thus, gallin and avian beta-defensins   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> which have been detected in the egg white by proteomic analysis  <cit>  and/or in the magnum at transcriptional level  <cit>  are alternative candidates to explain a change in antimicrobial activities. the quantification of these peptides was not possible because neither specific antibodies nor quantitative elisa kits are available. variation at the transcriptional level was therefore analysed by rt-qpcr in the magnum as a potential marker for relative protein synthesis between experimental groups. previous studies showed that hens intravenously injected with lipopolysaccharide showed a transitory increased expression of avbd <dig>  avbd <dig> and avbd <dig> in the vagina  <cit> . in our steady-state experimental conditions, even if c and spf hens were more challenged immunologically than gf hens, their magnum showed no stimulation of avbd <dig>  avbd <dig>  avbd <dig> and gallin expression, suggesting that these molecules are not responsible for the increased antimicrobial activity observed in the egg white. therefore, the higher anti-s. aureus and anti-s. uberis activities in the egg white of c hens did not appear to rely on avbd <dig>  avbd <dig>  avbd <dig> and gallin.

egg white contains large amounts of chelating molecules with antimicrobial activities, the most representative being ovotransferrin and avidin. ovotransferrin was quantified both at the protein  and transcriptional levels, while avidin was assessed only at the transcriptional level. no modifications in any of the three hen groups were revealed for these molecules. it is believed that the most efficient antimicrobial molecule against gram-negative bacteria e. coli and s. enteritidis in the egg is ovotransferrin via its iron depriving mechanism  <cit> . s. enteritidis is of major concern in public health as it is considered as the first foodborne disease agent in eggs and egg products  <cit> . this bacterium is capable of invading the intact egg when laid and, via different mechanisms, of withstanding the antibacterial molecules as well as the harsh ph conditions in the egg white during its storage  <cit> . the absence of variation in s. enteritidis growth in any of the three conditions was consistent with our observations showing that ovotransferrin was not modified, either at protein or transcriptional levels.

egg white antiproteases might play a role in egg innate immunity by exhibiting antimicrobial activities. cystatin is a potent antimicrobial, active against a variety of bacteria including escherichia coli and s. aureus <cit> . two other egg antiproteases, ovomucoid and ovoinhibitor, are known to inhibit bacterial peptidases  <cit>  in spite of limited data regarding their antimicrobial properties. in particular, their effect on s. aureus is yet unknown. likewise, there is no data in the literature demonstrating anti-s. uberis properties for ovomucoid, ovoinhibitor and cystatin. in our study, the analysis of egg white antiprotease activities and magnum gene expression of these molecules was of interest as staphylococci and streptococci are bacteria known to secrete extracellular peptidases that presumably play some role in virulence. in particular, s. aureus produces and releases to the extracellular milieu several enzymes belonging to distinct classes of proteases, such as serine- , cysteine-  and metallo-  proteases  <cit> . s. uberis produces extracellular proteases that are involved in the regulation of biofilm formation  <cit> . our results showed that global anti-trypsin, anti-chymotrypsin and anti-papain-like protease activities were not influenced by the microbial environment of hens. moreover, gene expression analyses of ovoinhibitor, cystatin and ovomucoid in the magnum did not show any differences among the three experimental groups. these observations suggest that increased egg white activities against s. aureus and s. uberis do not rely on these egg antiproteases.

the egg white ph affects global egg white antimicrobial activity. high ph values are bactericidal for s. aureus <cit>  and are correlated with anti-s. enteritidis activity  <cit> . egg white ph was slightly higher in c  and spf  groups as compared to gf . however, for this magnitude of changes, there was no correlation between ph and anti-s. aureus or anti-s. uberis activities  so this parameter is unlikely to explain the bacterial growth inhibition.

our observation that only two out of the six bacteria studied responded to the treatment, suggests that the effect results from some specific egg molecules. however, our attempt to identify the molecular origin of the change in the egg white antimicrobial activities observed for s. aureus and s. uberis was not fruitful. it strongly suggests that additional egg components, not investigated in the present study, are involved in this regulation. the sequencing of the hen’s genome and the development of proteomic  <cit>  and transcriptomic  <cit>  approaches reveal hundreds of minor peptides and proteins expressing a large range of biological functions including protection against diverse pathogens   <cit>  in the different egg compartments. an alternative explanation for the difficulty in identifying the minor egg molecules responsible for the increased antibacterial effect towards s. aureus and s. uberis is that we explored the gene expression of candidate proteins, and not the egg protein or peptide levels or activities in the eggs. however, by using such extreme experimental situations , this strategy should be valid and this was confirmed by the dramatic changes observed for interleukins at the intestinal level. it is obvious, however, that numerous alternative candidates amongst the newly identified molecules may be at the origin of the observed changes, including histone-like proteins or lipolysaccharide-binding proteins  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study shows evidence that the microbial environment of the hen modulates some of the antibacterial activities of the egg white, independently of the ph. the change in the antibacterial activity remains however of moderate magnitude and concerns only a limited number of bacteria . in particular, the microbial contamination of the hen environment changed anti-s. aureus and anti-s. uberis egg white activities, whereas anti-s. enteritidis egg white activity was not affected. the restricted bacterial spectra affected by the bacterial environment suggested a change in some of the minor egg protein or peptides for which it would be useful to develop quantitative methods for measuring their level and antibacterial activity. the absence of anti-salmonella modulation by the hen in response to microbial milieu underlines the importance of keeping the environment free of salmonella to reduce egg contamination risks in the alternative breeding systems emerging in europe.

