BACKGROUND
the stressosome signalling complex of bacillus subtilis is activated in response to diverse environmental stresses, including ethanol, temperature, uv light, and osmolarity, and initiates a protein partner switching cascade that leads to the release of the alternative transcription factor σb <cit> . the complex is the most upstream component so far characterised of the environmental arm of the general stress response in b. subtilis <cit> . its activation results in the upregulation of nearly  <dig> genes, including proteins which provide protective adaption to environmental change  <cit> .

the stressosome has a supra-molecular structure of a truncated icosahedron  <cit>  and consists of the presumed sensor protein, rsbr, and the scaffold protein, rsbs  <cit> . the cryo-em structure of the stressosome revealed its molecular organisation with  <dig> copies of rsbr associated with  <dig> rsbs molecules    <cit> . in the ground state,  <dig> rsbt molecules are bound by  <dig> copies of rsbs  <cit> ; rsbt dissociates from the stressosome following activation by environmental stress  <cit> . five paralogues of rsbr are also present in b. subtilis: rsbra, -b, -c and -d   <cit>  all of which retain the ability to form functional stressosomes with rsbs  <cit> . the fifth paralogue, ytva, mediates the stress response to blue-light  <cit>  and is also capable of forming stressosome complexes, at least in vitro . this ability to form complexes appears to stem from the high sequence conservation of the common c-terminal, stas domains possessed by these proteins  <cit> . by contrast, the n-terminal domains of the paralogues are highly variable, suggesting differences in either stress perception, or the interactions with rsbt  <cit> .

the role of the stressosome is the binding and the controlled release of rsbt in response to stress signals. both rsbr and rsbs are necessary for the association of rsbt in the stressosome  <cit> . in stress-free conditions, a significant proportion of rsbr molecules are phosphorylated, whereas rsbs remains non-phosphorylated  <cit> . the imposition of stress leads to an increase in the phosphorylation levels of rsbr   <cit> , which is a requirement for the subsequent phosphorylation of rsbs by rsbt  <cit> . as the level of phosphorylated rsbs increases, the affinity of rsbt for the stressosome decreases   <cit> , resulting in the dissociation of rsbt. the released rsbt activates the protein phosphatase rsbu  <cit>  and the activation of the partner switching cascade which ultimately leads to the release of σb from its quiescent complex with anti-sigma factor, rsbw  <cit> . once released, σb directs rna polymerase to the promoters of genes of the general stress regulon to stimulate their expression  <cit> . to reset this switch, the phosphorylation statuses of both rsbs and rsbr must be returned to pre-stress levels to allow rsbt to re-associate with the stressosome. the dephosphorylation of rsbs and/or rsbr appears to be catalysed by the phosphatase, rsbx  <cit> . the properties of the stimuli that activate the general stress response can be summarised in two categories,  environmental stress, and  energy stress  <cit> , both of which activate a phosphatase for rsbv-p  <cit> . environmental stress  is transmitted via the stressosome to activate the phosphatase rsbu whereas energy stress  leads to the stressosme-independent activation of phosphatase rsbp  <cit> . however, there is insufficient knowledge of the phosphorylation dynamics of the stressosome because of the limitations of the experimental methods applied thus far. for instance, it is not known how the perception of an environmental signal causes the increase in rsbr and rsbs phosphorylation levels. functional explanations for the existence and the mechanisms of the four rsbr paralogues are also missing; the paralogues have broad and overlapping sensitivities regarding stress stimuli  <cit> .

microbiological, molecular, and biochemical techniques have provided essential, general knowledge of the protein interactions and chemical reactions of the stressosome, but they are insufficient to understand the molecular events taking place in the complex. here, we use computational modelling of the cryo-em stressosome structure to test three hypotheses about the protein interactions within it, to gain insight on the spatial events associated with rsbr phosphorylation and their regulatory capacities. we compared three models:  ‘no cooperativity’, where the phosphorylation reactions in the stressosome are independent of neighbouring proteins;  ‘substrate activation’, in which non-phosphorylated protein neighbours stimulate phosphorylation; and  ‘product activation’, where phosphorylation is increased by the presence of phosphorylated neighbours. we evaluated the simulation results by comparing them with published data and found the ‘product activation’ model provided the best fit to the experimental data. a comparison of our simulation results with the signal-response data of marles-wright et al.   <cit>  revealed identical sigmoidal stressosome activation patterns for salt and ethanol treatment, indicating that the activation dynamics of the stressosome are independent of any specific stressor.

RESULTS
stressosome fractional phosphorylations are comparable between experiment and simulation, though independent of the model type
we compared our simulation results with the experimental data from kim et al.   <cit>  . the authors measured the fractional phosphorylation of stressosome components rsbr and rsbs during exposure to nacl and ethanol  <cit> . the parameter settings used for fitting the observations are given in table  <dig> and observations  and simulations  are shown in figure  <dig>  activation of the stressosome is simulated with an increase in rsbr phosphorylation probability from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the experiment, the fractional phosphorylation of rsbr decreased after  <dig> min, while levels for rsbs decreased after only  <dig> min. to simulate this apparent stress adaptation, we reset the rsbr phosphorylation probability from  <dig> to  <dig>  after  <dig> minutes and therefore the stress is only active in the simulation between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes.

the parameter kphr, the phosphorylation probability, has two values, the first for stress-free, the second for stress-response conditions. to consider the effects of neighbours, the parameter kphr is multiplied by an allosteric parameter .

in the kim et al.   <cit>  study, the fractional phosphorylation of rsbr pre-stress is around  <dig> , and is thus similar to our simulation results of  <dig> . the peak phosphorylation levels are also comparable, although shifted to later times for rsbs in the simulation. in the experiments of kim et al.   <cit> , the rsbs fractional phosphorylation level increased rapidly following stress induction, whereas in our model rsbs phosphorylation increased only after the phosphorylation of rsbr. the rsbr fractional phosphorylation decayed faster in the simulation in comparison to the experiment, but both experiment and simulation arrived at comparable values of  <dig>  towards their respective conclusions.

we did not attempt to model the long-term regulation of stressosome activation because that requires the additional consideration of changes in the σb operon gene expression levels. therefore, while we captured the ranges of rsbs and rsbr phosphorylation, the dynamics of the rsbs deactivation process are not reproducible in our framework. a notable difference between the models was the faster activation of rsbr and rsbs in the ‘no-cooperation’ model in figure  <dig>  this faster response is caused by an increase in the phosphorylation probability for all rsbr molecules, because, unlike in the other models, the phosphorylation probability is not restricted to neighbouring molecules. all three models perform comparably in relation to the activation profiles in kim et al.   <cit> , indicating that another parameter must determine the biological significance of one model over the others.

the stressosome acts through a product activation model based on the sigmoidal signal-response characteristics seen in vivo
to determine the crucial parameter that separates the three models, and to understand the phosphorylation dynamics of the structure of the stressosome, stress activation was modelled as a function of the increase in rsbr phosphorylation probability. marles-wright et al.   <cit>  measured the β-galactosidase activity using a σb dependent lacz reporter in response to different concentrations of the stressors nacl and ethanol. a sigmoidal signal-response curve for both these environmental stressors was observed  <cit> . the sigmoidal signal-response was not observed during the stressosome-independent activation of σb by energy stress, suggesting strongly that the sigmoidal environmental stress response is stressosome-specific. we evaluated our simulation using these data because the direct outcome of the simulation is the rsbs fractional phosphorylation, which correlates directly to the release of rsbt from the stressosome and to the activation of σb. to compare experiments and simulations, the experimental data were normalised as described in the methods section. strikingly, the experimental data for the stressosome response generated for ethanol  and nacl  coincide almost perfectly after normalisation . consequently, the stressosome response is identical for these two different signals. among the three models generated, only the ‘product-activation’ model resulted in a signal-response curve with a comparable sigmoidal character , where the deviations from the experimental data are probably rooted in the model simplifications.


the stressosome model captures rsbx titration experiments if rsbs is the only target of rsbx
we also evaluated the product activation model using experimental data from völker et al.   <cit> . here, the cellular concentration of the phosphatase rsbx was controlled by cloning it downstream of an iptg inducible promoter. the ethanol stress response was tested by titrating the cellular levels of rsbx with iptg. yet again, the experimental outputs were measured using a σb dependent β-galactosidase reporter gene fusion, whereas the simulations produced fractional phosphorylation levels of rsbs. as described above, these two measures correlate directly because rsbs phosphorylation leads directly to σb activation. we normalised the two data sets internally with their highest unperturbed output, i.e. wild type β-galactosidase activity and rsbs phosphorylation. stress was applied at  <dig> min by the addition of ethanol in the experiment and by increasing the phosphorylation parameter of rsbr, kphr, from  <dig>  to  <dig> in the simulation. since rsbx is a phosphatase we altered the values of probability of dephosphorylation of rsbs, kdps, and rsbr, kdpr, in our model. we reproduced  the three data sets by völker et al.   <cit>  using three values for kdps:  <dig> ,  <dig>  , and  <dig>  . in the simulation, a reduction in the dephosphorylation of rsbr failed to reproduce the experimental data, because the response after activation remained constant at the level of the wild type response . the response in our simulations was faster than the experimental data, because we used rsbs phosphorylation as the activity proxy, and thus omitted the additional time delay caused by the expression of the reporter gene. the time delay between maximum rsbs phosphorylation and maximum reporter protein signal is about  <dig> to  <dig> minutes  <cit> , which only slightly smaller compared to the approximate  <dig> minutes delay of simulation and measurements in figure  <dig>  the experimental results of völker et al.   <cit>  are thus explained in the model by assuming that the stressosome and thus the environmental stress response is reset by the unique dephosphorylation of rsbs-p by rsbx.

the computational model is able to reproduce a variety of experimentally determined stressosome phenotypes
by relating experimentally measured σb activities to the fractional phosphorylation of rsbs , we were able to compare the simulations with a number of published experiments . first, akbar et al.   <cit>  measured stress responses for strains with mutations in both rsbra and rsbrb, and in either rsbrc or rsbrd, or both . the major outcome is that rsbrc and rsbrd increase in pre-stimulus and post-stimulus β-galactosidase levels. in the experiments of martinez et al.   <cit> , stress was induced by the transition to stationary phase , and it was thus reported by these authors that rsbrc and rsbrd can sense energy stress. our unbiased simulations support this notion and provide clues about the kinetic implications of these findings. the most direct way to replicate this finding in the simulation is to increase the phosphorylation likelihood for rsbs, kphs. thus, rsbrc and rsbrd are more efficient than rsbra and rsbrb in inducing the rsbt kinase activity towards rsbs during energy stress stimulation. the mixture of rsbrc and rsbrd, with stress-insensitive rsbra and rsbrb, lowers the apparent activation of rsbs   <cit> . second, kim et al.   <cit>  detected a hyperbolic β-galactosidase stress response for rsbrd instead of the sigmoidal response seen for rsbra and rsbrb. as shown in figure  <dig>  the models of ‘substrate activation’ and ‘no cooperation’ produce hyperbolic responses while the sigmoidal response generated by the ‘product activation’ model is caused by the allosteric behaviour of rsbr interactions . although the data of kim et al.   <cit>  are in the form of a time course and the sigmoidal property is derived from a dose–response curve, a time course can be controlled by the dose–response if the stressosome adapts faster to the stimulus than the stimulus changes itself. on the basis of this assumption, the model predicts that rsbrd is less allosteric than rsbra. finally, the cellular automaton enables qualitative analysis of rsbr mutations. amino-acid substitutions on certain positions of rsbra result either in elevated or reduced pre-stress output while maintaining a wild type stress response   <cit> . since the stress response is unaffected, the protein interactions of the stressosome are not involved and thus the truth table remains unchanged. based on the assumption that stress stimulation increases rsbr phosphorylation by rsbt, the substitutions either activate or inhibit rsbt without stress stimulation if the mutations increase or decrease the pre-stimulus response, respectively. however, the stimulation of rsbt after stress perception proceeds undisturbed.

the phosphorylation of rsbs is correlated to the β-galactosidase response because phosphorylated rsbs releases rsbt, the activator of σb.

the first column represents the neighbourhood composition  and columns two to six represent different phosphorylation states of the models and their allosteric parameter. the section labelled ‘general’ contains the model independent allosteric parameters, whereas the other three sections show the parameters for their respective models.

discussion
herein, we present the first computational model of the stressosome based on a boolean representation of phosphorylation. the consequences of the unique neighbourhood compositions in a truncated icosahedron were simulated in a cellular automaton-like computational environment wherein the future state of a protein is based upon the phosphorylation status of its neighbouring proteins. we analysed simulated time course data of rsbr and rsbs phosphorylation, as well as steady state phosphorylations at different stress inputs and compared them to data from the literature. for simplicity, we disregarded any effects that may originate from the interactions between dimers of rsbr and rsbs as there are no experimental data available on such effects. moreover, we also ignored the potential for the rsbr paralogues to display a localisation bias within the stressosome . this is, because, to date, there is no information available on the localisation patterns of rsbr and its paralogues within the stressosome. although four rsbr paralogues contain two threonine residues as potential phosphorylation sites  <cit> , our model considers only single phosphorylations of rsbr. the double phosphorylation of rsbr occurs only in response to the imposition of strong stresses and the double rsbr phosphorylation actually limits stressosome activation  <cit> . we have avoided the double phosphorylation phenomenon in order to keep the model simple, whilst maintaining a model that is applicable for all but the most extreme of stressful incidents. the fitting of the model to the experimental data required a high phosphorylation status for rsbr molecules in a neighbourhood with only rsbr neighbours . a single phosphorylation of rsbra  was measured in response to low and to moderate stress  <cit> , whereas strong, growth inhibiting stress required double phosphorylation . the phosphorylation of rsbra at both sites is likely to attenuate σb activation and is not involved in the initial response to stress  <cit> . we considered only one phosphorylation event, as we sought to reproduce experiments that induced moderate stress levels , which do not require the double phosphorylation of rsbra.

predictability of the stressosome cellular automaton
whereas the majority of bacterial sensory systems consist of monomers or dimers, some systems, including the stressosome and chemotaxis arrays, form large complexes. amongst the possible reasons for this phenomenon is an increase of the regulatory space; a sensor that interacts with its neighbours expands its input signal range. an adaptation of the interactions can thus affect the response. in terms of cellular automata, these interactions correspond to the update tables. what is the knowledge we can expect from such an abstraction? a cellular automaton is first and foremost a spatial model; it reproduces patterns like the distribution of black and white squares on a lattice. a different update table yields a different pattern, fitting an observation better, or worse. the best test of the stressosome cellular automaton is the direct observation of phosphorylation patterns. for example, our model predicts hyper-phosphorylation of rsbr in the neighbourhood of r <dig>  this, however, is technically impossible to measure and probably biologically irrelevant. the purpose of the stressosome is the release of rsbt from phosphorylated rsbs, and thus probably no particular pattern but the total phosphorylation matters. our cellular automaton allows the examination of different interactions by adapting the truth table in table  <dig>  and the effect of external inputs, as represented by the parameters of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. in this context, predictions are hard to formulate because the output of an altered rsbs phosphorylation can be reproduced by a number of patterns generated by different update tables and input parameters. consequently, we evaluated our model on existing data that enabled us to associate model parameters with biological functions.

phosphorylated rsbr cooperatively activates rsbt
the phosphorylation of rsbr is a requirement for the activation of the stressosome, because inhibition of the threonine residue targeted for phosphorylation in rsbra  blocks stress response  <cit> . furthermore, the phosphorylated form of rsbr was found to stimulate the kinase activity of rsbt  <cit> . our simulations of the allosteric activation of rsbt by phosphorylated rsbr reproduced most successfully the published data on stressosome activation. this rsbr phosphorylation requirement also explains why rsbr is phosphorylated to high levels in stress-free conditions  <cit> .

different stress signals induce constant increases in rsbt activity
environmental stresses lead to an increase in rsbt kinase activity against rsbr and rsbs, either by direct interactions of rsbt with rsbr paralogues, or through some, as yet, undetermined secondary interaction  <cit> . reanalysis of the data presented in marles-wright et al.   <cit>  shows that the levels of the activation of rsbt in response to stress is independent of the nature of the stress . how is this achieved? the n-terminal domains of rsbr, presumed sensors , may interact with a secondary messenger molecule, or with a protein that integrates the initial stress signal. a candidate for this possibility is obg, a ribosome-interacting protein with unclear roles in sporulation and σb activation  <cit> . ethanol and nacl have similar physiological effects by inducing secondary oxidative stress  in the electron transport chain  <cit> , potentially linking these stressors with the stressosome. whether rsbt activation requires the involvement of a small molecule, or a protein integrator, are aspects of the stress response that remain to be determined experimentally.

rsbx only dephosphorylates rsbs during low and moderate stress events
in vitro, rsbx can dephosphorylate rsbs-p and rsbr-p, but the latter only at residue t <dig>  <cit> . the dephosphorylation reactions have also been studied in vivo <cit> , and the two approaches provide broadly consistent results. the inefficient dephosphorylation of rsbr t171-p by rsbx probably explains the slow decrease in rsbr phosphorylation observed by kim et al.   <cit>  , whereas rsbs was dephosphorylated rapidly. in our simulations we found a dephosphorylation probability for rsbr that is 16-fold lower than that for the dephosphorylation of rsbs-p . the stress response of strains expressing different levels of rsbx following a challenge with 4% ethanol has been tested  <cit>  and such a challenge should lead to only a single phosphorylation in rsbra at residue t <dig>  <cit> . indeed, the data of völker et al.   <cit>  could only be reproduced in our model by assuming that rsbx was active as a phosphatase solely towards rsbs-p. a functional stressosome also requires a balanced phosphorylation status of rsbr. experiments and simulation do not support the prior assumption that rsbx mediated the dephosphorylation of rsbr-p, though it is still formally possible at a low, but significant level.

CONCLUSIONS
in reproducing numerous published experiments, our stressosome simulations add weight to a model in which rsbt is activated allosterically by phosphorylated rsbr. our model also suggests that rsbx is only required to dephosphorylate rsbs to reset the stressosome to a pre-stress state. furthermore, the normalization of the data of marles-wright et al.   <cit>  shows that stressosome activation and thus phosphorylation dynamics are identical for different stressors. our model forms the foundation for future computational experiments to explore the effects of phenomena for which the mechanism of their action is currently unknown. these experiments could explore the impact of rsbr t <dig> phosphorylation on stressosome activation, the impact on localisation constraints of rsbr paralogues in the stressosome, or the negative feedback exerted on the system via σb mediated control of rsbx expression. our initial model provides a proof of the utility of using boolean network simulations to model stressosome activation, as demonstrated by our modelling of the activation dynamics of the stressosome for moderate stresses. for a complex and fascinating molecule like the stressosome, many questions remain to be answered despite two decades of intensive research on the regulation of σb. the limitations of biological experimentations in this system can be overcome by computational modelling, which is proving to be a valuable tool to shed light on the function of not only this system  <cit> , but other signalling networks too  <cit> . consequently, the application of cellular automata is likely to provide insight to other, highly symmetric molecules that are poorly understood, for instance, the co-ordinated assembly and disassembly of bacteriophage, viruses, and bacterial micro-compartments, the communication of enzymatic active centres in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex  <cit>  and the dynamic effects of pore opening and closing on iron uptake in ferritins  <cit> .

