BACKGROUND
developmental processes occur throughout an animal's entire life history, during both pre-adult and adult stages. just as patterning and morphogenesis are required to sculpt the body during embryogenesis and larval development, similar cellular differentiation pathways must be continuously re-deployed in the adult to compensate for the turnover of differentiated cells, to generate context-specific specialized cell types, and to repair damaged tissues. for example, in adult mammals, cellular differentiation pathways are activated to replace various cells of the hematopoietic lineage  <cit> , to differentiate ova  <cit> , to develop mature hair follicles  <cit> , and to heal wounds  <cit> . many such "adult developmental" processes are thought to depend upon stem cells exhibiting varying degrees of developmental potency  <cit> . additionally, the same developmental processes may occur in those adult animals that are capable of extensively regenerating missing body parts  <cit> .

one family of genes known to be involved in both pre-adult and adult development is the runx family of transcription factors. runx proteins are important for myriad developmental processes in both protostomes  and deuterostomes  . the runx protein in a basal deuterostome, the sea urchin strongylocentrotus purpuratus was found to be involved in basic developmental processes in the embryo and larva such as control of cell differentiation and survival  <cit> , while an isoform of one of the zebrafish runx genes products, runx2b was recently found be a maternal factor acting as a ventral determining regulator in the earliest stages of axis formation in the embryo, further illustrating the importance of these factors in multiple aspects and phases of animal development  <cit> . importantly, runx factors have been also widely shown to play particularly key roles in cell fate determination and the maintenance of stem cell populations  <cit> .

some metazoans, including c. elegans and the sea urchin, have a single runt-like gene, while others, including drosophila and fugu, may harbor up to four genes  <cit> . mammalian genomes contain three runx genes, each of which is critical for several different developmental processes occurring during embryogenesis: runx <dig> is important for hematopoiesis and neurogenesis of distinct cns neurons and nociceptive neurons in the dorsal root ganglion   <cit> , runx <dig> is critical for skeletal morphogenesis  <cit> , and runx <dig> is important for neurogenesis of proprioceptive neurons in the drg and for hematopoiesis  <cit> . mammalian runx proteins are also important for recurring developmental processes in the adult. for instance, loss of runx <dig> in the adult causes hematopoietic abnormalities  <cit> . overexpression of runx <dig> in adults increases bone turnover leading to multiple fractures  <cit> . runx <dig> controls cd <dig> cells, dendritic cells and cd <dig> th <dig> cells development in adult stages  <cit> .

runx genes regulate transcription of target genes by binding to a variant of the consensus binding site rccrca . cis-regulatory runx binding sites have been found in proximal promoter regions, as distant as a few thousand base pairs from the start methionine, in introns, and even within the coding region of genes whose transcription they regulate  <cit> . runx binding is mediated by a highly conserved dna-binding domain termed the runt domain  . while the rd can bind dna independently, in vivo binding usually occurs with its heterodimeric binding partner cbfβ. the protein cbfβ lacks a dna-binding domain, but when bound to runx, it increases the dna-binding affinity of the rd several fold, substantially enhancing its transcriptional activity . all presently known runx proteins terminate in a short conserved pentapeptide motif, vwrpy, which binds the co-repressor groucho and allows them to act as transcriptional repressors under certain conditions  <cit> . a post-translational control mechanism for mammalian runx dna-binding activity occurs via two cysteine 'redox switch' residues  <cit> . interestingly, due to their ability to either activate or suppress target genes  <cit> , when runx genes are mutated or their regulation is perturbed, they can act as either tumor suppressors or tumor inducers.

while runx has been intensively studied in some triploblastic animals, little is known about its presence and function in the more ancient "basal" animal lineages such as cnidarians and sponges. these lineages are critical to understanding the early functional evolution of runx because they diverged from the main metazoan stem lineage prior to the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes . over 99% of all extant animal species belong to the triploblastica , including deuterostomes  and protostomes . additionally, basal animals may be particularly informative about the evolution of developmental genes required during pre-adult and adult stages because they exhibit much greater regenerative capacity than many triploblastic model systems. for example, both sponges and cnidarians are able to completely regenerate from very small body fragments, and even from aggregates of single cells  <cit> . in cnidarians, this extensive regenerative capacity extends to the nervous system, which is able to regenerate in its entirety after injury. it is experimentally possible to eliminate the entire cnidarian nervous system, obtaining viable epithelial animals which regenerate a complete and functional nerve network when repopulated with interstitial stem cells  <cit> . during the regeneration process in hydra, pluripotent interstitial stem cells differentiate to form new nerve cells, gland cells and stinging neurons . in addition, the differentiated cells at the regenerating region undergo de-differentiation to form epithelial stem cells, which then re-differentiate to complete the regeneration process  <cit> . sponges have only four cell types, and one of these cell types, the archaeocyte, is a stem-cell lineage that gives rise to the three other differentiated cell types  <cit> . thus, cnidarians and sponges are excellent model organisms to study how developmental potency can be maintained in both stem cells and differentiated cells, and how de-differentiation and differentiation processes are initiated and controlled during de-novo creation of form upon regeneration.

in an effort to illuminate the early evolution of runx and cbfβ genes and explore a possible ancestral connection with stem-cell potency and regeneration, we used computational methods to identify runx and cbfβ orthologs from basal animals and then subjected them to phylogenetic analyses, comparative structural modeling, and expression studies. in the course of this work we identified runx and cbfβ genes in cnidarians and sponges, revealing that these genes existed in the ancestral metazoan, an organism which lived perhaps as much as ~ <dig> million years before the previously known earliest runx and cbfβ genes from the bilaterian ancestor . the sequence of the runt domain is highly conserved between sponges , cnidarians , and triploblastic animals. likewise, the heterodimeric runx/cbfβ transcription factor complex and its mode of dna-binding appear to be highly conserved between sponges, cnidarians, and humans. in situ hybridization studies in adult nematostella reveal expression in isolated cells of the tentacles, which may represent sensory neurons or their pluripotent progenitors. this possibility is intriguing because runx factors are required for the development of sensory neurons in mammals  <cit> 

RESULTS
novel runx and cbfβ genes in basal metazoans
to detect runx and cbfβ genes in phylogenetically basal organisms, we used bioinformatic approaches to search est and genomic databases for runx and cbfβ in basal metazoans and unicellular protozoans. this search revealed well-conserved runx and cbfβ gene pairs in the sea anemone nematostella vectensis, the freshwater hydra hydra magnipapillata, and the marine demosponge amphimedon queenslandica. we also identified a runx gene in the freshwater demosponge oscarella carmela and a cbfβ gene in the coral acropora millepora. neither runx nor cbfβ were detected in the genomes of any unicellular protozoans .

† predicted sequence

* est accession #

** scaffold # for venter institute draft assembly

***contig in stellabase assembly v. <dig>   <cit> .

the genomes of the following organisms were also searched, but no runx genes were detected.  represents unfinished genomes at the time of the latest search : database: cryptosporidium hominis ; cryptosporidium parvum; plasmodium berghei ; plasmodium chabaudi ; plasmodium falciparum 3d7; plasmodium yoelii yoelii ; theileria parva ; theileria parva strain muguga; leishmania major strain friedlin; trypanosoma brucei treu927; trypanosoma cruzi ; dictyostelium discoideum ax4; entamoeba histolytica hm-1:imss ; giardia lamblia atcc  <dig> .

runx
the nematostella runx gene  encodes a predicted protein  <dig> amino acids long. it contains four exons, the first two of which encode the highly conserved runt domain . within this domain, the nematostella sequence is 81% identical and 93% similar to human runx <dig> . the third and fourth exons encoding the c-terminus of the protein do not exhibit sequence similarity to other runx proteins, nor to any other protein housed in the ncbi genbank non-redundant database  <cit> . nevertheless, as in other runx proteins, the nv-runx c-terminal region, residues 148– <dig>  is enriched in proline , serine  and threonine  residues. the anemone protein ends with the canonical c-terminal vwrpy groucho binding motif  <cit> . a characteristic intron at nucleotide position  <dig> within the rd, conserved amongst protostomes and deuterostomes  <cit> , is also conserved in nv-runx. the second rd exon of nematostella is identical in size to the corresponding exon in all deuterostome runx genes  that have been described. the closest similarity in gene structure is for the echinoderm runx where the n-terminal part of the rd is encoded by a single exon while in other deuterostomes it spans two exons  <cit> .

the hydra magnipapillata runx gene  encodes a shorter protein,  <dig> amino acids in length. the rd of hm-runx is also highly conserved with human runx <dig> . hm-runx also terminates in the groucho binding motif vwrpy, but the remainder of this c-terminal region bears no obvious homology to any protein housed in genbank. it is enriched in serine residues , but interestingly, unlike the sea anemone protein, it is not enriched in proline  or threonine . the gene structure of hm-runx is similar to that of nv-runx and may thus reflect the ancestral condition for cnidarian runx genes.

we found partial runx transcripts from the freshwater demosponge oscarella carmela  and the marine demosponge amphimedon queenslandica  that encode well-conserved rds. oc-runx and aq-runx share ~61% and 69% of residues with human runx <dig> in the  <dig> amino acid rd, respectively . the incomplete ests we identified do not encode the complete carboxy-terminus of the proteins, thus we cannot tell whether these sponge proteins also contain the groucho-binding motif at their c-termini. however, all of the runx proteins we have identified contain the two cysteine residues that act as redox switches in mammals . notably, the second of these two cysteine residues  functions as a redox switch in deuterostomes but not in protostomes . this position is a cysteine in both cnidarians and in one of the two sponge sequences , while being a valine in the freshwater sponge .

cbfβ
a search of the ncbi est database revealed three cnidarian cbfβ ests – one from nematostella , one from hydra magnipapillata  and one from a pre-settlement stage of the coral acropora millepora . the cnidarian ests encode proteins that are highly conserved relative to their bilaterian counterparts, e.g., the nematostella protein is 59% identical and 79% similar to the human cbfβ isoform  <dig> . the anemone and coral sequences are very similar to each other , whereas the hydra protein is markedly more distant . this reflects the ancient divergence of the medusozoan lineage, which includes hydra, from the anthozoan lineage, which includes corals and sea anemones . a putative cbfβ protein identified in the genomic traces of the sponge amphimedon queenslandica  bears almost as much similarity to human cbfβ as do cnidarian cbfβ proteins . interestingly, aq-cbfβ shares less identity with the  <dig> cnidarian cbfβ proteins  than it does with the human variant . the sequence predicted based upon blast homology includes exons from  <dig> genomic traces which cannot be directly assembled .

the gene structure of cbfβ also appears to be highly conserved between cnidarians and deuterostome bilaterians. the nematostella cbfβ  locus comprises six exons, and the positions of the first four exon boundaries are conserved relative to the cbfβ of the purple sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus  <cit>  . the sixth exon is unique to nematostella and encodes only the three final amino acid residues at the c-terminus of the protein, the stop codon, and the 3' utr. the entire cbfβ transcript is encoded by a single exon gene in protostomes, suggesting that a retrotransposition event may have occurred deep within the protostome lineage.

cnidarian and sponge runx and cbfβ possess the structural elements needed for heterodimerization and dna binding
in triploblastic animals, runx and cbfβ proteins are known to cooperate in the regulation of gene expression by binding dna as heterodimers . to test whether the cnidarian and sponge variants of these proteins possess the structural determinants necessary for them to interact and bind dna together in a manner homologous to the human complex, we modeled their three dimensional structure using the human aml1rd-cbfβ-dna complex as a modeling template . unless noted otherwise, all residue numbers described in the text below correspond to the human runx <dig> and cbfβ proteins .

in three of the four organisms – nematostella, hydra and amphimedon – the dimerization faces of runx and cbfβ are conserved, and when amino acid residues differ from those of the human proteins these differences do not alter the general structure of the protein complex . this can best be demonstrated with a more detailed analysis of the nematostella runx-cbfβ-dna complex: in nv-runx,  <dig> of the  <dig> residues on the cbfβ binding face are conserved, including all p and g residues that may be important for the folding of the polypeptide chain . four additional residues  are replaced by amino acids with similar physical-chemical characteristics, and only two residues  are significantly different. the latter two residues are found in the outer rim of the interface where protein-protein contacts are generally less conserved. similarly,  <dig> of the  <dig> residues involved in runx binding by the human cbfβ are identical in nv-cbfβ. four additional residues have conserved physical-chemical characteristics , and  <dig> residues  are significantly different .

it is noteworthy that the latter residues, while different, are well accommodated within the structure of the proteins: f <dig> of human runx, which is in a hydrophobic environment , is replaced by k in nv-runx, whose side chain is capable of making most of the interactions with the hydrophobic environment. the positively charged end of this k makes an h-bond with the s that replaces t <dig>  h <dig> in human runx <dig> makes an exposed interaction  with d66; it is replaced by c in nv-runx, which cannot form such an interaction but can interact with the nearby backbone carbonyl. p <dig> of human cbfβ, which makes hydrophobic contacts with y <dig> and i <dig>  is replaced by h in nv-cbfβ. this residue can form a hydrogen bond with the backbone carbonyl of f <dig>  q <dig> of human cbfβ is solvent exposed in the separated molecule: it is replaced by h in nematostella without losing or gaining particular contacts.

interestingly, while not all of the residues in the rd-cbfβ interface are conserved between nematostella and humans, a change in the residue of one protein is accompanied by a reciprocal change in its binding partner . one such change involves residues f <dig> and m <dig> in human runx <dig> rd, which interface with s <dig> and q <dig> of cbfβ. nematostella differs at both positions in its rd, where f <dig> and m <dig> are replaced by k <dig> and a <dig> in the nematostella protein; these changes in the runx protein are mirrored by changes in cbfβ, where s <dig> and q <dig> are replaced by t <dig> and h <dig> . another reciprocal change involves h <dig> of human runx <dig> rd, which interfaces with t <dig> and f <dig> in cbfβ; the corresponding residues in nematostella are c <dig>  and s <dig> and m <dig> , respectively. this suggests that while the specific residues may differ between taxa, these proteins have co-evolved to maintain their functional interaction.

in contrast to the runx proteins from the cnidarians and the demosponge amphimedon, the cbfβ binding face of the sponge oscarella carmela runx protein is quite distinct, with many non-conservative amino acid substitutions found both in the periphery and in the center of the cbfβ binding region . this suggests either that the corresponding cbfβ protein in this sponge is considerably different, or that the oc-runx does not bind a cbfβ protein at all.

phylogenetic history of runx and cbfβ
runx and cbfβ genes have previously been reported in many different phyla of triploblastic animals where a single species may contain multiple runx or cbfβ genes. the detection of runx and cbfβ genes in cnidarians and sponges allows, for the first time, reconstruction of their early evolutionary history, in the period preceding the evolutionary origin of triploblasts.

in addition to the apparent reciprocity of amino acid changes that we have observed in the interacting portions of runx and cbfβ, the anomalous position of the sea urchin sequences on both the runx and cbfβ trees could be another reflection of co-evolution between these proteins. to explore this hypothesis further, we employed a variation on the protein co-evolution test proposed by sato and coworkers  <cit>  . when each of the phylogenies described above is limited to only those  <dig> taxa contained in both phylogenies, and the tree topologies are constrained to the accepted organismal phylogeny , the resultant branch lengths on the two trees are significantly and strongly correlated . in contrast, the branch lengths from a glyceraldehyde-phosphate-dehydrogenase phylogeny, which is a "house-keeping" gene serving as a control, are not correlated with the runx branch lengths  and only weakly correlated with the branch lengths from the cbfβ phylogeny .

runx and cbfβ are expressed in overlapping, but not identical, regions of the nematostella head and tentacle ectoderm
to determine if expression of nv-runx and nv-cbfβ is spatially restricted along the primary body axis of the adult polyp we performed reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction  on equal amounts of total rna isolated from four different body regions:  tentacles,  head region,  body column, and  physal region. using two different primer pairs, runx expression was detected in the tentacles and head/pharyngeal region but not the body column or physa . high levels of cbfβ expression were observed in the tentacles and head/pharyngeal regions; although a lower level of cbfβ expression could also be detected in the body column. no cbfβ expression was observed in the physal region.

we next used whole mount in-situ hybridization, followed by cryosectioning, to characterize the spatial expression of runx and cbfβ. in agreement with the rt-pcr results, nv-runx was expressed mainly in the tentacles, with the strongest expression seen in the tentacle tips . we found that the expression is limited to small foci found exclusively in the ectoderm, often in tight association with nematocytes . sporadic runx-expressing cells were also seen in the outer body wall in the pharyngeal region . the same general pattern of runx expression was observed in ten different anemones using two different anti-sense rna probes – a  <dig> nucleotide probe corresponding to exons 1– <dig> of the gene  as well as a  <dig>  kb probe corresponding to the entire orf . no staining was observed with the complementary negative control sense-strand rna probes . while the general pattern of expression was similar in all of the individual anemones, possible differences in the relative level of expression were observed between different animals within the same experiment .

similar to runx, cbfβ is expressed in the tentacle ectoderm, with the strongest staining in the tentacle tips . also like runx, the cbfβ-expressing cells are located primarily in the basal layer of the ectoderm and in close association with large microbasic mastigophore nematocytes, which are a major component of this cell-rich region of the animal . however, in contrast to runx, some of the individual animals assayed also expressed cbfβ in the mouth region .

discussion
runx and cbfβ evolution
a primary motivation for performing the phylogenetic analysis was to decipher the relationships among the multiple paralogs that are found in some taxa, and to pinpoint the ancestral lineages in which gene duplications must have occurred in the runx and/or cbfβ genes. the presence of only a single runx locus in porifera and cnidaria, two of the most ancient animal phyla, along with the fact that both the maximum likelihood  and neighbor-joining  trees can be rooted such that the sponge and cnidarian sequences emerge from the base of the tree, supports the hypothesis that the eumetazoan ancestor possessed only a single runx locus. subsequently, it appears that this ancestral runx gene underwent independent duplications within arthropods and within vertebrates. while the non-insect arthropods are only known to possess single runx genes, and the runt <dig> sequences from spider , mite , and crayfish  cluster together, distinct runt, runxa, and lozenge genes are found in both anopholes and drosophila. drosophila also possesses a fourth runx paralog, runtb. this requires at least three gene duplications among dipteran insects, with at least two of these gene duplications clearly predating the divergence between fruit fly and mosquito. while only single runx proteins are known from the non-vertebrate chordates , there are three human paralogs , which cluster together on the tree. this is not surprising given that two rounds of whole genome duplication are known to have occurred early in vertebrate evolution, prior to the divergence of the ray-finned fishes from the lobe-finned fishes. the genomes of pufferfishes , which are ray-finned fishes, contain four runx genes  <cit> , three of which appear as orthologs of the mammalian runx1– <dig>  the additional runx gene has a relatively short coding region; it has been suggested that it represents an ancestral vertebrate runx that was subsequently lost in the tetrapod lineage  <cit> . zebrafish also contain four runx genes, however two of those are clearly runx <dig> orthologs  that likely arose from partial or whole genome duplication in the ray-finned fish lineage  <cit> . the two zebrafish runx <dig> paralogs have different functions, including the aforementioned role of runx2b in dorso-ventral axis formation  <cit> . thus, the evolution of this gene family displays dynamic changes in gene number as a result of gene duplications but also of possible gene loss.

with respect to cbfβ, the presence of only a single known cbfβ homolog in all taxa except the fruit fly, including other insects  points to a single, relatively recent gene duplication, in the lineage leading to drosophila.

on both the runx and cbfβ trees, two sea urchin sequences group together with robust bootstrap support , but fail to group with other deuterostome taxa as expected. in the case of runx, the two echinoid sequences  appear most closely related to an arthropod clade, although with relatively low bootstrap support . in the case of cbfβ, the two echinoid sequences  fail to group with a fellow echinoderm, the starfish asterina, instead appearing most closely related to a sequence from a snail . the bootstrap support for this particular grouping is <40%. the low bootstrap support indicates that the echinoids are not exhibiting a strong affinity for protostome sequences so much as they are exhibiting a lack of affinity for the more closely related deuterostome sequences. the simplest explanation for this pattern, which is also supported by echinoid-specific residues in the sequence alignments  is that these proteins have undergone echinoid-specific sequence changes that obscure their underlying affinity to other deuterostome sequences.

for both proteins, the amino acid substitution rates differ between lineages. in particular, both runx and cbfβ have diverged rapidly in drosphila and caenorhabditis, resulting in the fruit fly and nematode proteins being less similar to their human homologs than are the cnidarian proteins, despite being more closely related to humans by some  <dig> million years. drosophila runx rd's share, on average, ~72% of residues with human runx proteins  while c. elegans and c. briggsae share, on average, only ~48% residues with human rd. likewise, the cbfβ proteins from cnidarians share 57–59% of the residues with human cbfβ, respectively, whereas drosphila and c. elegans share only ~55% and 22%, respectively. these data are consistent with a number of recent studies that have noted greater genomic similarity between humans and anthozoan cnidarians than between humans and the major protostome model systems  <cit> . it remains to be seen whether the gene duplication events of both runx and cbfβ in various lineages are correlated with a diversification of the roles and regulatory networks in these organisms. such questions may be addressed through functional studies of proteins and computational predictions of regulatory networks.

runx and cbfβ binding, co-evolution, and co-expression
the majority of the amino acids involved in the binding of cbfβ to runx, and the binding of the runx-cbfβ protein complex to dna, are highly conserved between human and nematostella. our comparative protein modeling results show a high degree of stabilizing selection within the runt domain  and the rd-interacting face of cbfβ. further, the complete conservation within the metazoa of residues necessary for interaction between the rd and dna suggests that the rd-cbfβ-dna complex has been essentially conserved throughout the ~ <dig> million year history of the eumetazoa, in animals whose morphology, ecology, and physiology are as diverse as terrestrial vertebrates, aerial arthropods and marine invertebrates. interestingly, the cbfβ-binding faces of the sponge proteins are more divergent. indeed, the oscarella runx represents the longest branch on the runx phylogeny. this is interesting given that we failed to recover a cbfβ homolog from this sponge. this higher degree of sequence divergence within the cbfβ-binding face of o. carmela runx combined with the lack of cbfβ expression in developmentally mixed est pools could indicate cbfβ loss within this demosponge or indicate that this demosponge may deserve a basal position within the metazoan lineage, pre-dating the origin of cbfβ. targeted sequencing for cbfβ within genomic sequence of o. carmela may help resolve this.

notably, where the nematostella cbfβ protein differs from human, there appear to be compensatory changes in the nematostella rd. the possibility of compensatory substitutions in the rd and cbfβ proteins of sea anemone and human suggests that functional constraints require that directional selection on either protein may promote commensurate divergence in its partner. to test this hypothesis over broad phylogenetic distances, we employed a variation on the protein co-evolution test proposed by  <cit> . our results indicate a significant and highly predictive relationship between the branch lengths of runx and cbfβ phylogenetic trees, providing further support that the evolutionary rates of these two domains are correlated.

however, shared evolutionary histories could result in significant correlations between any pair of proteins  <cit> . for example, any two proteins will exhibit a correlation if they have evolved in clock-like fashion on the same underlying phylogeny, or if the species from which they are derived differ substantially in their overall rates of molecular evolution. to evaluate the contribution of shared history to the observed correlation, we can compare proteins that do not interact functionally. we observed no correlation between the molecular evolution of runx and gapdh, a well-conserved 'house-keeping' gene, and we observed only a weak correlation between cbfβ and gapdh . taken together with the reciprocal amino acid changes that have occurred over deep evolutionary divergences, this strongly suggests that these two proteins have co-evolved from sponges and cnidarians to humans to maintain their ability to co-regulate the transcription of target genes.

a role for runx and cbfβ in nerve cells of adult nematostella?
in the adult anemone, nv-runx is expressed in scattered ectodermal cells, mainly in the tentacles, and predominantly in the tentacle tips. scattered cells in the body wall ectoderm also express runx. similarly, nv-cbfβ is expressed most strongly in the ectoderm of the tentacle tips. however, in contrast to runx, cbfβ is also expressed in the mouth and upper portion of the pharynx. thus, nv-runx and nv-cbfβ are expressed in similar, but possibly not completely overlapping regions of the anemone head and tentacles. here, as in other systems, including mammals  <cit>  and sea-urchins  <cit> , cbfβ likely functions together with runx in the sites where they overlap. at other sites, where cbfβ is expressed in the absence of runx, cbfβ may have other roles, which may involve other partners  <cit> .

the tentacles of sea anemones, where the expression of both runx and cbfβ is most predominant, are the part of the animal involved in prey capture and manipulation. this region is relatively poor in cell types, with the majority of differentiated cell types present involved either in prey capture  or in its detection  . the nematocytes themselves do not seem to express either runx or cbfβ, nor do the gland/mucous cells, which are found exclusively in the apical part of the ectoderm . thus, we speculate that the cells expressing runx and cbfβ are probably neuronal cells. alternatively, they could be precursors of one of the above differentiated cell types – most likely of nematocytes and spirocytes, which are highly enriched in the tentacles, especially towards the distal tips.

in vertebrates, runx proteins are known to play critical roles in neural differentiation. for example, in mice, runx <dig> and runx <dig> influence the development and survival of sensory neurons in several ganglia types such as dorsal root ganglia  <cit> . in mice, runx <dig> is essential for development of the monosynaptic stretch reflex arc  <cit>  the simplest and most ancient neuronal circuit. based on these findings, it was speculated that a runx <dig> ortholog may play an analogous role in the highly similar anemone nematocysts response circuit  <cit> . the spatial expression of runx and cbfβ in adult nematostella suggests that these proteins might also be involved in neural differentiation.

taken together, our results suggest a putative role for runx in the maintenance of specific neurons in the tentacles of adult anemones, in addition to the diversity of other networks and functions in which runx is also likely involved. in vertebrates, runx proteins regulate disparate functions at different developmental stages, in each case by interacting with a different regulatory network  <cit> . it is noteworthy that an est encoding the acropora ortholog of cbfβ was detected in a library from a pre-settlement planula larva stage  <cit> . this suggests that in corals runx and cbfβ are expressed during embryonic and larval development. future studies involving microarray analysis of gene expression, chip-chip analysis of nv-runx target genes, and gene knockdown experiments may help identify the various roles played by nv-runx, nv-cbfβ, and their regulatory networks at different stages in the life history of nematostella.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we showed that runx and cbfβ are found in the most basal metazoans, cnidarians and sponges, and that in these animals they probably interact and bind dna in a manner similar to that found in humans. structural motifs involved in the regulation of the runx-cbfβ pair, such as the runx c-terminal groucho binding motif and the cysteine redox switches, are also conserved, suggesting that other parts of the regulatory network in which runx and cbfβ are embedded are also evolutionarily conserved. both runx and cbfβ are expressed mainly in small cells within the ectoderm of the tentacles, the identity of which still await proof, but may be sensory neurons or their precursors.

