BACKGROUND
rhodocista centenaria, first described as rhodospirillum centenum  <cit>  is a thermotolerant phototrophic purple bacterium of the α-proteobacteria group isolated from hot springs in wyoming  <dig>  the slightly spiroid or vibrioid shaped cells are motile by means of a single long flagellum, their intracellular photosynthetic membranes are lamellar and their in vivo absorption spectra show features almost indistinguishable from those of rhodospirillum rubrum  <cit> . however, 16s rrna analysis elucidated considerable differences between the species, hence rhodocista was separated into a new genus  <cit> , now consisting of three species  <cit> . r. centenaria is closely related to the plant-associated genus azospirillum  <cit> . as virtually all phototrophic organisms, r. centenaria exhibits a sensory response to light originally described as "schreckbewegung"  <cit> . engelmann and also manten  <cit>  found that r. rubrum cells accumulated in the most intense area of light gradients between wavelengths  <dig> and  <dig> nm. r. centenaria shows a particularly unique form of macroscopic phototactic behaviour, first described in  <dig> by gest and coworkers  <cit> . on solid media, the phototactic colonies move towards longwave light and away from light with wavelengths less than  <dig> nm  <cit> . r. centenaria develops lateral flagella in viscous media or on solidified surfaces. these flagella consist of a distinct flagellin whose expression is controlled by specific mot and fli genes  <cit> .

for r. centenaria, a close relationship between chemotaxis and the phototactic response has been found  <cit> . as seen with many other photosynthetic bacteria, r. centenaria has multiple chemotaxis operons with distinct functions  <cit> . the chemotaxis gene cluster has been well characterized and most of the genes are similar to those of other gram negative bacteria like escherichia coli. in brief, the histidine kinase chea is linked to the chemotactic receptors  by the chew protein  <cit> . this trimeric receptor complex controls the phosphorylation level of the response regulator chey. activated chey  interacts directly with the motor of the flagella to control swimming direction. the dephosphorylation of chey-p occurs spontaneously, only in enterobacteria this reaction is accelerated by the phosphatase chez. for adaptation, cheb and its antagonist cher remove or add methyl groups to the receptors, respectively.

in r. centenaria, the two central components of the chemotactic signal transduction cascade, namely chea and chey, are present as the fusion protein rc-cheay located in the first chemotactic operon  <cit> , a situation that is also observed in helicobacter  <cit> . whereas the role of the chey-domain of the cheay protein in h. pylori seems to be a phosphate sink, in r. centenaria, the function of rc-cheay remains still unclear. while che proteins are generally involved in chemotactic responses, they were also shown to affect the phototactic response in r. centenaria as demonstrated by the analysis of many che mutants  <cit> .

in the last decade, bacterial photoreactive proteins like phytochromes, previously thought to be a unique feature in plants, have been identified as photoactive yellow proteins  and have now been extensively studied in a variety of eubacterial species . for r. centenaria, a pyp-like protein, ppr, was described in  <dig> by bauer and colleagues  <cit> . the large fusion protein ppr consists of three functional domains, an n-terminal pyp domain with the cinnamic acid chromophore, the central phytochrome-like bilin attachment domain bbd and the c-terminal histidine kinase domain pph which autophosphorylates an essential histidine residue  <cit> . although some pyp proteins have been crystallized and biophysically characterized in great detail , no distinct physiological role could be attested to these unique proteins. a ppr-deletion mutant lacking amino acid residues 114- <dig> did not show any alterations in phototactic behaviour, instead exhibited a strongly deregulated expression of the chalcone synthase gene suggesting a regulatory function in the polyketide synthesis  <cit> . although there is no obvious direct involvement of ppr in the phototactic or scotophobic reaction, an interaction with the chemotactic signal transduction components is plausible to regulate general phosphorylation levels or transduce phosphoryl groups to a yet unknown light-dependent signal transducing protein. we therefore analysed whether the ppr protein and in particular its phosphorylating kinase domain pph interacts with the rc-che proteins.

RESULTS
the chemotactic response of e. coli is inhibited by the expression of ppr
the chemotactic network in e. coli is very sensitive to alterations in the expression level and stoichiometry of the chemotactic proteins ec-chew  <cit>  and ec-chea  <cit>  as well as the mcp receptors  <cit> . when high amounts of single proteins of the chemotactic network are expressed a non-responding chemotactic phenotype is observed, similar to a che deletion mutant  <cit> . to investigate whether the ppr protein of r. centenaria participates in the chemotactic network, ppr and, in particular, its histidine kinase domain pph were overexpressed in the chemotactic wild-type strain e. coli mm <dig>  to this end, the plasmids pbad-ppr, pbad-pph and pbad-pphh670a encoding the entire photoreceptor ppr, the c-terminal histidine kinase domain pph and the mutant pphh670a protein, respectively , were used to transform e. coli mm <dig>  these plasmids carry the cloned genes under the control of the arabinose-inducible arabad promoter. first, protein expression was analyzed by sds-page and coomassie-blue staining. all three ppr-derived proteins were expressed in the presence of arabinose  but not in the presence of fructose . next, the chemotactic behaviour of the transformed cells was assayed. tb swarm agar plates, containing either arabinose or fructose were inoculated with the respective cells, incubated for  <dig> hours at 37°c and the swarm diameters were compared . the chemotactic response of the wild type strain e. coli mm <dig> without or with the empty pbad vector was clearly visible by the formation of a swarming ring . the response was completely abolished when cells containing the plasmids pbad-ppr or pbad-pph were grown in the presence of arabinose. in these cases no swarm rings were visible . however, the expression of the mutant protein pph-h670a where the histidine residue at position  <dig> has been substituted with an alanine residue, led to an only intermediate chemotactic response . the histidine residue at  <dig> of pph is a putative phosphorylation site and is located in a h-box region  <cit> . all strains were also analyzed on swarm plates containing  <dig> % fructose that did not induce the expression of the ppr proteins and did not significantly affect the size of the swarming rings . as a control, the histidine kinase kdpe from r. centenaria was overexpressed which did not interfere with the chemotactic swarming . to rule out that the inhibitory effect on chemotaxis is caused by a reduced growth rate due to the heterologous expression of the rhodocista proteins, growth curves of induced and non-induced and empty plasmid control cells were recorded and compared. no differences in growth rates depending on the presence of arabinose or fructose in the media were found .

to investigate the inhibitory effect of the ppr protein on chemotaxis in more detail capillary assays with a chemotactic chamber  <cit>  were performed. e. coli mm  <dig> was transformed with pbad-pph and pbad-pphh670a, respectively. the cells were grown in minimal medium a  containing  <dig> % fructose as a carbon source, and the heterologous protein expression was induced by the addition of arabinose when the culture reached an optical density of  <dig> . the number of cells entering a capillary containing the attractant aspartate  was determined after  <dig> min of incubation. to normalize the chemotactic activity the chemotactic inhibition  was evaluated by dividing the colony forming units in the control samples  by the colony forming units in the experiment onset . consequently, a high ci value indicates that the chemotactic response is blocked whereas a low ci value reflects a normal chemotaxis. e. coli cells expressing pph showed a nearly complete absence of a chemotactic response to aspartate after  <dig> min . the chemotactic inhibition was calculated to  <dig> . in contrast, cells grown with  <dig> % fructose  or cells harbouring the pbad vector , showed a ci of approximately  <dig> . corroborating the results with the swarm plates shown in figure 2b, the expression of the pph-h670a mutant protein lead to an only reduced chemotactic inhibition of  <dig>  and did not reach the wild type ci value. to check whether the inhibitory effect depends on the amount of pph protein, capillary chemotaxis assays with different induction times were performed . at the respective time, the expression of pph was analysed by sds-page . our results indicate that the chemotactic inhibition increases with time and depends on the amount of pph protein expressed. a similar effect of ec-chew overexpression on chemotaxis has been observed  <cit> . the cellular protein level of pph was verified in parallel by sds-page and westernblot analysis . taken together, the results strongly indicate that the pph interferes with the chemotactic pathway in e. coli.

the pph protein interacts with rc-chew in an atp-dependent manner
to investigate in detail with which components of the rc chemotactic pathway ppr and its c-terminal histidine kinase domain pph interact, the binding to rc-chew or rc-chea was analyzed. first, purified r. centenaria chew  containing an n-terminal his-tag and in vitro translated and radiolabelled pph protein were tested for interaction by matrix-assisted coelution. the rc-chew protein as a bait was heterologously expressed in e. coli c <dig> and purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography . the prey protein pph was translated in vitro and labelled with -l-methionine . to avoid unspecific binding of pph to the cu sepharose, a buffer containing  <dig> mm imidazole was used. in the assay, both the bait and prey protein were mixed, incubated overnight at 37°c and then bound to the cu sepharose column. after intensive washing the bound protein was eluted, separated by sds-page and analysed by autoradiography. as shown in figure 4a, the pph protein co-elutes in the elution fractions containing rc-chew  whereas no pph protein was detected in the elution fraction of the control without rc-chew . the co-elution rate was calculated to 13% of the input pph protein . to address the possible role of atp in the binding process of the histidine kinase domain to rc-chew, co-elution experiments in the presence of increasing amounts of added atp  were performed. the data clearly show that the stepwise addition of atp increased the amount of the rc-chew-bound pph up to 24% . when, for a control, the residual atp was hydrolyzed by adding apyrase, the binding decreased to 5%. it should be considered that in all experiments a low atp level  is required to allow in vitro transcription and translation. this explains why in the experiment with apyrase a lower binding was observed than when no additional atp was added.

to calculate the dissociation constant  of the binding between the histidine kinase domain pph and rc-chew, resonant mirror spectroscopy experiments with a biosensor cuvette system were performed. for these experiments pph with a c-terminal strep-tag and an n-terminal his-tag was purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography . an aminosilane cuvette was activated and coated with streptactin. the purified pph protein was then bound via its strep-tag to the immobilized streptactin. increasing concentrations of purified rc-chew were added and the binding was recorded during  <dig> minutes. the amount of bound rc-chew and the fractional saturations  were calculated for each experiment and the data were displayed in a plot against the added rc-chew concentration . a hyperbolic binding curve was revealed and the dissociation constant was calculated to kd =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm. therefore, the binding of the histidine kinase domain pph to rc-chew of r. centenaria appears to be stronger than the binding between the histidine kinase ec-chea and ec-chew that has been analysed in e. coli  <cit> .

the histidine kinase pph is present in a complex with rc-chew and rc-cheay
since the chemotactic mcp receptor proteins in e. coli and rhodobacter sphaeroides were found in heterooligomeric complexes together with chew and chea  <cit> , we investigated whether the pph protein can bind to rc-cheay in the presence of rc-chew. pull-down experiments with purified rc-chew containing an n-terminal his-tag and in vitro translated and radioactively labelled pph and rc-cheay proteins were performed . the translation reaction with added rc-chew protein was incubated overnight and loaded on an affinity column . unbound proteins were removed by extensive washing steps and the specificly bound proteins were eluted by imidazol and analyzed by sds-page, coomassie staining and autoradiography. the pph protein as well as rc-cheay co-eluted together with rc-chew . in addition to the cheay and pph protein bands at the expected positions, smaller bands were detected that presumably result from incomplete translation of pph and rc-cheay, respectively. the results indicate that a complex composed of rc-chew, cheay and the histidine kinase domain pph may be formed in vitro. when rc-cheay protein was incubated with only rc-chew, it was also found in the elution fraction  suggesting that rc-cheay itself binds to rc-chew. this result is not unexpected since in e. coli ec-chea is also found attached to ec-chew . when only the pph protein was incubated with rc-chew , both proteins co-eluted from the cu sepharose column, showing that pph presumably binds directly to rc-chew. as control experiments, the proteins were analysed in the absence of rc-chew  showing no elution of pph or rc-cheay.

taken together, the results give preliminary evidence that the c-terminal histidine kinase domain pph of the photosensor protein ppr assembles in vitro into a trimeric complex of pph, rc-chew and rc-cheay.

the oligomeric state of the histidine kinase domain pph
sequence alignments of the pph domain with other bacterial histidine kinases  identifies a predicted dimerization motif in the n-terminal part of pph. the pph sequence shows an identity of 27% and a similarity of about 57% compared to the dimerization domain of envz . to investigate whether the pph protein can form a dimer in vitro, we performed gel filtration under non-reducing conditions. crude soluble extracts of pph expressing e. coli cells were separated on a sephadex g- <dig> column and analyzed by sds-page and westernblotting. the pph protein eluted in fractions 43- <dig> . the molecular weight of the pph protein complexes was estimated by comparison with standard proteins on the same column. a majority of the pph protein eluted at about  <dig> kda  but a substantial amount was found as dimers at  <dig> kda . a higher molecular weight form of pph was found in fraction 22/ <dig> above the exclusion limit of the column  and contains most likely higher aggregates which were also previously observed with ppr  <cit> . to verify the oligomeric states, fractions 43- <dig> were run on a non-reducing sds-page. two protein bands with a molecular weight of about  <dig> and  <dig> kda, respectively, were detected and analyzed by maldi-tof mass spectroscopy. the analysis clearly identified the ppr photoreceptor .

the pph protein expressed in r. centenaria is found in a complex with rc-chew
to test whether the pph protein also assembles into a complex in r. centenaria cells, a plasmid containing an oxygen regulated puc promoter and an n-terminally his-tagged and c-terminally strep-tagged histidine kinase domain gene was constructed. this plasmid was transferred from e. coli rr <dig>  <cit>  to r. centenaria by conjugation and the protein expression was induced by anaerobic growth conditions . the culture was continued at 42°c for  <dig> h and the pph protein was purified using streptactin sepharose. the elution fractions were analyzed by sds-page, silver staining  and western blotting . at the expected molecular weight of about  <dig> kda no monomeric pph protein was detectable . in contrast, two bands corresponding to a molecular weight of about  <dig> kda and  <dig> kda, respectively, were found. the  <dig> kda band was recognized by an antibody to the strep-tag epitope , that is present at the c-terminus of pph. the  <dig> kda band was also recognized by the antibody to rc-chew , suggesting that this band contains a pph dimer and rc-chew protein. the  <dig> kda band represents a non-identified protein that bound to the immobilized pph. in conclusion, a stable complex of pph and chew can be isolated from r. centenaria cells confirming our in vitro findings.

discussion
since photosynthetic bacteria have to locate their habitat with optimal light conditions, specialized sensor systems and signal transduction cascades involving different chromophores arose during evolution . the blue light sensitive ppr protein of r. centenaria consists of three distinct domains, the pyp domain containing a cinnamic acid chromophore, the phytochrome-like bilin binding domain and the histidine kinase domain pph . the structural organization suggests that the protein is involved in a light-dependent signaling pathway similar to chemotaxis. since r. centenaria exhibits a strikingly obvious phototactic behavior it is compelling to assume that the ppr protein is involved in this reaction. light with a wavelength of above  <dig> nm is attractive, whereas light with less than  <dig> nm acts as a repellent  <cit> . the absorption maximum of a prototypical cinnamic acid chromophore in a pyp light sensor is at about  <dig> nm  <cit> , whereas the phytochrome-linked biliverdin absorbs red light, suggesting that the latter could function as an attractant sensor. recently, cusanovich and co-workers showed that the holo-ppr of r. centenaria has absorption maxima at  <dig> nm ,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nm   <cit>  corresponding to the typical absorption spectrum of pyp  <cit>  and phytochromes  <cit> . the phytochromes taxd <dig>  cph <dig> and plpa were found to be involved in the phototactic reaction of synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig>  a finding that supports the idea of a participation of the ppr sensor in the phototactic response of r. centenaria  <cit> .

the data presented here show that the histidine kinase pph domain of the ppr receptor is found in a complex with rc-chew when isolated from r. centenaria . the interaction of pph and rc-chew was also observed in vitro with purified components showing a strong affinity with a kd of about  <dig> nm . in contrast to the trimeric tsr-chea-chew complex that is formed in e. coli with an affinity of about  <dig> μm  <cit>  we observed that the complex formation of pph and rc-chew is clearly atp-dependent . it is likely that the pph-chew complex is capable to bind rc-cheay  consistent with the idea that the chemotactic network is functioning in the presence of pph. however, the function of the rc-cheay fusion protein in this signaling cascade remains unclear. preliminary transphosphorylation experiments that we perfomed indicate that the chey domain of the rc-cheay protein acts as a phosphate receiver domain and that the chey domain acts as a phosphate sink similar as it has been described for the chemotactic system in rhizobium meliloti and helicobacter pylori  <cit> . the involvement of ppr in chemotaxis is also supported from the experiments we performed with e. coli. the heterologous expression of pph has a strong inhibitory effect on chemotaxis as demonstrated by the swarm assay  and the capillary assay . both assays showed that upon expression of ppr or pph the chemotaxis of e. coli is turned off whereas expression of the r. centenaria histidine kinase kdpe had no effect. this suggests that the ppr protein interacts with ec-chew although the chew proteins of e. coli and r. centenaria show a homology of only about 59% and an identity of 28%  <cit> . however, the structural analysis suggests that all chew proteins of different species share common features  <cit> . we propose that the binding of the ppr protein results in a non-functional ec-chew-ppr complex that is inhibitory for chemotaxis  due to the inactivation of ec-chew. remarkedly, a mutant of the predicted phosphorylation site of pph with the histidine at position  <dig> being changed to an alanine residue had a less inhibitory effect on chemotaxis, suggesting that the kinase activity of pph has a functional role in chew binding. similar inhibitory effects on chemotaxis have been observed for e. coli when ec-chew, ec-chea or the mcp-receptors were overproduced  <cit> . in addition, such an inhibitory effect was also observed when chemotactic proteins from other organisms like rhodobacter capsulatus  <cit>  or leptospira interrogans  <cit>  were heterologously expressed in e. coli.

we found that the histidine kinase domain pph was mainly present as a monomer when expressed in e. coli  and only a minor fraction was found as dimers. most other bacterial histidine kinases that have been investigated so far were found to be homodimers  <cit> . accordingly, when the plasmid encoded pph protein was isolated from r. centenaria it appeared in a complex consisting of chew and most likely a dimer of pph .

CONCLUSIONS
working in a network together with the perception of chemical substrates by the chemotactic signal transduction cascade, ppr could very well be a part of a complex sensory machinery to tune metabolic and phototrophic processes in phototrophic bacteria. the perception of light may only be an oblique indicator for the metabolic state of a r. centenaria cell as is suggested by its influence on cyst formation  <cit> . therefore, ppr could work in parallel with the photosynthetic electron transport sensor ptr of r. centenaria  <cit>  to specifically regulate cellular motility and sense the metabolic state of the cell.

