BACKGROUND
emerging or re-emerging infectious agents are rarely subject of extensive preceding experimental investigations by sheer implication of their definition, as they would, for example, exist for model pathogens such as salmonella. even when their potential for global pandemics or for being used as biothreat agents is recognized, in-depth data cannot be easily generated in a timely fashion. while high-throughput data such as full genome sequences, microarray gene expression profiles, or proteomic data can be obtained quite efficiently for the pathogen in question, the context for proper interpretation of such data is often missing. one such case is represented by francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia  <cit> . this pathogen is highly infectious and can cause fatal systemic disease after inhalation of as little as  <dig> organisms. this extremely low infectious dose, ease of transmission via the aerosol route, and previous attempts to weaponize this microbe have led to its recognition as a biothreat agent  <cit> . extensive research over the last years in the field of tularemia after the full potential of francisella had been recognized has been focused on vaccine development, virulence factors, and whole genomic sequencing of francisella isolates. there are few data sets for the physiological characterization of this bacterium during infection. its central metabolic pathways still remain largely uncharacterized. however, growth of francisella within macrophages or other potential host cells depends on its ability to utilize available nutrients and exploit this niche by presumably having to adjust its metabolism  <cit> . this is critical for the success of francisella as an intracellular pathogen. at the same time, critical bacterial metabolic pathways represent the most likely targets for novel antibacterial strategies. in this setting computational systems biology approaches may facilitate the integration of high-throughput data, exclude redundant possibilities, and suggest novel hypotheses.

constraints-based systems analysis after reconstruction of genome scale metabolic networks has emerged as a suitable tool for such tasks  <cit> . this type of reconstruction allows the evaluation of metabolic networks through flux balance and variability analysis, in silico gene deletion analysis, robustness analysis, and the successive application of other suitable constraints. such analysis has already been implemented for organisms from all the three classes  including e. coli  <cit> , salmonella  <cit> , haemophilus  <cit> , saccharomyces  <cit> , and leishmania  <cit> . for these organisms, large traditional and high-throughput experimental datasets were available. here we employ this approach for francisella tularensis with the goal of providing a framework for the integration of existing high-throughput data that might be used for interrogating pathogenesis and for identifying novel antibacterial targets.

RESULTS
reconstruction and analysis of the metabolic network of f. tularensis
the reconstruction process for building a metabolic network for francisella tularensis subspecies holarctica vaccine strain  is described in detail in material and methods and followed previously described procedures  <cit> . the network reconstruction statistics for irs <dig>  which has  <dig> genes,  <dig> proteins, and  <dig> intra-system reactions, are summarized in figure 1a. throughout this manuscript irs <dig> refers to the metabolic reconstruction of francisella lvs. the low number of reactions in the reconstruction as compared to similar models like e. coli and salmonella is the result of a reduced set of metabolic pathways in this organism and of limited legacy data to confirm the annotation of its genome. the reconstruction includes  <dig> single gene protein reaction relationships  and  <dig> multigene gprs . the genes included in the model represent those for which genomic, transcriptomic or physiological data exist in the literature in the form of gene-protein specific biochemistry or large-scale screens. genes with high sequence homology to genes in other francisella strains such as schu <dig> or osu <dig> are also included in the model. there are  <dig> non-gene associated reactions included in the model that lack experimental evidence but are essential for validation and prediction of a physiological phenotype in silico .

gap analysis of the model identified several gaps in the network. there are gaps in a network when certain metabolites can only be consumed or produced. since francisella has several pathways that are disrupted or that miss genes  <cit> , there are  <dig> dead end metabolites in the francisella network . the reactions catalyzed by these genes form a set of reactions whose presence or absence provide important hypotheses on possible connecting reactions that can be further experimentally investigated and can thus lead to efficient annotation of the genome. with this, a more functionally complete network can be obtained.

the distribution of pathway functions are summarized in figure 1b. twenty five percent of those constitute amino acid metabolism  <cit> . when these biosynthetic pathways are disrupted the respective compound is required as an essential component of a synthetic medium for growth. the partial amino acid pathways identified that are essential for growth  <cit>  include those for asp, cys, ser, thr, met, tyr, lys, pro, arg, his, val, ile, and leu and comprise a significant part of the bacterial network.

pathways identified to be incomplete by gap analysis and confirmed using gene sequence data are discussed below. central metabolic pathways that are incomplete include the pentose phosphate pathway and glycolysis. the genome encodes all glycolytic genes but lacks the phosphofructokinase  gene. constraints based analysis suggests that the presence of fructose bisphosphatase , allows francisella to build up complex carbohydrates by gluconeogenesis. this suggests the use of the embden-meyerhof-parnas  pathway for gluconeogenesis rather than glycolysis. the pathogen is then able to synthesize glucose from pyruvate, since it encodes phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxylase. this allows gluconeogenesis starting from oxaloacetate. despite an incomplete glycolytic pathway and only an oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway, genes predicted to encode sugar uptake systems might at least ensure partial energy generation via the oxidization of hexoses. the retention of transketolase and transaldolase genes of the nonoxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway indicates the ability to regenerate glucose-6-phosphate and oxidize hexoses to pyruvate, although without an energy yield. for energy generation, francisella may thus prefer to oxidize amino acids or other organic compounds derived from the host. thus network reconstruction and constraints-based analysis identify condition-dependent operational pathways that throw light on adjustments the organism is capable of making in different environments.

pyrimidine and purine metabolism  <cit>  and fatty acid biosynthesis in francisella are virtually identical to those in e.coli. several glycerol and phospholipid biosynthesis pathways are present in francisella including phosphatidyl serine. however, there is no evidence for cardiolipin synthesis  <cit> . orthologs of cardiolipin synthase are also absent. diaminopimelic acid , which is an intermediate of lysine biosynthesis and an important compound in cell wall biosynthesis, cannot be synthesized, although lysine itself can be synthesized.

although paps reductase is missing, francisella is able to reduce sulfate to sulfide for macromolecule synthesis via the aps-paps pathway and eventually fix as cysteine. this may mean broader specificities of the enzymes involved and further emphasizes the need to test experimentally the predicted gaps in francisella metabolism.

the majority of transport systems present in francisella are secondary carriers  <cit> . the remaining transport systems are abc-type carriers, consisting of a membrane-spanning permease and an atp-binding subunit. interestingly, periplasmic substrate-binding proteins, which usually are an integral part of such transport systems, are missing in most abc-type carriers. very few permeases that catalyze transport by a concentration gradient are found. in accordance with the advanced degeneration of its amino acid biosynthetic capability as discussed earlier, francisella has retained several transport systems for amino acids  <cit> , including lyse and sdac, that are both secondary carriers for branched chain and hydroxy amino acids. there is also evidence for aquaglyceroporin glpf that is involved in glycerol and water transport. it may also accept other small, uncharged organic molecules such as urea, glycine, or glycerolaldehyde as substrates. francisella seems to posses uptake systems for several minerals and salts including a low and high affinity transport system for potassium  <cit> , a secondary carrier for inorganic phosphate, and an antiport system for na/h. francisella also encodes an abc transporter for manganese and zinc.

metabolic functional states and in silico growth of francisella tularensis irs605
a constraints based flux balance model was derived from this metabolic reconstruction that can be used to predict growth both qualitatively and quantitatively under specified conditions. flux balance analysis is set up as a linear optimization problem with maximization of the biomass function as the objective. this biomass objective function was defined by conducting experimental measurements for macromolecular composition of f. tularensis. the biomass objective function was defined using experimental data and literature for chemical composition studies of f. tularensis and includes metabolites in addition to experimentally determined growth associated atp maintenance costs. we accounted for absence of phospholipids like cardiolipin that form integral parts of biomass in other organisms like e.coli and salmonella. the reconstruction of the biomass function is critical to the success of the model in predicting physiological behaviors  since it defines the drain on several metabolites to make macromolecules that determine the biomass composition.

irs <dig> was grown in silico by specifying appropriate exchange fluxes  in defined chamberlain media and using flux balance analysis  to maximize the defined biomass function . calculated physiological states of f. tularensis indicate that amino acids can provide all the bulk carbon requirements for growth. biomass production changed on varying amino acid concentration, which correlates with experimental data. thirty-six percent of the total metabolic reactions were estimated to be operational  during growth of f. tularensis on chamberlain's minimal media supplemented with glucose. this is higher than found in other bacteria such as e. coli and salmonella  <cit>  that use only 25% of their metabolic capacity to accomplish the same goal. also, higher rates of ammonia exchange  were predicted for francisella than for salmonella. ammonia exchange was estimated using flux balance analysis. amino acids were not only incorporated into biomass but also used for energy generation in francisella. the molar fraction of the amino acids in biomass was experimentally determined  and used to specify coefficients in the biomass equation. different atp requirements for growth and maintenance were thus incorporated in the francisella model by combining specific growth rates, substrate uptake data, and flux balance analysis  <cit> . the accuracy of the model-predicted growth rates is dependent on this and was confirmed by comparing physiological growth rates on different substrates . growth experiments and metabolic phenotyping for the pathogen in addition to existing literature were used for this purpose.

model irs <dig> accurately predicts gene essentiality and virulence
irs <dig> was used to perform in silico gene deletion studies that carry the potential to identify antibiotic drug targets. the model was initially used to determine condition dependent essential metabolic genes  needed for growth and survival. the conditions chosen were chamberlain media with no additional carbon/energy source, chamberlain media with six different primary carbon/energy sources , a rich media designed to simulate conditions found in macrophages, and complex mueller-hinton broth. gene essentiality was assessed by deleting single reactions in silico and testing for growth. the essentiality of a given gene was determined by calculating the maximal growth rate using fba when fluxes through associated reactions were constrained to be zero. this type of analysis identifies lethal gene deletions  and non-lethal gene deletions  are limited, more metabolic genes are essential than in the rich medium. hence, gene deletion studies with minimal media predicted 25% more essential genes than in the case of enriched environments. these genes are condition-dependent lethals  <cit>  and are based on the specific growth environment. condition-independent lethal genes are those that are lethal irrespective of the environment. unconditional essential genes were identified for irs <dig> at the intersection of the sets of such essential genes in six environmental conditions including a simulated macrophage environment.

based on this intersection set we found  <dig> condition independent lethal genes . given the scarcity of experimentally confirmed essential genes during infection with francisella, we used data on virulence genes associated with metabolism to determine if our predictions matched any existing literature  <cit> . the identification of genes essential for survival not only suggests potential virulence genes, but is also important for understanding the minimal requirements for pathogen survival in the host cell. the model predicted essential genes involved in virulence with 47% accuracy . such single gene perturbation experiments are effective in identifying components in francisella that are essential for the growth phenotype and whose deletion may cause attenuation in pathogens.

accuracy of irs <dig> virulence prediction = 47%

metabolic reactome during infection
the metabolic capacity of an organism is determined by all available alternate routes it can use to achieve its growth objective. as demonstrated for salmonella, for a pathogen it is the ability to achieve this during infection  <cit> 
. flux variability analysis  was used to identify such metabolic reactions that might be operational in different environments including that during infection. this allows us to identify the host metabolism that francisella could exploit in order to survive and replicate.

in defined medium  32% of the network reactions that span a range of flux values when biomass production was optimal were operational. the constraining conditions that represent the environment during infection in the macrophage  were derived by literature mining. based on this nutrient composition, fva identified only  <dig> reactions that can be utilized for growth via alternate routes. this suggests that only 6% of the whole genome  spans a non-zero integer flux for optimal biomass production. this is less than half of that we found in silico for salmonella irr <dig> in a similar environment  <cit> . francisella potentially minimizes utilization of its own pathways during infection. the larger reactome  during optimal growth in a minimal medium  supports this hypothesis. the condition-independent reactome for optimal growth identified  <dig> reactions .

we compared the transcriptomic data from literature  <cit>  and found that 33% of the genes are contained in the optimal reactomes under the same conditions in silico . proteomic data  <cit>  identified  <dig> metabolic proteins by itraq. 52%  of these proteins were detected in silico . the prediction of metabolic capacity as a function of the reactome is lower for francisella than for salmonella  <cit>  . a reduced metabolic genome increases dependency on availability of nutrients and necessary metabolites that cannot be made in the cell. the accurate representation of this environment is crucial in determining the predictive capability of irs <dig>  the lower predictive capability of the model in comparison to salmonella is in part due to the incomplete knowledge of exchange fluxes that represent the environment during intracellular replication and infection and in part a result of francisella's unique potential to exploit of the host niche for intracellular replication and growth.

effect of constraining metabolite flux and gene expression levels on growth
the effect of reducing expression levels of metabolic genes on growth was tested in silico using robustness analysis  <cit> . pair-wise interrogation of growth as a function of varying expression of the metabolic genes  was conducted in different environments. among the genes studied 25% of them were observed to have a differential effect on growth rate under in vivo and in vitro conditions. robustness diagrams  consist of trajectories describing the linear or non-linear relation between a specific metabolic enzyme concentration  and growth.

one particularly striking example of the power of in-silico simulation is the investigation of ph homeostasis on cell behavior. in the case of francisella grown in chamberlain medium the presence of amino acids and their consumption could compensate for excess protons by production and exchange of ammonium  ions in the opposite direction. thus media might serve as pools supplying and dissipating both acidic and basic ions as needed. the calculated ammonium flux out of irs <dig> is four times that of salmonella. the model was used to correlate the effect of changing h+ and nh4+ ion flux on growth rate in different environments using robustness analysis . the effect on growth rate was highly dependent on the media composition. completely distinct trajectories were observed in each case.

in the absence of any added carbohydrate source in chamberlain media, the rds for nh4+ and h+ ions are complex and consist of multiple trajectories and inflection points. initially, the h+ ion trajectory has a negative slope and although fluxes move on same time scales, they are in opposite direction. this implies lowering of growth rate as h+ ion flux increases. this is accompanied by a simultaneous increase in nh4+ flux  that might neutralize the environment to promote growth. the rds for both ions show a threshold above which there is a sharp decrease in growth rates. thus there exists a limiting concentration of these ions that results in a buffered environment ideally suited for growth of francisella. in the presence of glucose  in chamberlain media both nh4+ and h+ ions lower the growth rate gradually. during infection of host cells the growth seems to be independent of the nh4+or h+ ion fluxes. this type of analysis demonstrates the power of our systems approach to generate important new hypotheses that can then be addressed experimentally.

metabolic profiling of francisella
metabolic profiling of francisella was done to identify carbon and nitrogen sources  that it can utilize for respiration. different growth states of francisella were tested to identify changes in metabolic capacity based on age and growth cycle. cells were pre-cultured on rich chocolate agar plates to confluence and minimal chamberlain media with glucose to exponential, mid-log, and stationary phase.

cells in early exponential phase or chocolate agar grown cells were able to utilize a vast array of c/n sources . 60%  of substrates were utilized which is similar to that observed for several other isolates of francisella as reported in literature  <cit> . culturing on chocolate agar reduced the ability to utilize 22% of the carboxylic acids utilized otherwise . cells in stationary phase lost the ability to respire on most c/n sources . irrespective of the growth phase they are in, francisella cells can utilize  <dig> compounds including some hexoses and amino acids completely and  <dig> compounds including glycoconjugate and pyrimidine salvage intermediates partially for respiration . although the model could predict steady-state growth accurately for about 50% cases, it currently cannot predict the switch in carbon utilization patterns due to growth phase induced by regulatory effects.

differential effect of carbon sources on bacterial growth
chamberlain's chemically defined medium with the addition of different sugars was used to experimentally determine the growth and metabolism of francisella. the same media composition was also used to compute the state of francisella cells in silico for validation and predictive purposes. considerable growth was observed on all carbon sources tested as seen in the growth curves . growth followed monod kinetics on all investigated carbohydrates. f. tularensis was also able to grow in chamberlain media on amino acids without an additional carbohydrate source. increasing the amino acid concentration increased the growth rates as has been reported  <cit> . however, the specific growth rates were slower and the final biomass concentration was much lower . when we studied the effect of the concentration of glucose on specific growth rates we found an increase in growth rates with increase in glucose concentration with a sudden jump at  <dig> mg/ml , the physiological concentration of glucose). growth on the selected hexoses glucose and fructose allowed similar uptake and growth rates, while the pentoses xylose and ribose resulted in lower growth rates and biomass yields. hplc analysis of the spent media showed complete consumption of all amino acids added to the medium . this confirmed an earlier prediction of the model that amino acids can fulfill the bulk requirement for growth, although additional carbohydrates are needed to achieve better biomass yields. using fba we were able to predict the experimentally determined growth rates accurately . the corresponding uptake rates of all the compounds that define the media composition are represented as exchange fluxes in silico. the saturation constant  and maximum growth rate  on glucose were estimated using the experimental data. using the model to vary initial uptake rates of glucose and to estimate growth rate resulted in a good correlation between experimental and in silico results.

growth under microaerophillic conditions resulted in specific growth rates lower by an order of magnitude . oxygen conditions are simulated by specifying a value for the uptake rates of oxygen . the model also predicts an order of magnitude decrease in growth rate on decreasing the oxygen uptake rates  from  <dig> to  <dig>  mmol/gdcw/hr on all the carbohydrates tested. our values of less than  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr have been observed for several organisms  <cit>  under microaerobic conditions. anaerobic conditions were simulated using a zero oxygen uptake rate.

gene expression profiling
the global metabolite pool in the macrophage cytosol defines the substrate availability and nutrient milieu for francisella. variations in gene expression of metabolic pathway genes reflect changes in components of this pool as the pathogen adapts to the host environment. we selected a core set of  <dig> metabolic genes for quantitative analysis , which included genes that may be required for adaptation to the host cell by driving metabolism, energy and ph homeostasis. these genes included some house-keeping genes and genes with putative predicted function.

initially we analyzed the expression of selected metabolic genes during growth under defined culture conditions  in order to gain insight into the use of metabolic pathways that might correlate to francisella's intracellular growth. gene expression was measured quantitatively by using the genomelab expression profiler  as described in methods. the media and other physical parameters were kept identical except for carbohydrates added to the medium. during growth on all carbohydrates, the citrate synthase gene, glucose-6-p isomerase, nad dependent malic gene, pyruvate kinase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, nadh dehydrogenase, chorismate synthase, fructose  <dig>  bisphosphatase, glucose kinase, purine/pyrimidine phosphotransferase, glutamine synthase were all active indicating similar metabolic function and up-regulation of central metabolic, amino acid, and nucleotide pathways. however, some of the specific substrate utilizing, amino acid, nucleotide metabolism, and transport genes had different expression profiles, depending on the added carbon source. in the case of growth on pentoses and glycerol, glycolysis and tca cycle genes  were low  compared to growth on hexoses. during growth on pentoses and glycerol, the expression level of the glycine cleavage system  was 2-fold that found for hexoses. there was also a 2-fold increase in pep carboxylase  expression. relatively higher rates  of aromatic amino acid synthesis  also took place when francisella was growing at the expense of fructose and glycerol as carbon-sources. prpp synthesis was similar in all cases, suggesting similar rates of nucleotide biosynthesis. however, during growth on glycerol adenine phosphoribosyl transferase was very low, suggesting the de-repression by fbp. on comparison with the data where no carbohydrate was added to chamberlain media, amino acid pathway genes were expressed at higher levels than genes involved in the metabolism of fatty acid oxidation , oxidative stress response , and gluconeogenesis .

gene expression profiling during francisella infection
we then measured gene expression of selected metabolic genes in francisella recovered from macrophages after one or twenty-four hours of infection  and compared those to the profiles obtained when francisella was grown in defined culture media.

several genes of the citric acid cycle were expressed, including succinate dehydrogenase and cytochrome bdii. the data showed a glutamate decarboxylase mediated ph homeostasis in francisella within an hour after infection. atp synthesis and simultaneous proton exchange was mediated by f1f <dig> atp synthase  and was required for acid resistance and is critical to survival in the host cell. the pathogen respires oxidatively in the initial stages as indicated by increased ubiquinol oxidase activity. expression of ubiquinone/menaquinone biosynthesis gene in later stages was detected, suggesting a switch to more microaerophillic environments. co-expression of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis  and fatty acid oxidation genes at this time indicated the switch in carbon source utilization for growth and survival in the macrophage. the gene encoding pep carboxykinase was highly expressed at  <dig> hr post infection. our data also show the utilization of fatty acids as growth substrates, similar to what has been observed for mycobacteria  <cit> . several genes involved in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids were seen to be upregulated including a ligase that has been implicated in import of exogenous fatty acids. this is not surprising since fatty acids are the preferentially utilized gluconeogenic substrates during carbohydrate limiting conditions. anaplerosis seems to be mediated by pep carboxykinase, which was upregulated in francisella, and also by increased expression of several other genes involved in oxaloacetate synthesis. detection of catalase and peroxidase early on in francisella suggests a redox active phenotype for the macrophage. amido ribosyltransferase , which commits pentose phosphate pathway metabolite prpp to nucleotide biosynthesis, had increased mrna abundance but there were lowered transcript levels for adenine phosphoribosyltransferase  at  <dig> hours post infection. this might result in aicar accumulation, which is an allosteric regulator for many pathways. these data demonstrate the metabolic adaptations francisella undergoes when replicating in macrophages.

we also observed upregulation of amino acid genes , sugar metabolism genes  and genes related to fatty acid metabolism . this suggests a possible intra-macrophage environment for pathogen metabolism during infection. the up-regulation of both acetyl-coa carboxylase subunits indicates regulation of fatty acid oxidation by synthesis of malonyl-coa. the down-regulation of pep carboxykinase indicates that there may be other mechanisms of mediating anaplerosis during infection.

gene expression profiles and robustness of irs605
the model predictions of robustness analysis matched the trends in differential gene expression both in vivo and in vitro. among the genes whose expression levels do not affect the growth differently based on environment, are the nodes of metabolic network that are highly connected, like atp synthase and nadh dehydrogenase . the reactions catalyzed by the genes whose expression levels affect growth rate  and those that are not regulated are listed in figure 6a. the genes whose level of expression affect the growth rate include genes of core central metabolism including nucleotide, acid resistance, carbohydrate functional classes. figure 6b shows the effect of varying the effect of one such gene involved in glutamate/gaba antiport on growth in varying environments. the growth rate and gaba antiport flux are separated by different time scales both in vivo and in vitro. in vitro  the addition of a carbohydrate changed the robustness diagram trajectory. if the flux through the gaba/glutamate antiporter is equated to the observed mrna abundance in vitro, the growth rate is in the maximum range in silico, indicating the time of harvest in exponential growth. the homolog of this gene in e.coli forms a part of the glutamate based acid resistance system that protects e.coli from the deleterious effects of high proton concentration environments  <cit> .

discussion
metabolism of the pathogen during infection of its host is one of the most fundamental aspects of the host-pathogen relationship. emphasis on mechanisms and survival strategies aimed at evading the immune responses of the host often ignore that the host cell determines the habitat for the pathogen by limiting concentrations of certain nutrients and other essential metabolic factors. the pathogenicity of f. tularensis has been linked to the ability of the pathogen to escape from the phagosome and replicate in the cytosol  <cit> . little is known about central metabolic, amino acid, fatty acid, and nucleotide pathways used by f. tularensis during infection. this is the first comprehensive study that uses a systems biology approach to define the metabolic capacity of an experimentally ill-characterized pathogen, f. tularensis, in multiple environments including the macrophage cell. in this study we designed an in silico strain irs <dig> of francisella tularensis lvs and used it to probe the functional state of the cell.

francisella represents a pathogen with limited experimental datasets and has recently garnered increased attention because of its potential as a biothreat agent. our systems approach presented here illustrates how constraints-based computational analysis can be used under these circumstances in an efficient way to provide an analysis of the pathogen's metabolic potential during infection and provide a framework for integration of high-throughput datasets. such an approach is an important testing ground when novel therapeutics or vaccines have to be developed for an emerging pathogen for which initially only high-throughput data such as genomic and transcriptomic data are available.

francisella has a reduced genome although about a quarter of its genome codes for metabolic functions. only the penultimate or final steps of many metabolic pathways, such as those of amino acid biosynthesis, are maintained in the pathogen. it has a broad range of host specificity, which suggests that its metabolism is specifically tailored to exploit conserved eukaryotic metabolic niches. thus there may have been a certain selection pressure during the evolution of francisella to select or preserve enzymes with a broader specificity and subsequently reduce genome size and still be an inimitable intracellular pathogen. this is supported by flux balance analysis of irs <dig>  which demonstrates very stringent growth requirements, and by in silico gene deletion analysis, which predicts a high number of  <dig> condition-independent single essential genes.

experimental single gene deletion assays have become a principal established tool for studying cell behaviour  <cit> . such experiments, however, are not trivial for class a biothreat agents or for uncharacterized novel pathogens, for which genetic tools and suitable screening assays are not readily available. at the same time, gene deletion data are essential for understanding pathogenesis and, more importantly, for identifying potential targets for antibacterial intervention. our studies here demonstrate how a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction can very efficiently generate a list of lethal single gene deletions using appropriate constraints. the distribution of essential genes into functional categories shows that most belong to amino acid  and nucleotide  metabolism. the other functional categories that feature in this list include fatty acid/lipid metabolism , cell wall synthesis , cofactor biosynthesis , and extracellular transporters . only 4% of genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism  were identified as essential for the survival of francisella. the significance of amino acid metabolism is also supported by our experimental data that demonstrate that all amino acids in chamberlain media are consumed in the presence of a carbon source. asparagine, tryptophan and glutamine synthase genes are essential probably because only their precursors are available to francisella in the host cell. amino acid decarboxylases may coordinate ph homeostasis along with their corresponding antiporter. nucleotide metabolism genes are indeed critical to the survival of the pathogen with prpp being supplied by the pentose phosphate pathway. the production of several intermediates in purine and pyrimidine synthesis is essential and suggests a role as substrates for other networked pathways. interconversion of nucleotide kinases is important since all the four nucleotide kinases are predicted to be essential. several fatty acid genes are also essential and suggest the use of fatty acids as gluconeogenic substrates. combined with limited validation by transcriptomic profiling as presented in this study this approach can thus generate testable hypotheses. these will have to be validated by further experimentation, but our approach significantly reduces the possible solution space. we have also illustrated this approach by highlighting how the in silico analysis of ph homeostasis affects the metabolism and subsequently growth of francisella, which correlates well with observed experimental results.

in silico analysis of irs <dig> can be used to identify nodes in metabolic networks that act as potential controllers of overall metabolism. one such example is aicar. the adenylyosuccinate lyase gene that catalyzes its formation, is a condition independent lethal gene, essential for survival. robustness analysis showed that flux through the adenylosuccinate lyase and aicar formyltransferase genes need to be in equilibrium for optimum growth . aicar is a known allosteric regulator of several enzymes in carbohydrate and amino acid metabolic pathways  <cit> . aicar is also known to stimulate beta-oxidation and drive the equilibrium of fbp towards gluconeogenesis. fatty acid utilization for gluconeogenesis during infection is also supported by increased aicar synthesis, which is known to stimulate beta-oxidation. mrna transcript data in chamberlain media supplemented with glycerol and glucose also suggest an accumulation of aicar as a regulator of fructose bis phosphatase  gene in francisella. thus, the predicted accumulation of aicar in the macrophage suggests a role as a potential master regulator during infection. such hypotheses are not readily intuitive and further demonstrate the usefulness of a systems biology approach .

our in silico analysis was able to demonstrate that francisella undergoes changes of its metabolism when it enters its host. flux variability analysis determines all possible alternate routes for growth of a bacterium that are necessary under specific conditions. irs <dig> would thus be able to achieve this objective with a smaller reactome in nutrient rich conditions than in a minimal medium in silico. the common reactome of francisella during infection and during growth on chamberlain medium with glucose  is comprised of genes required for growth and macromolecule formation including nucleotides and fatty acids. the microbe tends to utilize preferentially specific amino acids for energy and fatty acids as gluconeogenic substrates rather than relying on carbohydrate sources like glucose and fructose during infection. these predictions have been validated by selective quantitative gene expression profiling as discussed earlier. the significance of these findings remains to be further elucidated, especially in conjunction with further research as to what particular metabolic niche the host provides and how it might deal with intracellular pathogens by restricting the availability of certain nutrients. previous metabolic analysis of the model pathogen salmonella  <cit> , which displays greater variability of its metabolic pathways during intracellular growth, revealed alternate functional pathways that are operational during infection. models and data for both organisms, however, demonstrate a robust limited set of reactions required for intracellular proliferation. thus, a systems biology approach as presented here reduces the possible solution space for novel antibacterial targets.

constraints-based modeling approaches have now been used for a variety of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, but usually for those with a significant body of experimental data. in most of these cases the modeling efforts could predict experimental findings with some accuracy and correlated with prevailing hypotheses about pathogenesis. in mycobacterium tuberculosis constraints-based modeling was also used to predict potential targets for antibacterial therapy in the mycolic acid pathways, which has always been the main attention of antituberculous research  <cit> . the challenge in pathogens which have not been extensively studied but which may gain rapid notoriety due to intentional release into the population or due to sudden unanticipated epidemic spread, is the rapid identification of achilles heels that can be exploited for intervention. our studies here demonstrate that constraints-based modeling might significantly aid such efforts.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented here the reconstruction of a genome-scale metabolic model for the biothreat agent francisella tularensis . this model has been validated by legacy data, experimental phenotypic arrays, selective determination of metabolites, and growth profiles on defined minimal media. we demonstrated an accuracy of almost 80% in predicting growth and virulence phenotypes.

analysis of the model showed significant changes of metabolism during francisella's intracellular growth in its host cell, the macrophage. this was evident in a switch from oxidative metabolism  in the initial stages of infection to glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation, and gluconeogenesis during the later stages. computational analysis also demonstrated a limited set of metabolic genes that are likely to be operational during infection. these findings were corroborated by quantitative gene-expression profiling of selected genes that code for key metabolic enzymes. prediction of synthetic lethals also identified a set of potential drug targets.

we have thus demonstrated how such an integrated systems approach can be used for pathogens with limited extended datasets to elucidate key metabolic processes during pathogenesis and identify potential novel drug targets.

