BACKGROUND
dogs colonized the americas with early human groups from asia  <cit>  and were widespread by the time europeans arrived late in the 15th century  <cit> . most of the dogs around the world today have mitochondrial dna  control region sequences that form a well-defined phylogenetic clade   <cit> . genetic characterization of ancient american dogs  revealed a unique set of mtdna sequences that clustered within this clade, but have not been observed in extant dogs . most notably, a subclade  has so far only been identified in ancient american dogs and had a frequency of 62% in ancient latin american animals  <cit> . however, most genetic studies are based on purebred dogs, and since most internationally recognized breeds today are primarily european or asian in origin, it is possible that american dog lineages have been excluded.

to determine contemporary distribution and frequency of the native american dog lineages in the americas , we analyzed the fragment of the mtdna control region comparable to available genetic data for ancient native american dogs in  <dig> village and non-breed dogs from alaska to patagonia. these included dogs living in small isolated settlements in canada, mexico, central america, the caribbean, the orinoco llanos, the andes, the amazon basin and patagonia . this novel data set allowed us to compare the genetic composition of past and present populations, and to use statistical population genetic models to estimate the maximum possible contribution of pre-columbian dogs to the extant population.

RESULTS
in the total sample of  <dig> modern american dogs , we identified  <dig> unique mtdna haplotypes, of which  <dig>  had not been identified in previous studies that included samples from around the world. haplotypes were widespread across sampled localities and we did not detect any geographic pattern. this shows that significant undescribed diversity is likely to be present in non-purebred dogs  <cit> . in addition, the level of mtdna nucleotide diversity in the present latin american population  indicates an effective population size similar to that in ancient america . 

more than half of the haplotypes  and individuals  belonged to the common clade i. however, none of the sequences was identical to nor clustered within the ancient native american dog clade ia . this striking difference in haplogroup frequencies between ancient and modern dogs suggests that very little of the mtdnas present in the extant population trace back to the native american population this could be due to either genetic drift or population discontinuity between the two time points.

we investigated the probability of this result under different demographic models and found that the observation of a private haplogroup in the ancient sample with a frequency as high as ia allows rejection of complete continuity between ancient and present populations for an extensive range of assumptions. for the constant size population model , we found that all models with an assumed ne >  <dig>  could be rejected at the 5% significance level, and the population expansion scenario was similarly rejected for initial ne >  <dig>  .

however, complete continuity is not a realistic model since introduction of european dogs is known to have occurred. thus, we also tested the possible contribution of the ancient population under a model where the current latin american dog population is a mixture of old- and new world populations . the simulations indicated that given the estimated mitochondrial , less than 10% of the ancestors of the modern american dog population are ancient american dogs . while based on inferences from a single genetic marker, this upper limit for the average genetic contribution of the ancient population is expected to apply also to the autosomal genomes of extant dogs. however, we caution that the average genome-wide native american ancestry in the extant population could be different if male and female dogs contributed an unequal number of offspring to the population , the mitochondrion has been subject to selection, or if other assumptions in the demographic model  have been violated in the recent history of the population.

we also examined if ancient american haplotypes other than those in clade ia were present in the modern sample, and identified a single modern haplotype derived from a pre-columbian haplotype . this previously undescribed haplotype was found in two dogs from the maya villages of pisté and chan kom, both in the state of yucatán, mexico  and is most closely related to the ancient mexican haplotype d <dig>  <cit> , from which it differed by a single substitution. although these communities are in close contact with modern life, they still live largely according to indigenous traditions, including a lack of organized dog husbandry. the mtdna of these two individuals may be inherited from the pre-columbian population, and thus indicate that not all ancient lineages went completely extinct.

arrival by columbus to the americas in  <dig> was quickly followed by the arrival of conquistadors, missionaries and colonists from europe with their livestock, pets, commensals and pathogens, all of which had an important impact on native american populations and culture  <cit> . our results show that native american dog populations were also impacted. the extent of this impact is unexpected because of the large historical population size of dogs in the americas and the existence of potential refugia  where native lineages could have survived. several factors might have contributed to this replacement, including direct persecution  <cit> , preference for the often larger newly arrived dogs, or susceptibility to introduced infectious diseases. future studies including more ancient and modern dogs and more genetic markers, such as neutral autosomal markers, genes of known function and y-chromosome markers, will contribute to a deeper understanding of the causes of and extent to which the native american dog population has changed since the arrival of columbus.

CONCLUSIONS
using molecular data and statistical modeling, we demonstrate that an important amount of mitochondrial haplotype diversity exists in undersampled non-breed dog populations, and that the breadth of the impact of post-columbian colonization on the americas has been underestimated. the extensive replacement of the native american dog population inferred from our data set illustrates that even cultural and biological elements that are not specific targets of invaders can be profoundly affected at a continental scale and in a short period of time.

