BACKGROUND
serial analysis of gene expression  technology  <cit>  has been described as a powerful method for genome-wide analysis of the transcriptome  <cit> . sage is a quantitative technique that allows the discovery of new genes and the detection of transcripts expressed at low levels. it is based on the generation of short  nucleotide sequences denominated tags from poly rna. these tags are then concatenated serially into long dna molecules which are sequenced in such a way that the frequency of each tag reflects the average copy number of the transcript from which it is derived  <cit> .

a critical step in the sage methodology is the tag mapping process, which refers to the unambiguous assignment of an experimentally measured tag to a given transcript. currently, the tag mapping process frequently involves the search of the observed tag sequences within the known transcriptome. commonly employed databases available for tag mapping  <cit>  use unigene clusters  <cit>  to map the experimental sage tags to the 3'-most potential tag in each expressed sequence, i.e. determining the unigene cluster that most likely represents the gene from which the experimental sage tag was derived. each unigene cluster contains a collection of expressed sequences, which consists of well-characterized mrna/cdna sequences and expressed sequence tags  that might represent a unique transcript. unfortunately, this strategy allows only for the partial assignment of tags to transcripts, because the current resources for transcriptome data are incomplete for most species and organisms. therefore, a significant fraction of the experimentally measured tags remains unidentified. in addition, there are several drawbacks of using this strategy for the mapping of sage tags to transcripts. first, a single gene may be represented in several clusters, resulting in ambiguous assignments. second, est sequences, which are the major components of the unigene clusters, have an approximated error rate estimated at 1% , resulting in a tag error assignment rate close to 10%  <cit> . third, unigene clusters do not contain the entire collection of transcripts and generally the genes represented in the est databases correspond to the most abundant transcripts; therefore some tags will not be assigned . for example, sage studies in human have shown that 60% of the  <dig> bp tags do not have any match to sequences in the unigene clusters  <cit> . the correspondence between the unmatched tags and the real transcripts was demonstrated by rt-pcr, where more than 90% of the studied unmatched tags originated from a true transcript  <cit> . fourth, mapping against unigene database does not allow the discovery of new genes, which is an important feature of sage data.

sage can be very efficient for gene discovery and annotation  <cit> . for this purpose, genome information, instead of transcriptome data, must be used in the tag-to-gene assignment process. this overcomes the problem of being limited to only those genes for which an est has been already found. furthermore, the genomic sequences have a low estimated error rate, of less than  <dig> %  <cit>  and the amount of annotated genes is significantly higher than the set of expressed sequences of an organism. therefore, genomic information is the best source for tag mapping and gene discovery by sage. however, the use of genomic information for tag-mapping represents a bioinformatics challenge because the complexity of large genomes makes tag uniqueness more improbable  <cit> .

in this work, we designed a bioinformatic method that gives different confidence values to each of the multiple hits in the genome for a tag sequence. our method allows to fully exploit the abovementioned benefits while using genomic sequences for the tag mapping process in sage. the confidence values were assigned according to several parameters that were obtained by the analysis of experimental sage tags from previous studies in yeast  <cit> . we defined this new method as hierarchical gene assignment  tag-mapping. hga provides, in most cases, an unambiguous prediction of whether tag matches correspond to a real gene or to a region that currently is annotated as intergenic. in addition, we propose a novel and more detailed classification scheme for sage tags, which gives the expected confidence level of experimental tags and facilitates the processes of discovery and searching for new genes. as a proof of concept, we demonstrate the usefulness of this new method using yeast as a model organism, which results in a more complete, reliable and comprehensive assignment of experimental sage tags, when compared to other existing methods. we end by highlighting the benefits of using this new method on larger and more complex genomes.

RESULTS
the hierarchical gene assignment procedure
in this work, we describe a new method, hga, for tag mapping in sage. the method combines existing knowledge of a genome sequence and its current annotation, along with known data from previous sage experiments, to increase the accuracy and reduce the ambiguity of the tag mapping process.

though this methodology can be applied to any organism, we describe it here with some parameter values that have been specifically tuned for saccharomyces cerevisiae. some of these parameters are highly specific to yeast and may not be as crucial for other organisms, and viceversa.

hga consists of four main steps, which are described below. a detailed flowchart of the hga method is illustrated in figure  <dig> 

step i: genome based extraction and annotation of potential sage tags
the complete genomic sequence of an organism is first searched for occurrences of the recognition site of the anchoring enzyme used in sage. the virtual potential sage-tags are then extracted by combination with a given tagging enzyme. these potential tags are then compared all-against-all in a pairwise fashion and the frequency of occurrence of each of the potential tags in the genome is determined . the transcript tables containing the known genomic annotations are used by the hga method to map the occurrence of genes in different locations of the studied genome . in the case of saccharomyces cerevisiae, its protein tables only specify the coding regions of each gene  and do not contain the assignment of the untranslated regions  at the 5' and 3' ends. therefore it was necessary to assign them. the precise assignment of these regions is particularly relevant in the case of the 3'-utrs, because it is expected that a significant fraction of experimental sage-tags will be obtained from these regions. with better knowledge of the transcriptome, a larger fraction of the utrs can be accurately assigned. for most model organisms, a large number of expressed sequence tags  are available even though only a small fraction of full length cdnas is known. therefore, the precise assignment of utrs for most of the coding genes is not possible. for yeast, about half of the known genes have a predicted 3'-utr with high confidence. these are mainly due to the identification of downstream polyadenylation signals  <cit> . for those cases where the 3'-utr is not available, a fixed length is assigned .

once all 3'-utrs are assigned for each coding gene, the hga method proceeds to complete the annotation of the coding transcripts with the assignment of the 5'-utrs. in the case of yeast, little is known about the 5'-utrs, but we used the length of  <dig> nts because more than 95% of the experimental tags that map into the 5'-utrs are observed at an upstream distance from the initial codon of the open reading frame  of less than  <dig> nts  <cit> . at this point, known and hypothetical coding transcripts are annotated as accurately and completely as possible .

after the assignment of complete coding transcripts to the genome, the rna tables are used to map and assign the non-mrna transcripts . this feature of the hga method is new, because previous works in sage have not explicitly used the non-coding transcripts to map experimental tags. though most non-coding transcripts do not contain poly tails, and thus should not be observed in sage experiments, a recent study has shown that some ribosomal rnas are polyadenylated in yeast, even in the absence of a canonical polyadenylation signal  <cit> . furthermore, priming to internal poly regions of rna molecules during reverse transcription occurs at a high frequency  <cit> . thus, we included non-coding rnas in the annotation of the yeast genome to be used for mapping of virtual sage-tags.

once all transcripts have been assigned, the remaining intergenic regions of the genome are categorized into two types, depending on whether an annotated transcript is present in the complementary strand or not . when the procedure described above completes, the genome information is organized into five categories,: 1) known transcripts, 2) hypothetical transcripts, 3) non-mrna transcripts, 4) intergenic regions where a transcript is found on the opposite strand, and 5) intergenic regions on both strands.

step ii: definition of tag classes and features
the structured genome information generated above is crossed against all the potential tags, generating a genome based annotation of virtual sage-tags. the resulting virtual tags are categorized into one of seven classes, depending on the genomic position, annotation and frequency of occurrence of each virtual sage-tag in the genome . a detailed definition for each tag class is given in table  <dig>  this new proposed tag categorization facilitates the inference of not only the assignment confidence, but also the potential knowledge that can be extracted from a particular tag .

as an important complement for this new tag classification scheme, the hga method also incorporates two additional tag features, which are intended to reduce some potential distortions that can affect the interpretation of sage results. first, all continuous stretches of eight or more adenines within each annotated transcript are recorded to account for oligo-dt priming to internal poly regions of rna molecules during reverse transcription. it has been demonstrated that this process occurs at a high frequency, causing that about 12% of ests are truncated due to internal poly priming  <cit> . therefore, those tags mapping within a transcript and situated near and upstream of an internal polyadenylation site are labelled as 'poly next'. otherwise, they are labelled as 'non-poly next'. second, the effect of splicing and its potential impact on tag sequence generation is considered. tags mapping onto a transcript at an intron-exon boundary are labelled 'potential-splice-tags'. in this case, a virtual splicing is generated in the computer and the new tag sequence that would match the spliced and mature transcript is produced and recorded as 'spliced-tag'. each 'spliced-tag' inherits the classification previously assigned to its former 'potential-spliced-tag'. in those cases where a new recognition site for the anchoring enzyme used in sage is generated after splicing, the new virtual tag sequences are generated and recorded. these tags are labelled as 'potential-new-tags' and their corresponding class is calculated de novo. the remaining tags are labelled as 'non-spliced-tags'.

step iii: extraction of probability values for tag observation from experimental data
the resulting tag classification, along with the abovementioned additional tag features, are used to select particular tags from the genome, the occurrences of which are searched for among known experimental sage-tags obtained previously and described in the literature for the studied organism. table  <dig> shows the known sage data currently available for yeast. selected tags belong to three different classes: platinum , copper  and iron  , and they are chosen because these tags can be unambiguously assigned to a unique transcript or intergenic region in the genome. thus, the probability that a given potential tag with some specific characteristics would be observed by experiment can be obtained. for those tags mapping onto a single transcript, with a unique sequence in the genome  and labelled as 'non-poly next', the likelihood to observe them experimentally, as a function of their mapping position from the 3'-utr can be calculated. in this case, we obtained several probability values depending on the transcript position the tag maps, thus incorporating the effect of partial digestions with the anchoring enzyme in sage experiments. the obtained probability function for yeast is shown in figure 2a. on the other hand, for pt class tags labelled 'poly next', a single probability value is derived from experimental data. this value gives the likelihood to obtain an experimental tag as consequence of oligo-d priming to an internal poly region during the cdna synthesis . finally, copper  and iron  tag classes correspond to tags that map to an intergenic region of the genome; the former is unique and the latter represents multiple matches in the genome. in both cases, the frequency of occurrence of these tag classes in the experimental data indicates the probability that a tag arose from an intergenic region, according to the current genome annotation of a specific organism .

to summarize, all the potential tags are assigned with a value according to the genomic regions they map and to their specific features. for example, the tags mapping into a certain transcript will have different values according to the transcript position and the proximity of internal poly sequences, whereas the tags mapping to intergenic regions have a single value.

step iv: odds ratios for confidence assignment of virtual sage-tags
the estimated probability functions described above are then crossed against all virtual genomic tags, to obtain a tag confidence assignment for each potential virtual sage-tag in the genome . the tag confidence gives the odds that an experimental tag is properly assigned to a virtual genomic tag and is represented in the hga method by one of three possible classes: 1) high confidence, 2) low confidence, or 3) undefined confidence. the class 'high confidence' means that the tag has a high probability of being correctly assigned. all virtual tags that are unique in the genome and have a single annotation are assigned to this class. in those cases where a tag sequence occurs two or more times in the genome, the odds ratios among all instances of the tag are calculated . the odds ratios for all possible pairwise combinations of tags belonging to the different categories generated in this work for the yeast organism are shown in table  <dig>  a high confidence has been arbitrarily defined by us as being at least five times more probable than all possible alternative assignments. this odds ratio figure equivalent to five is a parameter of the method and therefore could be easily modified. the class 'low confidence' is the opposite of the class 'high confidence', meaning that there is an alternative assignment for the same tag sequence that is at least five times more probable. the class 'undefined confidence' is assigned to those cases where there is not a single instance of a tag occurrence in the genome that can be assigned to the class 'high confidence' . in these cases, the tags could still be ranked based on the odds ratios that they exhibit, which is provided by the annotation generated by the hga method. some examples illustrating how the tag confidence assignment process is carried out by the hga method are shown in figure  <dig> 

odds ratios between all possible pairs of tag types are calculated based on the eight probabilities of experimental observation shown in figure  <dig>  these probabilities are included in the third row and in the second column of the table, while the tag type descriptions are provided in the first two rows and in the first column of the table. odds ratios are calculated by considering in the numerator the probability of the tag type shown in each row; the corresponding probability of the tag type shown in each column is used in the denominator. odds ratios higher than  <dig>  are highlighted with bold type font.

annotation of virtual genomic sage-tags from yeast by the hga method
we applied the hga method to the full genome of saccharomyces cerevisiae . we found that 80% of the  <dig>  potential virtual tags were unique in the genome . 54% of the potential virtual tags mapped onto intergenic regions and the remaining 46% to transcripts. about 60% of these intergenic tags had an annotated transcript on the opposite strand, though this was expected, given the high coding density present in the yeast genome.

when the hga method was applied to the yeast genome, 82% of the potential virtual tags were classified with high confidence, thus reducing the ambiguity to 2% of the potential tags, out of the 20% tags that are not unique in the genome. in other words, hga increased unambiguous annotations by 10%.

most of the virtual tags that mapped onto annotated transcripts are located within the coding region , or on the 3'-utrs  and a small fraction of the tags were found at the 5'-utrs . as should be expected, these figures correlate with the observed lengths of these elements.

the total number of virtual tags shows an inverse linear relationship to its position within the transcript, as expected, based on the fact that position number correlates with distance from the 3'-utr end, which is directly related to the probability of finding a downstream recognition site for the anchoring enzyme used in sage.

only a small fraction of the virtual tags map onto annotated introns  and non-coding rnas . very few tags map onto exon-intron boundaries , accounting for a total of  <dig> new tag sequences generated by splicing.

when we considered potential unique virtual tag sequences within the genome, most of the results described above remain unchanged . the only tag features that showed major differences with the results given above involved the tag classes and confidences. in the first case, the fraction of tags belonging to the platinum and copper classes, which represent unique tags in the genome, increased. the other tag classes decreased at least two fold in proportion to the full genome annotation, because most of the non-unique tags are repeated two times in this genome. in the case of tag confidence classes, the total number of high confidence tags remained the same, but there was a 12% increase in the fraction of this confidence class because the total number of virtual tags is lower when most of non-unique tags are discarded. the proportion of undefined confidence tags decreased about 9%, because several instances of repeated tags were eliminated. low confidence tags were not assigned because their high confidence counterparts were assigned and the low confidence tags discarded. in summary, when only the potential tag sequences that could be observed by a sage experiment are considered, a potential gain of about 3% of the high confidence class is achieved by the hga method. in the case of the yeast genome, this means that, when using this method, about  <dig>  additional experimental sage-tags could be assigned with a high confidence to a single gene or genomic region. the complete annotation of virtual sage-tags from the yeast genome generated when using this method is available as supplemental material .

mapping of experimental sage-tags from yeast against the hga-based annotation
we collected all published data available from sage experiments in yeast . we then used the annotation of virtual sage-tags generated by the hga method for this organism to map these experimental sage-tags . several of these results contributed to validate the hga method. first, about 82–90% of the experimental tags were mapped onto transcripts and not onto intergenic regions; as expected for an organism with a complete genome annotation. most of these tags belonged to the classes platinum, aluminum and gold. a large fraction of these tags mapped to coding and 3'-utr regions of transcripts, and a few mapped to 5'-utr regions. for all cases, more than 91% of the experimental tags mapped belong to the high confidence class according to the hga-based annotation. all these facts suggest that the hga method is reliable.

there are several interesting new features that are presented in this work concerning experimental sage data. first, though there are few instances, tags mapping onto introns are observed in all the sage experiments examined. second, a significant fraction of tags located near an internal poly- region within a transcript are observed in all sage experiments reported. third, in all experiments, sage-tags mapping onto non-coding rnas are observed. almost all these cases consist of tags belonging to the class 'non-poly-next' and mapping to the first position within the transcripts, suggesting that typical polyadenylation occurs at the 3' end of these transcripts . fourth, analogous to what was observed for introns, spliced-tags are observed in all sage experiments. this is the first time that experimental sage-tags are mapped onto virtual and potential spliced-tags from a genome. fifth, a significant fraction of experimental sage-tags map onto regions in the genome that currently are annotated as intergenic. though this has already been observed, it must be mentioned that it is for the first time that this analysis is carried out by considering the confidence of the assigned tags, and thus the figures obtained here should be more accurate. these intergenic tags could represent new genes not yet described in yeast. using the hga-based annotation they can now be easily ranked according to their estimated confidence, which will facilitate and optimize the experimental planning of the gene discovery process. finally, a large fraction of the experimental tags that map onto an intergenic region has an annotated transcript on the opposite strand. these tags could correspond either to new genes or to new regulatory elements such as antisense rna  <cit> . the detailed genome mapping of known experimental yeast sage-tags, generated by searching against the hga-based annotation, is available as supplemental material.

comparison of the previous experimental sage-tags assignments with the results obtained by the hga-based annotation
we compared the gene assignments of experimental sage-tags carried out by the authors of the different sage experiments reported in yeast  with those generated here by the hga method for the same experimental data . about 8–10% of the ambiguous assignments by other authors  were unambiguously classified by the hga method. in these cases, the authors of the sage experiments assigned a tag to two or more genes and the hga method assigned the same tag with a high confidence to a single gene. when the gain of unambiguous tag assignments by the hga method is calculated considering only those cases with ambiguity , independently for each tag class, the obtained figures are highly significant . for the gold, aluminum and silicon tag classes,  <dig> to 70% gain of unambiguous assignments was achieved. the gain of about 16% obtained for the tags of class silver is low because in most of these cases all tag instances mapped to the first positions of each transcript. however, this tag class is less abundant and thus it only has a small impact on the absolute gain.

we also found some conflicting assignments of unique tags to single genes between former sage experiments and those performed here . in the cases of tags belonging to the platinum class, the authors assigned a different gene than the hga method. the low number of conflicting assignments for these tags validates the hga method. for tags belonging to the copper class, the literature assigned a single gene and the hga method mapped the tag onto an intergenic region. in both cases, most of the conflicting assignments are due to the different length of 3'-utrs used by the authors  and by the hga method . this issue and its significance are discussed in the next section.

discussion
in this work, we present a novel bioinformatics method called hierarchical gene assignment or hga, for the accurate tag-to-gene mapping process in sage. the hga method has two major advantages compared to other previously described approaches  <cit> : 1) a new tag classification scheme, useful for the initial identification of sage-tag features and to infer the capabilities of tags for gene assignment and gene discovery. 2) a confidence assignment for potential sage-tags in the genome. these two advantages allow to minimize the number of unambiguous assignments of experimental tags to genomic regions in sage.

improvements in tag mapping by the hga method
several new features that improve the accuracy and completeness of the tag mapping process in sage have been incorporated by the hga method, and are detailed below.

first, instead of using only the coding regions of known and hypothetical genes, we assigned, as precisely as possible, the 3' and 5' utrs, thus generating more accurate putative transcripts. mature and immature transcripts were generated, by considering exon-intron boundaries, thus keeping and using all the relevant available genomic information and annotation. when no information about utrs was available for a given gene, we used a fixed maximal length estimated from experimental data. it is noteworthy that most conflicting assignments of unique tags observed between hga and other authors' assignments resulted from the large length of 3'-utrs previously used by these authors  <cit>  . the precise assignment of 3'-utrs is critical for accurate mapping of sage tags. this is one of the key contributions of the hga method to data analysis in sage.

second, non coding rnas, in addition to known and hypothetical genes, were also included in the genomic annotation. though the amount of tags mapping to these transcripts is low  and most of them do not contain a poly tail at the 3'-end, it is important to include them to maximize the analyzing power of sage.

third, tags mapping to intergenic regions in the genome, where an annotated transcript is found in the opposite strand, were also considered in the hga method. these supposedly intergenic tags, if experimentally observed, could account for unknown elements, such as antisense rna. we showed that a significant fraction of these tags were observed in sage experiments with yeast , even though s. cerevisiae constitutes one of the best annotated genomes available today. if est data were used to map experimental sage-tags, this information would not be obtained. hence, a method that considers these elements explicitly in the annotation process would accelerate the discovery of new regulatory elements. the identification of regulatory elements of this kind is important for a complete and accurate interpretation of the gene expression patterns.

fourth, by using genomic information in the tag mapping process, the hga method identifies tags mapping onto regions where no gene annotations exist in either of the dna strands. in this work, we demonstrated that a significant fraction of these tags were observed in sage experiments with yeasts . it is again worth mentioning that, although gene annotation for yeast is quite complete when compared to other organisms and that a significant fraction of the genome is currently annotated as coding, a large amount of intergenic tags experimentally observed by sage suggests that many unknown transcripts are still to be discovered. this observation agrees with previous results obtained from dna microarray experiments  <cit> .

fifth, the combined use of genomic information along with the generation of new putative splicing tags not explicitly available in the genome sequence, allows a more accurate estimation of tag uniqueness and, therefore, of potentially ambiguous mappings.

sixth, the inclusion of internal poly regions within annotated transcripts as possible reverse transcription initiation sources is another important feature of the hga method. this was included because recent est data analyses have shown that a significant fraction of the reverse transcription processes are initiated at internal poly regions of more than  <dig> consecutive adenines  <cit> . the results with poly-next tags from sage experiments described here  confirmed this feature, strongly supporting its consideration in accurately mapping experimental tags onto genes. interestingly, about 5% of the virtual tags mapped onto annotated transcripts are classified as 'poly-next', accounting for a total of  <dig>  occurrences in the genome, suggesting that these instances should not be overlooked when mapping experimental tags onto a genome. moreover, in the case of pt class and 'poly next' tags, the position of the tag within the transcript should not be relevant for the probability that a tag was experimentally observed. we verified this and found that, as expected, a small and insignificant effect was observed. further, given the low proportion of 'poly next' tags occurrence, the inclusion of a position dependent probability for 'poly next' tags would translate into a small number of experimental observations for several positions within the transcript, which would add noise to the actual estimated probability functions. when sufficient experimental data from sage experiments is available, a position dependent probability function for pt class and 'poly next' tags should be derived.

seventh, the new definition of tag classes considered by the hga method  facilitates the understanding of the tag origin from a genome along with an initial estimation of the confidence that this tag could be observed in a sage experiment.

finally, the calculation of tag probabilities from experimental data based on the new tag classification, along with other tag features, allows the hga method to get the odds or confidence that a tag would be experimentally observed when several instances of a tag sequence are present in the genome. this constitutes the core of the hga method and one of the most important contributions of this work to reduce the number of unambiguous tag assignments in sage. in addition, we also demonstrated that about 20% of the experimental tags mapping onto a transcript are located from the second tag position and above. if this information is not considered in the tag-to-gene mapping process, a substantial fraction of the experimental tags will be missed. finally, it is important to note that even in those cases where the ambiguity could not be completely removed, the hga method could reduce the number of possible assignments, thus reducing the overall ambiguity for a particular tag with multiple occurrences in the genome.

parameters depending on genome annotation
the score of intergenic tags is strongly dependent on the quality of the genome annotation. in poorly annotated genomes, intergenic tags will have a higher probability of being observed by the hga methodology. this is a desirable feature for tag probability estimation in the discovery of new genes. in yeast,  <dig> % of all experimental sage-tags obtained to date and searched against the current annotation of the yeast genome map into an intergenic region, suggesting that new coding or non-coding transcripts are still to be discovered. this figure will be even larger for poorly annotated genomes.

significance of hga-based annotation for tag mapping on complex genomes
in this work, we achieved an 8–10% increase in unambiguous tag assignments when considering all experimental yeast sage-tags . this improvement rose as high as 70% when only those tags with multiple matches to the genome were considered . in yeast, with a relatively small genome with a size of about  <dig> million base pairs, the fraction of unique tags of  <dig> nts accounts for 87% of the potential virtual genomic tags. therefore, 8–10% increase in unambiguous assignments has limited interest. however, when larger genomes with sizes of billions base pairs are considered, the fraction of unique tags of  <dig> nts was significantly reduced to 10% . therefore, the main problem of using genome sequences for tag-to-gene assignment in long genomes is that with their increased size and complexity tag uniqueness and unambiguous tag-mapping becomes increasingly difficult. it is in these cases that hga would be most useful, because it will significantly reduce unambiguous tag mappings.

long-sage has been proposed to reduce the ambiguity of tag mapping for large genomes  <cit> . however, there are some major drawbacks of using this new technique, such as the higher costs involved, lower efficiency of tag sequencing and a significantly increased sequencing error rates for tags of 20– <dig> nts, estimated to occur in 20% of the experimental tags derived from long-sage experiments  <cit> . whether sage or long-sage technology should be used for genome-wide analysis is still a matter of debate. the generation of sage tags with  <dig> bases implies a 3-fold increase in sequencing cost when compared with  <dig> bp tags, a high increase in cost for an 8% increase in unambiguous mapping when unigene databases are used  <cit> . contrary to this, others have demonstrated that an increase in the length of the tag is crucial for tag uniqueness when the genome is used for mapping  <cit> .

to better assess or estimate which sage methodology should be used, we performed some bioinformatics analysis of the virtual tags from the recently released xenopus tropicalis genome . this genome has  <dig>  billion base pairs, half the size of the human genome and  <dig> times larger than the yeast genome. our preliminary analysis of all potential tags for x. tropicalis genome showed that tag uniqueness for short  virtual tags is around  <dig> %, small compared to the  <dig>  % of uniqueness for the long  virtual tags. when a histogram of occurrence for each tag sequence was constructed, we found that 60% of the virtual short tags have less than  <dig> matches to the genome and 90% of the tags have less than  <dig> matches. this low number of genome hits per tag for a significant amount of the potential short tags suggests that the use of hga tag-mapping should allow proper tag-to-gene assignment when typical sage technology with tags of  <dig> nts is used. more importantly, when we built a virtual reference database for sage-tags from x. tropicalis genome using only some of the parameters involved in the hga method described here, we have found that 40% of the short virtual tags are included in the high confidence class. this indicates that after using the hga method, a significant fraction of the short tags will be unambiguously mapped with a high confidence to the genome and represents a total potential gain of unambiguous assignments of about 31%. this figure is significantly higher than the 8–10% obtained for yeast, though its estimation for x. tropicalis was based on the virtual genomic tags instead of the experimental sage-tags, where this figure will increase, as it was shown for yeast . in addition to this, though in several cases the ambiguity will not be completely eliminated, it will be significantly reduced. all this suggests that the hga method will be most useful for tag-mapping in large and complex genomes, providing a highly-efficient and low-cost alternative to long-sage.

however, more complex and larger genomes can pose new challenges that were not faced in this work with yeast. among these challenges are the large number of alternative splicing transcripts that are more frequently observed in complex genomes. this constitutes a problem for the accurate estimation of position-dependent tag probability functions. therefore, some modifications to the hga methodology proposed here will be required depending on the particular genome.

we are currently adapting the hga method to annotate as accurately as possible all virtual sage-tags for the genomes of xenopus, arabidopsis, mouse and human, and these results will be published elsewhere.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have presented a novel bioinformatics method for tag mapping in sage. the method has been tested and validated using experimental sage data from saccharomyces cerevisiae organism. based on the results obtained, we draw the following conclusions:

1) a significant increase of unambiguous assignments for experimental sage-tags in yeast is achieved when using this method .

2) using a genome-based annotation of virtual sage-tags like the one described here shows that a significant fraction of experimental sage-tags comes from intergenic regions, from partially digested cdna, from the opposite strand of annotated transcripts, and from truncated cdnas .

3) in all sage experiments reported for yeast, tags map onto introns, exon-intron boundaries and onto non-coding rnas .

4) in all sage experiments reported for yeast, it was observed that the largest fraction of tags map to the coding regions of transcripts and not to the 3' utr elements .

