BACKGROUND
many drosophila melanogaster homologs of the proteins required for both dna replication and repair have been identified and in several cases purified to apparent homogeneity. these include dna polymerase α holoenzyme  <cit> , dna polymerase δ  <cit> , replication protein a , replication factor c  and various origin recognition complex  subunits . moreover, complete replication of dna containing the sv <dig> origin of replication has been reconstituted in vitro using purified sv <dig> t-antigen and drosophila cell-free extracts  <cit> .

a protein about which much information has been obtained is proliferating cell nuclear antigen . drosophila pcna was first identified both as a highly purified protein able to substitute, albeit poorly, for human pcna in a cell-free sv <dig> dna replication system reconstituted from purified proteins  <cit>  and by yamaguchi et al.  <cit>  who used an oligonucleotide probe to detect the drosophila pcna cdna and gene, express the protein in e. coli and deduce its complete amino acid sequence. further results indicated that in flies, pcna was encoded by a single gene located at position 56f5- <dig> on the right arm of chromosome  <dig>  this was subsequently identified as the drosophila mus <dig> locus  <cit> . recently, a second drosophila pcna gene of limited homology to the original and of unknown biological function has also been found  <cit> .

protocols have been established for purification of wild-type human pcna from tissue culture cells  <cit> , unmodified wild-type human pcna after regulated expression in e. coli  <cit>  and nh2-terminally his-tagged but otherwise wild-type human pcna, also engineered for bacterial expression  <cit> . all were comparably effective at stimulating mammalian pol δ. similar protocols have been developed for drosophila pcna and strategies for site-directed mutagenesis have been devised and implemented  <cit> .

recently, zhang et al.  <cit>   as well as others  identified the interdomain connector loop of pcna  as crucial for binding pol δ. of note, relative to wild-type pcna, mutations of the molecule within this region such as glutamine at position  <dig> changed to glutamic acid  promoted increased pol δ-processivity  <cit> . in human pcna, residues  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were defined as being essential for interaction with pol δ  <cit> . comparison of human with drosophila pcna sequences in this region indicated that of these four amino acids, three  are identical. the fourth, residue  <dig>  is glutamine  in wild-type drosophila pcna. the corresponding residue in human pcna is valine .

to investigate the role of the interdomain connector loop of pcna on the effects of pcna on pol δ, we mutagenized residues within this region of drosophila pcna so that they more nearly resembled human amino acids. after bacterial expression and purification, we tested the effects of these site-specifically modified  drosophila pcna molecules on purified calf thymus pol δ . calf thymus and human pol δ are highly similar in amino acid sequence  <cit>  and can, for our purposes, be used interchangeably. "humanization" of a single drosophila pcna residue, conversion of q <dig> to v , conferred upon it, enhanced ability to affect several properties of calf thymus pol δ. more extensive mutagenesis, in which the entire interdomain connector loop of drosophila pcna  was replaced by the corresponding human residues, was still more effective at stimulation of calf thymus pol δ, than either wild-type or q123v drosophila pcna. however, it was considerably less effective than wild-type human pcna at altering the properties of calf thymus pol δ. these results therefore suggest that in addition to the interdomain connnector loop, other regions of pcna are also important effectors of pol δ activity. they also provide a means to couple operationally, the considerable power of in vivo genetic analyses performed in drosophila with the sophistication of mammalian biochemistry.

RESULTS
to study the role of the interdomain connector loop of pcna , we compared human and drosophila homologs. of the  <dig> interdomain connector loop residues, nine are identical between the two; identical residues are shaded . overall, drosophila pcna is >70% identical to that from mammals . others showed that pcna residues  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were essential for interaction with pol δ  <cit> . of these four, only one  differs between flies and humans. also shown is a model constructed from the x-ray crystallographically determined structure of pcna indicating the locations of the sites to be mutated in drosophila pcna . shown  is the x-ray crystal structure of human pcna. the drosophila homolog is assumed to be similar.

purification of wild-type and site-specifically mutated pcna
four nh2-terminally his-tagged pcna variants were highly purified; purity for each is shown . first constructs were prepared encoding 1) nh2-terminally his-tagged wild-type human pcna; 2) nh2-terminally his-tagged wild-type drosophila pcna  and two dpcna derivatives; 3) one in which amino acid  <dig> was mutated from glutamine to valine ; and 4) the other, in which drosophila amino acids 119- <dig> were replaced by the corresponding human sequence . then all four were transformed separately into e. coli  and respective proteins were expressed. finally bacteria were lysed and his-tagged proteins were purified using various procedures including ni2+-ida sepharose chromatography. the purity of each was determined by sds-page and is shown as indicated . the identity of wild-type human pcna was confirmed using mouse monoclonal anti-mammalian pcna antibody pc10; the identity of wild-type drosophila pcna was confirmed using affinity purified polyclonal anti-drosophila pcna antibodies prepared in rabbits  <cit>  .

stimulation of calf thymus pol δ activity by highly purified wild-type versus selected mutant pcna fractions
calf thymus pol δ  was purified and assayed for polymerase activity in the presence of varying concentrations of both highly purified wild-type and specific mutant pcna molecules. we showed previously that either calf thymus or human pcna could be used interchangeably as stimulatory co-factors for calf thymus pol δ  <cit>  . assays were performed using poly-oligo as described . as can be seen, human pcna resulted in robust stimulation of calf thymus pol δ; much less stimulation was observed for wild-type drosophila pcna . mutation of drosophila pcna resulted in substantially increased stimulation of calf thymus pol δ; both substitution of a single amino acid  and replacement of the entire fly interdomain connector loop with corresponding human amino acids  had demonstrable effects. of note, at relatively high concentrations, drosophila pcna but with the entire fly interdomain connector loop replaced by corresponding human amino acids  was similarly effective to wild-type human pcna at stimulating the activity of calf thymus pol δ; however, it was considerably less effective at lower concentrations . this suggests an effect on binding of pcna to pol δ and/or on mutant pcna multimerization.

the effects of highly purified wild-type versus selected mutant pcna fractions on the processivity of incorporation by calf thymus pol δ
to examine further, the stimulation of calf thymus pol δ by both wild-type and specific mutant pcna molecules, we examined effects on processivity of nucleotide incorporation. processivity is defined as the number of deoxyribonucleotides incorporated each time a dna polymerase binds its template-primer. as can be seen, without pcna , pol δ is essentially a distributive enzyme incorporating only a few nucleotides as a result of each binding event. with increasing concentrations of wild-type human pcna , processivity of incorporation increases dramatically . this correlates quite closely with the pcna-mediated activity increase . wild-type drosophila pcna had relatively much less effect on the processivity of calf thymus pol δ . this is also consistent with activity data presented herein  as well as with results reported previously  <cit> . when mutants of drosophila pcna were tested, both q123v dpcna  and dr119-133h dpcna , promoted increased pol δ processivities, again consistent with increased activities . increases were concentration-dependent, also as expected.

stable complex formation among pol δ, 32p-labeled oligonucleotide template-primer and highly purified wild-type versus selected mutant pcna fractions
page band mobility shift assays were used to evaluate, in an essentially qualitative manner, the stability of complex formation among calf thymus pol δ, labeled template-primer and highly purified wild-type versus selected mutant pcna molecules. as can be seen, wild-type drosophila pcna promoted almost no pol δ•pcna•template-primer complex formation . in contrast, complex-formation with both drosophila pcna mutants  was readily detectable but neither gave results as robust as those seen with wild-type human pcna .

dna synthesis beyond chemically defined template base lesions promoted by highly purified wild-type versus selected mutant pcna fractions
as a final test, we examined the abilities of various pcna fractions to promote pol δ-dependent dna synthesis beyond template base lesions . pcna-dependent tls by pol δ was first reported by o'day et al.  <cit>  and subsequently analyzed in detail biochemically  <cit> . the structure of the synthetic oligonucleotide used for evaluation is shown in fig. 6a. for the data shown , x represents the model abasic site  used previously for many of our studies . the mobility of the labeled 21-mer primer, page-purified but without any subsequent enzymatic incubation is shown . when calf thymus pol δ alone was added, primer extension opposite the template abasic site was detected but there was no discernible elongation of the resulting 22-mer primer and no full-length product  was observed; some degradation of the 21-mer primer, presumably resulting from the activity of the intrinsic pol δ 3'-5' exonuclease, was seen . addition to incubations of wild-type drosophila pcna resulted in slight but readily detectable dna synthesis beyond the template abasic site; this included some full-length 30-mer . relatively more full-length 30-mer was seen when q123v mutant drosophila pcna was included in addition to calf thymus pol δ  and still more full-length 30-mer was seen when dr119-133h drosophila pcna was added . clearly, the greatest amount of full-length 30-mer product was seen when wild-type human pcna was incubated with calf thymus pol δ . of note, wild-type human pcna also promotes the tightest complex formation between calf thymus pol δ and 32p-labeled template-primer dna .

discussion
although human pcna and drosophila pcna are more than 70% identical at the level of primary amino acid sequence, wild-type drosophila pcna is only a very poor substitute for human pcna in cell-free reactions with calf thymus pol δ. this is documented both in this report and previously  <cit> . however, mutating only a single drosophila pcna amino acid, glutamine at position  <dig>  to valine , leads to a dramatic enhancement in the abilities of drosophila pcna to stimulate calf thymus pol δ. effects were shown on total activity , processivity , pol δ•pcna•template-primer complex formation  and extended dna synthesis beyond a template abasic site . replacing the entire interdomain connector loop of drosophila pcna  with the corresponding residues from human pcna resulted in additional enhancement , but in neither case were the mutants of drosophila pcna  equivalent to wild-type human pcna in the stimulation of calf thymus pol δ.

our data indicate that although a single drosophila pcna amino acid at position  <dig>  is very important for pol δ-stimulation, the further enhancement of stimulation seen when the entire interdomain connector loop of drosophila pcna  was replaced with the corresponding residues from human pcna suggests that other residues in this loop are also involved directly in binding pol δ. alternatively, it is possible that loop residues other than  <dig> and 126– <dig> play a secondary or indirect  role in positioning crucial amino acids so as to optimize their direct binding to pol δ.

in this context, we would like to call attention to the fact that at relatively low concentrations, dr119-133h dpcna is considerably less effective than wild-type human pcna in stimulating the activity of calf thymus pol δ; at higher concentrations, dr119-133h dpcna and wild-type human pcna stimulate calf thymus pol δ similarly. this implies complex protein-protein interactions between pcna and pol δ such that biochemical properties recorded in dilute solutions in vitro may not accurately predict properties manifest at much different and generally much higher intranuclear concentrations present in vivo. alternatively, pcna must be present as a trimer  in order to function. since the equilibrium among monomer, dimer and trimer was shown to depend on pcna protein concentration  <cit> , it is certainly possible that the difference observed between dr119-133h dpcna and wild-type human pcna actually reflects differences in the keq for pcna multimerization. these two possibilities, concerning both complicated pol δ•pcna interactions and pcna multimerization, are not mutually exclusive.

similarly, the fact that replacement of the entire interdomain connector loop of drosophila pcna  with the corresponding residues from human pcna did not result in a molecule as effective in stimulating calf thymus pol δ as human pcna suggests that regions other than the interdomain connector loop are important for pol δ-stimulation. our data do not address the question of whether these putative "other regions" affect pol δ directly  or indirectly . additional mutagenesis studies may shed light on this issue. for example, based on experiments of others, it seems likely that the extreme c-terminus of pcna also interacts directly with pol δ . hence it may be of interest to perform similar mutagenesis experiments to those reported here, focusing instead on the c-terminal region of drosophila pcna, rather than the interdomain connector loop.

we think it should also be noted that both oku et al.  <cit>  and ola et al.  <cit>  prepared hybrid proteins between human and s. cerevisiae pcna. as in our studies, ola et al.  <cit>  found that regions other than the interdomain connector loop of pcna were important for interaction with pol δ. these authors suggested that additional interacting regions were likely to exist both in the pcna c-terminus and n-terminus.

it may also be of interest to prepare double-mutants, first in the interdomain connector loop of drosophila pcna, thereby allowing efficient in vitro function with purified calf thymus pol δ, and then elsewhere in the pcna molecule corresponding to interesting sites defined phenotypically by in vivo genetic studies of others. for example, it might be possible to determine if particular mus <dig> mutations leading to enhanced mutagen sensitivity among affected organisms  alter any functional interactions between pcna and pol δ in vitro. results of such studies could lead to novel biochemical insights regarding the mechanism by which point mutations in the drosophila pcna gene lead to enhanced mutagen sensitivity among animals bearing these mutations.

the strategy taken here will presumably allow study of interactions between pcna and other proteins with which it interacts. in this context, we think it important to note that partial effects on pol δ-stimulation have been recorded. this suggests that our methodology will also allow detection of partial rather than complete effects on the binding of other proteins. interactions between pcna and many of the molecules with which it interacts have recently been mapped  <cit>  and for example, one might immediately compare interactions between several mammalian proteins  and both various wild-type and mutant pcna molecules described in this paper. functional  as well as direct binding measurements may be made. as with pcna•pol δ interactions, it may ultimately be feasible to correlate interesting pcna molecules defined phenotypically using genetic analyses performed in living animals and biochemical studies of specific pcna•protein binding. for example, do mutagen sensitive mus <dig> animals bear mutations in a region of pcna responsible for msh binding? both msh <dig> and msh <dig> were reported to possess a consensus motif for binding to the interdomain connector loop of pcna  <cit> .

finally, we think it important to note that pol δ has most recently been reported to contain at least four subunits  yet all experiments performed here were with the two-subunit form of the enzyme purified from calf thymus. we and others have shown that the larger subunit, p <dig>  is catalytic while the smaller, p <dig>  does not seem to contact the dna closely , but instead, is required for processivity-stimulation by pcna  to which it apparently binds. it is also clear that pcna binds to what has been termed, the third pol δ subunit, p <dig> or p <dig> in mammalian systems  <cit> , cdc27p in s. pombe  <cit>  and pol32p in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . clearly the physiologically important interaction between pcna  and this third pol δ subunit was omitted from our analyses, but could markedly affect any or all of the responses of polymerase to pcna that we reported here.

CONCLUSIONS
through our experiments, we showed that drosophila pcna could be "humanized" and that "humanization"  increased effects on mammalian pol δ. the highly purified two-subunit form of pol δ was used for all of our studies. it is possible, though we think it unlikely, that different conclusions would be reached if a different form of pol δ  was used. nevertheless two of the effects we observed could be considered beneficial. they were enhancement of polymerase activity and processivity. a third effect seems likely to be detrimental, at least over the long term, that is increased synthesis opposite and beyond a chemically defined template base lesion . our data suggest that all three of these effects result from enhancement of pcna-dependent stability of the pol δ•pcna•template-primer complex. in other words, in the range that we have studied, the more tightly pol δ binds to dna, the greater its activity, the greater its processivity, but also the more likely it is to catalyze tls. our results provide an explicit approach to correlate in vivo genetic studies with rigorous in vitro biochemistry.

