BACKGROUND
dna delivery by lactic acid bacteria  is a topic that has been the focus of an increasing amount of research groups, not only for its potential use for vaccination purposes, but also as a mean to deliver bioactive compounds directly in the gastrointestinal tract  <cit> . in this regard, a promising advance has been the development of a system based on a new vector for dna delivery using lactococci, named vaccination using lactic acid bacteria or pvalac  <cit> . this plasmid harbours an eukaryotic region containing the cytomegalovirus promoter  under which the gene of interest can be expressed, the polyadenylation signal of bovine growth hormone  which is required for gene expression by eukaryotic host cells, a prokaryotic region containing the repa/repc replication origins for both escherichia coli and lactococcus  lactis, and a chloramphenicol resistance gene  for bacteria selection. in order to allow expression of the genes of interest by eukaryotic cells, such as those of the gastrointestinal tract, these dna delivery vectors must be effectively incorporated into these cells. an interesting way to achieve this latter objective is to take advantage of the mechanisms used by invasive pathogens.

pathogenic bacteria can be internalized by eukaryote cells by using invasins expressed on their cell surface  <cit>  such as the fibronectin binding protein a  stemming from staphylococcus  aureus  <cit> , the internalin a from listeria monocytogenesis  <cit> , or the invasin of yersinia pseudotuberculosis  <cit> . thus, these proteins possess the potential to be used as tools in genetic engineering for the design of invasive bacterial strains developed from non-pathogenic strains considered “gras”  for human health, such as the model lab, l. lactis.

in the particular case of fnbpa, the internalization process involves three molecules including the bacterial fnbpa, the fibronectin synthesized by the host, and a clustering of integrins from the host cell surface. the binding between these three entities results in the bacterial uptake by the eukaryote host involving tyrosine phosphorylation and actin rearrangement  <cit> .

the role of fnbpa in cell internalization using l. lactis has been previously described by que et al.  <cit> . this process has been used in the design of recombinant bacterial strains expressing fnbpa with varying results, thus we hypothesized that an increase of the external expression of the invasin could improve the functionality of the dna delivery system. one method of accomplishing this goal would be to use a strong heterologous promoter such as the nisa gene promoter which has been described as being one of the most efficient promoters used during the last years  <cit> . the nisa promoter is derived from the lactococcus lactis nisin gene cluster where nisin is considered as an outside inducer that requires the control of the nisk and nisr gene regulators. this strategy could improve current constructs and improve dna delivery in eukaryote cells.

the objectives of this work were to construct a lactococcus lactis strain expressing the fnbpa gene under the control of the nisa promoter and evaluate if this new construct was able to increase fnbpa expression compared to the use of constitutive fnbpa promoter and consequently improve bacterial internalization and nucleic acid transfer in eukaryotic cells in vitro and in the gastrointestinal tract of mice.

RESULTS
pnisfnbpa plasmid design
plasmid pnisfnbpa was obtained by placing the fnbpa gene of s. aureus, without its constitutive promoter, but under control of the nisa promoter . the backbone of this construction is provided by the pori <dig> plasmid allowing resistance to erythromicyn. the final plasmid pnisfnbpa was used to transform the l. lactis nz <dig> wild type strain, resulting in ll-pnisfnbpa strain, since this strain, a derivative of l. lactis mg <dig>  contains the nisrk gene necessary for the expression of genes downstream of the nisa promoter in the presence of sub inhibitory concentrations of nisin.

fnbpa expression characterized by facs analysis
fnbpa expression at the surface of ll-pnisfnbpa and ll-fnbpa was analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting  using anti-fnbpa antibody after nisin induction. an increase of fnbpa expression in the range of 55% is observed in the strain with fnbpa expressed under the control of nisa promoter , compared to the strain with the constitutive promoter. different concentrations of nisin were used for induction , and it was shown that the best results were obtained with the highest concentration used  which is in accordance to the optimal concentrations for the expression of genes of interest in the description of this system  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
fnbpa expression at the surface of ll-pnisfnbpa and ll-fnbpa as analyzed by flow cytometry where the secondary antibody was labeled with fitc. results are expressed as means ± standard deviation. a-bmeans with a different letter are significantly different from each other with a p ≤  <dig> .



in vitro invasiveness assay in caco- <dig> cells and bmdcs
the recombinant strains ll-fnbpa and ll-pnisfnbpa were co-incubated with caco <dig> cells or bone marrow derived dendritic cells , as well as two control l. lactis wild type strains . the bacterial invasiveness was then defined by the ratio between internalized bacteria, determined by colony forming units observed after cell lysis and plating, and bacteria input for co-incubation. figure  <dig> shows the invasiveness levels obtained with the four l. lactis strains using caco- <dig> and bmdc cellular models, respectively. in the caco- <dig> cell model, it can be noted, that the invasive ll-fnbpa strain allows greater invasiveness levels  than the control strains. this invasiveness value can even reach a  <dig> fold increase in the case of bmdcs model. moreover, in both cellular models, the ll-pnisfnbpa strain exhibits invasiveness levels  <dig> to  <dig> times greater than the ll-fnbpa strain. therefore, the increase of fnbpa expression on the outside bacterial membrane can be related to an improved internalization ability in eukaryote cells in vitro.figure  <dig> 
in vitro
invasiveness assays of ll-nz <dig>  ll-mg <dig>  ll-fnbpa and ll-pnisa-fnbpa strains in a) caco- <dig> cells and b) bmdcs. results are expressed as means ± standard deviation. a-cmeans with a different letter are significantly different from each other with a p ≤  <dig> .



in vivo invasiveness assay in the intestinal tract of mice
in an attempt to compare the dna transfer properties in vivo of ll-fnbpa and ll-pnisfnbpa, the pvalac plasmid containing the gfp gene  <cit>  was used to transform these strains, thus obtaining strains denominated ll-fnbpa-gfp and ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp, respectively.

the subsequent oral administration of mice with ll-pori23-gfp, ll-fnbpa-gfp or ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp allowed us to evaluate the effect of fnbpa expression on dna delivery as observed by the presence of fluorescence  in the small and large intestine tissues, 24 hours after administration.

the importance of fnbpa in the dna delivery was observed mainly in large intestine. mice that received ll-fnbpa-gfp showed significant increases  in the number of fluorescent cells compared to the mice that received ll-pori23-gfp . the improvement of the delivery system with the addition of the promoter pnisa to increase the expression of fnbpa was also demonstrated. mice that received ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp strain showed the highest number of gfp positive cells in both small and large intestines ; however, when comparing this strain with ll-fnbpa-gfp, a significant higher number of fluorescent cells was  only observed in the large intestine .figure  <dig> 
number of fluorescent cells in the a) small or b) large intestines of mice orally administered with ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp, ll-fnbpa, ll-pori-gfp, ll-fnbpa-gfp. on the left is represented the number of fluorescent cells determined in  <dig> fields of vision and when a significant difference was observed, the p values were places. on the right are representative histological slides observed at different magnifications using a fluorescent microscope.



fluorescent cell counts are in favor of a more efficient dna transfer associated with the ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp strain, where the fnbpa gene is under the control of the nisa promoter, compared with the native promoter ll-fnbpa-gfp strain, and the control ll-pori23-gfp strain without fnbpa.

discussion
in this study, the design of a particular lactococcus lactis strain expressing fnbpa on the external membrane under the control of the strong inducible nisa promoter was described. this so-called ll-pnisfnbpa strain was studied for its properties to improve dna delivery in vitro on eukaryote cell models, as well as in vivo in mice intestinal tract. this recombinant strain was obtained from the transformation of the wild type l. lactis nz <dig> strain, since it contains the nisr and nisk genes which are needed for the regulation of the expression system based on the nisa promoter  <cit> .

a sub-inhibitory nisin concentration  was used for the overnight induction of the ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp strain allowing then a 55% gain regarding fnbpa expression compared with ll-fnbpa where fnbpa production is under the control of its constitutive promoter. this shift is in agreement with the nisa promoter strength already described where the efficiency of the nisa promoter is compared to other promoter in gram-positive bacteria  <cit> .

it is now well established that ll-fnbpa recombinant strains exhibit good properties of internalization in caco- <dig> cells as can be observed by gfp expression plasmid delivery  <cit>  or through the expression of blg in vivo  <cit> .

here, we confirmed this capacity in vitro on caco- <dig> cells and showed in addition that an enhancement of fnbpa expression, by the use of ll-pnisfnbpa strain, resulted in an increase of invasiveness level of  <dig> to  <dig> times compared to the ll-fnbpa strain.

moreover, we showed for the first time that fnbpa production at the surface of lab increase invasiveness in bmdcs. both strains ll-fnbpa and ll-pnisfnbpa showed higher invasiveness in bmdcs than in caco- <dig> cells compared to non-invasive ll strain. this observation can come close to the fact that pathogenic bacteria uptake by dendritic cells also involves the dc maturation stage independently of the invasin  <cit> . the increase of fnbpa expression is directly related to the higher invasiveness level associated to the ll-pnisfnbpa strain when co-incubated with caco <dig> cells or bmdcs.

an in vivo study was also performed  using the pvalac delivery system with gfp being used as the indicator of dna delivery and expression. the effectiveness of this dna delivery system was demonstrated previously in healthy mice that received ll-fnbpa-gfp  <cit>  and also in a tnbs-induced colitis mouse model, where the delivery of il- <dig> dna was evaluated using ll-fnbpa-il <dig>  <cit> . in both animal models, the recombinant l. lactis strain expressed fnbpa under its own constitutive promoter. here, it was observed that the expression of fnbpa under nisa promoter increased the dna delivery in the intestinal tract of mice that received ll-pnisfnbpa-gfp, compared to the mice that received ll-fnbpa-gfp.

the transit of l. lactis in the digestive tract has been especially described  <cit> . it turns out that l. lactis does not colonize the gastrointestinal tract and exhibits a low survival in the gut. as a matter of fact, if l. lactis is resistant to gastric acidity it can be noted that less than one third of the orally administrated bacteria survive in the duodenum. so, the expression of fnbpa can help to the dna delivery by this lab. this was confirmed in the present work where we detected increased dna transfer in the cells of small intestine, and even more in the large intestine of mice following the administration of recombinant l. lactis strains that expressed fnbpa , compared to the animals that received l. lactis without the fnbpa gene . it is also important to note that dna delivery in the intestine was increased by the use of pnisa promoter in the recombinant strain as a replacement to the constitutive promoter used in other studies.

the animal model used in the present work did not show any adverse secondary effect in the mice that received the recombinant strains; however, considering that this experiment consisted in only 24 h, new experiments to evaluate the safety of this new recombinant strain are currently under way using healthy animals and also animals with some specific intestinal pathologies such as induced crohn’s disease and colon cancer models.

CONCLUSIONS
one of the immunotherapy research fields is looking for adapted bacterial vectors as dna vaccine carriers  <cit> . in this report, we describe the design of a l. lactis recombinant strain where the expression of fnbpa, the invasin from s. aureus, is driven by the nisa promoter. we showed that this l. lactis strain provides an improved tool for bacterial invasiveness and dna transfer as can be observed by co-incubation with caco <dig> cells or bmdcs, as well as by gfp expression in small and large intestine after orally administration of recombinant strains that expressed pvalac:gfp.

therefore, these results highly suggest that the enhancement of fnbpa expression on the bacterial membrane through the engineering of a promoter system is directly correlated to the increase of dna delivery properties, which is a good illustration of the knowledge acquired in the field of dna vaccine or the production of other beneficial proteins.

