BACKGROUND
spermiogenesis offers a good model for investigating the molecular basis of large-scale cellular morphogenesis and movement. in drosophila ,  <dig> haploid sperm develop from a single gonial precursor through several well-defined morphogenetic steps  <cit> . this entire process happens in three distinct developmental stages:  the formation of  <dig> spermatids from a gonial precursor;  the elongation of spermatids from nearly spherical to around  <dig>  mm long cells; and  the individualization of the elongated spermatids into mature sperm, which then enter the seminal vesicle   <cit> . altogether, it involves large-scale changes in cell shape and internal reorganization  <cit> . every spermatogonial cell is encapsulated by two somatic-origin cyst cells within the testicular lumen as they form at the testis apex. subsequent developments occur within this cyst capsule. at the end of the process, the individualized sperm coil up inside the cyst capsule at the base of the testis before entering the sv  <cit> . studies in drosophila indicated that defective sperm fail to enter the sv as they fail to remain attached to the head cyst cell during the coiling process  <cit> . thus, the dynamics of sperm head attachment to the cyst cell are likely to play a major role in this quality control exercise.

spermatids grow in an asymmetric manner and the positions of the nuclei define the rostral ends. subsequently, the nuclei differentiate into needle-shaped structures containing tightly packed dna and point towards the sv  <cit> . as spermatid elongation proceeds, the rostral ends of the nuclei bundle  advance towards the sv at the basal end of the testis. then, f-actin-based conical structures called investment cones form around each of the needle-shaped nuclei and shortly thereafter, move down the axoneme at a constant speed  <cit> . this process separately invests each individual spermatid with a plasma membrane, extrudes excess cytoplasm and organelles from the cells, and discharges them as waste bags  <cit> . thus individualized, sperm bundles coil up at the base of the testis and then enter the sv  <cit> . f-actin dynamics, myosin vi, dynamin, dynein light chain  <dig>  and myosin v  <cit>  as well as several pro-apoptotic proteins  <cit>  are involved in investment cone assembly and the sperm individualization process. the cyst cells also differentiate along with the spermatids. two cyst cells of different morphological features are found to encapsulate the spermatid bundle at the start of individualization. the head cyst cell caps the rostral ends like a lid on a tube and the rest of the spermatids are enclosed within the tail cyst cell  <cit> . however, little is known about the molecular basis of sperm release after individualization.

the sperm release process has been extensively studied in the mammalian system. seminiferous tubules are the functional units of mammalian spermatogenesis. a layer of somatic-origin sertoli cells line the tubules and constitutes the blood-testis barrier. the sertoli cells adhere to each other through sets of tight junctions and desmosome-gap junctions  <cit> . the spermatocytes traverse through these sets of inter-cellular junctions from the basal to the adluminal side as they differentiate , and complete the differentiation  while still attached to the adluminal side of the sertoli cell  <cit> . then they are released as mature sperm into the lumen. this last stage is called spermiation. prior to this, each spermatid sheds a residual body containing membrane organelles and cytoskeletal elements, which forms at the junction of the sperm head and flagella  <cit> . this resembles the shedding of waste bag after individualization in drosophila testis  <cit> . spermatids also associate with the sertoli cells through cell-adhesion complexes. a testes specific adherens junction  called an ectoplasmic specialization  is formed at the inner side of the sertoli cell  <cit> . this contains characteristic hexagonal actin arrays packed between the er cisterns and the plasma membrane with a dense formation of tubulin fibers adjacent to the er  <cit> . such a structure has not been reported in invertebrates  <cit> .

in this paper we report the results of a systematic analysis of the final stages of sperm maturation before their release in drosophila testis. we show that the somatic-origin head cyst cell grows f-actin based membranous projections into the interstitial spaces between the mature spermatid heads at the start of individualization. immunohistochemical analysis showed that these f-actin-rich processes contained markers of filopodia and also proteins found in the aj. pharmacological manipulations of the f-actin and microtubule dynamics further revealed that these structures are dynamic and are involved in maintaining mature spermatids in a tight parallel bundle. finally, a genetic screen identified that shibire  function is essential to maintain the integrity of these f-actin-based structures and the sperm bundle at the final stage of maturation. altogether our data provide an initial set of descriptions for further cellular and molecular analysis of spermiation in drosophila .

RESULTS
f-actin-based membranous extensions of the head cyst cell cover the sperm heads after individualization
an adult testis contains multiple cysts at different stages of differentiation. they are recognized by the nuclear morphology of the spermatids and the relative positions in the testis. for instance, the needle-shaped nuclei of the elongated spermatids are loosely organized in the cyst  at the start of individualization and these are generally found at about  <dig> μm from the base. the f-actin-rich investment cones  form around each nucleus during the individualization stage and move towards the caudal ends in synchrony  <cit> . the nbs of the individualizing spermatids  are found in a region 200– <dig> μm from the testis base , and they move further towards the sv in subsequent developmental stages  until the mature sperm enter the sv. the entire process was estimated to take nearly  <dig> hours  <cit> . therefore, the rostral ends of the maturing spermatid bundles are likely to traverse around  <dig> μm to the sv in as much time or longer.

additional f-actin accumulations were observed at the rostral tips of the nbs  at the start of individualization. subsequently, the f-actin grew as cap-like structures around the spermatid nuclei during individualization . the f-actin densities were found around rostral tips of individual nuclei and acrosomes of an nb , marked by the sneaky-gfp  <cit> . at a later stage when the individualized and mature sperm coiled up inside the cyst, the f-actin densities were mostly found around the lateral sides of the nuclei . this is likely to correspond to a stage when sperm were about to be released as both the acrosomes and the nb appeared unpacked . these f-actin based structures will be referred as 'actin caps' in the subsequent discussion. the actin caps were also observed to form inside the head cyst cell covering the rostral ends of maturing spermatid bundles  and occasionally 'empty' actin caps not associated with the nb were also observed inside the testis. these observations raised an obvious question about the cellular origin of the actin caps.

transmission electron microscopy  studies further showed that the nuclei of the 'individualized' spermatids were tightly invested with plasma membrane  and contained very little cytoplasm. they were embedded into the head cyst cell  with electron dense material around . an earlier study reported that membrane bound projections containing microfilaments are extended from the head cyst cell and interspersed between the sperm heads after individualization  <cit> . we also found some tightly packed nbs  with dense material around them near the head cyst cell perimeter . together with the previous results this suggested that the actin caps are likely to form inside the head cyst cells and therefore, unlikely to be a part of the spermatids.

to further establish this point we used two gal <dig> stocks,  sg <dig> gal <dig> and  pcoggal <dig> , which were found to express in the head cyst cells during the final stages of sperm maturation . although the sg <dig> gal <dig> expression was also found in the spermatocytes at an earlier stage, the pcoggal <dig> expression was limited to the cyst cells from the very beginning . the expression of uas-actin:gfp in sg <dig> gal <dig> background marked the actin caps  and the f-actin cones . however, only the actin caps were marked in the pcoggal4/y; uas-actin:gfp/+ testis . furthermore, the recombinant myosin-vii:gfp expression in the w pcoggal <dig> uas-ck:gfp stock clearly marked the actin caps at the rostral ends of mature nbs . these observations confirmed that the actin caps are indeed formed inside the head cystcells. in addition, the actin caps were always found attached with the spermatid heads in squash preparations. this suggested that these f-actin-based extensions of the head cyst cell are likely to adhere to the maturing sperm heads. however, tem studies did not reveal obvious cellular junctions between the sperm heads and the cyst cells.

cell adhesion proteins along with certain filopodial components are enriched in the actin caps
therefore, to further understand the role of the actin caps, we decided to characterize its molecular composition. regulation of actin dynamics and ajs are known to play crucial roles in epithelial cell morphogenesis and movement during development. in addition, the basolateral protrusive activity of these cells that penetrate into the neighboring cells to promote the formation of adhesive contacts is suggested to involve actin  <cit> . immunostaining revealed that prominent aj markers such as de-cadherin and crumbs were enriched in the head cyst cells . the drosophila lamin , armadillo , tubulin and erp <dig> were also enriched at the actin caps . erp <dig>  which seemed to be enriched more caudally than the others, is an er resident protein found in testes specific ajs  <cit> . this suggested that actin caps could adhere to the sperm heads through ajs. actin-based membrane extensions such as filopodia and invadopodia are also known to require dynamin, syndapin and wasp  <cit> . these were also associated with the actin caps . in addition, syntaxin  <cit> , a t-snare involved in membrane fusion events, was present along the actin cap extensions . thus, actin caps contained proteins characteristic of both filopodia and ajs. they are likely to adhere to sperm heads through beta-catenin, which is an integral component of aj in the epithelial cells  <cit>  and testes  <cit> .

filopodia and pseudopodia require the functions of different unconventional myosins  <cit> . we found that both myosin vii  and myosin vi  were present in punctate spots in the head cyst cell cytoplasm  and jar/myosin vi was enriched along the actin cap extensions . in addition, expression of the recombinant myosin ii regulatory light chain-gfp   <cit>  also marked the actin caps . myosin vi is known to stabilize f-actin bundles in the microvilli and the stereocilia  <cit> , and both myosin ii and viia were shown to maintain vesicular traffic into the microvilli projections  <cit> . in drosophila ovary, myosin vi was localized in the membrane protrusions at the leading edge of migrating border cells  <cit> , and at the investment cones in the testis  <cit> . therefore, the actin caps appeared to be filopodia-like projections of the head cyst cells maintained by myosin-dependent vesicular traffic. however, we noted that unlike the ck:gfp, the ck antibody did not label the actin cap extensions. the ck antibody is raised against the stalk domain of the predicted myosin vii orf  <cit> , which is likely to be involved in homodimerization of the motor subunits and also in binding other accessory subunits. therefore, unlike the ck:gfp, the antibody could only label myosin vii  in the tissue if the epitope is exposed. furthermore, the ck:gfp transgene is ectopically expressed using a non-homologues promoter and this could also alter its subcellular localization in the cell. all of these could account for the apparent differences in the subcellular staining patterns of ck in the head cyst cell.

a large number of vesicles were reported to accumulate inside the head cyst cell around the rostral tips of the embedded sperm heads  <cit> . this was also revealed in the dic images of the isolated head cyst cells. the punctate distributions of myosins in this region further suggested that these motors might be involved in vesicle transport into the actin cap projections. myosin vi was known to associate with the clathrin-coated pits inside the cell during endocytosis as well as with dynamic membrane ruffles in the migrating epithelial cells  <cit> . we found that the clathrin light chain-gfp  was enriched in punctate spots around the actin caps  in the w; uas-clc-gfp actin5cgal <dig> testis. clathrin is involved in coated vesicle assembly  <cit>  and plays an important role in dynamin-mediated vesiculation inside the cell and the clc is an integral part of the clathrin complex. therefore, this observation further supported the hypothesis that vesicular traffic from the head cyst cells could supply membrane to the actin cap projections. altogether the immunolocalization results indicated that actin caps are filopodia-like extensions and likely to attach to the sperm heads during individualization.

f-actin and microtubule stability are essential for actin cap assembly and maintenance
spermatids are maintained in a tight bundle inside the cyst during individualization and this is predicted to play a critical role in selecting out the improperly developed sperm  <cit> . live analysis of acrosome movements inside testis by using the sneaky-gfp  <cit>  further showed that the acrosome movements slow down after they are packed . this coincided with actin cap formation and, thus, suggested that the actin caps are required to maintain the sperm heads in a tight bundle during individualization. indeed we noticed that few mature nuclei were left out in every nb in almost all wild-type testes during the coiling stage. both f-actin and microtubule dynamics play important roles in the filopodia/pseudopodia assembly and maintenance  <cit> . latrunculin b  binds to actin monomers and prevents their polymerization and the addition of lat b to cultured cells leads to major disruption of actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . similarly, treatments with vinblastine  leads to microtubule depolymerization in the tissue  <cit> . therefore, to determine the role of the cytoskeletal elements in actin caps, we treated intact testis with these reagents.

the acrosome bundles were disrupted and the individual acrosomes moved about each other in the bundles after  <dig> minutes of the  <dig> μm vinb treatment . a similar result was obtained with the  <dig> μm lat b as well . it also caused severe actin cap disruptions  within 10– <dig> minutes, with visible loss of f-actin . although the  <dig> μm vinb treatment did not abolish the f-actin staining, it disrupted both the actin caps and the nbs . these observations suggested that the stability of both the microtubule and f-actin cytoskeleton are essential to maintain the actin caps and this appeared to disrupt the nbs. in addition, the pharmacological treatments also disrupted the f-actin cone organization in the individualization complex  , although the staining at the f-actin cones was not visibly altered. finally, a quantification study showed significant increase in the disrupted nb and ic populations after the drug treatments , and the disruption indices were strongly correlated in each testis . the conjugated nb and ic disruptions reflected disorganizations of the spermatid bundles inside the cysts and the rapid manifestation of the defect further suggested that the association between the head cyst cell and the spermatids are dynamic. f-actin disruption in isolated testis of adult moths was shown to block sperm release and spermatid bundle disorganization  <cit>  and studies in mammalian testis showed that the f-actin stability in the apical es is essential to maintaining association between developing spermatids and sertoli cells  <cit> .

the percentage values are calculated with respect to the total number of nbs and ics in the same testis. a statistical cross-correlation plot of this data is shown in figure 6g. such disruptions were not observed in the control testes treated with  <dig> μm dmso alone.

shibire/dynamin is essential for maintaining the actin caps and spermatid bundles
the association between head cyst cells and spermatids was predicted to play an important role in spermiation  <cit> . the above results indicated that the head cyst cells are likely to adhere to the maturing sperm heads through f-actin-rich projections containing several filopodial markers. dynamin plays a key role in membrane reorganization process and our immunolocalization data suggested that it could play an important role in actin cap assembly or maintenance as well. the shibire gene codes for a dynamin homologue in drosophila , which is shown to play an important role in endocytosis  <cit>  and various other cellular functions  <cit> . previous studies have also shown that shi ts <dig>  hemizygous flies rapidly paralyze within a few minutes at non-permissive temperatures  <cit> . thus, the conditional shi ts <dig> alleles provided a good tool to further test the role of dynamin in actin caps and the latter's role in sperm maturation/release.

testes from the shi ts <dig> hemizygous males grown at 18°c had no apparent defect in nb organization and actin cap morphology . however, some of the actin caps  and a few nbs  appeared disrupted after  <dig> minutes at 29°c. in addition, a few actin caps were found without the associated nuclei . interestingly, f-actin levels in the disrupted actin caps were not reduced , indicating that shibire/dynamin functions were required to maintain the attachments to sperm heads. in addition, there was a small but significant increase in the numbers of mature nbs at the testis base after the heat treatment . since the gonial precursors form at an hourly rate, cysts are expected to mature at the same rate. therefore, the small increase in the nbs after a  <dig> minute pulse is quite significant. this indicated that shibire could regulate premature sperm release. this would also suggest that the sperm maturation process is very dynamic and the shibire/dynamin function is constitutively required to maintain the association between the sperm heads and the head cyst cell. however, this failed to resolve whether the shibire/dynamin acts at the actin caps.

shibire/dynamin function is required in the head cyst cells to maintain the actin caps and the sperm head bundles
the ectopic expression of the recombinant uas-shi ts <dig> transgene was shown to disrupt the endogenous shibire functions at non-permissive temperature  in a dose-dependent dominant-negative manner  <cit> . we used this technique to temporally perturb the shibire/dynamin function in the head cyst cells. the uas-shi ts <dig> expression in the head cyst cells owing to the pcoggal <dig> as well as the sg <dig> gal <dig> drivers caused visible actin cap and nb disruptions within  <dig> minutes at 29°c . in addition, f-actin rich spots appeared to accumulate in the head cyst cell after the heat pulse . same set of gal <dig> driver stocks were used to drive uas-wasp Δca and uas-gfp expressions in the head cyst cells as controls. the recombinant waspΔca lacks  <dig> amino acids in the c-terminal part constituting the vca domain of the wild-type protein and therefore, it cannot bind to arp2/ <dig>  <cit> . its expression in the drosophila myoblasts caused fusion defects  <cit> . however, expressions of the uas-wasp Δca  or uas-gfp in the head cyst cells did not disrupt the actin caps even after the heat pulse. these observations further established that the effects observed after the heat pulse due to the ectopic uas-shi ts <dig> expression in the head cyst cells are indeed caused by the presence of recombinant shibire protein, and further proved that the shibire function is required in the head cyst cells to maintain the actin cap morphology and its attachment with the spermatid heads. since the shibire antigen along with syndapin is enriched near the actin caps, this could further suggest that dynamin function is required in the actin cap region. therefore, sihibire/dynamin mediated membrane dynamics in the actin cap region is likely to play an important role in maintaining adhesion between the maturing sperm heads and the head cyst cell, and thus prevent premature release of spermatids inside the testis.

discussion
in summary, our results highlight the cellular and molecular mechanism of the sperm bundling process in drosophila . previous anatomical studies in drosophila  <cit>  as well as in several other insects  <cit>  established that spermatids are tightly bundled towards the end of differentiation and before their release into the sv. this process is predicted to single out abnormal sperm after individualization and thus acts as a quality control step in spermiogenesis  <cit> . however, the cellular and molecular mechanism underlying this process was unknown. the sperm heads are embedded into the somatic-origin head cyst cell at the start of individualization. we have shown that they are held by the head cyst cell through f-actin-based extensions , immunohistochemical characterizations combined with pharmacological interventions showed that these are filopodia-like extensions adherent to the maturing sperm heads . finally, molecular genetic analysis suggested that shibire/dynamin function is essential in the head cyst cells to maintain the sperm heads in a bundle and prevent their premature release inside the testis. these observations have several interesting parallels with the spermiation process in the mammalian system as discussed in the following sections.

actin caps organize spermatid heads in a tight bundle inside the head cyst cell
post individualization, all of the  <dig> clonally derived spermatids are twisted together and the bundle coils up inside the cyst. the head cyst cell attaches to a terminal epithelial cell at the base of the testis, and then the sperm is released into the sv  <cit> . our studies identified a specific function of the head cyst cell in the sperm bundling process during the maturation stage. as summarized in figure 9b, it is found to grow several f-actin-based extensions at the start of individualization that are enriched with proteins found in the filopodia of other cell types  <cit> . in addition to dynamin, syndapin and wasp, proteins found in the apical es  <cit>  such as erp <dig>  e-cadherin and beta-catenin are enriched in the actin cap extensions. this suggests that the actin cap extensions are dynamic membrane bound projections and they adhere to the individualized sperm heads while the remaining parts of the spermatids undergo morphogenetic changes during the individualization and coiling stages. lamin, a protein associated with the f-actin cones during the sperm individualization process  <cit>  was enriched at these structures. this could strengthen the membrane cytoskeleton and provide rigidity to the actin cap extensions. myosins are essential for the formation of filopodia-like extensions  <cit>  and for cell adhesion  <cit>  in several other cell types. hence, the presence of the myosin ii regulatory light chain, myosin vi and myosin vii suggests frequent vesicular membrane transport into and out of the actin cap projections as well as cross linking of actin filaments to the plasma membrane inside these extensions. the presence of clathrin light chain and syntaxin further pointed towards the existence of dynamic membrane exchange along the actin cap projections. altogether these immunolocalization studies suggested that actin cap extensions could adhere to the maturing sperm heads during individualization and coiling through a combination of different cellular mechanisms. this is also confirmed by the results of our pharmacological and genetic analyses, which indicates that the actin cap extensions and their interactions with the spermatid heads are dynamic. altogether, it showed that the differentiating spermatids are tightly attached to the head cyst cell until they are fully mature and suggested that this could play a critical role in preventing premature sperm release inside the testis.

f-actin-based membrane remodeling at filopodia and pseudopodia-like structures is involved in cell migration, axonal growth cone guidance and cell ingestion  <cit> . in drosophila ovary, the somatic origin 'border cells' migrate through the germ-line 'nurse cells' by extending similar f-actin-based membranous projections  <cit> . actin-based cellular extensions were also known to anchor epithelial cells on the substratum involving beta-catenin and cadherin  <cit> . white blood cells migrate out of the blood vessel by penetrating the endothelial cell layer through such actin-based membranous projections by a process called transcytosis  <cit> . drosophila spermatids lose all of their cytoplasmic contents after individualization by the movement of the f-actin-based investment cones through them  <cit> . hence, the somatic-origin cyst cells that encapsulate these near-mature sperm are expected to play an important role in regulating their release. this is further established by a targeted disruption of shibire/dynamin functions in the head cyst cells, which indicate that the maintenance of spermatids in a tight bundle is essential for preventing a premature release. this is also consistent with observations made in the mammalian testis. the sertoli cells play an important role in the mechanical movement of germ cells from the basal to the adluminal side during their differentiation  <cit> . this process is aided by the f-actin-rich es and a variety of different cellular junctions  <cit> . our results helped to identify the molecular and cellular framework involved in the spermiation process in drosophila . this also provides a useful base for future analysis of sperm release mechanisms.

dynamin-mediated membrane remodeling is essential for actin cap maintenance and attachment to sperm nuclei at the terminal stages of maturation
dynamin is implicated in the assembly and maintenance of f-actin-based membrane ruffles, podosomes and invadopodia  <cit> , and a specific dynamin isoform in rat  was found to associate with the tubulobulbar junctions around the sperm heads  <cit> . dynamin is enriched at the actin caps and genetic analysis showed that they are essential for maintaining the sperm bundle inside the cysts. the dynamin requirement appeared to be constitutive as the temporal loss of shibire/dynamin function caused actin cap disassembly and nb disorganization. in addition, it caused accumulation of nbs inside the testes within  <dig> minutes. thus, dynamin-mediated membrane remodeling at the actin cap region is expected to play a role in sperm bundling and release processes in drosophila , and provided a basis to investigate the interactions between the somatic origin cyst cells and spermatids during the sperm maturation process in drosophila.

CONCLUSIONS
in view of the observations presented here, the sperm maturation process in drosophila resembled the spermatid development inside the sertoli cell layer in mammalian testis  <cit> . the mammalian spermatids attach to the sertoli cell membrane through the apical es  <cit> . the f-actin-based es forms around developing spermatids inside the sertoli cell  <cit> . although electron microscopic studies did not reveal es-like structures around the sperm heads in drosophila testis, the actin caps contained the essential functional elements of these specialized junctions. it is rich in f-actin, beta-catenin and de-cadherin, and tightly associated with the spermatid heads during individualization. in addition, we found a second interesting parallel. mammalian sperm are physically released from the sertoli cells after the removal of integrin and beta-catenin from the apical es  <cit> . a tubulobulbar junction forms inside the sertoli cells and around the mammalian spermatids  <cit> . proteins involved in endocytosis, such as dynamin  <dig> and amphiphysin were enriched at these junctions  <cit> , and loss of amphiphysin from the tubulobulbar junctions was shown to block sperm release in the knockout mice  <cit> . we showed that shibire/dynamin functions in the head cyst cells in drosophila testis to maintain the actin cap integrity and sperm heads in a tight bundle. thus, our observations have the potential to establish drosophila as an attractive model for molecular analysis of spermiation in insects. it has defined an assay to study the role of f-actin-mediated cell adhesion process and can be used to screen for small molecule-based perturbation of the sperm maturation process in the future.

