BACKGROUND
within days of germination, 95% of the short roots of most conifers and deciduous trees form ectomycorrhizae  with soil fungi  <cit> , a form of symbiosis between plants and fungi whose evolution dates back 360- <dig> million years  <cit> . in ectomycorrhizae, the fungus forms a mycelial sheath around the plant's root, called the hartig net that isolates the root from the soil and inhibits the development of short root hairs. nutrients are exchanged between fungus and root across the apoplast, a zone that is outside both root and fungus, preventing direct contact between the fungus and plant cytoplasm and requiring that nutrients exchanged cross both fungal and plant cell walls. in ectomycorrhizae symbiosis, fungal and plant metabolisms are connected by a suite of transporters that shuttle essential nutrients across the apoplast from one organism to another. this union of the plant and fungal metabolisms, termed the mycorrhizal metabolome, provides greater environmental fitness to the partners in the symbiotic relationship than can be provided by either organism's metabolism alone. the mutualistic association provides the fungus with a source of photosynthetically derived carbohydrates  <cit> . as much as 25% of the plant's net photosynthesis is used to support its fungal partner  <cit> . the metabolic contributions of the fungus in return for those sugars are more diverse. the fungus increases the absorptive surface area of the root by the formation of an intense network of very thin hyphae in the soil, and is thereby able to explore and to access nutrients from a greater volume of soil than could be exploited by the plant's roots alone  <cit> . ectomycorrhizae fungi also contribute to tree nutrition by the mobilization of nutrients from organic material in the soil  <cit>  and through mineral weathering  <cit> . the network of hyphae in the soil is effective in taking up organic and inorganic nutrient resources such as phosphorus, nitrogen, zinc, copper and provides these nutrients to the host plant  <cit> . the symbiotic fungus also provides a higher tolerance against abiotic and biotic stresses such as drought, toxic heavy metal concentrations and protection from pathogens  <cit>  and buffers the plant against sudden changes in its environment  <cit> .

an experimental model for the mycorrhizal system uses the ectomycorrhizae fungus laccaria bicolor and tree species populus tremuloides . not only do these organisms readily form mycorrhizae in the laboratory, but also the l. bicolor and the closely related species populus trichocarpa genomes have been sequenced and annotated through the efforts of the department of energy and joint genome institute's  <cit> . we used next generation sequencing  of the fully formed mycorrhizal transcriptome to construct a model of the ectomycorrhizal metabolome. the model is comprised of those expressed ectomycorrhizal genes that code for proteins that are either enzymes participating in metabolism or transporters capable of conveying nutrients from one organism to another. previous studies reporting on differential expression  <cit>  in mycorrhizal systems identify some aspects of regulation and metabolism but do not provide a comprehensive representation of the ectomycorrhizal metabolome. although differential expression can highlight where a transcriptome differs in one biological condition to another, a full understanding of metabolism does not require that an associated gene or enzyme be differentially expressed to play a key role in a metabolic network, only that it be expressed. these previous studies have focused on discrete elements derived from either aspen or l. bicolor transcription profiles. our approach simultaneously evaluates the transcript profiles of aspen and l. bicolor to identify the ways which fungal and plant metabolism merge to form this ecologically important symbiotic relationship. in the analysis of the predicted model of the ectomycorrhizal metabolome, we identify those regions in the model where aspen and l. bicolor expressed enzymatic activities that its partner does not. where those unique metabolic contributions overlap with statistically significant, enriched expressed gene models for transporters, we find the likely nutrients that are exchanged between aspen and l. bicolor in the ectomycorrhizal interaction.

RESULTS
ectomycorrhizae were established in woody plant media  as an approach for identification of metabolic pathways unique to l. bicolor or aspen. this plant growth matrix is comprised only of nutrient salts and is devoid of any complex sources of organic nitrogen or phosphorus. observations or inference for metabolism of complex molecules for ectomycorrhizae grown in this medium must therefore be attributable to the synthetic abilities of l. bicolor and aspen and would not be attributable to the symbiont catabolism of any compounds present in the media. l. bicolor and aspen roots were allowed to form fully mature ectomycorrhizae in culture, then were harvested and rna extracted. the harvested mycorrhizal rna is a mixture of transcripts from both l. bicolor and aspen. using illumina ngs technology and 'bowstrap' a tool for identifying statistically significant levels of gene expression, we sequenced the mycorrhizal transcriptome and identified the gene models that are detected as statistically significantly expressed at p <  <dig>  in both biological replicates . we make the assumption that if a gene is detected as expressed, then the protein encoded by that gene is also expressed. the predicted ectomycorrhizal metabolome was constructed by identification of enzymes and transporters associated with cellular metabolic compounds. expressed genes that code for annotated enzymes were mapped to kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  metabolic pathways and expressed transporter proteins for sugars, phosphorous, and nitrogen containing compounds were identified and mapped to specific metabolites.

identification of expressed and enriched membrane transporters
in the ectomycorrhizal interaction, the individual enzymes and transporters of plant and fungal metabolism remain largely compartmentalized, prevented from directly interacting by the apoplastic space. to exchange nutrients, plant and fungus must have the capacity for importing and exporting nutrients across their cell walls. for the ectomycorrhizal metabolome, nitrogen, phosphorous and carbohydrate compounds are essential elements of nutrient exchange and gene ontology  annotations  <cit>  were used as a systematic approach to identify expressed genes in the mycorrhizal transcriptome annotated as members of these transporter classes. go annotations for predicted proteins coded by best gene models from sequenced genomes were generated by automated blast homology to proteins of previously identified function  <cit> . these go annotations are corroborated by individual publications on specific transporters for amino acids  <cit> , ammonium  <cit> , sugar  <cit> , and inorganic phosphate  <cit>  which have been identified as encoded in the genome.

members of all the transporter classes are detected as expressed in the mycorrhizal transcriptome . the l. bicolor genome encodes fewer transporters than does aspen in the selected analysis set but a larger proportion of the transporter genes is expressed. the expression patterns for the nitrogen and carbohydrate transporters in this study are similar to those reported using whole genome expression arrays  <cit> . a single inorganic phosphate transporter is annotated in the l. bicolor genome consistent with the previous observations of a limited number of fungal phosphate transporters in mycorrhizal symbiosis  <cit> . the sets of expressed mycorrhizal transporter genes were analyzed for significant enrichment of specific annotations. at a stringency of cumulative binomial distribution  pval <  <dig> , expressed transporters are enriched for amino acid transport in l. bicolor and aspen . sugar porter activity is enriched only in l. bicolor. ammonium transporters and inorganic phosphate transporters are not enriched in either the l. bicolor or aspen transcriptome.

transporters are categorized as "nitrogen", "carbon", and "phosphorus" using go annotation associated with the indicated metabolic compounds transported in the mycorrhizal metabolome. "# genomic" indicates the total number of gene models with a specific go annotation in the aspen or l. bicolor genome. "expressed" is the percent of expressed vs. total transporter genes for the indicated organism in the mycorrhizal transcriptome. "pval" is the cbd-pvalue for the enrichment of a transporter annotation in the set of "expressed" relative to the "# genomic".

the lack of enrichment for ammonium transporter genes suggests that ammonium is not one of the primary mediums of interaction between aspen and l. bicolor in spite of the fact that ammonium salts are present in the growth medium. amino acid transport, enriched in both aspen and l. bicolor suggests that amino acids are a major metabolite that is shared during ecm interaction. a number of nitrogen containing compound such as ammonia and amino acids have been proposed as candidate compounds for nitrogen exchange in ecm systems  <cit> . the correlation of the present model with amino acid transport is consistent with experimental data for arbuscular fungal and plant systems  <cit> . the transported amino acids are likely originated from the action of fungal enzymes as the growth medium lacks amino acids. aspen transcriptome is not enriched for sugar transporters, but aspen does not require them. sucrose molecules enter the apoplast from aspen roots via diffusion, where it is hydrolyzed into hexose sugars by a sugar invertase produced by aspen  <cit> . the glucose and fructose products of the invertase reaction are substrates for specific fungal hexose transporters  <cit> . the observed enrichment of sugar transporters in the l. bicolor transcriptome is consistent with the experimental data demonstrating transfer of carbohydrates across the apoplast interface in ectomycorrhizal roots of aspen  <cit> . the hexose transporter subset of enriched sugar transporters identified in this analysis overlaps with an expression profiling and characterization analysis of hexose transporters proteins encoded in the genome of l. bicolor  <cit> .

model of the mycorrhizal metabolome
the mycorrhizal metabolome map depicts all the metabolic compounds inferred by expressed genes annotated with enzyme functions . the respective metabolomes of these organisms are connected by a suite of transporters that shuttle essential nutrients across the apoplastic space. potential gateways for linkage of these compartmentalized l. bicolor and aspen metabolisms were identified using the amino acid and sugar transporters enriched in the set of mycorrhizal expressed genes. the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome is comprised of  <dig> metabolic compounds connected by  <dig> enzyme reactions. reactions are mediated by  <dig> specific enzyme functions, of which  <dig> enzyme functions are uniquely expressed by aspen and  <dig> enzyme functions are uniquely expressed by l. bicolor.

mapping aspen expressed genes to metabolic pathways in kegg
to better visualize the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome, reactions in the complete mycorrhizal transcriptome were mapped onto kegg global metabolism . global metabolism map is comprised of  <dig> metabolic sub-networks  <cit> . this map is an expert-curated metabolic pathway that highlights an organism's core metabolic pathways and is a useful tool for visualizing key features out of the much more inclusive set of all possible metabolic interactions in the complete mycorrhizal metabolome. the significantly expressed genes of the mycorrhizal transcriptome that code for proteins annotated with ec activities were mapped to the global kegg metabolism map and generated a sub-set of enzymatic reactions predicted to take place in aspen- l. bicolor mycorrhizal system . in this illustration, the nodes correspond to metabolic compounds while the edges represent enzymatic transformations of the compounds. although many unique enzyme functions are shared in both organisms, expressed enzyme functions unique to the aspen or l. bicolor transcriptome are indicated by green or red edge colors, respectively. of all enzyme reactions represented in kegg global metabolism map <dig>  30% are expressed in complete mycorrhizal transcriptome,  <dig> % in aspen transcriptome, and  <dig> % in the l. bicolor transcriptome. of the  <dig> kegg subnetworks that make up global metabolism kegg map <dig>   <dig> % in the complete mycorrhizal transcriptome,  <dig> % in the l. bicolor transcriptome, and  <dig> % in the aspen root transcriptome are detected with at least 30% of enzyme activities significantly expressed.

 as a model for metabolism during mycorrhizal interaction was evaluated by analysis expressed sequences for core metabolic functions. the ability of the sequence data to fully represent expression of core metabolic functions would indicate the suitability of the transcriptomic data to investigate all predicted metabolic pathways. the approach and results are largely consistent with a previous transcript profiling study that delineated the major pathways of carbohydrate metabolism in l. bicolor  <cit> . to determine if genes that are expected to be expressed in aspen and l. bicolor are detected as expressed, we consider enrichment of core metabolism kegg maps in the observed transcriptomics data. expressed enzyme activities in the kegg pathways for the core metabolic pathways pyruvate metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis , citrate cycle , fatty acid metabolism , purine metabolism , and pyrimidine metabolism  are significantly enriched  in both aspen and l. bicolor transcriptomes.

many enzyme activities that are expressed in common between aspen and l. bicolor should also illuminate core metabolic activities. metabolic pathways significantly enriched for enzyme activities expressed in both organisms  are largely composed of core metabolic pathways. examples of kegg pathways for carbohydrate metabolism; glycolysis  and citrate cycle , energy metabolism; oxidative phosphorylation , nucleotide metabolism including purine  and pyrimidine  metabolism, and amino acid metabolism make up the majority of significantly shared kegg pathways for shared and expressed mycorrhizal enzyme activities. this makes intuitive sense, as the basal metabolism required for living things should be well represented in both aspen and l. bicolor transcriptomes. of more direct relevance in understanding the unique aspects of this interaction are the common signaling pathways enriched for activities expressed in both aspen and l. bicolor during mycorrhizal symbiosis. phosphatidylinositol signaling system  and calcium signaling pathway  have 100% overlapping annotated expressed enzyme activities between aspen and l. bicolor. calcium has been demonstrated to be an important intracellular signal involved in the regulation of fungal-plant symbiosis gene expression  <cit> . regulation of calcium levels is an early signaling event in many plant/microbe interactions and sequential elevations of cytoplasmic and nuclear calcium levels may have a regulatory role in symbiosis  <cit> . the phosphatidylinositol signaling system is related to plant development and regulation, such as root hair growth  <cit> . this mechanism is relevant to ectomycorrhizal interactions, in which plant root hair growth is specifically suppressed in the formation of mycorrhizae by l. bicolor. the enrichment of activities for these common signaling pathways is consistent with commonalities observed for modulation of host cell responses in symbioses  <cit> .

the "% shared annotations" represent the percent of shared relative to the total annotations for the indicated pathway.

identification of unique metabolic capabilities
the expressed activities mapped to kegg pathways were analyzed to identify metabolic activities that are uniquely expressed only in aspen or l. bicolor. the kegg pathways enriched for enzyme activities unique to l. bicolor  consists of only two pathways. both amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism  and arginine and proline metabolism  pathways are significantly enriched for expressed l. bicolor enzymes. the pathways associated with the arginine and proline metabolism  are extensive and both aspen and l. bicolor have unique and enriched enzyme activities that map to this pathway. the transcriptomic data from l. bicolor is consistent with the observation that the mycorrhizal transcriptome is significantly enriched for amino acid transporters encoded by both aspen and l. bicolor. the unique metabolic activities expressed in l. bicolor mediate metabolism of glutamate, arginine, proline, and aspartate .

another set of unique activities in l. bicolor is the capability for the synthesis and utilization of allantoin via ureidoglycolate or urea . this capability is represented by the uric acid oxidase, allantoinase, allantoicase, and urease proteins encoded in the l. bicolor genome and expressed in the mycorrhizal metabolome. the assigned enzyme activities and annotations are supported by sequence alignments to conserved domain database profiles , for these enzymes  <cit> . the l. bicolor urate oxidase protein sequence  generates a position-specific scoring matrix  alignment to the conserved domain for urate oxidase  with and e-value of  <dig> e- <dig>  the l. bicolor protein sequences for allantoinase , allantoicase , and urease  generate similar pssm alignments consistent with the assigned activities  are organized into several general categories. the first and largest category is the set of "kegg plant" metabolic pathways. flavonoid biosynthesis , phenylpropanoid biosynthesis , and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms  are plant-specific pathways in kegg that should be expressed in aspen and absent in l. bicolor. those enzyme activities expressed in aspen but not l. bicolor that map to biosynthesis of steroids , share considerable overlap with the pathway for synthesis of plant hormones  suggesting this observation is generally consistent with the category of plant-specific metabolism. the kegg pathways for phenylalanine metabolism , methionine metabolism , and arginine and proline metabolism  can be grouped into a category of nitrogen metabolism. ddt degradation  is a xenobiotic degradation kegg pathway and may be involved in the metabolism of signaling molecules synthesized by l. bicolor during mycorrhizal interaction. the kegg pathway group for carbohydrate metabolic networks uniquely expressed in aspen during mycorrhizal interaction and includes starch and sucrose metabolism  and pyruvate metabolism . unique carbohydrate metabolism present in aspen but absent in l. bicolor conforms to our understanding of the biological basis for the ecm interaction. l. bicolor is poorly suited for metabolizing complex sugars from its environment and is largely dependent upon its plant symbiotic partner to provide hexoses for its survival. a closer look at the specific unique activities expressed in aspen supports this interpretation. one of the unique activities possessed by aspen is the capacity to break down starch and generate fructose and glucose from sucrose. aspen also expressed a capacity for metabolism of plant cell wall components pectin and pectate that is absent in l. bicolor transcriptome. these integral reactions of the starch and sucrose metabolism kegg pathway  represent prototypical plant pathways and additionally specific ec activities supportive for mycorrhizal symbiosis.

discussion
the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome
transcriptome data mapped at the level of kegg pathways enabled identification of unique metabolic capabilities contributed by aspen and l. bicolor to the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome. to identify a priori the specific molecular mechanisms of those contributions it is necessary to consider the mycorrhizal metabolome model as a complete network of compartmentalized metabolisms interacting by transported metabolites through expressed membrane transporters. the process is enabled by identification of regions in the model represented in figure  <dig> that exhibit unique interconnecting enzyme activities. particular emphasis is assigned to those regions of unique activities that are also associated with compounds predicted to be transported by expressed, enriched amino acid transporters or sugar porters. those identified regions underscore the most likely metabolic compounds that are synthesized by one of the ecm partners and transported across the apoplast to the partner organism. several regions are identified using this strategy and lead to the identification of five compounds; fructose, sucrose, glycine, glutamate, and allantoin . these compounds meet the three criteria imposed for analysis of the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome; 1) the activities are uniquely expressed in one of the organisms, 2) the synthesized compound can be matched to appropriate exchange transporters, and 3) there is a reciprocal pathway in the partner organisms to enable utilization of the synthesized compound.

l. bicolor imports fructose and glucose hydrolyzed from sucrose by aspen
in ectomycorrhizal symbiosis, sucrose is released into the apoplast where it may be hydrolyzed into hexose sugars by a plant-provided acid hydrolase, ec <dig> . <dig>   <cit> . five out of the eight aspen genes models annotated with the activity ec <dig> . <dig>  are significantly expressed in mycorrhizae . however, no gene in l. bicolor is annotated with this activity indicating the fungus is dependent upon aspen's ability to cleave sucrose into hexoses that can be imported by l. bicolor. this hypothesis from the predicted mycorrhizal metabolome is consistent with accepted models for sugar transfer and with experimental observations  <cit> . the genome of l. bicolor encodes several hexose importer genes  <cit>  which are expressed in mycorrhizae .

l. bicolor synthesizes glycine and glutamate for import by aspen
in spite of the presence of abundant ammonium salts in the growth media, we observe that l. bicolor is expressing enzymes for synthesizing nitrogenous compounds and membrane transporters for their export to aspen. aspen expresses the transporters necessary for uptake and metabolism of those amino acids. the ability to absorb amino acids through the roots appears ubiquitous in plant species  <cit> . glutamic acid in particular has been demonstrated to be significantly absorbed through the root systems  <cit>  and glycine uptake has been observed in trees  <cit> . unique enzymatic transformations expressed in l. bicolor generate l-glutamate from ammonium via ec  <dig> . <dig> , glutamic dehydrogenase. aspen expressed a unique enzymatic pathway that converts l-glutamte to succinyl-coa . aspen expresses a unique pathway from glycine to glycolysis/glucogenesis .

l. bicolor possess capability for synthesis and utilization of allantoin
another set of unique activities in l. bicolor is the capability for the synthesis and utilization of allantoin via ureidoglycolate or urea . allantoin is used by plants, bacteria, and some fungi as a nitrogen and carbon source  <cit>  and is a candidate metabolic product that is useful to aspen. the expression of these enzymes in l. bicolor indicates compounds derived from this pathway may supplement the ability of the fungus to supply nitrogen to the plant. examples of plants that are able to import allantoin through their roots and the ability of some plants to use allantoin as sole nitrogen source have been previously reported  <cit> . there is evidence that allantoin transporters are expressed in mycorrhizae. l. bicolor possesses at least one gene annotated as an allantoin permease,  <dig>  which is highly homologous to yeast protein dal <dig>  allantoin permease  with a blastp evalue 2e- <dig>  aspen also has at least one allantoin uptake transporter gene,  <dig>  homologous to arabidopsis allantoin uptake atups <dig>  with a blastp evalue of 8e- <dig>  the current predicted metabolome model does not indicate the utilization of allantoin by aspen roots. this is, however, the result that is expected. allantoin has been previously identified as one of the primary nitrogenous compounds exported from soybean root nodules to be metabolized in shoots  <cit> . assuming that allantoin is used similarly in aspen, that the metabolic pathways for immediate utilization of allantoin should not be observed as expressed in the root, but should be detected in transcriptomic analysis of aspen shoots..

CONCLUSIONS
we have generated a predicted model of l. bicolor and aspen root mycorrhizal metabolome using transcriptomic data. the mycorrhizal metabolome is comprised of the expressed metabolic enzymes in the mycorrhizal transcriptome and the transporters required for the exchange of metabolic compounds. in mycorrhizal symbiosis, aspen exchanges with l. bicolor photosynthetic sugars for nutrients. this expectation is validated by the statistically enriched expression of sugar porters by l. bicolor. the enrichment of kegg amino acid metabolism pathways with unique expressed enzyme activities and the enrichment for expressed amino acid transporters for both aspen and l. bicolor indicate that, for mycorrhizae formed in wpm, l. bicolor's debt to aspen for carbon is paid with organic nitrogen. l. bicolor expresses the metabolic capacity to synthesize nitrogenous compounds such as glycine, glutamate and allantoin, via pathways not expressed in aspen roots. in the growth conditions used here, the predicted exchange compounds are the fructose and glucose as well as organic nitrogen compounds, specifically glycine, glutamate and perhaps allantoin. the predictions suggest l. bicolor is an active metabolic partner in addition to passively extending the absorptive surface of aspen roots. this role encompasses uptake of ammonium from the medium and synthesis of more complex compounds provided to the plant. additional experiments in different nutrient environments are expected to uncover additional mechanisms of mycorrhizal metabolic interactions.

the model we generated confirms prior biological knowledge and predicts previously unobserved mechanisms of mycorrhizal interaction. to generate the model required transcriptomic analysis in addition to knowledge of aspen and l. bicolor genomic annotations as it is necessary to know not only the complete metabolic capacity of an organism, but what fraction of that capacity is being actively transcribed under specific biological conditions or developmental state. these predictions are suitable for the design of future, hypothesis driven biological experiments. a deepening understanding of the molecular components of mycorrhizal interactions, an important component of terrestrial forest ecosystems, will have applications in global carbon management and sustainability. the approach applied to this ectomycorrhizal system can also be generalized to additional symbiotic metabolomic systems. this method depends on accurate annotation of genomes and a complete picture of metabolism from kegg. in the jgi gene model annotations for l. bicolor version  <dig>  nearly 60% of the predicted gene models do have annotation and 30% do not share homology to any previously identified protein. as the quality of gene model annotation continues to improve and as more complete metabolic pathways are published, generation of future metabolomic models will become more and more accurate. our available and interactive model of the mycorrhizal metabolome will serve as an important resource for other investigators.

