BACKGROUND
the levels of fat storage and allocation within body compartments have become the focus of critical interest during the last few years, due to their impact on human health  <cit>  and meat quality of farm animals  <cit> . dietary manipulation and genetic selection constitute the two ways to manage body fat content in farm animals. energy intake and genetic factors also have a major influence on fattening in humans  <cit> .

storage of triglycerides in the different body compartments depends on the availability of plasma lipids originating from either the diet or lipogenesis. in fish, human and most avian species, lipogenesis mainly takes place in the liver  <cit>  and is negligible in muscle  <cit> . the liver has a central role in metabolic homeostasis and in coordinating body metabolism in response to dietary conditions. an increase in dietary lipid generally leads to modification of lipid metabolism in most animals, with inhibition of lipogenic enzymes  <cit> , and stimulation of fatty acid oxidation  <cit> , especially when the dietary fatty acids are provided as polyunsaturated fatty-acids   <cit> . however, most of the studies investigating the hepatic metabolic changes induced by long term feeding a high fat diet focused on lipid metabolism.

body fat distribution is clearly a heritable trait  <cit> . in farm animals, genetic selection has been used to manage fat content of target body compartments  <cit> , but it generally leads to changes in whole body fat content. in humans, studies comparing groups with different fat distribution patterns have highlighted differences in postprandial plasma metabolites  <cit> , suggesting differences in fat, glucose and protein metabolism. however, the physiological mechanisms responsible for these differences have not been described to date.

using divergent selection on muscle fat content in rainbow trout, we obtained animals that were characterized by differences in fat allocation between visceral adipose tissue and muscle, with no change in overall body fat content between lines. we then decided to characterize the differences in metabolic changes occurring between these two lines when fed a low or a high energy diet. we focused on the liver, since this organ is the center of intermediary metabolism and main site for lipogenesis in fish  <cit> . the aims of the study were 1) to assess the overall changes in gene and protein expression induced in the rainbow trout liver by long term feeding of a high energy/high fat diet, 2) to identify the differences in gene and protein expression profiles induced in the liver as a consequence of the selection for muscle fattening, and 3) to evaluate to what extent the two factors used to modulate muscle fat content may have interacted on the different metabolism-related genes and proteins. this was achieved through two complementary approaches at the transcriptomic and proteomic levels, using microarray and bidimensional electrophoresis.

RESULTS
growth, biometry and biochemical parameters 
% ww, percentage of wet weight. values are expressed as means ± sd ; his, hepato-somatic index; vsi, viscero-somatic index; p-values are presented in italics when the differences are significant . means with different superscript letters are significantly different .

the higher energy content of the he diet enhanced growth rate  of fish irrespective of the line. at the end of the feeding trial, fish of the lean muscle line  showed higher whole body weight  compared to those of the fat muscle line . whole body lipid content was increased in fish fed the he diet compared to those fed the low energy diet , and was similar for the two lines fed the same diet. muscle lipid content was higher in fish fed the he diet  and in the f line . viscero-somatic index , used as an indicator of fat deposition as visceral adipose tissue, was increased in fish fed the he diet  and in fish from the l line . plasma triglyceride levels were higher in fish fed the le diet  and in fish of the f line . glycemia was not significantly different between diets  or lines   <dig> hours after the meal.

microarray data analysis
hepatic transcripts differentially expressed between the dietary treatments
the results derived from anova  and sam  analysis for global dietary effects  on hepatic gene expression are summarized in table  <dig>  a comparison of the two lists of genes generated by these two analytical methods  revealed that  <dig> genes were significant according to both statistical analyses. with regard to the ontology of these  <dig> clones,  <dig> were attributed a biological function . our study was focused more particularly on genes involved in the metabolic process since it was the largest category represented . lipid metabolism was the metabolic pathway that contained the majority of the differentially expressed transcripts , with, in particular, genes encoding for proteins involved in lipid transport , fatty acid desaturation  and cholesterol/steroid metabolism , down-regulated in trout from both lines fed the he diet . there were two different transcripts corresponding to the h-fabp protein  that shared 88% of sequence similarity. their deduced amino acid sequences contained 94% similar residues, suggesting that these two transcripts may be different isoforms of h-fabp.

 <dig> according to anova , sam analysis  and both statistical methods

 <dig> according to both anova  and sam  analysis

several clones corresponding to enzymes involved in generation of precursor metabolites and energy , amino acid metabolism  and proteolysis were also found to be significantly reduced in the livers of fish fed the he diet compared to those fed the le diet.

hepatic transcripts affected by the selection procedure
the results derived from anova  and sam  analysis for global genetic selection effects  on hepatic gene expression are summarized in table  <dig>  . seventy transcripts were found to be significant by both statistical methods. transcripts involved in metabolic pathways accounted for 46% of the transcripts that had received a biological function . only two of these transcripts were involved in lipid metabolism  . a greater proportion of differential transcripts encoded for proteins involved in xenobiotic and oxidant metabolism , generation of precursors and energy , amino-acid metabolism  and proteolysis . all were expressed at higher levels in the f line than in the l line .

 <dig> according to anova , sam analysis  and both statistical methods

 <dig> according to both anova  and sam  analysis

hepatic transcripts involved in a line per diet interaction
twenty-six transcripts for which the effects of the diet were dependent on genotype were detected by the two-way anova. two of these encoded for proteins involved in immune function, eight in cellular processes, and one in trafficking, four encoded for transcription factors, and ten were involved in metabolic pathways. the latter are represented in figure  <dig>  it is of note that six of the ten significant interactions that concerned metabolic genes occurred in the f-le group: transcript levels of four genes involved in lipid metabolism and energy production , and cytochrome b-c <dig> complex subunit ) were increased in the f-le group, whereas the expression of long-chain acyl-coa synthetase  <dig> , involved in the activation of long chain fatty acids, and ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase , involved in proteolysis, were concomitantly decreased.

confirmation of microarray data by real time rt-pcr
changes in gene expression demonstrated by microarray analysis were further confirmed with a small set of genes using real time rt-pcr performed on nine trout liver samples per experimental group, including the samples we used in the microarray experiment . genes were selected for each category of effects we observed, i.e. fads <dig>  and pgdh <dig> , which exhibited a significant diet-induced change, got <dig>  and mdh , that were found to be differentially expressed between lines, pgd , that was regulated by both factors, and finally g6pd  and gk , for which a line/diet interaction was detected. the real time rt-pcr analysis of fads <dig>  not only confirmed the dietary effect detected by microarray analysis, but also revealed a significant line effect, with higher expression in the f line than in the l line.

2-d gel analysis of soluble liver proteins
over  <dig> different spots were detected in at least one experimental condition, and  <dig> were detected in all four groups. according to the two-way anova analysis,  <dig> protein spots showed a change in abundance between experimental conditions . of them,  <dig> were deemed to be of sufficient quality to allow peptide mass fingerprinting, and  <dig> yielded significant identities . of the  <dig> proteins identified,  <dig> corresponded to proteins involved in metabolic pathways . in particular, we identified two protein species of heart-type fatty acid binding protein , with different isoelectric points and molecular weights . the best match for trypsin digest products from these two spots corresponded to the two est printed on the microarray that we found to be differentially expressed using transcriptome analysis . we also identified two α- <dig> enolase and two transketolase protein species.

three proteins involved in intracellular lipid transport  were reduced with the he diet, in agreement with the results observed with the transcriptome analysis. in addition, the two h-fabps showed greater abundance in the f line than in the l line, an effect that was not evidenced at the transcript level. glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  that is involved in phospholipid biosynthesis was also more highly expressed in the f line than in the l line. finally, apolipoprotein a- <dig> , the major protein in high-density plasma lipoprotein, was specifically up-regulated in the l line fed the he diet .

two proteins involved in the generation of precursor metabolites and energy were identified, i.e. nadp-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase , which was lower in fish fed the he diet, and ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase, a component of the respiratory chain, that was more abundant in the f line than in the l line. icdh-nadp was in addition markedly reduced in l fish fed the he diet .

six proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, particularly in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis  were expressed at lower levels in fish fed the he diet compared to fish fed the le diet. with regard to the selection effect, gapdh, phosphoglucomutase , one α-enolase and one transketolase were more abundant in the f line than in the l line. in addition, line/diet interactions were observed for pgm, the two α- <dig> enolases and the two transketolases that were considerably less abundant in l fish fed the he diet .

several key enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism were identified: glutamate dehydrogenase  and alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase , both involved in amino acid transamination, and betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase , involved in sulfur amino acid bioconversion pathways, were expressed at lower levels in fish fed the he diet, whereas serine hydroxymethyl transferase was expressed at higher level in these fish. aspartate aminotransferase , gdh, agx and homogentisate  <dig>  2-dioxygenase  were detected in greater abundance in the f line than in the l line. in contrast, serine hydroxymethyltransferase  and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase  were expressed at higher levels in the l line.

finally, we identified four proteins related to oxidative cell status, i.e. glutathione peroxidase  and glutathione s transferase , involved in the anti-oxidant process, as well as stress-activated protein kinase  <dig>  and arylamine n-acetyltransferase, that are induced by oxidative stress conditions. lower levels of the two anti-oxidant enzymes were detected in the f line than in the l line, whereas the two stress-induced proteins were less abundant in the latter. of these four proteins, only gpx showed a diet-induced change in abundance, with higher protein levels upon he diet feeding.

discussion
agreement between transcriptome and proteome analyses
transcriptome and proteome analysis constitute powerful tools for obtaining a view of the changes induced by genetic selection procedures and molecular adaptations to dietary treatments. the combination of the two approaches was justified in several respects. indeed, the expression of a transcript and that of its corresponding protein are not necessarily related. although much relevant information can be obtained from proteome analysis alone, the current proteomics technologies have some limitations of a technical order  <cit> . in addition, we are currently limited in the sequenced proteins available for fish species, in particular rainbow trout. about half of the spectra generated in this study led to significant protein identification. the combination of microarray and proteome analyses therefore makes it possible, to some extent, to get round the drawbacks associated with each method and to extract complementary information from these two independent methods.

in the present study, these two overall approaches provided consistent results. some of the differentially expressed proteins we identified were also found on microarray to have altered mrna levels . the changes in abundance detected for these proteins were in accordance with the changes observed at the mrna level.

long term effects of a high energy/high lipid diet on the hepatic gene and protein expression profiles
one of the aims of the present study was to examine the changes in hepatic gene and protein expression profiles induced by long term feeding of a high energy/high fat diet. as could be expected, given the large number of genes that are transcriptionally regulated by dietary fatty acids, particularly pufas  <cit> , a high proportion of the transcripts that showed differential expression between dietary groups were involved in lipid metabolism. three proteins involved in intracellular fatty acid transport  exhibited lower abundance at both mrna and protein levels in fish fed the he diet. h-fabps belong to a family of small, cytosolic proteins that bind long-chain fatty acids and cholesterol. they are predominantly expressed in the heart, skeletal muscle and testes of mammals  <cit> , but have been detected in a wider range of tissues, including the liver, in several fish species such as zebrafish, mummichog and lamprey  <cit> . whereas h-fabp is thought to be involved in fatty acid uptake and transport toward mitochondrial β-oxidation in muscle tissues, as evidenced in mammals and atlantic salmon  <cit> , indications that h-fabp may also mediate intracellular fatty acid sequestration and transport toward the lipogenic process in the liver and oocytes have been reported in zebrafish  <cit> . our results support the latter assumption, since the change in h-fabp level coincided with a decrease in the activity of key lipogenic enzymes  <cit> . acbp is an intracellular lipid-binding protein that selectively binds medium and long chain acyl-coa esters  with high specificity  <cit> . studies in yeast  <cit>  and the mouse  <cit>  have suggested that acbp may play a role in the synthesis of very long chain fatty acids, with dual regulation by both pparα and srebp- <dig>  as for Δ <dig> and Δ <dig> desaturases  <cit> . the he diet down-regulated the gene expression of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase , a key enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that provides nadph for the lipogenic process. the he diet also decreased transcript level of Δ6-desaturase , a rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of highly unsaturated fatty acids . fish oil is particularly rich in  polyunsaturated fatty acid and several studies performed in mammals  <cit>  and salmonids  <cit>  have demonstrated that a hufa-rich diet reduces hepatic mrna levels of Δ5- and Δ6-desaturases. increasing the level of dietary  fatty acid supply has been shown to enhance enzymes of the antioxidant defense system such as gpx and catalase at both activity and mrna levels  <cit> . accordingly, we found that protein levels of gpx, a key enzyme in the antioxidant defense system, were increased in fish fed the he diet, which contained 15% fish oil.

the protein abundance of gdh and agx, two key enzymes of amino acid transamination and indicators of metabolic utilization of dietary amino acids, was lower in fish that received the he diet. some transcripts involved in proteasome-dependent proteolysis were also expressed at lower level with this diet. fish swiftly use proteins as oxidative substrates  <cit> . thus, increasing non-protein energy-yielding nutrients such as lipids generally leads to a protein sparing effect, probably by redirecting dietary protein and amino acids from energy production toward tissue deposition  <cit> . this is consistent with the enhanced protein efficiency ratio and growth performance observed in fish fed the he diet, as previously described  <cit> . feeding the he diet was also associated with reduced levels of transcripts and proteins involved in sulfur amino acid bioconversion, such as 3-pgdh, cgl, or badh. this might reflect a decrease in amino acid turnover in response to higher lipid supply, a nutritional context that would allow the cell to rely less heavily on the use of essential amino acids such as methionine to meet their energy requirements.

long term feeding a diet supplemented in fish oil has been shown to induce substantial lowering of blood triglycerides  by inhibiting the production and secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particles by the liver  <cit> . the plasma triglyceride level was consistently lower in fish fed the he diet than in fish fed the le diet. a reduction in lipogenesis associated to a stimulation of fatty acid oxidation in the liver, as suggested by our previous results  <cit> , resulting from the higher level of fish oil provided by the he diet might have decreased triglyceride and vldl secretion in circulating blood.

hepatic transcripts and proteins affected by the selection procedure
in contrast to the results observed regarding the dietary effect on hepatic gene expression, the transcriptome analyses revealed minor changes in lipid metabolism induced by the selection procedure. however, the proteome approach yielded some complementary information, as higher levels of the two h-fabp proteins were present in the livers of the f line compared to the l line. this might have been due to post-transcriptional regulation, or to increased stability of these two proteins in the f line hepatocytes. abundance of g3pdh, involved in phospholipids biosynthesis, was also increased in f fish livers. in addition, real time rt-pcr measurement of fads <dig>  encoding for the delta-6-desaturase, an enzyme involved in fatty acid desaturation, showed increased mrna levels in the f line. all these results, together with increased gene expression of 6-pgd, a key enzyme that provide nadph for lipogenic process, suggest greater hepatic lipid biosynthesis in the f line. this is in good agreement with the higher activity of acetyl-coa carboxylase, as previously evidenced  <cit> , although no differences in fatty acid synthase activity could be found between the two lines  <cit> .

however, most of the alterations induced by the selection procedure we observed occurred in protein and amino acid metabolism. in particular, levels of mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase , gdh and agx, three key enzymes that play a major role in amino acid catabolism, were increased in the livers of f fish. transcripts and proteins that functioned in amino acid bioconversion  and in proteasome-dependent proteolysis were also enhanced in this line. all these findings may reflect an increase in hepatic flux for energy production through amino acid metabolism in the f line compared to the l line. this is in agreement with the lower growth rate and protein efficiency observed for the f line  <cit> . interestingly, some studies have reported strong evidence that amino acid catabolism may be negatively regulated by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α  in rodent liver  <cit> . in agreement with this, pparα expression was lower in the f line than in the l line  <cit> . the increase in amino acid metabolism suggested here could thus be mediated through weaker inhibition of related genes by pparα. this phenomenon has previously only been described in the mouse and rat. although this remains to be confirmed by appropriate experiments in fish, the fact that such a mechanism might also operate in lower vertebrates would support the idea that regulation of amino acid metabolism by pparα might be evolutionarily conserved throughout vertebrates.

the lower protein levels of two key enzymes in the antioxidant defense system  observed in the f line might be explained by a lower production of reactive oxygen species  derived from fatty acid oxidation.

taken together, all these findings suggest that a difference in nutrient utilization occurs between the two lines, the l line having a higher propensity to oxidize fatty acids than the f line  <cit> , which may use comparatively more protein and amino acids for energy production. this difference in nutrient utilization could be at least in part orchestrated by pparα, exerting opposing controls of fatty acid oxidation and amino-acid catabolism.

plasma triglyceride levels were higher in the f line than in the l line. increased fatty acid synthesis and decreased fatty acid oxidation in the liver of the f line might have led to enhanced fatty acid availability for triglyceride and subsequently vldl production. another hypothesis might be that a decreased extra-hepatic tissue lipid uptake in the f line compared to the l line also contribute to their higher blood triglyceride levels by lowering triglyceride clearance from plasma. further analysis of the muscle and visceral adipose tissue lipid uptake should enlight this point.

comparing the effects of the he diet and upward selection for muscle fat content on hepatic expression profiles
significant effect exerted by both dietary treatment and genetic background were observed for some liver transcripts and proteins involved in processes such as cell cycle, transcription/translation, immune response and metabolic pathways. overall, the he diet and upward selection for muscle fat content exerted opposite effects in the liver. in particular, the expression of genes and proteins involved in lipid biosynthesis and amino acid and protein catabolism were decreased by the he diet, and were increased in the f line compared to the l line. some transcripts and proteins were involved in line/diet interactions, but they did not fall into function-related groups, except for the protein involved in glycolysis/neoglucogenesis, the abundance of which was decreased in the livers of fish from the l-he group. gene expression level of gk, a key enzyme of glycolysis that plays a major role in glucose homeostasis, was particularly high in the l-he group compared to the three other groups. we are currently not able to explain the magnitude of changes observed for gk gene expression, since these changes are not correlated with glycaemia. this might reflect a disturbance of carbohydrate metabolism in the l line. further analyses are needed, such as glucose tolerance test or post-prandial kinetics of glycaemia and gk gene expression. the relative few number of genes and proteins affected by both factors as well as line/diet interactions observed in the present work is in agreement with the results derived from our previous study  <cit> . all together, these results suggest that the dietary treatment and the genetic selection used in this study to manage muscle fattening are likely to act through different metabolic actors in the liver. the present study reveals that the cumulative effect exerted by the genetic selection and the high energy diet on muscle fattening is not associated with cumulative changes of hepatic metabolic pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
the combination of liver transcriptome and proteome analysis led to the identification of several molecules that responded to the dietary treatments and the genetic selection for muscle fattening.

the increase in dietary energy and lipid supply provided by the he diet induced significant changes in the hepatic transcriptome and proteome. the present findings confirmed the effects of long term feeding of a high-pufa diet on the expression of genes and proteins involved in fatty acid desaturation and anti-oxidant metabolism previously described in mammals, suggesting that the underlying molecular mechanisms are evolutionarily conserved. the use of high throughput technologies led to the identification of previously unappreciated molecular actors, such as those involved in amino acid and protein metabolism, which responded to long term feeding with a high energy/high fat diet. they provide complementary information on the effects of dietary fat levels on genes involved in the regulation of energy metabolism.

although muscle was the direct target, the selection procedure applied significantly affected hepatic metabolism. the main changes observed were in transcripts and proteins involved in amino acid and protein catabolism that were higher in the f line than in the l line. some transcripts involved in lipogenesis were also increased in the f line compared to the l line. to our knowledge, the present study is the first that provides insights into the hepatic metabolic changes associated with differences in body fat distribution in a context of similar whole body fat content. we identified genes and proteins that could be used as markers to prevent excess muscle fat accumulation.

further analysis of the muscle and visceral adipose tissue transcriptome and/or proteome will provide greater understanding of the mechanisms that are responsible for the differences in fat allocation between the two lines and of the fattening effects of a high energy/high fat diet on these body compartments.

