BACKGROUND
dispersal, defined as a movement between the birth site and the first breeding site  or between two successive breeding sites , has important ecological and evolutionary consequences both at the individual and the population level  <cit> . in particular, dispersal allows individuals to escape adverse conditions and thereby enhance their fitness. it is also a key driver of gene flow and metapopulation dynamics  <cit> .

individual dispersal propensity often covaries with other behavioural, morphological and physiological traits , a covariation which can have a genetic as well as environmental basis  <cit> . these associations of traits are thought to have evolved because they reduce time and energy costs during the movement phase and/or exploration and competition costs during settlement in the new habitat  <cit> . accordingly, dispersing individuals can show morphological adaptations to movement, such as larger wings or fat store  <cit> . they also show behavioural and physiological adaptations to competitive encounters, such as higher aggressiveness  <cit> , and to the exploration of a new habitat, such as higher exploratory behaviour  <cit> , lower xenophobia  <cit>  or higher immune response  <cit> .

although the association of phenotypic traits with dispersal propensity may be favoured if these traits reduce some of the costs of dispersal , they may nonetheless entail long-term costs to dispersing individuals in terms of reproductive success or survival prospects, especially when resources are scarce  <cit> . indeed, most of the phenotypic traits found to be associated with dispersal  are likely to be energetically demanding  <cit> . due to such energetic constraints, dispersing and philopatric individuals may evolve different life-history strategies, with different relative investment in maintenance and reproduction  <cit> . although metabolic requirements could play an important role in shaping these strategies  <cit> , the physiological constraints that underlie life-history variation in relation to dispersal remain unclear.

among the metabolic processes that could be involved in shaping such life-history variation, the regulation of the oxidative balance is expected to play a particularly important role. energy production through aerobic metabolism leads to the production of highly unstable oxidative components, called reactive oxygen species or ros  <cit> . although ros are important messengers in central cell signalling pathways such as cell death signals  <cit> , they can also damage the structure of biological macromolecules through oxidation and thereby disturb from cell to whole organism functioning, i.e. impose an oxidative stress. if a higher metabolic rate is selected in dispersing individuals compared to philopatric ones to face increased energetic requirements, dispersers could be exposed to a higher production of ros that could lead to more oxidative damage and reduced life expectancy  <cit>  . oxidative damages can be prevented through antioxidant defences including inducible enzymes  or molecules acquired through the diet . therefore, dispersing individuals may also regulate a higher production of ros via an increased investment in antioxidant defences, either internally produced or externally acquired. so far, studies on the links between oxidative balance and personality traits found to be associated with dispersal are inconclusive: higher exploratory behaviour was associated with higher antioxidant defences and lower oxidative damages to lipids in greenfinches  <cit>  whereas no such effect was observed in blue tits  <cit> . no study has however directly tested for links between dispersal and oxidative balance.

here, we explored whether dispersing and philopatric individuals differ in oxidative balance in a patchy population of a migratory passerine bird, the collared flycatcher ficedula albicollis. dispersal was defined as a binary variable, i.e. a change of breeding plot between birth and the first breeding event  or between two consecutive breeding events . in this population, individuals show consistent and heritable differences in dispersal  <cit> . collared flycatchers migrate each winter to sub-saharan africa, whereas dispersal is measured over comparatively small spatial scales , leading to negligible direct physiological costs of dispersal movement between plots from one year to the next. moreover, exploration and prospection occur before migration, in the previous year, for both breeding adults and juveniles  <cit> , thus the energetics costs of prospection may be expected to be low at the beginning of the breeding season. it follows that differences in oxidative balance according to dispersal are expected to stem out of differences in behaviour, life-history strategy or metabolism between dispersing and philopatric individuals rather than reflect direct physiological costs of prospection and dispersal movement per se.

we investigated differences in several markers of energy management and oxidative balance during reproduction, as well as reproductive output, between individuals having or not dispersed between habitat plots. the physiological markers studied included total body mass, fat mass and fat-free mass measured through the doubly-labelled water method  <cit> , primary oxidative damage measured as reactive oxygen metabolites  concentration in the plasma  <cit>  and plasma antioxidant capacity estimated through the oxy test  <cit> . because metabolic and oxidative balance differences between individuals are more likely to become apparent under constrained energetic conditions, we experimentally manipulated the level of energetic demand by increasing flight costs  during reproduction. such wing load manipulation was successful at increasing energy expenditure in our study population . we focused on females because they can easily be manipulated as early as incubation in this species, allowing sufficient time for the manipulation to impact energetic demand and reproductive decisions during nestling rearing . such manipulation would increase the reproductive effort necessary to maintain the same reproductive success. differences in the physiological parameters and/or reproductive output between dispersing and philopatric females could also arise from differences in habitat quality, either because dispersing and philopatric individuals respond differently to habitat quality or because they settle in habitats of different quality. therefore, we also controlled statistically in our analyses for natural environmental variation in habitat quality, measured by the local breeding density of conspecifics, which positively relate to reproductive success in this population  <cit> . if dispersing and philopatric females only are of different intrinsic quality, the lowest quality individuals should show both a stronger decrease in reproductive success and a stronger increase in oxidative stress in response to handicap and/or at low densities . if however they have different strategies of investment in maintenance and reproduction, individuals maintaining their reproductive success in response to handicap and/or at low densities should show an increase in reproductive effort, and thus oxidative stress. oxidative costs resulting from reproductive effort should remain limited only at the cost of lower reproductive success under those energetically constrained conditions .

RESULTS
correlations between physiological markers
rom concentration was negatively correlated to fat mass . there was however no correlation between roms concentration and fat-free mass , nor total body mass . antioxidant capacity was positively correlated to total body mass , but not separately to fat mass  or fat-free mass . finally, roms concentration and antioxidant capacity were not significantly correlated . because fat mass was very small relative to fat-free mass , variation in total body mass was mostly related to fat-free mass rather than to fat mass .

female body mass and body composition
female body mass did not differ according to dispersal status , wing load manipulation  or plot density ; all interactions between these variables were non-significant . body mass however increased with tarsus length , decreased with nestling age on the day of capture  and was lower in  <dig> compared to  <dig> . regarding the two components of body mass, neither fat-free nor fat mass differed between dispersing and philopatric females . fat-free mass was however higher in manipulated females compared to control ones  and increased with plot density ; all interactions between dispersal status, manipulation and plot density were non-significant . fat-free mass also increased with tarsus length , decreased with nestling age on the day of female capture  and was lower in  <dig> compared to  <dig> . fat mass did not differ between manipulated and control females  and was not associated with plot density  or tarsus length , but decreased with nestling age  and was higher in  <dig> compared to  <dig> . there was no effect of brood size at hatching on total body mass or its components .

female oxidative balance
differences between dispersing and philopatric individuals in roms concentration depended on the wing load manipulation : among manipulated females, roms concentration was higher in philopatric compared to dispersing females , while no difference was observed among control females . differences between dispersing and philopatric individuals were also density-dependent : in low-density plots, philopatric females had higher roms than dispersing ones , whereas no difference was observed in intermediate  and high-density plots . the effect of plot density on roms concentration also depended on manipulation of female wing load , but post-hoc analyses showed no significant associations between roms concentration and plot density in any of the treatment groups , preventing a clear interpretation of this interaction. there was no effect of body mass , brood size  or nestling age  on roms concentration. adding antioxidant capacity as a covariate yielded qualitatively similar results .fig.  <dig> roms concentration in relation to wing load manipulation for dispersing and philopatric females. roms concentrations were scaled within each year

fig.  <dig> roms concentration  in relation to plot density for dispersing and philopatric females. plot density quantiles were used to define three density classes for the sake of illustration 



antioxidant capacity was higher in philopatric females compared to dispersing ones . wing load manipulation and plot density had no effect on antioxidant capacity, either alone  or in interaction with each other or with dispersal status . there was no effect of body mass , brood size  and nestling age  on antioxidant capacity.

nestling body mass and fledging success
differences in nestlings’ body mass between dispersing and philopatric foster mothers depended on plot density . chicks raised by dispersing mothers reached a lower body mass than chicks raised by philopatric mothers in low density plots , whereas there was no significant difference in intermediate  and high density plots . the wing load manipulation had no effect on nestling body mass, either alone or in interaction with the dispersal status of the mother or with plot density . nestling body mass was also lower in  <dig> compared to  <dig> , decreased with increasing brood size  and increased with the time at weighting . there was no effect of the body mass of the foster mother  on nestlings’ body mass.fig.  <dig> mean nestling body mass in relation to plot density for dispersing and philopatric foster mothers. nestling body mass was measured at 12 days of age and corrected for between-year differences. plot density quantiles were used to define three density classes for the sake of illustration 



fledging probability was higher when the foster mother was philopatric . plot density and wing load manipulation had no effect on fledging probability, either alone or in interaction with each other and with the dispersal status of the mother . fledging probability was lower in  <dig> compared to  <dig> . there was no effect of the body mass of the foster mother  or the initial brood size  on fledging probability.

link between oxidative balance and reproductive output
nestling body mass increased with the antioxidant capacity of the foster mother  and decreased with her roms concentration . nestling fledging probability was independent of the antioxidant capacity of the foster mother  or her roms concentration . all these effects were independent of the dispersal status of the foster mother, plot density or wing load manipulation .

discussion
dispersal is considered an energetically demanding behaviour that may entail costs through increased exposure to oxidative stress. in this study, we experimentally investigated whether dispersing and philopatric individual differ in metabolic markers during reproduction depending on the energetic demand. only plasma antioxidant capacity was higher in philopatric than dispersing females independently of the experimental increase in wing load and of local breeding density. differences in roms concentration between dispersing and philopatric individuals depended on internal  and/or external  factors. in response to the increase in wing load, metabolic rate increased in both dispersing and philopatric females , but roms increased in philopatric females only. similarly, philopatric individuals showed higher roms than dispersing ones in low-density plots only. overall, nestlings raised by dispersing mothers had a lower fledging probability and body mass compared to philopatric mothers, especially in low-density plots. our results suggest that dispersing and philopatric individuals manage oxidative balance and reproductive investment differently under constrained energetic conditions.

differential management of roms in response to experimental energetic constraints
the wing load manipulation modified female energy budget, with a higher fat-free mass for manipulated compared to control females. the difference in fat-free mass likely results from an increase in muscular mass, which has a critical influence on flight performance  <cit>  and can increase following wing load manipulations  <cit> . this would at least partly explain the absence of a decrease in body mass between control and manipulated females, a result previously observed in various passerine species . interestingly, female wing load manipulation affected neither the physiological parameters of their partners  nor the mass and fledging success of their nestlings. this suggests that manipulated females developed stronger flight muscles allowing them to maintain the same reproductive output as control females, without requiring any noticeable physiological compensation from their partner. behavioural measures of reproductive investment, such as feeding rates, would help to confirm the absence of compensation by mates of manipulated females.

the increase of field metabolic rate in response to wing load manipulation  is expected to come at an oxidative cost. a study in the great tit parus major however showed no effect of feather clipping on roms concentration and antioxidant capacity  <cit> , suggesting that such costs if they exist are not straightforward. the interaction between female dispersal status and manipulation on roms concentrations suggests that the oxidative cost of the manipulation might differ between dispersing and philopatric females. among philopatric females, manipulated females showed higher roms concentrations than control ones, whereas there was no difference among dispersing females . therefore, dispersing females were able to mitigate the deleterious effect of increased metabolic rate, at least on the short-term, whereas philopatric females were not. as higher roms have been related to lower survival and lower reproductive output in other bird species , those differences might transfer into long-term fitness costs and thus mediate the trade-off between current and future reproduction.

differential management of roms and reproduction in response to habitat quality
we used the density of breeders in a plot as a measure of local habitat quality. we found increasing nestling body mass with increasing density. thus, in general, individuals did not appear to undergo stronger competition in denser plots. on the contrary, denser plots appeared of higher quality in terms of reproduction and may thus be more attractive. this is in line with previous results in this population showing a positive correlation between local breeding density and success at the plot scale, and consequently higher immigration rate  <cit> .

differences between dispersing and philopatric individuals in roms concentration depended on plot density : philopatric individuals had higher roms concentrations than dispersing ones in low-density plots but not in other habitats. this difference was paralleled by the higher body mass of nestlings from philopatric females in low-density plots only, suggesting a trade-offs between exposure to oxidative stress and offspring quality. our data was however not sufficient to properly test for a within-individual correlation between these two traits, and the overall relationship between them was negative, suggesting that it was mainly driven by differences in individual quality: high quality individual have both low roms concentrations and heavy offspring.

overall, the interactions observed between dispersal status and breeding density on measures of oxidative balance and reproductive success suggest that habitat quality plays a key role in shaping oxidative costs during reproduction. differences in the effect of dispersal measured in habitats of varying quality could result from the multi-causal nature of dispersal and the resulting heterogeneity between dispersing and philopatric individuals. for example, individuals dispersing to low quality habitats might have lower competitive abilities than those dispersing to high quality habitats . alternatively, as suggested by the effect of the experimental manipulation, the differences between dispersing and philopatric individuals could reflect different responses to environmental and physiological challenges. however, we cannot fully exclude that high quality individuals settle in high quality habitats. an experimental manipulation of habitat quality, e.g. through food supplementation or parasite infestation, would help to disentangle the role of habitat and individual quality on the management of oxidative costs.

an overall difference in antioxidant capacity and reproductive success
philopatric females showed higher plasma antioxidant capacity and higher nestling survival than dispersing ones. plasma antioxidant capacity has been shown to be correlated with dietary non-enzymatic antioxidants  in humans  and birds  <cit> . indeed, the oxy-test used here to measure antioxidant capacity, through a reduction of the activity of the hypochlorous acid, mostly reflects the activity of these non-enzymatic antioxidants rather than enzymes targeting specific oxidants such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide or lipid peroxide. thus the difference between dispersing and philopatric females in antioxidant capacity and nestling survival supports the idea that philopatric individuals have higher familiarity with their habitat and may be more efficient at finding high quality resources  <cit> . alternatively, philopatric and dispersing individuals may be of different quality prior to dispersal. discriminating these alternatives would require  sampling individuals for antioxidant capacity before dispersal and  using translocation experiments to evaluate the benefits of familiarity.

birds often respond to experimental increases in reproductive effort by increasing antioxidant protection to maintain stable oxidative damages  <cit> . here however, circulating non-enzymatic antioxidants were not increased in response to the wing load manipulation. some major enzymatic antioxidants, such as catalase and superoxide dismutase, could be alternative low-cost antioxidant mechanisms mobilized when facing an oxidative challenge  <cit> . quantifying multiple antioxidants would help determining whether these different antioxidant mechanisms are correlated or on the contrary are traded against each other  <cit> . it was however not possible here because of the small quantity of plasma available in this small passerine species.

CONCLUSIONS
overall this study shows that dispersal-related differences in metabolic markers and reproductive success are often condition- or habitat-dependent. although our results reveal no general associations between metabolic markers and dispersal, dispersing and philopatric individuals showed different management of oxidative costs in response to reproductive effort . they suggest that dispersing individuals do not adjust reproductive effort even in challenging conditions, resulting in a lower reproductive output, contrary to philopatric individuals that may adjust their effort to the local conditions, possibly because of their better knowledge of the environment. our study calls for further work investigating the differential management of oxidative constraints between individuals, especially in the context of dispersal.

