BACKGROUND
drosophila melanogaster males are heterogametic , while females are homogametic . the y chromosome has gradually lost genes and degenerated, resulting in an increasingly aneuploid condition in males and the evolution of systems that compensate for between-sex differences in doses of genes located on x chromosomes  <cit> . the dosage-compensation system equalizes x-linked gene expression between males and females, thus maintaining an appropriate balance between the expression of genes on x chromosome and the autosomes  <cit> .

the amount of transcripts from the single x chromosome of male drosophila individuals is boosted about two-fold relative to levels of each of the two in females, thereby roughly equalizing their overall x chromosome gene expression  <cit> . this dosage compensation is critical, and loss of required proteins leads to male-specific lethality  <cit> . these proteins include msl- <dig> , msl- <dig>  msl- <dig>  mof  and mle , which form an x chromosome-specific msl complex, or dosage compensation complex , with two functionally redundant long non-coding rnas: rna on the x <dig> and x2; rox <dig> and rox <dig>  respectively  <cit> . the selective activation of x chromosomal genes is at least partly due to the hyperacetylation of histone h <dig> lysine  <dig>  by the histone acetyltransferase  - mof, an integral subunit of the msl complex  <cit> .

the binding pattern of msl proteins on the x chromosome has been identified in diverse cell lines, embryos and third instar larvae using various genome-wide techniques such as chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with microarray technology  or deep sequencing   <cit> . transcript levels of genes in rnai-mediated depletion backgrounds and msl gene mutants have also been examined in diverse cell lines, embryos, and larvae using hybridization of transcript populations to gene expression microarrays or real-time pcr  <cit> . these studies have revealed that: the msl complex preferentially binds to gene coding regions, particularly the 3' end of genes; the binding pattern does not dramatically change during different stages of development; and loss of msl-complex functionality only reduces expression of x-linked genes to about 80% of wild type levels. in addition, results of a recent analysis indicate that the msl complex mediates dosage compensation of x chromosomal genes by enhancing transcriptional elongation, in accordance with the observed 3' bias  <cit> .

two main models have been proposed to explain the distribution of msl complexes along the x chromosome. one suggests that the complex initially targets a relatively small number of x chromosome-specific primary recruitment or chromosomal "entry" sites  then "spreads" along the chromosome from these sites in cis  <cit> . the other postulates that large numbers of specific sites of varying affinities are present, based on data gathered from x chromosomal translocation studies  <cit> .

in situ hybridization analyses of polytene chromosomes have shown that the drosophila x chromosome is enriched in n/n sequences  <cit> , and that in every drosophila species examined to date dosage-compensated chromosomes have higher than average ca/tg, ct/ag and c/g frequencies  <cit> . subsequent, computational whole-genome sequence analysis showed that throughout the drosophila genus x chromosomes can be distinguished from other chromosomes by their a, t, c/an and g/tn repeat sequences  <cit> . recent msl protein-binding region analyses have also detected x chromosomal enrichment of low complexity sequence elements, such as ga- and ca-based dinucleotide repeats and runs of adenines  <cit> . in addition, ga-rich or tc-rich motifs have been identified in high affinity binding sites  for msl proteins on the x chromosome using genome-wide techniques  <cit> . a repetitive sequence motif  <dig> was also recently discovered in low affinity sites targeted by msl proteins  <cit> . however, although the enrichment of simple sequence elements has been detected on the x chromosome it is still unclear if primary dna sequences are involved in the targeting of the msl complex to and within individual genes.

here we present an extensive analysis of x chromosome sequence variation, and its potential involvement in dosage compensation, in which we used multivariate modeling and previously published data to explore relationships between msl complex distributions, transcription patterns and five gene features -- promoters, 5' utrs, coding sequences , introns, 3' utrs -- and intergenic sequences . our results show that: the x chromosome has a distinct sequence composition within all six types of features examined; some of this variation correlates with genes targeted by the msl-complex; the insulator protein beaf- <dig> binds preferentially upstream of msl-bound genes; beaf- <dig> and mof co-localizes in promoters; and bound genes have a distinct sequence composition that shows a 3' bias within coding sequence.

RESULTS
the drosophila melanogaster x chromosome has distinct sequence signatures
in a previous analysis of sequence variation between the drosophila melanogaster  chromosomes we found evidence of chromosome-distinguishing sequence words on the fourth and x chromosomes  <cit> . in the study presented here we focus on the x chromosome and whether any of its sequence variation can be related to the dosage compensation of this chromosome. we excluded the 4th chromosome  from all our analyses.

to examine the sequence variation of the x chromosome systematically we divided the dm genome into six sequence types : promoters , 5' utrs, coding sequences, introns, 3' utrs and intergenic sequences. within these gene features we calculated the frequencies of all two to six base pair long sequence words and performed principal component analysis  as in  <cit> . pca summarizes the main variation in a multidimensional dataset, here consisting of  <dig> observations  and  <dig> variables . as expected, the first principal component separates the observations based on at-content . in general the x chromosome has a lower at-content than the autosomes .

to study sequence variation that is not directly correlated to at-content we applied the following simple normalization. the frequency of each sequence word was divided by its expected frequency in each observation, see  <cit>  for details. interestingly, the pca based on the normalized values showed that there is more sequence variation between gene features than between chromosomes . the first principal component separates coding sequences of all chromosomes from all other gene features and the second separates 5' utrs. the other gene features separate in the proceeding components . this has strong implications for attempts to identify discriminating patterns between groups of sequences; if the differences between gene features included are not accounted for, the results may reflect differences in gene feature composition rather than biologically relevant sequence variation.

in the fifth principal component of the gene feature pca, all x-chromosomal gene feature sequences are shifted away from the autosomal sequences . corresponding loadings for the fifth component reveal that all gene features on the x chromosome are enriched in mono- and di-nucleotide repeats . the at-normalized pca models for each individual class of gene features also clearly showed that the x chromosome has a distinct sequence composition , indicating that there are potential x chromosome targeting sequences within all of its gene features.

gene features of expressed genes strongly bound by msl have distinct sequence signatures
we next explored whether any of the sequence signatures in the gene features correlated to binding of the male-specific lethal  complex. for this purpose we used the data from  <cit>  to select strongly msl bound and weakly msl bound genes as well as expressed and unexpressed genes . we did not try to define genes that are bound or unbound by the msl-complex, but rather select two extreme groups . the data from  <cit>  currently represent the only dataset where mapping of several msl-complex components and transcription in mutants/knock-downs of msl-components are available in the same cell-type. using several components of the msl-complex should improve estimates of its binding values to genes, but we also compared the gene binding values obtained using the mof, msl- <dig> and msl- <dig> data from  <cit>  to gene binding values calculated in the same way based on data from  <cit>  and modencode http://www.modencode.org. in general all data sets correlate very well despite being performed by different groups using different conditions and antibodies . we conclude that estimates of msl-binding values are consistent irrespective of which data sets are used.

after at-normalization  we again applied pca to the data for each class of gene feature , but this time incorporating information on msl-binding and expression status . interestingly, the first two principal components of each resulting pca model not only separated x-chromosomal sequences from autosomal sequences, but also strongly msl-bound from weakly msl-bound sequences. expressed and unexpressed genes separated in the same component as strongly msl-bound and weakly msl-bound genes. the strongly msl-bound, expressed genes are expressed at slightly higher levels, on average, than the weakly msl-bound, expressed genes . however, weakly msl-bound but expressed genes cluster with unexpressed genes. although we grouped genes into single observations our results show that all gene features have sequence signatures that could potentially be involved in msl-complex targeting. when we studied the sequence words enriched in msl complex-bound genes identified by each of the gene feature pca models we found that intron, 3' utr and 5' utr sequences were ga, ca or adenine enriched whereas intergenic sequences were guanine and cytosine enriched .

promoters and coding sequences are potentially involved in msl-complex spreading along x chromosomes
we next wanted to see whether it was possible to identify sequences or motifs that could be used to predict the msl-binding status of individual genes. for this, we applied the supervised multivariate method orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis   <cit> , which seeks variables that are predictive of a pre-defined classification of the observations . since transcription has been shown to be important for msl-complex targeting  <cit> , we excluded all genes for which transcription levels cannot be accurately determined . we selected genes that are expressed and strongly bound by the msl-complex  and those expressed but weakly bound by the msl-complex  as before. in the different models some genes were excluded because they lacked the annotated gene feature modeled . two-thirds of the dataset was randomly selected and used as a training set for constructing the models, and the other third as a test set for assessing the accuracy of their predictions. we excluded intergenic sequences as they cannot be specifically assigned to a particular gene. we obtained significant models for promoters, cds and introns, but not for 3' utrs and 5' utrs . by plotting the relation between the first component and both expression levels and at-content we determined that expression levels did not significantly influence the models . however, at-content strongly affected the intron and 3' utr models and when we normalized for at-content, we obtained no significant models for these features. the promoter and coding sequence models were then used to predict the msl-binding status of the previously excluded third of the genes. strikingly, the y prediction scores for expressed genes strongly and weakly bound by msl differed significantly according to both the promoter and coding sequence models . to verify these results we constructed new models, for which we again randomly selected two thirds of the data for modeling and one third for testing predictions. the prediction results were very similar . the promoter and coding sequence models could therefore robustly predict the msl-binding status of the genes.

insulator protein beaf- <dig> is enriched in promoters of genes strongly bound by msl
encouraged by the promoter sequence modeling results, we wanted to know whether the presence of msl is associated with any specific dna motifs. we therefore developed an iterative algorithm that aligns the predictive sequence words from a model into motifs. the most predictive sequence words are given stronger weighting during the motif construction, and the algorithm assures that the predictive power of the evolving motif is maintained or increased . using this algorithm we extracted the motif shown in figure 3a from the model based on two thirds of the promoter dataset . this motif scored significantly higher in promoters  of strongly msl-bound, expressed genes than in promoters of weakly bound, expressed genes when using the previously excluded test set . we then mapped the motif across the entire x chromosome and calculated the average distances to transcription start sites of expressed genes strongly bound and weakly bound by the msl-complex. we found the motif to be closer to the tss of strongly msl-bound genes on average than to those of the weakly bound, expressed genes . the motif was found within  <dig> bp of the tss in 44% of the strongly and 18% of the weakly bound genes. the corresponding number for active genes on chromosome 2l is 27% . we also tried to construct motifs using predictive sequence words for weakly msl-bound genes. since this was unsuccessful we conclude that there are no clear motifs in promoters that could potentially block msl-recruitment.

our opls-da model was based on two-thirds of the  <dig> strongest bound genes on the x-chromosome and previous studies have indicated that 534- <dig> genes are bound by the complex  <cit> . therefore, we plotted the fraction of genes containing the promoter motif within  <dig> bp of the tss versus the average gene-binding value of the three msl proteins for all expressed x-linked genes . we observe that promoters of genes that have an average binding of the three msl-proteins considered here of about  <dig>  or more seems to have an enrichment of this motif. the number of expressed genes with an average of the three proteins above  <dig>  is  <dig>  which falls within the range of previous estimates for number of msl bound genes. further, a search with our promoter motif pwm in the tomtom tool  <cit>  indicated that the promoter motif match the boundary element associated factor beaf- <dig> motif. to test whether this protein preferentially binds to promoters of msl-bound, expressed genes we downloaded beaf- <dig> mapping data gathered by the modencode consortium for s <dig> cells  <cit> . interestingly, the average distance to a beaf- <dig> binding site from the transcription start site is significantly shorter for strongly msl-bound, expressed genes than for both weakly msl-bound, expressed genes  and unexpressed genes . in addition, a larger fraction of the strongly bound class of genes have beaf- <dig> binding within  <dig> bp of the tss  compared to weakly bound genes  and active genes on chromosome 2l . similar to the motif, the beaf- <dig> binding sites overlap a larger fraction of the genes  that have an average gene-binding value of the three msl proteins of more than about  <dig> , likely representing functionally msl-bound and dosage compensated genes . however, we found no general enrichment of beaf- <dig> on the x chromosome relative to the autosomes when we analyzed genome coverage of binding regions . to test whether only beaf- <dig> is found preferentially upstream of strongly bound genes or whether also other insulator proteins behave similarly, we run the same analysis  using cp <dig>  su and ctcf . none of the other insulator proteins showed any preference for genes strongly bound by msl . however, su has a tendency to bind upstream of expressed but weakly msl-bound genes .

it is known that mof, but not the other components of the msl-complex, targets the promoters of msl-complex bound genes  <cit> . we therefore wanted to test whether the binding of mof to promoters correlates to the binding of beaf- <dig>  both mof and beaf- <dig> binds to promoters of active genes also on autosomes  <cit> . since mof binding levels are very different between the x-chromosome and the autosomes, we focused on the larger autosomal data set. visual inspection of the mof and beaf- <dig> profiles clearly indicate that both proteins co-localize in promoters . when we study autosomal distribution of beaf- <dig>   <dig> % of all binding regions have mof enrichment above background levels . 97% of all beaf- <dig> binding regions have mof enrichment more than background plus one standard deviation. we next selected the beaf- <dig> regions overlapping promoters on autosomes and plotted the average mof enrichment values in  <dig> bp bins surrounding the beaf- <dig> peak center . it is clear that the mof binding peaks at the same position as the beaf- <dig> peak center . although, the mof enrichment is low at some beaf- <dig> sites we conclude that mof and beaf- <dig> strongly correlate across the dm genome.

the high affinity sites  that are thought to be responsible for the initial recruitment of the msl-complex to the x-chromosome, was defined by being the strongest msl-sites along the x chromosome  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that many of the genes we selected as strongly bound  overlap a has. to find out how our results correlate with the presence of high affinity sites we used  <dig> defined has  resembles the ga-rich has motif  <cit> . to investigate if the presence of the promoter motif we identified is correlated to the presence of has, we divided the strongly bound genes into those proximal to a has  and those far from a has . we found no significant difference in terms of distance from the tss to the nearest promoter motif for these two groups . in fact, 41% of the has proximal strongly bound genes have the motif within  <dig> bp of the tss compared to 49% of the strongly bound genes far from a has . we also constructed a new promoter opls-da model , this time excluding genes within  <dig> kb of a has. since, many of the most strongly bound genes are close to a has, we decreased the cut-off for being strongly bound to  <dig>  . we ended up with  <dig> strongly bound and  <dig> weakly bound genes that are far from any has. the motif extracted from this model is virtually identical with the motif in figure 3a, showing that this motif is not correlated to high affinity sites. in addition, the expressed genes on the x chromosome with beaf- <dig> in the promoter are not preferentially found close to high affinity sites .

sequence signatures in coding sequence of genes strongly bound by msl have a 3' bias
using our modeling approach we found sequence variations in coding sequence that are strongly predictive of msl-bound, expressed genes. however, our sequence word aligner failed to extract any complex motifs from the coding sequence model . we concluded that, as expected, there are no long, complex msl-targeting motifs in coding sequences, but when we calculated the frequencies of sequence words in the analyses described above we merged the scores for the forward and reverse complements of each word. thus, we scored both strands of each sequence region. therefore, for completion we examined the possibility that predictive sequence words for genes strongly bound by msl may be preferentially located on only one strand and/or preferentially in-frame. models based on sequence word frequencies in the transcribed strand only, or only in-frame, did not perform as well as the original model for predicting the excluded third of the dataset . we conclude that the short sequence words that are predictive of strongly msl-bound, expressed genes are not preferentially located either on transcribed strands or in-frame. further, as the x chromosome is known to have a more optimal codon usage than the autosomes  <cit> , we tested whether there are any significant differences in codon usage between expressed genes that are strongly bound and weakly bound by the msl-complex. we found evidence of codon usage bias between chromosomes x and 2l , but not between expressed msl complex strongly bound and weakly bound genes . however, the msl-complex is known to preferentially bind to exons with a bias towards the 3' end of the genes, and excitingly, when we divided the coding sequences of the genes in the prediction set into three equally sized parts, the msl binding status was significantly better predicted for their 3' ends than for their 5' ends , and the binding status of the middle parts of the coding sequences were better and less well predicted, on average, than that of their 5' and 3' parts, respectively. we also constructed an opls-da model using the complete coding sequence of all strongly bound  and weakly bound  genes and then used this model to predict the coding sequence of all expressed genes on x , divided into three equally sized parts. again, the 3' part of the coding sequence of genes with an average binding level of the three msl-proteins of about  <dig>  is better predicted when compared to the 5' part . as for the promoter model we wanted to know whether the coding sequence model was strongly influenced by high affinity sites. we selected strongly bound and weakly bound genes that did not have a has within  <dig> kb of either end. performing opls-da using these genes resulted in a similar model as before and in figure 5b is shown the prediction of the three parts of coding sequence of all expressed genes on the x-chromosome . hence, the distribution of the msl-complex within genes is most likely influenced by sequence signatures in the coding sequence. for a summary of the promoter and cds results for expressed genes along the x chromosome see additional file  <dig> 

since the number of genes in the initial model is relatively low  we wanted to test how likely it is that a model based on similar numbers of randomly selected genes produces a significant opls-da model. we randomly selected seven non-overlapping groups consisting of coding sequence from  <dig> expressed genes from chromosome 2l. using opls-da we modelled all pair wise combinations of these seven groups . all pair wise combinations produced models with negative q <dig> values . six models had a strong correlation to at-content . normalizing for at-content did not improve the models. next, we repeated this process with coding sequence from seven randomly selected groups of intermediately bound genes  on the x-chromosome. intermediately bound genes where defined as expressed genes on the x chromosome not belonging to the previously defined strongly and weakly msl-bound genes.  <dig> pair wise combinations produced models with a negative q <dig> and one combination produced a very weak model with a q <dig> of  <dig>  . three models had a strong at-correlation, but normalizing for nucleotide content did not improve the models. we conclude that randomly selected groups of sequences are unlikely to produce a significant model with predictive power.

discussion
we have thoroughly investigated x chromosome sequence variation in d. melanogaster and related this variation to the targeting of the dosage compensation complex, using frequencies of two to six base pair sequence "words" and multivariate statistical analyses. the advantage of our approach is that it is unbiased and focused on finding sequences with predictive value, rather than merely over-represented sequences. first, we divided the genome sequence into intergenic, promoter, 5' utr, coding, intron and 3' utr sequences. interestingly, there is more divergence among these six sequence types or gene features than within the sequence types on different chromosomes . our findings also show that sequences are present in promoters and coding sequence that could be involved in the spreading of the msl-complex from the high affinity sites on the x chromosome. the coding sequences we have identified share a similar 3' bias with the msl-complex. further, the highest scoring promoter sequences form the target motif of the insulator protein beaf- <dig>  and beaf- <dig> mapping data indicate that this protein binds preferentially upstream of genes strongly bound by msl.

sequence variation between gene features
different gene features are known to vary in sequence composition, but in our opinion their variation is not normally taken into account in attempts to discover new sequence motifs. we here show the extent of this sequence variation, and that coding sequences have the most distinct sequence composition followed by 5' utrs, 3' utrs and promoters. this has important implications for studies of sequence variation and motif discovery; when groups of sequences are compared it is important to take gene features into account , otherwise the results may reflect differences in gene feature composition rather than biologically relevant sequence variation.

the x chromosome has a distinct sequence composition
our separate analyses of the six gene features clearly show that the sequence composition of those in the x chromosome differs from the composition of corresponding features in all other chromosomes . this distinction of the x chromosome is mainly due to differences in frequencies of various di-nucleotides, many of which have been previously found to be enriched on x  <cit> . these sequences could, in principle, be involved in recruiting x chromosome-specific factors, such as the msl-complex. apart from being dosage-compensated in males, the x-chromosome might also be under selective forces that do not act on the autosomes. some of the sequence variation of the x-chromosome is likely a result of its evolution as a sex chromosome. the msl-complex is the only known protein complex involved in dosage compensation in drosophila with an x chromosome-specific distribution. we have focused here on the sequence variation that could be related to the targeting of this complex. it has been shown that the msl-complex is initially targeted to x by binding to so-called high affinity sites  that contain the ga-rich msl recognition element   <cit> . the msl-complex can be recruited to autosomes by inserting mre-containing high affinity sites  <cit> , but the mechanism involved in the spreading of msl to x-chromosomal genes is under debate  <cit> . we have investigated here whether sequence patterns may be involved in this spreading of the msl-complex, as discussed below.

genes strongly bound by msl have a distinct sequence composition
the genome distribution of the msl-complex has been mapped in several studies  <cit> . we used the data from  to select genes that are expressed and strongly msl-bound, expressed and weakly msl-bound as well as unexpressed genes. this is the only currently available dataset where mapping of several msl-complex components and transcription in mutants/knock-downs of msl-components was done in parallel and in the same cell-type. when merging all strongly msl-bound expressed genes into one observation and all weakly msl-bound expressed genes into another, we find that all six sequence types have sequences that differ between strongly bound and weakly bound genes . we observed that sequence variation between expressed genes strongly bound and weakly bound by msl complex is much higher than that between expressed and unexpressed genes on chromosome x. further, expressed genes that are weakly bound by the msl complex group more closely to unexpressed genes than to expressed msl-bound genes in our pca score plots. therefore, the small but significant expression difference detected between the expressed genes that are strongly bound and weakly bound by the msl complex did not have any major correlation on the sequence variation observed between the two groups. sequence words extracted from pca models of intron, 3' utr and 5' utr sequences were more ga, ca or adenine rich which are in agreement with the previous identification of ca dinucleotide repeats, runs of adenines and ga-rich mre motif from high affinity sites   <cit> . we conclude that there are differences in sequences of all six features between expressed genes that are strongly bound and weakly bound by the msl-complex. however, these results merely identify sequence words that are overrepresented in groups of genes strongly or weakly bound by msl. in order to search for predictive sequence patterns for msl-binding to individual genes we applied orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis, opls-da.

promoters and coding sequences are potentially involved in msl-complex spreading along x chromosomes
using opls-da we explored differences between features of individual genes that are strongly msl-bound and expressed versus weakly msl-bound and expressed, extracted sequence words with the highest predictive power, and attempted to combine them into more complex motifs using the algorithm described herein. interestingly, both coding sequence and promoter models yielded sequence words that could be used to predict the msl-binding status of genes excluded from the modeling. neither nucleotide content nor expression level significantly influence these promoter and coding sequence models and the top sequence words we identified are only weakly overrepresented on the x-chromosome. we conclude that promoters and coding sequences contain sequence signatures that are potentially involved in the spreading of the msl-complex from high affinity sites. in principle, there may be motifs in unbound, expressed genes that block the binding of the msl-complex, but we obtained no evidence for such motifs.

insulator protein beaf- <dig> preferentially binds to promoters of msl-bound genes
from the promoter model we extracted the motif in figure 3a, which could be used to predict promoters of genes strongly bound by msl. this motif proved to correspond to the targeting motif for the insulator protein beaf- <dig>  <cit> , which binds to hundreds of sites across the genome, generally located upstream of active genes  <cit> . although the molecular mechanisms of beaf- <dig> activity are unknown, it seems to be linked with active transcription  <cit> . in order to test whether the beaf- <dig> protein itself is enriched at strongly msl-bound genes we used beaf- <dig> chip-chip mapping data obtained from modencode, and found that beaf- <dig> preferentially binds proximal to transcription start sites of genes strongly bound by msl. this exciting link between beaf- <dig> and dosage compensation is supported by the observation that beaf- <dig> mutants have a male-specific defect in x-chromosome morphology  <cit> . further, laverty et al.  <cit>  found that reporters inserted on the x chromosome are better able to recruit the msl-complex if they have binding sites for gaga and dref factors. the dref binding site is very similar to the beaf- <dig> binding site and although dref might be involved in dosage compensation it is possible that increased beaf- <dig> recruitment is the true case of the effects observed by  <cit> . however, since dref has not been mapped genome wide we cannot exclude the possibility that our promoter motif correlate better with dref. beaf- <dig> is associated with active transcription and might facilitate the msl-complex targeting of active genes. since msl-complex bound genes show mof binding in the promoter  <cit>  and mof clearly co-localize with beaf- <dig>  we hypothesize that beaf- <dig> and mof interact in promoters of msl-complex bound genes. beaf- <dig> is a dna-binding protein and might recruit mof to active genes on the x-chromosome, genes that are then targeted by the msl-complex. however, further experimental efforts are needed to understand the link uncovered here between beaf- <dig> and the msl-complex.

sequence signatures in coding sequences of msl-bound genes have a 3' bias
the finding of sequence patterns that are predictive of msl-binding genes within coding sequences is intriguing, although it has been previously reported  <cit> . scoring the sequence words only in the transcribed strand or the correct frame did not improve the coding sequence model, suggesting that the relationships are not attributable to  specific variations in amino acid composition. neither did we find any codon usage bias between strongly bound and weakly bound expressed genes, or any model correlation with expression and at-content. however, we found using opls-da that bound coding sequences are rich in ag di-nucleotides, which have been previously reported to be abundant in dosage-compensated chromosomes  <cit> .

the msl-complex binds to genes with a preference for exons  <cit> . the relatively low binding to introns might suggest that the complex targets spliced rna transcripts. however, it was recently found that the complex targets chromatin rather than transcribed rna  <cit> . the exon specificity could be explained by various chromatin factors, nucleosome density and/or sequence specificity. variations in nucleosome density may partially explain the exon bias, as it is higher in exons  <cit>  and thus may provide more targets for h4k <dig> acetylation, a modification that is strongly linked to the msl-complex  <cit> . in addition, the msl-complex binding profile clearly shows that it binds most strongly towards the 3' end of genes  <cit> . accordingly, our models predicted the msl-binding status of genes better from the 3' thirds than from the 5' thirds of the coding sequences. this is in contrast to the lack of 3' bias of the  <dig> motif reported by  <cit> . taken together, our results strongly indicate that the msl-complex distribution within genes on the x-chromosome is influenced by the primary dna sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
the msl-complex evidently targets a limited number of high affinity sites along the x-chromosome. although, many strongly bound genes are close to a has neither our promoter motif nor our coding sequence signatures show any correlation to has. based on the results presented here, we believe that there are sequences in the promoters and coding sequences of targeted genes that have the potential to direct the secondary spreading of the complex to nearby genes. however, a number of genes are dosage-compensated by msl-independent mechanisms  <cit>  and expression on the x-chromosome is only reduced to ~80% of wild type levels in males when msl genes are mutated or knocked down using rnai  <cit> . apart from the dosage compensation mediated by the msl-complex there is evidence for a more general buffering system that targets haploid regions in the genome  <cit> . so other, as yet unknown, factors are likely involved in compensating the x chromosome and these factors could potentially act on a number of levels, such as transcription regulation, mrna export, mrna stability and translation  <cit> . the observed optimal codon usage on the x-chromosome likely represents compensation on the translational level. however, even if additional factors involved in dosage compensation remain to be discovered, we here show that there are plenty of sequences within all types of gene features that could act as x-targeting elements.

