BACKGROUND
propionibacterium acnes is a member of the actinobacteria, a phylum that includes streptomyces, mycobacterium and corynebacterium. it is renown through its associated with acne vulgaris  <cit> , the most common of all human skin diseases, as well as life-threatening diseases  <cit> , such as meningitis  <cit>  and endocarditis  <cit> . most recently, evidence has emerged that p. acnes infection causes chronic back pain following physical injury  <cit> . more usually, it is a harmless commensal of the skin, residing ubiquitously in sebaceous follicles  <cit> . to adapt, colonise and survive, p. acnes needs to sense and respond to changes in its natural environment  <cit> , yet almost nothing is known about how the physiology and growth of p. acnes is shaped by regulated gene expression. the  <dig>  mbp genome of p. acnes strain kpa <dig>  the first to be sequenced, contains  <dig>  annotated genes  <cit> . however, the organisation and regulation of the transcription units within this clinically important organism remained to be determined experimentally. indeed, prior to the work reported here, no transcription start sites  had been mapped. other key aspects of gene regulation for which no information was available were mrna turnover  <cit> , which ensures translation follows programs of transcription, the generation of rna components of the translational machinery  <cit> , and the prevalence of small regulatory rnas  <cit> . recently, the importance of understanding p. acnes gene regulation was exemplified by a study that found the ability of different strains of p. acnes to cause disease stems from divergence in the expression as well as the content of their genomes  <cit> .

in the first part of this report, we describe improved global and differential rna-sequencing  approaches  and their use in the construction of the first nucleotide-resolution transcriptome maps of p. acnes kpa <dig>  maps that show sites of rna processing and degradation in addition to sites of transcription initiation. in the second part, we show how analysis of these maps can shed light on many of the key steps in bacterial gene expression and regulation. we describe ‘pervasive’ transcription, riboswitches, leaderless mrnas, small non-protein-coding rnas, post-transcriptional control and unusual trna processing. expansion of these maps to incorporate transcriptional landscapes under different conditions and genetic backgrounds will ultimately reveal how regulated gene expression shapes the physiology and growth of p. acnes. as per the original differential  approach  <cit> , we distinguished 5′ ends corresponding to transcription initiation from those generated through rna processing and degradation on the basis of their 5′-phosphorylation status. this was done here, however, using tobacco acid pyrophosphatase , an enzyme that converts a 5′ triphosphate to monophosphate  <cit> , prior to constructing and sequencing cdna libraries of native 5′-end segments . the vast majority of primary transcripts are synthesised with a 5′-triphosphate group, while the 5′ ends of most ‘secondary’ transcripts, i.e. those generated through rna processing and degradation, have a monophosphate group  <cit> . thus, an increased number of sequencing reads from a 5′ end following tap treatment is an identifier of a transcription start site . the original drna-seq approach differentiated 5′ ends using terminator™ exonuclease , which removes 5′-monophosphorylated transcripts  <cit> . to determine 3′ as well as 5′ boundaries and the abundance of transcripts, aliquots of some rna samples were also analysed using a global rna-sequencing  approach  that avoids the use of pcr  <cit> . as indicated above, drna-seq identifies native 5′-ends only.

RESULTS
overview of approach
we analysed the transcriptomes of duplicate cultures of p. acnes strain kpa <dig> grown exponentially in holland’s synthetic medium . this defined medium was chosen as it supports highly reproducible growth, which reduces experimental variation and in turn allows underlying features to be identified with increased certainty. it can also be modified easily to investigate the contribution of individual components to growth and cellular physiology. to assess the sensitivity of our drna-seq approach to changes in gene expression, samples were taken following subculture with and without potassium downshift . we choose this change because of its long-established relevance to skin, e.g. potassium levels fluctuate as a result of perspiration  <cit>  and potassium deficiency is associated with dermatoses  <cit> . moreover, p. acnes genes inducible by potassium downshift were predictable from prior studies of other bacteria  <cit> . thus, the differential approach described here used eight cdna libraries;  <dig> replicates ×  <dig> conditions ×  <dig> treatments .  <dig> to  <dig> million reads were obtained for each library and mapped onto the p. acnes genome. next we counted, for each library, the number of times each genome position was the first nucleotide in sequence reads, i.e. associated with a 5′ end in vivo. then the reads corresponding to minus and plus tap treatment were compared using m-a scatterplots for each replicate and condition. samples from one of the cultures were also analysed by 5′ race, high-density microarrays and grna-seq to allow comparison with more widely used approaches.

transcription start sites
for each replicate and condition, m-a scatterplots  revealed a population of values that centred close to an m value of  <dig>  corresponding to sites of processing and degradation, and another with higher m values, corresponding to transcription start sites . the envelope of values corresponding to sites of processing and degradation was defined by using the standard deviation of m values in windows of ascending a values  <cit> . by this simple approach we were able to take into account the inherent noise within the drna-seq data . 5′ ends with m values above the envelope were then identified. this corresponded to around  <dig> thousand of the  <dig> thousand positions in each comparison. to increase the power of our tss analysis, we did not distinguish between samples from subcultures with and without the potassium downshift. positions with m values above the envelope in each of the four experiments  were designated positions of transcription initiation, and positions within  <dig> nt of each other were classified as belonging to the same tss. with regard to the latter, it is well established that many promoters can initiate transcription at more than one nucleotide position  <cit> . for the few genes that showed a change in gene expression following potassium downshift, the stringency of the analysis was reduced to the condition under which transcription could be detected most readily. by this approach we identified  <dig>  tsss . the probability of a position being outside the envelope in each of four comparisons by chance is less than  <dig> in  <dig> million . the latter number vastly exceeding the total of 5′ ends identified. moreover, the identified tsss were associated with low p-values  as determined using rank products analysis  <cit> , which is a statistical method specifically developed to analyse data that is based on replicated experiments and compares two outputs, in our case rna-seq reads obtained with and without tap treatment.

next, using the ucsc genome browser  <cit> , we viewed the positions of the tsss alongside genes annotated in genbank  <cit>  and transcription units revealed by grna-seq. with regard to the latter, it should be noted that for every position in the genome, we determined the number of times it was read irrespective of its position in fragmented rna. moreover, we limited the upper range of the grna-seq reads, which gives transcription units a block appearance, to make it easier to decipher their 5′ and 3′ boundaries. the main gene of interest to us in any view are always depicted left to right. for genes on the reverse strand, the rna-seq data are given negative values and are shown in red instead of black, and the genome position numbering is reversed. for all classes of functional rna, mono- and poly-cistronic mrnas, ribosomal rnas, transfer rnas and ubiquitous small rnas, we were able to identify tsss that aligned with the 5′ boundaries of transcription units revealed by grna-seq . such tsss are represented by black vertical lines. interestingly, the majority of tsss we identified did not correspond to the 5′ boundaries of obvious transcription units, or at least those of annotated genes . these tsss are represented by blue vertical lines. the function of the corresponding transcripts is cryptic with a large proportion being found within coding regions on either the sense or antisense strand. evidence for ‘pervasive’ transcription, a widespread phenomenon in eukaryotes  <cit> , is emerging in bacteria  <cit> . of the tsss we identified,  <dig> were associated with the 5′ boundaries of transcription units corresponding to annotated genes, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  or produced discrete rnas of high abundance relative to flanking regions . the tsss associated with step increases in transcription are identified within additional file  <dig> 

processing and degradation sites 
the vast majority of the 5′ ends detected by drna-seq  corresponded to processing and degradation sites , which were not enriched following tap treatment and were internal to transcription units identified by grna-seq. p. acnes encodes three endoribonucleases, rnase e  <cit> , rnase y  <cit>  and rnase iii  <cit> , and a dual endonuclease/5′ to 3′ exonuclease, rnase j  <cit> ,  that could account for the large number of pdss. the coverage provided by pdss is sufficient to allow the detection of transcription units and changes in gene expression. this is illustrated here using the kdp operon , which encodes an inducible high-affinity potassium transporter  as well as an associated two-component sensory and regulatory system  <cit> . the vertical bars correspond to positions at which a 5′ end was detected by drna-seq following tap treatment, irrespective of whether or not it was enriched. the bar height indicates the number of times a 5′ end was detected by sequencing. shown are the results of analysing rna extracted from cells with and without a potassium downshift. a horizontal arrow  indicates the position of genes corresponding to the kdp operon. following the downshift, it is clear from the drna-seq data that the expression across this entire operon increases substantial. the average number of reads increased by ~ <dig> fold, which is similar to that detected using microarrays and grna-seq  <cit> . genes with altered gene expression as a result of the downshift have been catalogued based on rank product analysis of the microarray data .

transcription and maturation of stable rnas
in stark contrast to what has been found for b. subtilis <cit> , which along with e. coli is one of the main model systems in which trna processing has been studied in detail  <cit> , none of the p. acnes trna genes  are part of the three rrna operons. another striking difference is that most p. acnes trna genes are transcribed individually: we only found one example of a tricistronic trna operon , and two examples of dicistronic operons . thus, co-transcription does not appear to be a major means of regulating stable rna production in p. acnes, unlike the situation in b. subtilis <cit> .

analysis of our drna-seq data revealed processing sites  close to the 3′ ends of most p. acnes trnas , about half of which are encoded by genes with a 3′ cca triplet . as in the previous figure, all genes are drawn left to right irrespective of whether they are on the forward or reverse strand, and the rna-seq data for genes on the forward and reverse strand are shown in black using positive values and in red using negative values, respectively. the drna-seq data incorporates an additional track showing the results obtained before tap treatment. no increase in bar height following tap treatment is an identifier of a site of processing or degradation. p. acnes has a homologue of trna nucleotidyltransferase , which is known to attach cca to trnas that are not transcribed with this motif  <cit> . a 3′ cca on mature trna is essential for several functions related to translation  <cit> . closer inspection of trnas encoded by genes with a 3′ cca triplet revealed endonucleolytic cleavage a few nucleotides downstream of the trna . this fits with current models in which the precursors of these trnas are trimmed back by 3′ exonucleases to produce a 3′ cca end to which amino acids can be attached  <cit> . p. acnes contains homologues of rnase ph and rnase d, two 3′-5′ exonucleases known to be involved in trimming trna . interestingly, cleavage sites were also identified within 3′ cca triplets . in these examples, the cleavage was always between the cs. to our knowledge such processing has not been described previously in bacteria. however, it is well established that at least some members of the trna nucleotidyltransferase family can recognise partial cca ends and add only the residues that are missing  <cit> . should p. acnes trna nucleotidyltransferase mediate this function in vivo, cleavages within 3′ cca triplets would not result in terminal inactivation of the trna. the identity of the p. acnes endoribonuclease that cuts within 3′ cca triplets is open to speculation. however, it is unlikely that it will be the homologue of rnase e as the e. coli enzyme has been found to have a preference for cutting bonds within sites rich in a and/or u nucleotides  <cit> . whatever the actual identity of the endonuclease, it might also cut 3′ to trnas encoded by genes that lack a 3′ cca triplet . p. acnes lacks an obvious homologue of trnase z, the endonuclease that generates the 3′ end for the post-transcriptional attachment of the cca in e. coli, b. subtilis and other bacteria  <cit> . differential rna-seq also identified mature trna 5′ ends , which are generated ubiquitously by rnase p  <cit> .

for each of the three rrna operons in p. acnes, two tsss were identified upstream of the 16s rrna gene, an arrangement reported previously for e. coli <cit>  and b. subtilis <cit> . for each operon, we also identified staggered cleavages in each of two pairs of complementary regions that flank 16s and 23s rrna . these cleavages are likely mediated by the p. acnes homologue of rnase iii , which is a well-characterised, double-strand-specific endoribonuclease  <cit>  with a widespread role in the maturation of ribosomal rna  <cit> . in addition to sites of rnase iii cleavage, we identified sites corresponding to the mature 5′ ends of all three ribosomal rnas and the mature 3′ end of 16s rrna. we also identified sites within one or two nucleotides downstream of the mature 3′ end of 23s and 5s rrna. this indicates that, as found for other bacteria, the maturation of rrna in p. acnes requires the action of multiple endoribonucleases. all of the sites described above were associated with a step change in transcript level as revealed by grna-seq . following endonucleolytic cutting, the mature 3′ ends of p. acnes 23s and 5s rrna are likely produced by trimming of short 3′ tails. regarding the generation of the mature 5′ end of 16s rrna, p. acnes has homologues of both rnase j and rnase e , ribonucleases that mediate this function in b. subtilis and e. coli, respectively  <cit> . interestingly, we also identified multiple cleavage sites within 16s, 23s and 5s rrna. these may represent steps in controlling the quality of rrna   <cit> , preventing rrna accumulating in excess over ribosomal proteins  <cit>  or simply mediating the normal turnover of the rna. the nature of cleavages within processed rrna is being investigated.

processing within mrna
we were also able to identify specific cleavage sites in other classes of rna. for example, we detected staggered cuts within a base-paired region of the 5′ leader of pnp mrna , which encodes a 3′-5′ exonuclease . cleavage at the equivalent sites in e. coli by rnase iii has been shown to produce 3′ ends that are accessible by pnpase. this facilitates an autoregulatory mechanism that ensures any overproduction of pnpase is only transitory as it leads to increased degradation of pnp mrna  <cit> . this autoregulatory mechanism would appear to be evolutionarily conserved: experimental evidence for its existence in streptomyces spp. has been obtained  <cit> .

vegetative promoters
to gain knowledge of vegetative promoters in p. acnes, we aligned with the aid of meme  <cit>  the sequences upstream of  <dig> tsss associated with genes of the translational machinery . this revealed hexanucleotide sequences gnttng and tannnt centred on average − <dig> and − <dig> nt, respectively, from the tsss . these sequences and their relative locations are similar to the consensus reported previously for ‘vegetative’ promoters of e. coli <cit> . following convention established for e. coli, we will refer to the above p. acnes sequences as ‘-35’ and ‘-10’ boxes, respectively. the consensus sequences of the equivalent boxes in e. coli promoters, ttgaca and tataat, are centred on average − <dig> and − <dig> nt, respectively, from the centre of the tsss  <cit> . the positioning of the − <dig> box of e. coli closer to the tss, means that the shared tng  is on average in the same position relative to the tss in both organisms. thus, it appears that the sequence specificity of the housekeeping rna polymerases in p. acnes and e. coli retain several elements in common despite these organisms diverging hundreds of millions of years ago.

we next analysed the sequences upstream of the  <dig> tsss associated with step increases in transcription, i.e. the 5′ boundaries of obvious transcription units. this revealed that the vast majority had appropriately positioned sequences matching the − <dig> box consensus. for example, using meme, we identified  <dig>  that matched the single most common sequence variant . as an aside, this finding reinforces the fact that the combined rna-seq approach described here identifies bona fide tsss. computational predictions of tsss in propionibacterium and related genera that utilise the promoters identified here as a learning set will be presented elsewhere. consistent with the analysis of the promoters of rrna, r-protein and trna genes , the overall level of sequence conservation at the − <dig> position was considerably lower. nevertheless, promoter sequences were identified that also matched the single most common sequence variant of the − <dig> box consensus . in addition to the promoters of rrna, r-proteins and trna genes, this included the promoters of the genes of translation factors ef-tu , if- <dig>  and if- <dig>  and central metabolism enzymes, e.g. alanine dehydrogenase , dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase , uridylate kinase , 3-oxoacyl- reductase , cytochrome d ubiquinol oxidase subunit i , fructose- <dig> -bisphosphate aldolase , isopentenyl diphosphate delta isomerase , nitric-oxide reductase subunit b , and polynucleotide phosphorylase . moreover, these promoters were associated with some of the highest transcript levels , consistent with the well-established finding that promoters with matches to a consensus tend to be ‘strong’  <cit> .

uncovering multiple layers of regulation
the identification of tsss and promoter sequences within the context of high-resolution transcriptome maps provides a much improved platform for assessing the complexity of gene regulation. this is illustrated here using the p. acnes homologue of nrdr, a transcription factor that controls the expression of ribonucleotide reductases   <cit> , key enzymes that catalyse the formation of deoxyribonucleotides from ribonucleotides  <cit> . by using meme to compare sequences positioned − <dig> to + <dig> relative to tsss mapped for nrdr and genes encoding components of rnrs, we were able to identify probable binding sites for nrdr . these binding sites overlapped some, but not all of the identified promoters: a pair of nrd-boxes overlapping the distal of the two promoters for the nrdrj operon and a single nrd-box overlapping the nrdab promoter . moreover, after constructing a position-weight matrix and scanning the entire genome of p. acnes using predetector  <cit> , we identified another pair of nrd-boxes far downstream of the nrddg promoter active under the growth conditions used in this study. thus, it appears that the transcription of nrdr and several of its targets are under the control of multiple promoters, only some of which are regulated by nrdr.

we also found evidence of post-transcriptional control: much of the transcription of the nrdab operon  appears to terminate before the first structural gene . consistent with this interpretation, the 5′ utr region of nrdab is annotated as containing a cobalamin riboswitch  <cit> , a cis-regulatory element that is widely distributed in the 5′ utrs of cobalamin -related genes in bacteria  <cit> . interestingly, the 5′ utr of nrddg , but not the nrdrj operon is also annotated as containing a cobalamin riboswitch. furthermore, the activity of the rnr encoded by nrdj, which is co-transcribed with nrdr, is cobalamin dependent  <cit> , and we detected expression of cobalamin biosynthetic genes . the above suggests that cobalamin is present at sufficient levels to activate the riboswitches, which in down regulates the expression of nrdab and nrddg. the result is that much of the rnr production is via nrdj.

our results also lead us to propose that the nrdr repressor is active under the conditions used for this study. the bulk of the transcription of nrdrj appears to initiate at the distal promoter, not the proximal promoter overlapped by a pair of nrd-boxes, and we did not detect transcription initiation in the immediate vicinity of the pair of nrd-boxes located upstream of nrddg. we did detect relatively high levels of transcription from an nrdab promoter, but this is overlapped by only a single nrd-box. we speculate that should a promoter exist in the vicinity of the nrd-boxes located upstream of nrddg inactivation of nrdr will produce a transcript lacking a functional riboswitch, thereby removing the cobalamin regulation. the rnr encoded by the nrddg operon is thought to function under anaerobic conditions.

comparison with standard 5′ race
prior to undertaking rna-seq analysis, we had initiated a study of a two-component system that is likely involved in p. acnes quorum sensing  <cit> . unusually, the genes of the histidine kinase  and response regulator  are divergently transcribed, and pqsa is preceded by a gene  that is predicted to encode an extracellular signalling peptide . analysis of the transcription of this locus using standard 5′ race revealed single promoters upstream of both pqsb and pqsc . rna-seq revealed much more: it not only identified both of the tsss identified by 5′ race , it identified a second tss that was associated with a clear step increase in transcription upstream of pqsb and identified a potential antisense rna  overlapping the 5′ end of pqsb . both of these new elements have now been incorporated into a continuing dissection of the pqs locus. additional tsss were also detected by rna-seq upstream of pqsc; however, their contribution to the expression of this gene is more difficult to assess due to background transcription. the tss of pqsb overlaps the start codon to produce a leaderless mrna, many more examples of which are described below.

identification of potential srnas
as indicated above, we identified a number of tsss that were associated with relatively short transcripts with high abundance relative to transcription in the surrounding regions . these include all the ubiquitous bacterial srnas   <cit>  and 5′ utrs with and without structural similarity to known riboswitches   <cit> . to be classified as a 5′ utr, the peak of rna abundance had to fall sharply at the boundary with the coding region of the downstream gene. such a profile could be the result of riboswitching  <cit> , attenuation-like mechanisms  <cit>  or simply the higher stability  that is often associated with structured regions  <cit> . an example of a 5′ utr that has not, as far as we are aware, been linked with known riboswitches is shown in figure  <dig> . like all the potential 5′ utrs that we have identified here, this is predicted to be structured . we also identified a few potential cis-acting antisense regulatory rnas that are complementary to the ribosome-binding regions of overlapping mrna and may thereby regulate the initiation of translation  <cit> . a complication is that many rnas that are antisense to ribosome-binding regions could equally be the 5′ utr of a divergent protein-coding gene. an example of a potential antisense rna complementary to a 5′ ribosome-binding site  is shown , along with one that might interact with a rbs internal to a polycistronic mrna . we also identified others that are complementary to sites distal to a rbs . it has recently been shown that antisense rna binding to internal sites can initiate mrna degradation via the stimulation of rnase e cleavage in vitro <cit> . as mentioned previously, p. acnes has a homologue of this key endonuclease . small rnas were also identified, some of which are highly abundant, that do not appear to overlap with protein-coding genes . our results indicate that, as is being found increasingly in other bacteria  <cit> , srnas are likely to a significant role in regulating gene expression in p. acnes.

leaderless mrnas
while mapping tsss, we noticed several examples that coincided with start codons for translation. this prompted us to gauge the prevalence of leaderless mrnas in p. acnes. the start codons of protein-coding genes, as annotated in the ncbi database  <cit> , were collated and their positions mapped against tsss associated with a step increase in transcription . this revealed  <dig> instances of annotated start codons overlapping tsss and another  <dig> where start codons followed tsss within  <dig> nt . the latter tsss produce a 5′ leader that is generally considered too short to recruit ribosomes via the canonical shine-dalgarno interaction, which requires base pairing between the leader and a complementary sequence in the 3′ end of 16s rrna  <cit> . we also identified  <dig> instances of mrnas with relatively short 5′ leaders  within which we were unable to detect a shine-dalgarno sequence using rbsfinder  <cit>  . from the above, we concluded that in sharp contrast to what has been found for nascent mrnas in e. coli <cit> , translation initiation in the absence of a shine-dalgarno interaction appears to be prevalent in p. acnes. analysis of the ontology of genes associated with ‘leaderless’ mrna failed to identify enrichment of a particular function. this is in contrast to the situation in e. coli where repressors of mobile genetic elements are clearly enriched . pyruvate kinase, a key glycolytic enzyme, and ferritin, the major store of iron, are two examples of products translated from leaderless mrna in p. acnes . the proportions of aug, gug, uug start codons present in p. acnes leaderless mrna are 68%, 29% and 3%, respectively. this is similar to the proportion reported for another actinomycete, streptomyces coelicolor <cit> . to our knowledge, the mechanism by which leaderless mrna is translated in actinomycetes has not been determined. very recently it has been shown that leaderless mrnas in e. coli can be generated post-transcriptionally by a stress-induced mrnase that is the toxic component of a toxin-antitoxin system  <cit> . should such processing also exist in p. acnes, the detection of the corresponding sites would require us to add a phosphorylation step to facilitate the cloning and sequencing of the 5′-hydoxylated downstream products of cleavage by toxin mrnases.

re-annotation of protein-coding genes and operon structures
we also noticed that a significant proportion of tsss associated with significant step increases in transcription were internal to the 5′ half of annotated genes  suggesting that the actual gene might be shorter. consistent with this notion, we have been able to find rbs along with appropriately spaced start codons downstream of many of these tsss  and homologous genes that lack sequences matching the 5′ end of the original gene annotation . our combined rna-seq approach also revealed many examples of operon structures that differ significantly from bioinformatics predictions . this was not particular surprising; it is known that even the best bioinformatic approaches are not completely accurate  <cit> . nevertheless, achieving accurate information on gene and operon structures is essential for gene expression and regulation to be modelled  <cit>  at the level of the whole cell  <cit> . our transcriptome approach and data should hasten the achievement of this goal for p. acnes.

discussion
here we describe a number of mechanistic insights gained from an improved drna-seq approach that distinguished sites of transcription initiation without erasing the secondary transcriptome using tex, an enzyme that in our hands can degrade a substantial proportion of 5′-triphosphorylated rna under the conditions recommended by the vendor . with the advent of sequencing techniques that can provide in excess of  <dig> million reads  there is now no need to erase the secondary transcriptome in order to detect transcription start sites. we simply used tap  <cit>  to distinguish tri- from mono-phosphorylated 5′ ends. this enzyme was used in earlier drna-seq approaches, but to facilitate the cloning of 5′-fragments remaining after tex treatment  <cit> . other improvements were to fragment the rna after the addition of the 5′ adaptor to improve the efficient cloning of 5′ ends from large transcripts, and to combine with a grna-seq approach that does not require an amplification step  <cit> . the latter – used here for the first time to study bacterial transcription - allowed us to identify the 3′, as well as 5′, boundaries of transcripts. it should be particularly beneficial for the study of organisms with a high gc content in their genomes, as the amplification of segments of such genomes  is prone to pcr bias and artefacts  <cit> . moreover, as we included biological replicates in our drna-seq approach and incorporated a statistical method that is ideally suited to the analysis of drna-seq data, we are confident that our analyses are not dominated by false positives. this is particularly relevant with regard to our finding that the majority of tsss in p. acnes are not associated with step increases in transcription that continued into annotated genes or produced discrete rnas of high abundance relative to flanking regions .

evidence for pervasive transcription on a genome scale has previously been obtained for several bacteria  <cit> . however, this has largely been in the form of the identification of transcripts antisense to annotated genes  <cit> . by including biological replicates and mapping tsss in addition to transcripts, our study shows that pervasive transcription in p. acnes stems as much from transcription of the coding strand as the non-coding strand of annotated genes. of the thousands of tsss identified within annotated genes , approximately half produced transcripts sense to the coding strand. the only strong bias we have identified so far is for the leading strand of replication . our interpretation is that clashes with oncoming dna replication hinder pervasive transcription initiation on the lagging strand.

the initiation of pervasive transcription is not random. meme analysis of sequences immediately upstream of tsss associated with pervasive transcription revealed that a high proportion  matched the single most common sequence variant  of the − <dig> box of p. acnes vegetative promoters . it is our view that much of the pervasive transcription observed in bacteria is a consequence of the ability of rna polymerases to recognise a range of sequences, which means that these enzymes can initiate transcription from sub-optimal sites albeit at reduced frequency. just because a region is transcribed  does not mean that it is has a function  <cit> . nevertheless, pervasive transcription may be of evolutionary significance by facilitating the transcription of genes acquired horizontally and in turn the production of products that could confer a selective advantage. pervasive transcription might also have been the source of bona fide srna regulation. through spontaneous mutation of promoter regions upstream of tsss or the acquisition of mobile elements such as rep sequences, which are known to stabilise transcripts  <cit> , small rnas could increase in abundance and their likelihood of being subject to selection.

very recent work suggests that the folding architecture of the chromosome influences the location of pervasive transcription  <cit> . this is consistent with a model in which pervasive transcription is largely driven by the ability of rna polymerases, given access, to initiate transcription from sub-optimal sites albeit at reduced frequency. nevertheless, the growing evidence for pervasive transcription in bacteria challenges the dogma that transcription starts and ends just before and after a gene. moreover, it seems likely that mechanisms exist to minimise the accumulation of pervasive transcripts. one means of controlling pervasive transcripts is likely to be rna degradation. it is well established that rna turnover is particularly rapid in the absence of protection by rna-binding proteins or translating ribosomes and appropriately located structures  <cit> . in other words, the transcriptional landscape may be defined by the stability of bacterial transcripts more than is currently appreciated.

in addition to providing additional evidence for pervasive transcription, we have identified over a thousand tsss and associated transcripts encompassing all classes of functional rna, mono- and poly-cistronic mrna, ribosomal rna, transfer rna, and ubiquitous small rnas , this alone is an important milestone along the route to understanding the cellular workings of p. acnes. in addition, we have identified changes in gene expression resulting from potassium downshift , post-transcriptional steps  including unusual 3′ processing of trna , features of vegetative promoters , potential transcription factor-binding sites , functioning riboswitches as well as a number of srnas , and an abundance of leaderless mrnas . we have also shown how knowledge of the above can be used to build models of gene regulation that inform experimental investigation . simply knowing the position of a tss narrows the search area for transcription factor-binding sites. for example, inspection of the promoter of the kdp operon identified a direct repeat overlapping the − <dig> region , which is characteristic of the binding sites of the response regulators of two-component systems  <cit> .

the prevalence of leaderless mrnas in p. acnes is in stark contrast to the situation in e. coli, the main bacterial system in which the translation of leaderless mrna has been studied  <cit> . indeed, only two examples of e. coli leaderless mrna have been widely reported, the ci repressor of bacteriophage lambda  <cit>  and the tetr repressor of transposon tn <dig>  <cit> . the association between leaderless mrna and repressors within mobile genetic elements in e. coli has been extended to the repressors of the rac, e <dig> and qin prophages by our own deep rna-seq analysis of the e. coli transcriptome . we speculate that some aspect of the translation of these leaderless mrnas may be important in linking the mobilisation of the corresponding genetic elements and the physiological of their host. recently, it has been shown that stress induces the production of specialised ribosomes that selectively translate a group of mrnas made leaderless by mazf  <cit> , an endoribonuclease of a toxin-antitoxin  module. like their mrna targets, the specialised ribosomes are produced by mazf cleavage, which removes  <dig> nt from the 3′ end of e. coli 16s rrna  <cit> . intriguingly, we have mapped a processing site  <dig> nt from the 3′ end of p. acnes 16s rrna . this raises the possibility that specialised ribosomes, similar to those generated by mazf in e. coli, could mediate much of the translation in p. acnes. however, unlike the situation described for e. coli <cit> , the translation of leaderless mrna in p. acnes does not appear to require that the start codon is aug. as described above, a significant proportion of the leaderless mrna in p. acnes have gug  or uug  start codons in place of aug  .

regardless of the actual mechanism by which leaderless mrnas are translated, our study adds to a growing body of evidence that leaderless mrnas are prevalent outside e. coli and its closest relatives and the notion that the mechanism of their translation may represent an ancient milestone in the evolution of gene expression  <cit> . a gene ontology analysis of leaderless mrna in p. acnes revealed a wide distribution of cellular roles . thus, since the emergence of translation mediated by a shine-dalgarno interaction, there does not seem to have been divergence in terms of cellular functions that are dependent on leaderless translation in p. acnes. it will be interesting to establish for p. acnes whether there is a correlation between leaderless translation and the level of gene expression, as measured by protein levels, or the response of genes under conditions of stress or both.

we estimate that around  <dig> reads  correspond to  <dig> transcript per cell, assuming that the levels of rnase p and tmrna are similar to those in e. coli <cit> . this appears to be reasonable; our estimate yields  <dig>  ribosomes per cell, which is within the range reported for e. coli <cit>  and other bacteria, when applied to the  <dig> million reads for p. acnes 5s rrna. many of the mrnas we identified were associated with less than  <dig> reads. this does mean necessarily that not every cell expresses the corresponding gene, only that it was expressed for a proportion of the p. acnes cell cycle. moreover, many mrnas will not need to be continuously present to ensure translation produces sufficient protein for the daughter cell at division, given that the doubling time is relatively long . we estimate that transcription associated with pervasive initiation corresponds on average to  <dig>  transcripts per cell . this relatively low level is perhaps consistent with a background of sporadic transcription.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, by combining the differential and global rna-sequencing approaches used here to analyse p. acnes, it is clear that major step increases in both knowledge and understanding of gene organisation and regulation can be obtained for any bacterial species, which in turn would inform experimental investigation, as illustrated using the nrdr operon and pqs locus, as well as further computational approaches. with regard to the latter, our data can be mined further, for example, to identify cis-regulatory signals that control transcription termination, initiation from the promoters of genes with shared cellular function, rna processing and degradation, and to predict the potential structures and targets of small rnas. our rna-seq approach can also be used to identify and compare genes expressed under particular conditions. there is excellent agreement between the microarray and grna-seq data  <cit>  and we are currently comparing the expression profiles obtained here for cells growth in liquid culture with those of cells grown as a biofilm  as well as cells grown by others in a rich complex medium  <cit> . with continuing annotation, it should be possible eventually to computationally model the p. acnes cell and its interaction with the environment and animal hosts  <cit> .

