BACKGROUND
as important agents of bacterial evolution, integrons are genetic elements that aggregate mobile gene cassettes via site-specific recombination. the functional platform of integron systems consists of a site-specific tyrosine recombinase , its primary recombination site , and a transcriptional promoter for the cassettes
 <cit> . integrons are capable of acquiring, rearranging, and expressing genes contained in gene cassettes sampled from a near-infinite environmental bank of cassettes
 <cit> . each cassette carries one or a small number of genes  linked to a recombination site termed attc. the genes in cassettes are highly diverse and mostly of unknown function
 <cit> , and they are usually promoterless and hence rely on the integron’s promoter for transcription. accordingly, insertions of gene cassettes in the cassette array are highly orientation specific such that integron genes are transcribed from the integron promoter. studies have revealed that gene cassette composition is extremely dynamic within and between environments
 <cit>  and even between closely related strains as observed in the vibrio cholerae species
 <cit> .

there are two primary types of integrons: mobile integrons and chromosomal integrons
 <cit> . mobile integrons  are found commonly on plasmids and are characterized by frequent lateral gene transfers ; most other classes of integrons are nonmobile and so confined to chromosomes and specific bacterial lineages, and are therefore called chromosomal integrons
 <cit> . first discovered in the 1980s
 <cit> , mobile integrons contain mostly antibiotic resistance genes
 <cit>  and their ability to acquire a number of resistance cassettes leads to most clinical multidrug resistance. by contrast, chromosomal integrons were first found in vibrio cholerae in the 1990s
 <cit> , and typically carry more gene cassettes than mobile integrons, of more diverse functions. in some species the chromosomal integrons constitute a significant fraction of the genome 
 <cit> .

chromosomal integrons have been found in a wide range of bacterial species and environmental samples. an analysis surveying  <dig> sequenced bacterial genomes revealed that 9% carried integrons
 <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of the integron integrase  suggests that integrons are ancient structures that have contributed to the evolution of bacterial genomes for hundreds of millions of years, primarily by vertical inheritance
 <cit> . horizontal transfer of integrons has also been proposed, as discrepancies are found between the 16s rrna gene tree and the integron integrase tree for the species vibrio fischeri <cit> , shewanella denitrificans, nitrosococcus mobilis, and the xanthomonas lineage
 <cit> . at a larger scale, two major clades of integrase were identified, and found to be associated with different environments , consistent with their exchange among bacterial species occupying common environments
 <cit> .

treponema species belong to the spirochete family and many are involved in human diseases: t. pallidum is the cause of syphilis and yaws
 <cit> ; and the oral pathogen t. denticola is associated with periodontal diseases
 <cit> . different from other chromosomal integron-containing species  that cause serious infectious diseases, treponema species are widely found in healthy human populations
 <cit> . by building and examining the phylogenetic distribution of chromosomal integron-containing species among a wider selection of spirochetes, and a phylogenetic tree of integron integrases  from genomes that contain chromosomal integrons—assisted by an analysis of attc sites—we hypothesize that the chromosomal integron system has undergone at least one gain and one loss in the evolutionary history of the treponema species. the gain happened after the speciation leading to the two termite-gut-associated species, treponema azotonutricium and treponema primitia <cit> . the persistent existence of the chromosomal integrons in the human-associated treponema species, especially in those associated with oral sites, indicate that these species may gain evolutionary advantages by having integron gene cassettes. the loss happened in the common ancestor of t. pallidum and t. phagedenis: the integron system has been entirely deleted in t. pallidum , while in the t. phagedenis genome several attc sites are present, but the inti gene seems to have been lost.

methods
building evolutionary tree
in order to understand the evolutionary history of the treponema species, we collected the  <dig> marker genes described in
 <cit>  for the treponema species, as well as for species serving as out-groups. the accession numbers and websites for downloading the draft genomes are listed in additional file
1: table s <dig>  the  <dig> reference genes were extracted from the complete genomes according to their annotations. for unannotated draft genomes, a similarity-based search method  was employed to find the genes in the contigs. we translated the genes into amino acid sequences using the standard codon table and aligned them using muscle
 <cit> —separately for each gene. the aligned amino acid sequences were then concatenated and imported into mega5
 <cit>  for tree construction, with the model set to jtt . the bootstrap number was  <dig> 

detecting integrons
we looked for integron systems by first detecting the presence of the integron inti. to find inti genes, we used genome annotations as well as performing similarity searches using the inti gene sequence from t. denticola atcc  <dig> as reference. after collecting inti gene sequences we built a tree for inti from all species that contain integrons, to ask how the integron system has evolved, using the same procedure as for the species tree described above.

besides looking for inti, we also identified attc sites in the genomes, using both similarity-search-based and ab initio approaches. while atti sites are one of the core components of integron systems, they are less conserved than attc sites
 <cit> , and there is only one atti site in each integron. thus, we focused on the analysis of attc recombination sites, taking advantage of their conservation and the fact that there are often multiple attc sites in an integron. first, we used eight recombination site sequences that represent all attc sites in the t. denticola atcc  <dig> integron
 <cit>  and performed similarity searches with all eight sequences, since not all recombination sites are the same . note that these eight representative attc sequences have been used to effectively recover treponema integron gene cassettes from human metagenomic samples
 <cit> .

second, we developed an ab initio approach to identifying chromosomal integrons, by searching for arrays of potential attc sites. existing computational methods—including the integrall database
 <cit>  and a context-driven approach using a computational grammar
 <cit> —focus on the identification of mobile integrons, especially those of class i, the most widespread and clinically important type. our method targets chromosomal integrons, utilizing the unique features of the attc sites’ secondary structure: a single-stranded attc sequence forms a structure with two stems, an r box and a l box , connected by a loop of varying length
 <cit> . our method first scans an input genome for regions that are capable of forming the typical attc structure, and then uses these regions’ sequences to search for additional potential attc sites , and finally we keep only the candidates that form clusters , to reduce false positives.

extracting integron gene cassettes
except for the annotated t. denticola atcc  <dig> genomes, for which the gene cassettes are described
 <cit> , the integron gene cassettes were extracted from the contigs of the draft genomes by identifying the attc recombination sites and extracting genes bounded by these sites. first, the attc recombination sites were detected using similarity searches with the eight representative attc sequences, with identity threshold set to 70% and coverage set to 50%. we then predicted the cassette genes using fraggenescan
 <cit> , and extracted genes that were exactly bounded by two attc sites . we also set the maximum number of genes between any two attc sites to three, which is the maximum number of genes so far reported between any two integron recombination sites
 <cit> . note that this approach has been applied to human metagenome samples and successfully recovered integron gene cassettes from the metagenomes
 <cit> , demonstrating that it is able to effectively collect genes from integron gene cassettes for both complete and fragmented genomic sequences.

RESULTS
integrons arrived in the treponema species at least once in their evolutionary history
we constructed the phylogenetic tree of the treponema species along with several other spirochete species, as well as several other integron-containing species, as out-groups, as shown in figure 
 <dig>  the evolutionary tree suggests that the treponema species appeared after other selected spirochetes, including leptospira interrogans, brachyspira murdochii, borrelia burgdorferi, spirochaeta thermophile, and spirochaeta coccoides. within the treponema clade, t. azotonutricium and t. primitia  are the two earliest branching species among sequenced treponema species.

integron systems were detected by looking for inti genes in sequenced genomes or contigs . figure 
 <dig> shows the phylogenetic tree of the species, with integron-containing species marked with stars, and with paths leading to these species highlighted. from this figure one can clearly see that there is a large gap  between the two subtrees containing integrons : integron systems are missing in all earlier branching spirochetes and only appear in some treponema species, including all strains of t. denticola, t. vincentii, t. brennaborense, and t. succinifaciens. this suggests that the integron system was acquired by the treponema lineage after t. azotonutricium and t. primitia—isolated from termite guts—diverged.

we collected inti genes from representative species described in
 <cit>  and built a phylogenetic tree specifically for the inti gene, as shown in figure 
 <dig>  the inti gene sequences of the treponema species form a unique branch in the tree, indicating that the integron system in treponema sps. we identified was obtained via lgt only once, and this branch clusters  with inti genes from kuenenia stuttgartiensis, synechococcus sp., chlorobrium phaeobacteroides, and blastopirellula marina. these species originate from a variety of environments: kuennenia stuttgartiensis was isolated from a bioreactor community; chlorobium phaeobacteroides was isolated from anoxic sulfide-containing water  <dig>  m below the surface of the meromictic lake blankvann in norway
 <cit> ; and synechococcus sp. and blastopirellula marina were extracted from marine environments; thus the actual transfer path of the integron system to the treponema species is still unclear, as is the division between soil/freshwater and marine integron types suggested in
 <cit> .
 <cit> , in which bacteria are classified into two categories: "marine environment" and "soil and freshwater environment." we added two more categories, including "human or animal bodies" to refer to the treponema sps., and “a variety of environments” category, bounded by red dashed box, to represent species with inti genes closely-related with the treponema category, but originated from a variety of environments.

while typical integrons are inverted
 <cit>  with the integrase gene transcribed in the opposite direction to that of the cassette genes , the treponema integron loci we have identified share the atypical structure previously characterized in t. denticola <cit>  with inti transcribed toward the atti , adding evidence to the hypothesis of a single lgt of the integron system into the treponema species. we note that there are a few transposases identified in the gene cassettes in the t. succinifaciens integron , but all the genes between the integrase gene  and the closest transposase —with the exception of one gene located between  <dig> and 728461 bp—are of the same orientation as that of the integrase gene, indicating that the atypical integron structure also applies to t. succinifaciens.

loss of integron systems in the evolutionary history of treponema species
besides the early gain of integrons by the treponema genus, we also observe the apparent loss of integrons in some treponema species. the most parsimonious explanation is that—following a single gain into the treponema lineage—there was a single loss in the common ancestor of t. pallidum and t. phagedenis. to the best of our knowledge, this loss of an integron system from a lineage is unique—the structure of the treponema chromosomal integron and its flanking regions are not associated with mobile elements and do not appear to be mobile
 <cit> . thus our result provides the first instance of the loss of a chromosomal integron in evolutionary history.

perhaps the most striking result is observed in the genome of t. phagedenis. even though we could not find an inti in this species, we did find integron attc recombination sites at a chromosomal location syntenic to the integron element in other treponema, and were able to predict integron cassette genes bounded by attc sites . the existence of integron recombination sites and gene cassettes indicates that the integron system did exist in the common ancestor of this species and was lost recently in the evolutionary process. we could not find any traces of the integron structure, including inti integrase gene and attc recombination sites, in t. pallidum, suggesting that the integron system has been entirely deleted in this species.

differences of attc recombination sites between treponema species
by employing the eight consensus sequences of the attc recombination sites to perform similarity searches in the treponema genomes, we found that all t. denticola strains and t. vincentii possess these attc sites. however, the same method didn’t identify attc sites in the t. succinifaciens and t. brennaborense genomes. after applying an ab initio method to find attc sites in the genomes of these two species, we discovered  <dig> attc sites in t. succinifaciens , and one attc site in t. brennaborense. figure 
3a shows the alignment of predicted attc sites; we focused on the core domains of the attc sites for the alignment, considering that the sequence conservation in attc sites is restricted to two triplets  located in the r” and r’ boxes
 <cit> . we only included five t. denticola attc representative sequences in the alignment, since the other three lack identifiable aac sites even though they all share sequence similarity with the attc sites included in the alignment. figure 
3b shows the predicted structures of these identified attc sites: all display the typical stem-loop structure with r and l boxes, suggesting that the attc sites found in the t. succinifaciens and t. brennaborense genomes are genuine.

note that we detected only a single attc site in the t. brennaborense genome . however, there is an adjacent inti gene . between the inti gene and the attc site, we found a small segment  of the same sequence  as the r’ binding site in the predicted attc site of t. brennaborense, consistent with this segment being the r binding site of the atti site for this integron. all suggest that the integron system in this genome is functional . chromosomal integron systems lacking integron gene cassettes are found in other species
 <cit> , but the lack of a gene cassette array, which is typical of chromosomal integron structures found in other treponema species, suggests that the integron system in t. brennaborense needs to be examined in additional isolates.

we found that some of the predicted attc sites in t. succinifaciens and t. brennaborense are significantly longer than those in t. denticola and t. vincentii : the lengths of the three attc site types in t. succinifaciens are 63 bps, 68 bps, and 132 bps and the attc in t. brennaborense is 115 bps. although chromosomal integron arrays—especially those with many gene cassettes—typically contain attc sites of similar sizes, arrays have been found that contain attc sites of varying lengths
 <cit> . note that there are more, long attc sites  than short ones in the t. succinifaciens genome, and these long attc sites share high sequence similarity . since the integron system was inserted into the genome of a common ancestor of the treponema species , and t. succinifaciens and t. brennaborense appeared earlier than t. denticola and t. vincentii , we hypothesize that the original integron recombination sites were longer , and were gradually reduced in t. denticola .

dynamics of integron gene cassettes
with the availability of the 14 t. denticola strains, we are able to compare the gene contents of the integron systems between the different strains . we calculated the proportion of integron genes shared between any two strains by clustering the genes  and show the results as a heat map in figure 
4a. among the  <dig> strains, a few are similar to each other in gene content. for example, the three strains myr-t, attc  <dig>  and h1-t  share more than 60% of their genes. other t. denticola strains that share large numbers of integron genes include us-trep and aslm , and otk and sp <dig> . by building a tree based on the  <dig> marker genes for the  <dig> strains, as shown in figure 
4b, we found that the sharing of integron genes is largely consistent with the evolutionary relationship among the different t. denticola strains: more closely related strains tend to share more genes. for example, strains atcc  <dig> and atcc  <dig>  which share  <dig> % of their integron genes, are almost indistinguishable on the phylogenetic tree. another example is strains us-trep and aslm, which share  <dig> % of their integron genes and are closest to each other, as compared to other strains. an exception is that of otk and sp <dig>  which share  <dig> % of their integron genes  even though they are not close to each other on the phylogenetic tree . a possible explanation is that these two species are exposed to similar resources for cassette exchange. further investigation is needed to understand this phenomenon.

despite the fact that very closely related t. denticola strains share integron genes, the overall integron-gene-sharing among all the denticola strains is not very high . note that koenig et al. reported even less sharing of integron genes  among  <dig> vibrio isolates
 <cit> . we also reported in a previous work that t. denticola integron gene contents are very different between different metagenomic samples
 <cit> . the dynamics of integron genes in t. denticola indicate that the integrons of t. denticola are fully active and are undergoing active insertion and deletion of cassettes.

note that for the study of gene cassette dynamics in t. denticola , we only considered genes present between identified attc sites, as attc sites are easier to predict than atti sites . however, we believe that ignoring the very first gene cassettes between the atti site and the adjacent attc site would not change our conclusions, considering that t. denticola isolates contain long arrays of gene cassettes.

CONCLUSIONS
our combined sequence and phylogenetic analysis of the integron integrases and attc recombination sites in treponema genomes suggest that integron systems have been acquired only once, by the common ancestor of t. brennaborense, t. succinifaciens, t. vincentii and t. denticola, as we could not find traces of integrons in earlier branching treponema species  or other spirochetes. we cannot exclude the possibility that the integrons have been gained independently in these species; however a single insertion event is more likely than several distinct events, as the chromosomal integrons are not associated with mobile elements and so cannot move freely, and the treponema inti genes form a common clade .

we also found evidence for the deletion of integrons in one subclade. the absence of a complete integron structure in t. pallidum and t. phagedenis can be explained by a single deletion event in the common ancestor of these two species. moreover, we found remnants of the integron structure, including attc recombination sites and gene cassettes, in the t. phagedenis genome, but not in t. pallidum. without the inti gene this integron structure is now static and cannot facilitate adaptation to new conditions by acquiring new gene cassettes, shuffling of existing gene cassettes, or deletion of cassettes. we could not find traces of an integron structure in t. pallidum, which could be the result of complete degradation of its integron structure.

our results demonstrate both gain and loss of integron systems in the treponema species. even though the horizontal acquisition of integron structures has been suggested by
 <cit> , to the best of our knowledge no literature has provided molecular evidence of integron loss—integrons have been found to be evolutionarily stable. the absence of the inti—along with the integron remnants in t. phagedenis—serves as the first instance of an integron deletion event. since these chromosomal integrons are not associated with mobile elements, the mechanism of integron insertion/deletion is unknown. with the release of ever more bacterial genomes, we may be able to identify more indel events of integron systems and infer the reasons for these events in the foreseeable future.

competing interests
there are no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
yw conceived of the study, carried out the analysis and drafted the manuscript. td participated in the analysis and helped to draft the manuscript. yy conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplementary materials. this document contains supplementary figures s1–s <dig>  and supplementary tables s1–s <dig> 

click here for file

 acknowledgement
the genome sequence of t. brennaborense was produced by the us department of energy joint genome institute
http://www.jgi.doe.gov/ in collaboration with the user community. the authors also thank the broad institute for sequencing and releasing the draft genomes of treponema denticola strains. this work was supported by the national science foundation . we thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions.
