BACKGROUND
ginger  and turmeric  are important not only as spices but also as traditional eastern medicines for arthritis, rheumatism, fever, nausea, asthma and other ailments  <cit> . terpenoids  and phenylpropanoid-polyketides  are believed to be responsible for most of these medicinal properties. curcumin in particular is used in treatment of cancer, arthritis, diabetes, crohn’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, osteoporosis, alzheimer’s disease, and psoriasis, among others  <cit> .  <cit> -gingerol also has potential in treating chronic inflammation, such as in asthma and rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> . this interest in the ginger and turmeric rhizome-associated diarylheptanoids and gingerols has prompted both enzyme assay and metabolic profiling-based inquiries into the biosynthesis of these compounds  <cit> . nevertheless, many of the enzymes involved in production of these compounds in ginger and turmeric have not been identified.

rhizomes hold greater biological significance as well. the rhizome was the original stem of the vascular plant lineage  <cit>  and is still the only type of stem found in primitive plant groups such as ferns and fern allies. in order to understand the evolution of the upright stem from its rhizomatous origins, we must understand how it differs from the rhizome. furthermore, we do not understand why and how many advanced plants have “reverted” back to rhizomatous growth. such reversions have huge economic implications, being responsible for the invasiveness and hardiness of many of the world’s most significant weeds, such as purple nutsedge , johnson grass  pers.), and cogon grass  beauv.). thus, increasing our understanding of rhizome biology may have significant impacts not only on our understanding of how important medicinal compounds are produced, but also on our ability to control important weedy species.

despite the importance of ginger and turmeric and of rhizomes in general, very few genes have been identified from ginger or turmeric rhizomes  <cit> . moreover, very little is known about the genes involved in rhizome identity, growth and development in general  <cit> . paterson and coworkers published work on several sorghum species that identified many genes that are expressed in the rhizomes of s. halepense and s. propinquim <cit> . several of these mapped to qtls for “rhizomatousness” on the sorghum genetic map. however, the exact role that any of these genes may play in rhizome development remains unclear.

here we describe the analysis of over  <dig>  expressed sequence tags  from rhizomes, leaves and roots of two ginger lines  and rhizomes and leaves of one turmeric line . using these ests, we identified ginger and turmeric transcripts potentially involved in rhizome biology and specialized metabolism, particularly in the production of curcuminoids, gingerols and terpenoids. moreover, we provide an explanation for previously observed growth responses of rhizomes to the phytohormones auxin and ethylene  <cit> .

RESULTS
production and analysis of a database of ginger and turmeric ests
random clones from eight cdna libraries representing rhizome, leaf and root of two ginger lines, and rhizome and leaf of one turmeric line , were 5′ and 3′ end-sequenced to produce ests, which were then assembled into contiguous unique transcriptional units  in the program for assembling and viewing ests . the resulting arrest  database  contains a total of  <dig>  ests  that assembled into  <dig>  unigenes . the average est sequence length was 817 bp, with unitrans lengths ranging from  <dig> to 4021 bp, with the greatest number of unitrans having between  <dig> and 800 bp, and with 95% exceeding 300 bp . average est number per unitrans was approximately  <dig> , and only fifteen unitrans contained  <dig> or more ests , whereas a very large number of the unitrans contained less than  <dig> ests. many unitrans contained ests from both species, suggesting significant homology between these two members of the zingiberaceae.

of the  <dig>  unitrans identified in the arrest database,  <dig> % could be annotated with gene ontologies . eight go categories  had est abundances greater than 5%, including protein modification , transport , metabolism , transcription , cellular process , protein biosynthesis , electron transport , and biological process unknown . although compounds such as the curcuminoids and gingerols accumulate to high concentration in the rhizome of these plants, the go category secondary metabolism contained relatively few ests . early steps in the pathways to these compounds are covered by other metabolism categories. other interesting findings from the go categorization are as follows: 1) transport and metabolism genes appeared to be more highly expressed  in root than in leaf or rhizome of ginger; 2) genes related to protein modification appeared to be expressed at higher levels in the rhizome than in the leaf or root for both turmeric and ginger; 3) protein biosynthesis genes appeared to be expressed at higher levels in gw roots than other tissues or other plant accessions; and 4) genes classified under the biological process unknown go category appeared to be expressed at higher levels in turmeric than in ginger.

based on the go categorization described above, we were able to outline a metabolic network in ginger and turmeric rhizomes that connects the metabolism of sucrose to the phenylpropanoids and terpenoids . we were also able to analyze the apparent relative expression levels  of genes governing the commitment of carbon flux into several primary and specialized metabolic pathways in different tissues , as we have previously done for glandular trichomes  <cit> . these results, which were validated by additional expression studies, suggest that metabolism is regulated in ginger and turmeric rhizomes differently than in leaves or roots, and also support the hypothesis that ginger and turmeric rhizomes are highly specialized for the production of high levels of specialized metabolites.

values given are normalized total est number  . ten, an indicator of est expression levels, was calculated as the sum of all ests that are associated with gene products carrying out a specific enzymatic activity, divided by the total est number within a particular library.

we also investigated the expression levels for members of eight specific gene families  that play important roles in the biosynthesis of large numbers of specialized metabolites in plants: polyketide synthases , terpene synthases , nadh-dependent dehydrogenases/reductases, bahd acyltransferases, 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxgenases , sabath carboxyl methyltransferases, small molecule o-methyltransferases  and cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenases . five of these gene families were particularly well represented in the arrest database, with normalized total est numbers of more than  <dig> for specific family sub-categories. in particular, the p <dig> gene family was very well represented in the database , suggesting that reactions carried out by members of this family are very important for metabolism in these plants.

biosynthesis of diarylheptanoids and gingerols in ginger and turmeric
of the more than  <dig>  nonvolatile compounds detected so far by lc-ms in fresh ginger or turmeric rhizome, less than  <dig> have been isolated or structurally identified, let alone biosynthetically evaluated  <cit> . what is known is that both the diarylheptanoid and gingerol-related classes of compounds are polyketides with origins in the phenylpropanoid pathway  <cit> . ests for phenylpropanoid pathway enzymes were abundant in almost all of the tissues examined. cinnamate 4-hydroxylase ests were the most abundant of the six phenylpropanoid pathway enzymes. phenylalanine ammonia lyase ests, the entry point into the pathway, were abundant in most of the ginger/turmeric cdna libraries except leaves. caffeoyl-coa o-methyltransferase  was apparently expressed at higher levels  in ginger rhizomes than in ginger leaves  and was not detectable in turmeric leaf. these results paralleled previous work that showed that ccomt specific activity was significantly higher in extracts from shoots when compared to leaves and rhizomes for both ginger and turmeric  <cit> , consistent with a role for ccomt in xylem development. moreover, the abundance of phenylpropanoid pathway-associated ests in rhizomes, which do not accumulate high levels of lignin, flavonoids, lignans, or other phenylpropanoid pathway-derived compounds, supports the hypothesis that the primary biochemical function of ginger and turmeric rhizomes is the conversion of sucrose into the curcuminoids and gingerols  <cit> .

recent metabolic profiling work has suggested that at least two  subclasses of polyketide synthases are involved in production of diarylheptanoids in turmeric  <cit> . one such enzyme can apparently utilize p-coumaroyl-coa and feruloyl-coa but not caffeoyl-coa as substrate and produces the major curcuminoids. additional pkss can utilize caffeoyl-coa to produce compounds with an ortho-diol on one of the two aromatic rings, such as 3′-hydroxy-bisdemethoxycurcumin  and 3′-hydroxy-demethoxycurcumin  . to further investigate the role of pkss in ginger/turmeric specialized metabolism, we identified > <dig> unitrans as putative pkss by comparing representative type iii pks genes  <cit>  against the arrest database using blastx. these potential pks genes belong to three major groups: chalcone/naringenin-chalcone synthases , relatives of a polyketide synthase from wachendorfia thyrsiflora   and hydroxycinnamoyl-diketide synthase  from turmeric  <cit> , and relatives of curcuminoid synthase  from turmeric  <cit> , as well as a diverse group of putative polyketide synthases . the ginger and turmeric enzymes tentatively identified as chs or naringenin-chs showed much lower expression levels compared to the other two classes in turmeric, based on est number. chs ests were not detected in gw and were only found in the gy rhizome. ginger is not known to produce large amounts of flavonoids, which would be produced by these chs enzymes, and instead is known for gingerols, gingerol-related compounds and a diversity of diarylheptanoids. indeed, our metabolic profiling work with these ginger lines  <cit>  suggests that flavonoids are only minor constituents of these plants, even though the phenylpropanoid pathway appears to be very active . thus, a combination of low expression of chs and competition by other pks-like enzymes may deplete substrate pools for chs, thus preventing ginger from accumulating flavonoids to appreciable levels.

in contrast, members of the ginger/turmeric wtpks1/dks and curs-like subclasses in aggregate are ubiquitously expressed in the rhizome, leaf and root tissues of both ginger and turmeric. the namesake protein of the first class, wtpks <dig> is the first type iii pks reported in the biosynthesis of diarylheptanoids  <cit>  and is neither a curcuminoid or gingerol synthase, but is rather a diketide synthase. other members of this sub-family have been shown to belong to the curcumin synthase-like subclass. certain members from both groups of enzymes are involved, apparently, in production of curcumin in planta; they have been demonstrated to produce curcumin in vitro when expressed in recombinant form. none of these genes have been shown to be involved in the production of gingerols. another gene of this class  was identified in rice and also annotated as a “curcuminoid synthase” despite the fact that rice does not produce curcuminoids  <cit> . expressed exclusively at low levels in the developing rice anther, this protein likely plays a different role in vivo than what is suggested from in vitro analysis of the recombinant rice protein. moreover, os07g <dig> is not closely related to wtpks <dig> or to any of curcuminoid synthase or diketide synthase genes identified from curcuminoid-rich ginger and turmeric . as a result, we cannot determine the exact roles of all of the members of the class of wtpks <dig> gene family in ginger and turmeric at this time. nevertheless, available data so far suggest that the large array of pks-derived compounds in ginger and turmeric may be the result of multiple pks-like enzymes catalyzing slightly different reactions, each with different substrate specificities and product outcomes. other ginger and turmeric genes from the wtpks1/curcumin synthase-like subclass are excellent candidates for involvement in these processes, and are the subject of ongoing investigation. furthermore, the β-ketoacyl-coa synthase-like subclass  is also noticeably expanded in ginger and turmeric relative to other species and may also play a role in production of these compounds.

other enzymes required to decorate or modify the diarylheptanoid and gingerol-related backbone structures could well belong to the other major gene families evaluated for expression. for example, specific reductases and hydroxylases are likely to be involved in elimination of double bonds and in forming hydroxyl groups on the compounds found in these plants, and these classes of enzymes were well represented in the arrest database. many of these potential genes show relatively high expression in all or most tissue types of ginger/turmeric . these results provide important clues for further research to elucidate the pathways/ networks involved in producing diarylheptanoids and gingerol-related compounds in these plants.

terpenoid biosynthesis in ginger and turmeric
terpenoids are another major class of bioactive compounds found in ginger and turmeric  <cit> . isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate , the common building blocks for mono-, sesqui- and other terpenoids, appear to be produced mainly by the plastidic methylerythritol phosphate  pathway in these species as ests for all enzymes in this pathway were readily identified in the arrest database at high levels , especially the potential regulatory enzyme, 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate  synthase. in contrast, two important enzymes of the cytosolic mevalonate  pathway, phosphomevalonate kinase and pyrophosphomevalonate decarboxylase, were not detected in the database. also, other genes in the mva pathway were represented by very low est levels for all tissues, even those producing high levels of sesquiterpenoids, which are derived from farnesyl diphosphate, a compound believed to be synthesized in the cytosol of most plants. these results suggest that the mep pathway is the essential pathway for production of precursor ipp/dmapp involved in the biosynthesis of terpenoids found at high levels in ginger and turmeric, including sesquiterpenoids. furthermore, the transport of ipp/dmapp out of the plastid to the cytosol is likely to also occur in these plants, as has been shown for other plants such as snapdragon and sweet basil  <cit> .

only two terpene synthases , a germacrene d synthase and -β-bisabolene synthase from ginger, have been reported from either of these species  <cit> . however, the arrest database contains  <dig> unitrans identified as putative tpss including:  <dig> monoterpene synthases,  <dig> sesquiterpene synthases,  <dig> diterpene synthases,  <dig> triterpene synthases and  <dig> tetraterpene synthases . most of the tps unitrans in the arrest database possess few ests , several may represent different regions of the same gene , and all putative triterpene synthases appear to be exclusive to the rhizomes. two of the unitrans appeared to represent full-length monoterpene synthase  cdnas, one from ginger rhizome and the other from turmeric leaf. the corresponding recombinant protein from ginger rhizome was expressed in e. coli and assayed for enzymatic activity. the ginger mts catalyzed the formation of  <dig> -cineole and small amounts of p-menth-1-en-8-ol, which is a intermediate product during gpp conversion to  <dig> -cineole. although all ginger tissues produce  <dig> -cineole, the rhizome contains much more than root or leaf tissues. gene expression profiling from a microarray analysis also verify that  <dig> -cineole synthase is predominantly expressed in the rhizome . although the turmeric rhizome also produces large amounts of  <dig> -cineole, this ginger mts was not expressed in the turmeric rhizome according to the microarray analysis, suggesting that there is/are other  <dig> -cineole synthase in the turmeric rhizome.

in addition to the tpss discussed above, other gene families possibly involved in ginger and turmeric terpenoid biosynthesis are easily identified in the database, including p450s. of these, a limonene hydroxylase-like enzyme  is one of the most highly expressed p450s , based on est counts. this enzyme class is associated with the biosynthesis of oxygenated monoterpenoids . because these specific compounds have not been detected in ginger or turmeric, cyp71d in ginger and turmeric plants is likely to be involved in producing highly accumulating compounds such as the turmerones, suggesting that this enzyme class may have evolved unique functions in these two plants.

conservation of rhizome-enriched genes
in an attempt to discover genes involved in defining rhizome tissue identity and rhizome development, we compared  <dig>  rhizome-specific ests from sorghum   <cit>  to our arrest database using tblastx. as a result,  <dig>  ginger/turmeric unitrans containing  <dig>  ests were identified as having significant homology  to the sorghum rhizome ests. of these,  <dig>  ginger/turmeric unitrans  were expressed in tissues besides the rhizome, leaving  <dig> unitrans  that appeared to be exclusively expressed in ginger or turmeric rhizome . within this group of  <dig> rhizome-enriched unitrans,  <dig> % or  <dig> unitrans  had go annotations in “biological process”, compared to  <dig> % of the entire arrest database. the remaining unknown unitrans, while lacking any known biological function, appear to represent actual genes and not random or “junk” sequence data. this result corresponds to earlier findings for johnsongrass rhizomes  <cit> .

the rhizome-enriched ests were enriched  for genes involved with “protein modification” , with 50% of these possessing homology to genes associated with kinase-mediated signal transduction, and the remainder having homology to other serine-threonine kinases or ubiquitin-associated activities. such post-translational protein modifications are suggestive of possible roles in biotic/abiotic stress response and phytohormone signal transduction  <cit> . in contrast, a number of go categories were noticeably deficient. for example, few unitrans were found with gos associated with transport or cell organization and biogenesis  , while 37% of the ests in the “catabolism” gene ontology are actually involved with the early stages of the phenylpropanoid pathway  <cit> . other go categories underrepresented in the rhizome include nucleotide/nucleic acid metabolism and generation of precursor metabolites/energy . this apparent lack of a diversity of metabolic processes displays a bias in the rhizome toward processes associated with cell wall biosynthesis and remodeling as well as specific specialized metabolic pathways.

identification of transcriptional regulators in ginger and turmeric rhizomes
myb factors easily dominated other classes of transcription factors in both unitrans and est numbers in the total arrest database . the other major groups of transcription factors are the nac, wrky, homeobox, bzip and constans classes. this contrasts with what has been found in either arabidopsis thaliana or oryza sativa, where the basic helix-loop-helix  family is one of the largest families of transcription factors, closely followed in number by the myb proteins  <cit> . in the case of ginger and turmeric, this trend is reversed: the myb class is the most highly expressed class of transcription factors and apparently possesses the largest number of distinct genes, whereas the bhlh class is one of the lowest abundant classes , based on est counts and confirmed by additional expression profiling . although this trend may merely be a reflection of the genes being transcribed rather than the actual genomic content, it is an interesting finding. these two classes of transcription factors have been shown to complex together and regulate a variety of processes, most notably the specification of hairy trichomes, root hairs and petal conical cells in arabidopsis and antirrhinum majus <cit> . in addition, both ginger and turmeric possess noticeably expanded numbers of the wrky and nac types of transcription factors compared to arabidopsis and rice. both wrky and nac transcription factors have also been shown to play integral roles in plant defense, stress response and development  <cit> .

in the case of ginger, turmeric and sorghum rhizomes, it will be interesting to see which genes are regulated by these classes of transcription factors, because rhizomes lack trichomes and root hairs and do not typically accumulate appreciable levels of anthocyanins. anthocyanin production and trichome development in plants are processes known to be regulated by myb proteins  <cit> . a plausible role for myb proteins in ginger and turmeric rhizomes might lie in the regulation of rhizome-specialized metabolism  or general rhizome structure and development.

to verify the rhizome-enriched expression of specific transcriptional regulators, we analyzed the expression patterns of  <dig> of the  <dig> rhizome-enriched data set using a custom oligonucleotide-based microarray . ten unitrans putatively encoding transcriptional regulators were expressed at higher levels  in rhizome versus other tissues in various tissue and/or age specific comparisons in both ginger and turmeric: a myb, an ethylene response factor ,  <dig> mads,  <dig> auxin response factors  and  <dig> aux/iaa transcriptional regulators . it is notable that  <dig> of the  <dig> transcriptional regulators identified in this manner  appear to encode phytohormone-related proteins and are significantly up-regulated in the rhizome tissues at several time points in both ginger and turmeric. two other genes shown by the microarray experiments to be up-regulated within the rhizome of ginger or turmeric, respectively, were the mads box genes gt_ <dig> and gt_ <dig> . whether these two genes play complementary or different roles in these two species remains unclear. nevertheless, these results suggest roles for auxin and ethylene in the establishment or maintenance of rhizome cell fate or rhizome apical dominance  <cit> .

identification of genes involved in rhizome development
aux/iaa proteins have been implicated in the development of auxin-dependent vascular tissues  <cit> . the presence of aux/iaa proteins with rhizome-enriched expression is notable because auxin has been proposed to repress the initiation of shoots from rhizomes in other rhizomatous species  <cit> . the simplest explanation for the role of these transient proteins is that the aux/iaa ests observed represent the basal transcripts produced in the rhizomes. the corresponding translated aux/iaa proteins would bind to and inhibit their arf counterparts that otherwise directly control gene expression via dna binding  <cit> . however, since auxin from the shoot is readily available in the rhizome, the aux/iaa proteins would be quickly degraded by a complex analogous to the auxin responsive scf complex  <cit> , allowing for arf-dna binding. as a result, the arf would not play the role of a transcriptional activator, but rather of a transcriptional repressor. as repressors, these arf proteins would bind to their respective promoter regions and repress shoot development, as well as possible transcription of relevant arf genes. this would help explain the lack of putative arf genes in the  <dig> ests common to rhizomes from ginger/turmeric and sorghum.

although apical dominance is pronounced in rhizomes of s. halepense <cit> , it appears to be reduced in ginger and turmeric, possibly due to the differential presence/absence of specific nac transcription factors. such a hypothesis is plausible because the rhizome is a stem and mutations in nac transcription factors have been associated with loss of apical dominance in stems  <cit> . nac proteins, which may also regulate various aspects of meristematic development like rhizome bud dormancy, are known to be expressed in monocot meristems  <cit>  and to be regulated by auxin via a similar auxin-responsive ubiquitination process  <cit> .

ethylene was also implicated in the maintenance of the rhizome as a distinct tissue by the abundance of ests in the rhizomes of ginger, turmeric, and sorghum for genes associated with ethylene signaling ; the potential role of this phytohormone in rhizome biology has also been suggested for other species  <cit> . ethylene may play a role in both the promotion of rhizome elongation and the suppression of shoot development. could shoot-derived auxin be stimulating ethylene evolution in the rhizome, thereby repressing shoot formation? this idea has been hinted at in earlier experiments where the addition of auxin resulted in increased production of ethylene from exposed plant tissues  <cit> , although rhizomes were not tested. however, this hypothesis does not completely explain the previously observed roles of gibberellins in rhizome growth and development  <cit> . a possible explanation is that gibberellins may be acting as agents in the crosstalk between auxin stimulus and the ethylene response pathways. such a relationship has been suggested for other tissues such as stem, root, and tuber  <cit> , but has not been established for rhizomes.

mads box transcription factors may also play an important role in rhizome initiation and development. three  of the eight mads box unitrans that were identified in rhizomes appeared to be expressed exclusively in the rhizomes of ginger, turmeric and sorghum, based on est data. microarray analysis confirmed rhizome-specific expression for one of these genes gt_ <dig> . this gene appears to be homologous to mads box genes whose positions are close to quantitative trait loci   associated with rhizomatousness in oryza and sorghum <cit> . in addition, related rice mads box proteins have been implicated as possibly having roles in flower development; flower tissue was not included in our analysis due to the difficulty in obtaining this tissue from these plants. possible functional overlap between flower and rhizome development is not unreasonable and some mads box transcription factors have been implicated in the development of both floral and vegetative tissues such as tubers and rhizomes  <cit> . it will be very interesting to determine if the proteins encoded by these three unitrans do in fact play some role in controlling or directing rhizomatous growth and development.

CONCLUSIONS
we have analyzed ests from two ginger lines  and one turmeric line  and investigated the expression of the corresponding genes in rhizome, root and leaf tissues. many candidate genes for involvement in many core and specialized metabolite pathways were present and highly expressed in especially the rhizomes of these plants. several transcription factors and transcriptional regulators were specifically expressed in ginger and turmeric rhizome, with corresponding homologs expressed in rhizome of johnsongrass, a rhizomatous, invasive grass. these rhizome specific transcription factors may be involved in regulation of rhizome growth and development.

