BACKGROUND
a tight regulation of gene expression is crucial for the development of an organism and the maintenance of cellular homeostasis, while aberrant gene expression leads to disease-related altered phenotypes. the control of transcription plays herein a key role, and research is still ongoing to decipher its mechanisms. many of these studies rely on in vitro rna polymerase ii transcription assays  <cit> .

effective transcription is especially critical for transformed cells  <cit> . since inhibition of transcription leads to apoptosis regardless of the p <dig> status of the cells, interfering with transcription is a promising therapeutic strategy for developing new anticancer agents  <cit> . several common chemotherapeutic agents indirectly inhibit translation by damaging the dna , by topomerase inhibition  or by inhibiting rna polymerase ii activation via cyclin-dependent kinase inhibition . compounds that directly inhibit the rna polymerase ii as the mushroom-derived amanitins  are well-known toxins  <cit> . however, in combination with antibodies targeting specific cancer antigens they turn into potent and specific antineoplastic agents  <cit> . for evaluation of the efficacy of new transcription inhibitors derived from medicinal chemistry approaches, the quantification of inhibitory activity is necessary. the activity of different compounds can be best compared using a standardized in vitro polymerase ii transcription run-off assay  <cit> .

for a typical polymerase ii run-off reaction, a well-defined nuclear extract providing the rna polymerase ii and a basal set of transcription factors are used together with a linear dna template containing the desired promoter. the newly synthesized rna is radioactively labeled by adding a 32p-ctp to the reaction mixture. after the transcription reaction, the rna has to be detected and/or quantified. most commonly, the rna is purified by phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. an rna gel electrophoresis is performed and the labeled rna detected by autoradiography  <cit> . alternatively, when unlabeled, the purified rna can be detected by primer extension using a fluorescently labeled primer  <cit> . after reverse transcription, the resulting cdna is purified and a gel electrophoresis performed.

however, these methods are difficult to use for an unexperienced laboratory. since the synthesized amounts are minute, reproducible and quantitative rna recovery during purification is challenging and strongly depends on the experience of the laboratory staff. quantification of the newly synthesized rna requires a phosphor-imaging device. moreover, because of the laborious and time-consuming procedure, studies involving high numbers of probes are difficult.

to overcome these limitations, our laboratory has developed a non-radioactive in vitro transcription assay that relies on a commercially available eukaryotic transcription kit and quantitative pcr rna detection. moreover, the method was further optimized by using a novel hybridization method for rna detection and quantification. with this optimized detection the purification step can be avoided so that the method can be used for the concomitant analysis of a considerable number of samples including replicates. we applied both new methods to quantify the activity of the strong rna polymerase ii direct inhibitor α-amanitin vs. natural, synthetic and semisynthetic amanitin-derivatives . moreover, we employed the methods for quantification of transcriptional activity from a promoter lacking the tata box, as well as of the inhibitory activity of flavopiridol, which affects transcription by binding to the p-tefb kinase.

RESULTS
primer extension followed by pcr detection
for the first transcription followed by pcr detection experiments, the well-characterized plasmid pegfp-n <dig>  was directly used as a template. the reactions were set up using the hela scribe kit without adding radioactive nucleotides. to assess transcription inhibition, α-amanitin or other compounds were added in various concentrations to the reaction mix. a transcription reaction mixture that did not include ntps served as a negative control, since it contained the same amount of template dna and would thus monitor dna interference. after transcription, the newly synthesized rna was purified and dnase digested. for rna detection, a primer pair was designed and used in a reverse transcription plus pcr approach to amplify a 295 bp long dna stretch within the first 400 bp of the egfp transcript . figure 2a shows the agarose gel of the amplified products. a dna fragment of expected length was synthesized using the rna from the positive transcription reaction, while rna from the reaction without ntps showed no product, proving that the pcr product was transcription-dependent. moreover, addition of α-amanitin to the transcription mix resulted in a clearly diminished amount of pcr product.

*locked nucleic acid  - bases are depicted as lower case.

**‘positive control dna’ is provided with the promega ‘helascribe nuclear extract in vitro transcription system’. its dna sequence is provided within the additional file  <dig> “helascribe positive control dna sequence”.

the residual transcriptional activity that was observed in the presence of 100 μm α-amanitin was attributed to rna polymerases i or iii recognizing alternative bacterial promoters on the plasmid. to minimize this interference, cmv-egfp, a 1136 bp linear dna template containing the cmv promoter and about 470 bp of the egfp transcript, was generated by pcr amplification. transcription reactions with this linear template followed by the primer extension & pcr for detection method showed gradually increasing inhibitory effects of increasing α-amanitin concentrations . in contrast, a synthetic α-amanitin derivative  containing only the left ring of the α-amanitin bicyclic octapeptidic structure showed in this experiment no inhibitory activity.

primer extension with qpcr quantification
to quantitate the observed gradual inhibition by α-amanitin, the established pcr was replaced by a standard qpcr with sybr green quantification. despite the promising pcr results, in a first qpcr experiment no differences were observed, although the same rna samples and primers were used. the product melting curve analysis showed that unspecific products interfered with the quantification. sybr dye-based quantification was thus replaced by quantification via the dual-labeled sequence-specific probe egfp-lna <dig> . egfp-lna1-based quantification revealed a clear difference between the positive, negative and inhibited reactions . however, the efficiency of the qpcr reactions dropped significantly upon using the probe, and no α-amanitin-concentration dependency could be discerned even when using the linear cmv-egfp fragment as a template .

on the other hand, when comparing rna samples derived from different in vitro transcription experiments, a very good reproducibility of rna detection and quantification was observed . rna samples from different translation reactions performed at different occasions showed very similar fluorescence levels and c values. interestingly, the inhibitory effect of 100 μm α-amanitin was clearly stronger in reactions performed with the linear dna template , when compared to the transcription reactions on the circular plasmid template .

this qpcr setting was subsequently used to compare the inhibitory activity of α-amanitin and several analogs in a single experiment. the methylated amanitin variant 6′–o-methyl-γ-amanitin  was used in a concentration range similar to α-amanitin , while the concentrations of synthetic ones were chosen 10-fold higher . for quantification, a standard curve of the linear template cmv-egfp was used. the results of this experiment demonstrated that this method allowed for a semi-quantitative comparison of α-amanitin and analogs . 6′–o-methyl-γ-amanitin, an about two-fold less potent rna polymerase ii inhibitor than α-amanitin  <cit> , showed an inhibitory activity similar to that of α-amanitin in our setting. one of the synthetic compounds, hdp <dig>  , an α-amanitin-analog with an open left ring and an isoleucine replacing the naturally occurring di-hydroxy-isoleucine as amino acid  <dig>  of α-amanitin, was free of inhibitory activity despite the high concentrations tested. the synthetic α-amanitin analogs hdp <dig>  , containing an open left ring and serine instead of the di-hydroxy-isoleucine as aa <dig>  as well as hdp <dig>  , an isoleucine-amanitin analog with closed left ring showed at both tested concentrations an inhibitory activity that was comparable with the activity of α-amanitin at the 10– <dig> - fold lower concentrations. these results demonstrated that the assay established so far allowed for a qualitative assessment of the inhibitory activity. however, smaller differences in the potency of various inhibitors could not be determined.

attempts for qpcr optimization including the use of an alternative primer pair, egfp-frw <dig> and egfp-rev <dig> amplifying a shorter pcr fragment , did not lead to any significant improvement. since the egfp template was not suited for more effective primer design, the positive control dna provided in the helascribe kit was chosen as an alternative. primers were designed to amplify the hs-dna linear fragment containing the cmv promoter and the transcribed sequence . several different primers pairs and two sequence specific probes were designed within the transcribed sequence . upon optimization, the primer-probe mix h <dig> gave the best qpcr results.

template immobilization and optimized qpcr quantification
to remove the dna after transcription, the two biotinylated linear dna templates cmv-egfp and hs-dna were synthesized and immobilized on magnetic beads. qpcr analysis of the supernatant, however, showed that the dna interference was still considerable . the rna purification step could thus not be avoided by using the immobilized template. since the bead-bound hs-dna was most efficiently transcribed, even when compared to the free linear one , it was chosen as a template for all subsequent experiments.

two different linear dna templates, cmv-egfp or hs-dna in solution  or immobilized on magnetic beads  were used. only positive transcription  and negative control reactions  were performed, and the product detected using primer extension and qpcr. c values for the positive reactions should be lower than  <dig>  values over  <dig> for the positive reactions reflect rna synthesis levels that are too low to allow reliable inhibition quantification. negative reactions should result in c values higher than  <dig>  c values >  <dig> reflect no amplification, i.e. no detectable rna synthesis.

a series of transcription and qpcr optimization experiments resulted in an optimized method for the in vitro rna polymerase assay, which is detailed in the additional file  <dig>  this method was applied to assess the inhibitory activity of α-amanitin in several independent experiments. the quantification of the synthesized rna showed a clear α-amanitin-concentration dependency  and a very good reproducibility over several experiments .

when applied to assess the inhibitory activity of several α-amanitin analogs vs. α-amanitin, this optimized method allowed for a quantitative estimation of the inhibitory potency using the inhibition concentration  <dig>  values . three of the tested synthetic α-amanitin analogs hdp <dig>  , hdp <dig>   and hdp <dig>  , sharing the α-amanitin structure but with the natural amino acid  <dig>  di-hydroxy-isoleucine replaced by different synthetic phenyl-glycine derivatives, showed 150-1000-fold weaker inhibitory activity than α-amanitin . the α-amanitin-analog hdp <dig>  , an aa <dig> α,α-dihydroxy-methyl-glycine derivative, showed no inhibitory activity up to concentrations as high as  <dig> mm .

rna polymerase assay with quantigene quantification
the optimized qpcr detection method allowed for very precise and specific rna quantification after transcription. however, due to the indispensable rna purification step, the assay remained very laborious. the affimetrics quantigene assay, described as a qpcr alternative, which still allows detection of minute rna amounts but does not require rna purification, was considered and tested. for a first attempt, rna was transcribed by the optimized method in positive and negative  in vitro transcription reactions. after transcription, half of the reaction mixture was used for rna purification and the synthesized rna amount was quantified using the optimized qpcr method. the unpurified positive reaction mixture and the purified rna derived from it were then serially diluted and assessed by the quantigene method.

a clear rna concentration dependency of the signal was seen for both the purified rna and the unpurified reaction mixture dilutions . moreover, the signal showed a clear linear relationship to the degree of dilution over three orders of magnitude. the purified rna from the negative control showed as expected only a background-level signal, but a significant signal, probably derived from dna interference, was observed in the negative control when the negative reaction mixture was assessed without prior rna purification. however, this signal , derived from an 1: <dig> diluted reaction mixture was <20% when compared to the signal of the 1: <dig> dilution of the reaction mix .

a second experiment was set up to compare the quantigene and qpcr detection of in vitro transcribed rna from a set of reactions containing serial α-amanitin dilutions. for qpcr quantification, half of the reaction mix was subject to rna purification. three different series were used to the quantigene detection: an aliquot of the purified rna, a dilution prepared directly from the reaction mix and the same reaction mix dilution that was digested by dnase prior quantigene assessment. as expected, almost identical inhibition curves were obtained when the purified rna was assessed by the quantigene or qpcr methods. most importantly, the inhibition curves derived from the reaction mix samples also showed a clear concentration dependency and did not differ significantly from the curves achieved using the purified rna, regardless of the dnase digestion step . the quantigene rna quantification method therefore proved to be a worthy alternative for the reverse transcription plus qpcr, combining its sensitivity with the huge benefit of avoiding rna purification.

this method was thus applied to compare the inhibitory activity of α-amanitin and α-amanitin-derivatives in a series of in vitro transcription reactions . in this experiment, three semisynthetic amanitin-linker derivatives were assessed, all of them being methylated on the hydroxyl-group of amino acid  <dig>  6-hydroxy-tryptophan, and containing the linker bound to the n <dig> of the same amino acid. these compounds only differed in the linker length, which varied between four, six and eight carbon atoms in hdp <dig> , hdp <dig>  and hdp <dig>  , respectively. the ic <dig> values of the three compounds, hdp <dig>  , hdp <dig>   and hdp <dig>  , were 30-100-fold lower than of α-amanitin , demonstrating that all these compounds could still bind to the rna polymerase ii despite methylation and substitution by linker, and that an optimum of activity could be achieved when using a linker with a length of 6c atoms.

effect of tata-binding protein  on the transcription efficiency
to assess for transcription efficiency in the absence of tbp activity, a template lacking the tata box was used, in which the tatata sequence had been substituted by the tagcta sequence . positive, negative and  <dig> nm α-amanitin-containing transcription reactions were set up as duplicates using either the standard bead-immobilized hs-dna template or the same template containing the tata box mutation. after transcription and sedimentation of the beads, an aliquot of each reaction mix was analyzed by the quantigene assay as described in the additional file  <dig>  quantification of the newly synthesized rna products revealed that an amanitin-sensitive transcription occurred on both templates .  <dig> nm α-amanitin inhibited the transcription efficacy by  <dig> ± 1% for both templates. when compared to the standard template, transcription efficacy from the template with mutated tata box was 20-30% lower.

transcription reactions were performed using the standard dna template  or a tata-box mutated template . transcription efficacy was determined by quantigene quantification.

*compared to respective average positive control, less the respective negative controls.

**compared to average positive control on standard template, less the respective negative controls.

qpcr and quantigene quantification of the inhibitory effects of flavopiridol
both the optimized qpcr detection method as well as the quantigene method were applied to assess the flavopiridol effect on the transcription efficacy. transcription reactions were performed and analyzed as described in the detailed protocol in the additional file  <dig>  flavopiridol was added in concentrations ranging from  <dig> nm to  <dig> mm, parallel control reactions contained  <dig> pm to  <dig> nm α-amanitin. the first set of reactions was performed using the standard bead-immobilized hs-dna template and the transcription reactions were incubated for  <dig> min at 30°c. a second set of reactions was performed using the longer template hs-dna_long sharing the same promoter but rendering a  <dig> bp longer transcript  i.e. a  <dig> bp longer primer extension and qpcr detection fragment . this set of reactions was incubated for transcription for a shorter period of  <dig> min  at 30°c.

in contrast to α-amanitin which showed similar inhibition effects regardless of the method used for quantification, the measured inhibitory effects of flavopiridol on the rna synthesis depended on the quantification method. generally, the quantigene method resulted in lower inhibition data , while figures generated by the primer extension & qpcr method indicated higher inhibitory effects . moreover, considering the figures from the qpcr quantification method, a higher degree on inhibition was measured for flavopiridol in the second set of reactions generating the longer transcripts within a shorter incubation period , when compared to the first set . in contrast, the inhibitory effect of amanitin was ca. 10× lower for the reactions with short incubation periods.

discussion
eukaryotic transcription is a highly complex and tightly regulated process and therefore extremely difficult to reconstitute in vitro. it is commonly divided into the six steps preinitiation, initiation, promoter escape/clearance, elongation, and termination, all being the subject of tight regulation. except for the termination, an in vitro run-off transcription system must emulate a proper environment for all these processes  <cit> . transcription initiation depends on the correct assembly of an active pre-initiation complex at the site of the promoter. in the past years, many different rna polymerase ii promoters with different dna sequences were described, requiring multiple types of pre-initiation complexes to be formed  <cit> . after initiation, rna polymerase ii starts rna synthesis by successively adding nucleotides to a growing rna chain. this “promoter clearance”  <cit>  marks the transition from initiation to elongation which is a highly dynamic and tightly regulated stage of the eukaryotic transcription, too  <cit> . minimal requirements for rna polymerase ii and cofactors for activity at specific promoters are now known and highly purified transcription systems have been described  <cit> . one commercially available transcription system is the helascribe nuclear extract that has been used for the studies described in this paper.

however, it is not trivial to perform an in vitro transcription assays even when using a kit. in our hands, its main limitation proved to be its ineffective initiation and low rate of transcription that had been also described by others  <cit> . the rna amounts synthesized in one reaction varied around 1× <dig> copies; the detection of such small amounts in the presence of a 1000-fold excess dna template turned out to be very challenging. moreover, for comparing various rna polymerase ii inhibitors, a precise quantification of the synthesized rna was required. gel electrophoresis and autography, as normally used for rna detection in the field of transcription research, were not considered to fit for our purpose.

the pegfp-n <dig> plasmid was selected as a template, since it had worked in our hands as an rna polymerase ii template in cells upon transfection. for detection, the primer extension method was chosen and complemented by a pcr step for signal amplification. the main challenge of this system was to ensure that dna contaminations would not interfere with the rna quantification. two negative controls were designed to control the dna removal: the ‘negative control transcription’ reactions that contained the complete reaction mix including the dna but no ntps, as well as a ‘dnase control’, a dna sample that was directly digested and then subject to reverse transcription and pcr as the purified rna samples.

the results of these experiments were highly encouraging, since the pcr method clearly detected newly synthesized rna and α-amanitin showed a concentration-dependend effect on the detected rna amount. this concentration-dependency, however, could not be translated into numbers by switching to a qpcr detection system, though the assay itself proved to be strikingly robust and reproducible. since there was no room for pcr optimization within the egfp translated sequence, another dna template had to be selected and the positive control dna from the helascribe kit, the hs-dna, was chosen. for this template, a very efficient, sequence-specific probe dependent qpcr detection method was established prior to proceeding with the further optimization of the transcription assay.

in parallel, magnetic bead immobilization of the linear dna fragments was considered to avoid the very laborious rna purification step by fishing out the dna from the mixture. however, dna contamination of the bead supernatant exceeded the rna amount and hindered its direct quantification. on the other hand, transcription from the immobilized hs-dna template was very efficient, so that the immobilization step was kept for the optimized protocol. interestingly, transcription from the immobilized cmv-dna was very poor. this probably is due to the fact that the dna stretch 5′ of the promoter is much shorter in the cmv-egfp dna than in the hs-dna. immobilization of the cmv-dna template probably results in a steric hindrance of the transcription initiation step.

finally, all steps of the transcription assay were optimized for maximal efficiency and minimal complexity. the transcription reaction volume was reduced back to 25 μl and reactions were performed as duplicates. for the rna purification, the rneasy micro kit was replaced with the more convenient rneasy mini kit, which is also available as a 96-well format. freeze-drying the rnas overnight in a speedvac compensated the higher elution volumes. the dried rnas were dissolved directly into the dnase digestion buffer. the volume of the digestion mixture that could be used for reverse transcription was maximized and the reactions were set up in qpcr vessels, so that the qpcr master mix aliquots could be subsequently directly added. the qpcr parameters temperature, concentration of primers, probe and mg2+ were optimized for highest reaction efficiency.

this optimized method was ready to be applied to quantitatively assess the inhibition profile of rna polymerase ii inhibitors. however, its requirement for rna purification limited the number of samples that could be processed simultaneously. we therefore continued searching for detection methods that would allow skipping the purification step and identified the quantigene assay as an alternative. the use of hybridization for the rna capture step renders this method very specific, while multiple subsequent hybridization steps and an enzymatic reaction achieve a high degree of amplification and allow detection of very low amounts. we thus tested this method for the quantitation of rna directly in the transcription mixture. although some dna interference in the negative controls leading to slightly positive detection results could not be avoided, the dynamic range and linearity of the assay were compelling. a direct comparison of the results of the optimized qpcr with the quantigene method finally demonstrated that the latter provided similar results without a need for rna purification or dnase digestion, thus considerably simplifying and speeding up the assay. using the quantigene assay, eukaryotic transcription assays can be performed in a 96-well format and eventually fully automatized, so that a high number of inhibitors can be concomitantly analyzed.

beside its simplicity, the main advantage of this new method is the precise quantification of the transcription reaction yield. for example, α-amanitin-derivatives modified by the same linker chemistry that differed only in the linker length showed distinct inhibition profiles with the longest linker showing slightly less potency than the shorter ones. this finding could be reproduced in cells in cytotoxicity experiments, after the respective amanitin-linker derivatives had been coupled to an igg targeting an antigen on the cells .

in another set of experiments, the activity of flavopiridol was assessed, an alternative inhibitor of transcription elongation. flavopiridol acts on transcription by stoichiometric binding to p-tefb, a protein kinase composed of the cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig>  and a cyclin subunit, which regulates transcription elongation by phosphorylating the c-terminal domain  of the large subunit of the rna polymerase ii  <cit> . as expected, the measured inhibitory effect of flavopiridol on the standard template was significantly lower compared to α-amanitin. α-amanitin directly binds with very high affinity to the polymerase core subunit and blocks its translocation to the next nucleotide  <cit> , its ic <dig> inhibition values thus depend on the concentration of rna polymerase core subunit. on the other side, by binding to p-tefb, flavopiridol inhibits the phosphorylation of the rna polymerase core subunit. slower transcription elongation at 20– <dig> nucleotides per min, however, occurs even in the absence of ctd phosphorylation and the resulting transcripts are therefore shorter  <cit> . the quantification results reflected these features of flavopiridol inhibition. a higher residual rna synthesis rate was measured by the qg method than by qpcr, due to the synthesis of short rna molecules that are missing the reverse priming site used for primer extension and qpcr. as expected, when a longer template was used and the incubation time shortened, a significantly higher inhibition degree was assessed for flavopiridol using the qpcr method. however, more thorough investigations would be required to explain the varied results from the flavopiridol experiments.

but apart from a high-throughput assessment of transcription inhibitors, the new methods can be employed for a large variety of transcription-related applications, since the transcript sequence can be combined with any desirable promoter. as an example, a dna template containing a mutated tata box was used for in vitro transcription reactions in comparison to the wild-type template. using the quantigene quantification method a transcription yield of ca. 75% of the wilde-type was observed for the tata mutant template. an intact tata box determines the transcription start position by providing the binding site for tbp but is not strictly required for human transcription to occur. the mutation can cause a shift of the start of transcription site to one or multiple weaker ones, as well as influence the transcription efficacy  <cit> . our results suggest that the hela scribe nuclear extract used contained several transcription initiation factors that compensate for the absence of tbp binding and activate alternative pre-initiation pathways.

moreover, provided that the composition of the transcripts has been previously analyzed to ensure an accurate interpretation of the results, the quantigene detection can be easily adapted for the detection and quantification of any specific transcript. the transcription reaction composition can be changed so that the effect of specific factors can be independently and quantitatively assessed. by using immobilized dna templates, pre-initiation complexes can be assembled, isolated and their translational activity further investigated. the immobilized linear dna can be processed to reconstitute a more physiological nucleosomal template for in vitro transcription experiments, since the ultrasensitive rna detection compensates for the low initiation efficacy of such in vitro transcription assays. however, determining the composition of the transcripts would be required before determining potential hts set-up.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, on the basis of a commercially available kit we have established a relatively simple, robust and reproducible non-radioactive method for rna quantification after eukaryotic in vitro transcription. we showed that a simple qualitative pcr detection of the rna transcript can be used after a run-off assay to avoid radioactive labeling. moreover, the optimized qpcr detection method allows for unprecedented precise quantification of the transcription efficacy. when using the quantigene detection, the laborious rna purification can be avoided and a large number of samples processed simultaneously.

