BACKGROUND
rpon  is a subunit of the rna polymerase and plays a critical role in the regulation of gene expression by recognizing specific promoter elements and initiating transcription. rpon-dependent promoters do not have conserved - <dig> and - <dig> elements typically found in the promoters recognized by sigma factors in the σ <dig> family. instead, a gg dinucleotide around position - <dig> and a gc dinucleotide around position - <dig> with respect to the transcription initiation site are highly conserved among rpon-dependent promoters  <cit> . the consensus of  <dig> rpon-dependent promoter elements from  <dig> bacterial species was reported to be mrnrytggcacg...4bp...ttgcwnnw  <cit> . in contrast to σ <dig> family sigma factors, rpon is able to bind to a promoter without the core rna polymerase   <cit> . rnap containing rpon  can form a stable closed complex with the promoter. in addition, rnap/rpon requires a transcription factor, the enhancer-binding protein , for initiation of transcription. some of the ebp family members are response regulators in two-component regulatory systems  <cit> . rpon was first identified in escherichia coli and was reported to regulate the transcription initiation of nitrogen assimilation genes  <cit> . since then, rpon homologs have been identified in bacteria from different phylogenetic origins and are involved in regulation of genes related to a diverse functional categories  <cit> , including genes for pili and flagella biosynthesis and quorum sensing in pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> , c4-dicarboxylate transport in mesorhizobium ciceri  <cit>  and carbon metabolism in gram positive bacteria, bacillus subtilis and listeria monocytogenes  <cit> .

geobacter species are important agents in the bioremediation of subsurface environments contaminated with organic or metal contaminants  <cit> . they also appear to be the primary contributors to current production in microbial fuel cells harvesting electricity from the environment  <cit> . some physiological responses of geobacter species can be predicted with constraint-based genome-scale metabolic models that determine the optimal flux of metabolites for a given environmental condition  <cit> . the ability to predictively model the physiological responses of environmentally relevant microorganisms to a wide diversity of environmental conditions is a major goal of environmental biotechnology  <cit> . however, the current version of these models lacks regulatory modules that could increase their predictive value. progress has been made using a combination of bioinformatic tools and molecular biological methods to identify regulatory components, such as operon structures, promoter elements, and transcription factors and their binding sites, as well as global transcriptomic and proteomic expression patterns that provide the basis for building regulatory modules in g. sulfurreducens  <cit> . sigma factors are key to constructing bacterial transcriptional regulatory networks. in g. sulfurreducens, homologs of rpod, rpos, rpoh, rpoe and flia of the σ <dig> family have been identified and physiological roles of g. sulfurreducens rpos  <cit> , rpoh  <cit>  and rpoe  have been elucidated.

an ortholog of the rpon gene  is present in the g. sulfurreducens genome  <cit> . it encodes a protein, which shares a considerable degree of similarity to rpon sigma factors from other bacteria. we report here that an rpon deletion mutant could not be isolated under conditions tested in this study. in order to identify the components of the rpon regulon in g. sulfurreducens, genome-wide microarray transcriptional profiling of an rpon over-expression strain and genome-wide prediction of rpon-regulated promoters were employed. we discuss below our findings that rpon-dependent genes carry out important functions that may contribute to the reasons why no viable rpon deletion mutants could be obtained.

RESULTS
the geobacter sulfurreducens rpon gene cluster
an rpon ortholog , which encodes the rpon sigma factor, is present in the g. sulfurreducens genome. phylogenetic analysis showed that g. sulfurreducens rpon is very similar to other experimentally characterized rpon sigma factors, such as the escherichia coli rpon  <cit> . the g. sulfurreducens rpon polypeptide displays characteristic structures of the members of the rpon family, including an n-terminal glutamine-rich region , a c-terminal x-link, a helix-turn-helix  dna-binding motif, and an rpon box   <cit> .

analysis of the chromosomal region surrounding the g. sulfurreducens rpon gene revealed that its downstream genes encode a homolog of a ribosomal subunit interface protein  whose n-terminal domain is homologous to the rpon modulation protein found in klebsiella pneumoniae  <cit>  and a homolog of hpr  kinase/phosphorylase . the upstream genes encode an atp binding protein  and two conserved proteins  with unknown function .

in order to understand the physiological role of rpon and of genes it controls in g. sulfurreducens, construction of a deletion mutant of the rpon gene was attempted. however, an rpon mutant could not be isolated under different growth conditions using media with different electron acceptors  citrate) and amendments  . different mutagenesis strategies were attempted, including deletion of the whole coding region of the rpon gene, only the 5'-end of the rpon coding region, or only the 3'-end of the rpon coding region . no viable mutants were derived from above attempts. we also constructed an rpon diploid strain  in which an extra copy of the rpon gene was integrated into the chromosome and controlled by the promoter from a chloramphenicol resistance cassette . attempts of deleting and replacing the original rpon gene from dlcn <dig> also failed. furthermore, an extra copy of the rpon gene under the control of a constitutively active lac promoter, or under the control of an iptg -inducible taclac promoter was introduced to the wild type strain in trans . attempts of deleting the chromosomal rpon gene yielded viable isolates. however, further analysis of these isolates indicated that none of them had deletion of the chromosomal rpon gene. in contrast, insertion of a kanamycin resistance cassette at the intergenic regions immediately upstream or downstream of the rpon gene yielded viable mutants, suggesting that the inability to isolate an rpon-deletion mutant was not due to the polar effects of the kanamycin resistance cassette. the conditions and mutagenesis methods used in this work for our attempts to isolate a null rpon mutant are summarized in table  <dig>  and mutation scheme is illustrated in figure  <dig> 

rpon expression patterns and over-expression of rpon
in order to understand rpon expression under different growth conditions, western blot analysis was performed using anti-sera against rpon with cell extracts prepared from cultures grown with a variety of electron donors/acceptors. rpon levels were similar in cultures grown in the presence of ammonium or when nitrogen fixation was required in ammonia-free medium, and rpon was constitutively expressed under all other conditions tested .

because an rpon deletion mutant could not be obtained, a strain in which the rpon gene was over-expressed under the control of the iptg-inducible taclac promoter was generated to gain insights into the function of rpon. the strain capable of over-expressing rpon  and the control strain harboring the empty vector pcd <dig>  were designated rpon+ and wtv, respectively, for simplification. the over-expression of the rpon protein in rpon+ after induction was confirmed using western blot analysis . the abundance of the rpon protein in the rpon+ strain was  <dig>  times more than that of the wild type with iptg induction, but it stayed at a similar level as that of the wild type in the absence of iptg. the wtv strain, with or without the addition of iptg, had levels of rpon similar to those in the wild type strain.

when induced with iptg, the rpon+ strain grew slower and had a longer lag phase than the wtv strain with either fumarate or fe citrate as the electron acceptor and acetate as the electron donor . the effect of over-expressing rpon on growth was more pronounced when cells were grown in media lacking ammonia . the doubling times for the wtv and the rpon+ strains were  <dig>  and  <dig>  hours, respectively, in the presence of iptg in the nbaf medium . under nitrogen fixation conditions, the doubling times for the wtv and the rpon+ strains were  <dig>  and  <dig>  hours, respectively, in the presence of iptg in the ammonium-free nbaf medium . for fwafc media, the doubling times were  <dig>  and  <dig>  hours with iptg for wtv and rpon+, respectively . the rpon+ strain grew similarly with the wtv strain in the absence of iptg in all media. these results suggest that over-expression of rpon inhibited growth under various conditions.

the rpon regulon identified by genome-scale transcriptome analysis and prediction of rpon-dependent promoters
to elucidate the function of rpon in geobacter species, the transcriptome of the rpon+ and the wtv strains was compared in order to identify those genes whose transcription is regulated by rpon. due to different growth rates between the two strains in the nbaf medium , total rna was isolated independently from three sets of wtv and rpon+ cultures during the exponential growth phase, about od <dig> =  <dig> – <dig>  and  <dig> – <dig>  for the wtv and rpon+ strains, respectively.

with a  <dig>  fold-change cutoff and a relatively strong cutoff for false discovery rate  of p <  <dig> , the rpon+ strain was found to have  <dig> genes with increased transcript levels and  <dig> genes with decreased transcript levels when compared to the wtv strain. the fold change of the transcription level of the rpon gene itself was  <dig>  higher in the rpon+ strain than in the wtv strain, which is in agreement with protein over-expression results obtained by the western blot analysis. a complete list of the differentially expressed genes and their expression ratio is provided as additional files . the  <dig> genes with significant changes in expression level in the rpon+ strain were assigned to  <dig> functional groups. most of them encoded hypothetical proteins or proteins with unknown function . the top three categories of genes with annotated functions consisted of genes associated with protein synthesis , energy metabolism , and transport and binding .

in addition to observing the rpon regulon by using gene expression microarrays, we employed computational analysis using the promscan software  <cit>  to identify rpon recognition sequence elements within the g. sulfurreducens genome. the search identified  <dig> putative rpon recognition sequence elements with scores ≥  <dig> . among these sequence elements,  <dig> elements were located upstream of protein-coding genes, in the same strand orientation as their potential target genes. of these possible promoter elements that could potentially regulate transcription of protein-coding genes,  <dig> were located in noncoding regions. we considered these  <dig> sequence elements to be the most likely rpon-regulated promoters. their sequences and genome locations are provided in additional file  <dig>  while their predicted target genes and operons are provided in additional file  <dig>  the consensus sequence of these  <dig> predicted g. sulfurreducens rpon-regulated promoter elements listed in additional file  <dig> was ttggcacggtttttgct, where the - <dig> gg and the - <dig> gc dinucleotides are in bold. the highest scoring rpon-regulated promoter was located upstream of the flagella biosynthesis operon containing the flia gene encoding the rna polymerase sigma factor flia  .

genome locations of the  <dig> rpon-dependent sequence elements identified using the promscan analysis were cross-examined with the list of genes identified by the transcriptome analysis with a fold change cutoff of  <dig> . the results of this comparison are listed in additional file  <dig>  and selected operons encoding genes related to nitrogen assimilation, appendages and solute transport are listed in table  <dig>  these combined data showed that rpon regulatory elements can be found in not only up-regulated genes, but also down-regulated genes. the increased transcript levels observed for some genes could result from increased rpon availability for transcription initiation that is the limiting factor at a normal rpon transcript level. the decreased transcript levels for some genes could be due to the fact that rpon alone can bind to the -24/- <dig> elements without the core rnap, and therefore the promoter regions may not be accessible by other sigma factors, or less core rnap may be available in the excess of rpon  <cit> .

§operon predictions in g. sulfurreducens are described in  <cit> .

†genes were discussed in the text and/or rpon regulatory elements have been confirmed in their promoter regions by primer extension analyses

*not all genes listed in the table matched the criteria for ≥  <dig>  fold-change cutoffs by the gene expression microarray analysis as described in methods, but these genes are listed because one or more genes from the same operon matched the cutoff criteria.

n.d.: not detected.

both microarray transcriptome analysis and computational prediction of rpon promoter elements concluded that the dcub gene, which encodes the fumarate/succinate exchanger , is rpon-dependent. both analyses also indicated that genes encoding components for nitrogen assimilation, such as glutamine synthetase  , are rpon-dependent . furthermore, our computational analysis identified an rpon promoter upstream of the glutamate synthetase  operon. the microarray analysis indicated that the gene encoding glutamate dehydrogenase   is rpon-dependent.

in silico modeling analysis was utilized to understand the role of gdh, gs and gogat enzymes in g. sulfurreducens metabolism. the growth of g. sulfurreducens was simulated under different growth conditions, varying electron donors, electron acceptors, and nitrogen sources. in silico modeling analysis suggested that missing both gs and gogat enzymes or gdh, gs and gogat is lethal under all growth conditions.

other genes identified by both the transcriptome analysis and the computational promoter prediction include those encoding flagella biosynthesis, formate dehydrogenase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and acetyl-coa carboxylase .

an rpon-dependent regulatory element, located upstream of the pila gene encoding pilin, the building block for nanowires  <cit> , was identified by the promscan software in this study and by 5'-race analysis in an earlier study  <cit> . therefore, the effect of rpon-overexpression was tested on the pili formation via a cell agglutination assay at 25°c  <cit> . in the presence of iptg, the rpon+ strain displayed less agglutination at 25°c than wtv and wt , which strongly suggests that rpon is involved in pili biogenesis.

genes that were differentially expressed in the rpon+ strain but for which no rpon-dependent regulatory elements could be found include those encoding components of stress response/molecular chaperones, central metabolism, extracellular electron transfer, and genes encoding regulatory proteins , suggesting their possible indirect regulation by rpon or a possibility that their rpon promoters may be too divergent from promoters in other bacteria to be detected using computational approaches. alternatively, the physiological states caused by the overexpression of rpon in the rpon+ strain, which were different from those in the wtv strain, such as slower growth, might affect gene regulation.

evaluation of predicted rpon-dependent promoters via primer extension analysis
in order to further validate the results of the microarray transcriptome analysis and of the computational promoter prediction and to examine promoters regulating differentially expressed genes, primer extension assays were carried out on  <dig> selected operons or singleton genes, including seven genes with increased expression and five genes with decreased expression in the microarray analysis . these selections included 1) genes involved in cellular functions that were reported in other bacteria to be rpon-dependent, such as flagella biosynthesis and nitrogen assimilation; or 2) genes involved in physiological functions that were not previously reported to be rpon-dependent in other bacteria, but were predicted to have conserved rpon-dependent -24/- <dig> promoter elements in their regulatory regions, or 3) genes encoding enzymes that are essential for cell growth. the trend of changes in transcript levels observed in the primer extension assays was similar to that reported in the microarray analysis , with an exception of gsu <dig> , which encodes a pii nitrogen regulatory protein.

eight genes out of the  <dig> selected genes had promoter elements identified by the primer extension assays to match those identified by the computational predictions, and six of these eight genes were found to be regulated by promoter sequences highly similar to other bacterial rpon promoter elements . these six rpon-regulated genes were gsu <dig> , gsu <dig> , gsu <dig> , gsu <dig> , gsu <dig>  and gsu <dig>  . alignment of these six g. sulfurreducens rpon promoter elements and of the promoter element upstream of the pila gene identified in the previous study  <cit>  was shown .

while conserved rpon-regulated promoters were predicted for other four genes/operons  by the computational tools , no -24/- <dig> rpon-dependent promoter elements could be identified by primer extension assays for these genes/operons . it is possible that the predicted rpon-regulated promoter elements for these four genes/operons are activated only under certain conditions, such as nitrogen-fixing conditions, which were different from the conditions for the primer extension assays.

in conclusion, the primer extension analyses showed that rpon-regulated promoters are located upstream of genes for a fumarate/succinate exchanger , glutamine synthetase , flagella biosynthesis proteins , nitrogen assimilation enzymes , and a formate dehydrogenase . in addition, an rpon-regulated promoter was also identified for the pila gene  by 5'-race analysis  <cit> .

discussion
the g. sulfurreducens rpon regulon
the g. sulfurreducens rpon regulon was identified using the microarray transcriptome analysis combined with the computational analysis. both methods indicated that rpon plays an important role in influencing the expression of a number of genes that are important for growth in subsurface environment and in microbial fuel cells. most evidently, both methods demonstrated that the g. sulfurreducens rpon controls the expression of a fumarate/succinate exchanger , which is essential under fumarate respiration  <cit> . thus, no viable rpon deletion mutant was isolated when fumarate was the terminal electron acceptor. this is the first report to our knowledge identifying a -24/- <dig> rpon-dependent promoter element in the dcub regulatory region. in other bacteria, such as e. coli, the dcub gene is transcribed by rna polymerase in complex with the rpod sigma factor, and its expression is under a hierarchical control involving fnr, crp, and a two-component regulatory system  <cit> .

glutamate and glutamine, the essential biomass components and major intracellular nitrogen donors, are the products of ammonia assimilation and are synthesized in bacteria via two pathways  <cit> . the g. sulfurreducens rpon controls the expression of enzymes involved in both pathways for ammonia assimilation, namely, 1) the gdh-dependent pathway, in which glutamate is synthesized by reductive amination of 2-ketoglutarate and 2) the gs-gogat pathway, in which gs converts glutamate and ammonia to glutamine and gogat transfers the amide group from glutamine to 2-ketoglutarate. therefore, deleting the rpon gene would result in deficiencies in ammonia assimilation and thus, cell death. in e. coli, the gs-gogat pathway is used under energy-rich and nitrogen-limiting conditions and the expression of both enzymes is under the control of rpon, whereas the gdh pathway is employed under energy-limiting and excess ammonium conditions, and the transcription of gdh is controlled by rnap/rpod  <cit> . in fact, the expression of other known bacterial gdhs is controlled by rnap/rpod, including those in neisseria meningitides, klebsiella aerogenes, psychrobacter sp, streptococcus pneumoniae and pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> .

acetate is a primary electron donor for geobacter species in soils and sediments  <cit> , especially during groundwater uranium bioremediation  <cit> . the microarray study suggests that rpon positively regulates the expression of genes essential for acetate oxidation coupled to metal reduction such as fumarase  and acetyl-coa transferases   <cit> . the inability to isolate an rpon null mutant could also be due to the poor expression of these essential tca cycle enzymes in the absence of rpon. the ability to recover such a mutant with fe as the electron acceptor would also be limited due to low expression of the cytochromes essential for fe reduction, such as the omcb gene  <cit> , which was up-regulated in the rpon+ strain .

flagella are considered to play an important role in fe oxide reduction by geobacter species  <cit> . the regulatory regions from both operons containing gsu <dig> and gsu <dig> encoding flagella proteins contain sequences homologous to rpon-dependent promoter sequences . as presented in table  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  the operon containing the flia gene  along with other flagella biosynthesis genes  was predicted to have the highest scoring rpon-regulated promoter, indicating that this promoter was highly conserved and that σ <dig> gene expression in g. sulfurreducens is likely regulated by rpon. interestingly, these results are similar to campylobacter spp and vibrio spp, in which rpon regulates the σ <dig> gene expression . in other bacterial species, e.g. salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, the regulation of flia is controlled by the flhcd transcriptional regulator  <cit> . flhcd is absent from the g. sulfurreducens genome, which also appears to lack flhcd binding sites  <cit> . it is interesting to note that c. jejuni and v. cholerae use pili and flagella to achieve virulence  <cit> , whereas in geobacter species, flagella and pili are implicated in extracellular fe reduction  <cit>  and higher power production in microbial fuel cells  <cit> .

unique features of the g. sulfurreducens rpon sigma factor
in most bacteria that have been studied, the rpon gene deletion resulted in viable mutants or mutants requiring certain nutrient addendum  <cit> . however, despite the high amino acid sequence similarity of the g. sulfurreducens rpon to other bacterial homologs, an rpon null mutant was not obtained after multiple attempts. the only other case in which the rpon gene is essential was reported in myxococcus xanthus, another delta-proteobacterium, for reasons that have yet to be elucidated  <cit> .

this work also suggested that the expression of rpon in g. sulfurreducens is under a tight control in a complex manner for several reasons:  over-expression of rpon inhibited growth under various growth conditions,  over-expression of rpon induced up-regulation of genes involved in stress responses , and  our inability to isolate a viable rpon deletion mutant even in the presence of another copy of the rpon gene, in trans or in cis, which was under the control of artificial promoters such as the lac promoter or the promoter from the chloramphenicol resistance gene. furthermore, the g. sulfurreducens genome contains  <dig> genes encoding transcription factors from the ebp family, whose members are required for transcription initiation directed by rnap/rpon. this number of the ebps is much higher than that found in most bacteria. for instance, e. coli, which has a larger genome  than g. sulfurreducens , has only  <dig> ebps  <cit> . approximately half of the ebps in g. sulfurreducens belong to two-component regulatory systems. this further suggests that cellular responses to various environmental conditions are directed by gene expression regulated by rpon. it has been reported for other bacteria that ebp-encoding genes are often located adjacent or close to their target promoters . this was also found to be the case for some of the ebps in g. sulfurreducens. it has been shown that pilr, a member of the ebp family, regulates the pila gene, which has an rpon-dependent promoter and is located immediately downstream of the pilr gene  <cit> . genes encoding ebps are also located upstream of the dcub and fdng genes, which were shown to contain an rpon-dependent promoter . in addition, a gene encoding an ebp is located upstream of gsu <dig>  which was predicted to contain an rpon-dependent promoter . however, it appears that g. sulfurreducens ebps are not always located adjacent or close to their target promoters for the cases of flil, glnb , nifen, and flgj, which were shown to contain an rpon-dependent promoter in their regulatory regions .

data analysis-combining computational prediction with microarray analysis
due to the absence of an rpon deletion mutant, our analyses were restricted to the use of an rpon over-expressing strain. activation of rpon-dependent transcription requires the presence of ebps activated by modification such as phosphorylation, and therefore, an increase in the amount of rpon alone would not directly lead to increasing expression of every rpon-regulated gene. this is exactly what we have observed with our microarray analysis. with a relatively strong cutoff for false discovery rate of p <  <dig> , the majority  of differentially expressed genes had fold changes between  <dig>  and  <dig>  when the results from the computational prediction are compared with the results from the transcriptome analysis, the use of an arbitrary cutoff level may not be able to detect all rpon-regulated genes in the rpon over-expressing strain. for instance, from the transcriptome analysis, the fold change of the nifen gene encoding a subunit of nitrogenase complex was - <dig>  , while an rpon-dependent promoter for this gene was identified in g. sulfurreducens  and in other species  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that the fold change in expression of the nifen gene and other genes did not reach the  <dig>  threshold due to complexity of gene regulation in the rpon over-expressing strain. in order to provide a broader list of potential rpon targets, we therefore provided a list of genes predicted to be under control of rpon-regulated promoters , with predicted sequences. to increase the possibility of capturing even weaker effects of rpon on gene expression, the threshold level for expression changes was set at  <dig>  for comparison of the microarray transcriptome analysis and the computer prediction . by lowering the cutoff of fold changes and by using additional validation by the primer extension assays, we were able to confirm rpon regulatory elements located upstream of operons/genes identified by both methods , suggesting that this strategy is feasible.

the results from the transcriptome analysis and the primer extension assays showed that rpon-dependent promoters can be found upstream of both up- and down-regulated genes in the rpon+ strain. for example, increased transcript levels observed for some genes, such as dcub, could result from increased rpon availability for transcription initiation, which is the limiting factor at a normal rpon transcript level. therefore, such genes were up-regulated with the increase in the rpon level. in contrast, excess rpon may inhibit transcription due to lack of proportional increase in ebps and/or core rnap, thereby making excess rpon an inhibitor or repressor instead of an activator. this might be explained by the degree of the conservation of the rpon-recognition sequences. when the rpon-recognition sequences of glnb, dcub, flil, fdng, nifen, and flgj, for which their rpon-recognition sequences were identified by the primer extension assays , were analyzed, it was found that the rpon-recognition sequences of the genes repressed in the overexpressing strain  are slightly more similar to the consensus of the rpon-recognition sequences  than those for the up-regulated genes  . this slight difference could make significant difference in transcriptional activation and repression. therefore, rpon might bind more tightly to the promoters that are more similar to the consensus and inhibit their transcription in the absence of a proportionally increased amount of an ebp for these promoters. furthermore, the decreased transcript levels for some genes could also be due to "sigma factor antagonism" in which other sigma factor could not access the promoter regions that were engaged by rpon  <cit> , or because less core rnap may be available for other sigma factors in the excess of rpon. it is likely that more than one sigma factor and/or transcriptional regulators can affect gene expression in the same cell. for example, it has been proposed that the transcription of rpon-dependent promoters is affected by ppgpp and its cofactor dksa through a mechanism in which more core rnap are available for rnap/rpon holoenzyme formation due to the short half life of rnap/rpod induced by binding to ppgpp and dksa  <cit> . alternatively, the physiological states caused by the overexpression of rpon in the rpon+ strain, which were different from those in the wtv strain, such as slower growth, and/or growth conditions, which affect gene regulation, such as fumarate respiration, resulted in positive effects on some genes and negative effects on others. for instance, the dcub gene was up-regulated in the rpon+ strain, because the active ebp was likely present for the activation of the dcub gene under the conditions for the microarray transcriptome analysis, during which cells needed to grow on fumarate, and thus the fumarate/succinate exchanger encoded by the dcub gene was required for growth. in contrast, it is unlikely that the genes for nitrogen fixation such as nifen were essential for growth in the presence of ammonia and thus the active ebp for these genes was scarce, if present, under the conditions for the microarray transcriptome analysis, resulting in the inhibition of these genes in the rpon+ strain. it is also possible that rpon may affect regulation of different promoters under a different set of conditions or different stages of cell growth.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here demonstrate that g. sulfurreducens has an rpon ortholog, which exhibits typical structural characteristics shared by the rpon family. however, unlike most of other bacterial rpon genes, the g. sulfurreducens rpon was indispensable for growth under all conditions tested. by combining data from the computational prediction with the microarray analysis of the rpon over-expression strain, the regulon of g. sulfurreducens rpon was identified, which includes a number of genes that are important for growth in subsurface environments and microbial fuel cells. the g. sulfurreducens rpon regulates the expression of the dcub gene encoding a fumarate/succinate exchanger, which is essential for fumarate respiration. the g. sulfurreducens rpon controls both pathways of glutamate/glutamine syntheses, including the gdh  pathway and the gs/gogat  pathway. thus, deletion of the rpon gene would hinder cells' ability for ammonia assimilation, and therefore this mutant would not be viable. this study provides information on transcriptional regulatory networks in g. sulfurreducens, which would increase the predictive value of the regulatory modules in the genome-wide in silico models. further studies for the rpon transcriptional network in global regulation in g. sulfurreducens are currently underway to fine-tune the regulatory modules in the models.

