BACKGROUND
the mammalian mitochondrion is a system of only few components. it consist of  <dig> protein coding genes,  <dig> trna, two rrnas and possibly a few non-coding rnas  <cit> . in spite of this, the mitochondrion is of great importance to the organism, and higher animals would likely not exist without functional mitochondria. thus, the mitochondria are an essential part of many metabolic pathways, most notably generation of atp through the oxidative phosphorylation system, and is unique among the cellular organelles, because it contains a genome of its own  <cit>  . the circular mitochondrial genome also deviates from the nuclear genome by being extremely compact in nature with almost no inter-spaced non-coding dna between genes, furthermore, it has a special codon usage using only the  <dig> trnas to encode the amino acids. the compact nature of the mitochondrion is directly reflected in the transcription mechanism, as all genes are transcribed in polycistronic transcripts which are then processed to give the mature rnas  <cit>  .

since, the genes encoded in the mitochondrial dna are used in pathways central to living organism, the patterns of expression can potentially provide considerable insights into the metabolic and biochemical mechanisms in different tissues. the massive amount of research on mitochondria  have to some extent uncovered the mechanisms responsible for regulation of mitochondrial genes: it has been found that the d-loop is the origin for transcription of both strands of the genome, and contains promoter and binding regions for transcription factors  <cit> , that can serve to up or down regulate transcription. it has, for example, been shown that there is a significant regulation of transcription in response to external stimuli  <cit> . however, due to the nature of the polycistronic transcription, such genes are expected to be expressed at equal levels and be jointly up- and down-regulated eg.  <cit> . furthermore, degradational mechanisms related to adenylation, stability, and translation have been linked to post-transcriptional regulation  <cit> , which is expected to lead to uniform relative expression levels between mitochondrial genes. this coordinated expression of mitochondrial genes has been verified experimentally, by eg.  <cit> . furthermore, the mitochondrial system is still being investigated for novel insights into disease mechanics, where a large scale expression analysis  provide useful insights. to conduct these expression studies, good animal models are desirable, and the pig is an obvious candidate. it is increasingly being used as a model animal  <cit> , since it is relatively close to humans, both genetically and physiologically, and thus a better model animal candidate than, for instance rodents. it has, for example, been shown that, in sequence space, the pig is closer to human than mouse  <cit>  and the similar observation can readily be made for the mitochondrial genomes . additionally, pig  provides easy access to tissues from various organs at different development stages. also the pig is one of the worlds foremost production animals and any insights gained could have a large economic impact. due to the extreme read-coverage of the mitochondrion, this study also provides predictions of the outcome from the "next"- generation sequencing methods  when applied to cdna sequencing . these new methods are characterized by very high throughput and can therefore generate huge amounts of data, which can, for example, be used in digital expression studies, in the manner presented herein.

here, we use the pigest resource comprising  <dig>  mitochondrial sequences  <cit>  to present the first large-scale mitochondrial expression study comparing different tissues and different developmental stages.

RESULTS
est assembly
the sino-danish pig-genome project generated around  <dig>  est  sequences as described in  <cit> . the sequences were generated from one normalized and  <dig> non-normalized cdna libraries covering in total  <dig> tissues. details are available online  <cit> . the library names and corresponding tissues are listed in table  <dig>  the resource contains  <dig>  est sequences  annotated as mitochondrial sequences. we assembled this set of mitochondrial sequences using the distiller pipeline  <cit> , and generated  <dig> contigs  and  <dig> single reads. the largest contig contains  <dig> reads while the smallest were aggregates of only two ests. this also demonstrate the strength of the distiller pipeline, as it is able to handle such large  clusters. a complete list of contigs along with their gene match in the mitochondrial genome is provided in table  <dig> 

*: developmental tissue.

†: is a normalized library.

•: ignored in expression analysis .

‡: likely to be heavily contaminated by liver ests.

the generated cdna libraries, representing  <dig> tissues. they are here shown as two  sets, a physiological and a developmental set. the column "libname" gives three letter code for the library, "tissue" indicates the overall tissue the library has been generated from, where "" indicates whether the library has been generated from a single  or multiple  animals. libraries listed with  and  represent the pig breeds  used in the danish breeding , whereas the libraries listed with  present chinese pig breeds. "description" provides a short description. the column "reads" show the number of mitochondrial reads that went into that library after cleaning. the f nn label refers to fetal tissue, nn days old, eg. f  <dig> libraries are tissues from  <dig> days old fetuses.

table showing which genes the different contigs maps to. found by comparing the matched  position to the annotations in genbank entry af <dig>  the expression annotation column marks which clusters in the expression clustering the contig has gone into.

to ensure that the ests were unique for the porcine mitochondrial genome, the ests were matched against the nr database  <cit>  using blast  <cit> . except for  <dig> ests , all  <dig>  mitochondrial ests matched with smaller e-values to mitochondrial proteins than all other proteins, where the vast majority  matched the with e-values smaller than 1e -  <dig> .

furthermore, our assembly yield an overall high coverage of the mitochondrial genome as the contigs covers  <dig> positions of  <dig> possible, corresponding to 94% of the mitochondrial genome, and has an average coverage of  <dig>  interestingly, in spite of this extreme coverage, we observed that there are almost no ests originating in regions outside annotated genes, and we essentially did not pick up any ests originating from a completely unprocessed polycistronic transcript, ie. there is an abrupt change in coverage from genes to the small gaps between genes.

the assembly program, distiller  <cit> , was also able to conduct a phylogenetic decomposition of a number of clusters. that is, clusters originally composed of ests from both european  and asian  pig breeds were divided into clusters with either european breed ests or asian breed ests based on snp information. a result of this is that there are five pairs of highly similar consensus sequences where one sequence match published asian strain sequence while the other match published european strain sequences.

another intricacy is overlapping genes, eg. atp <dig> and atp <dig>  these were clustered together in the assembly due to the existence of est sequences which overlap both genes, and therefore the clusters essentially represent both genes.

the phylogenetic decomposed pairs along with the gene covered are indicated in table  <dig> 

cdna library content of mitochondrial genes
an investigation of the proportion of mitochondrial gene expression in the different cdna libraries was performed. we found that cdna libraries from tissues associated with high metabolism  have a larger fraction of mitochondrial ests compared to the total number of reads from that library as shown in figure  <dig>  we observed that the fraction of total reads that originates from the mitochondrion ranges from roughly 0% up to 22%, with the majority falling between 2% to 10%. however, the libraries  with the smallest fraction seem to have unusual low mitochondrial-est counts, and were excluded in the following clustering. furthermore, we attempted to see if there were any correlations between the number of counts from a given tissue and diversity of expression, however we did not find any such patterns.

differential gene expression
to measure the digital expression of specific genes  in a given cdna library, we considered the number of ests relative to the library size , which in general, for high confident annotations , has been shown to be in agreement with experimental qpcr results  <cit> . using the digital expression values and merging clusters representing the same genes , we conducted a hierarchical clustering using the gene-cluster package  <cit>  . the result is shown in figure  <dig>  we observed that the tissues fall in two different main groups: one enriched and one deprived for cdna libraries established from tissues sampled at different developmental stages.

the confidence of the clustering was assessed using other clustering schemes and metrics . applying this range of schemes leads to essentially the same results. however, the exact relation between the individual libraries were to some extend shuffled from scheme to scheme, ie. the order of the libraries change slightly.

though it is difficult to make any clear distinction between the genes that are expressed in the tissue clusters, it appears that 16s rna and atpase subunits six and eight have a higher expression in libraries from muscles and brain tissues, while there is no systematic pattern in the remaining libraries.

furthermore, there is a distinct difference between the total expression of the different mitochondrial genes. this is readily apparent from figure  <dig>  where the depth of the est coverage is shown. comparing the depth to the genes it appears that the depth varies considerable, from just below ten thousand to zero at gene boundaries. the differences in expression can be seen in more detail in figure  <dig>  where the normalized depth of coverage is shown from four representative libraries . we see that the expression pattern varies greatly for different tissues. interestingly, we also find ests which map to the d-loop region , where no genes have been annotated. this is particularly intriguing considering the recent discovery of non-coding rna  in the mouse d-loop region  <cit> , however we were unable to find good matches  between the putative mouse ncrnas, and the porcine d-loop region . therefore, it has not been possible to conclude whether the porcine d-loop ests correspond to any of the reported mouse d-loop ncrnas.

processing of mitochondrial transcripts
the est data also contains information about post-transcriptional cleavage of the mitochondrial polycistronic transcript. at any given position on the mitochondrial genome, the coverage of an est indicates the existence of a transcript from that position. conversely, not finding any est reads in a particular region means that the transcript is likely to be rapidly degraded. this is exemplified by the lack of coverage of the mitochondrial genome between annotated structures  as shown in figure  <dig> 

the trna genes
due to the est read coverage patterns of the trna genes it appears that there are two different mechanisms responsible for cleaving of trna genes within a polycistronic transcript, each associated either with the 5' or 3' end of the trna transcript. for the 5' end of the trnas there is no read coverage, whereas, there is some read coverage of the 3' end . this is in agreement with previous discovery where it was found that 5' cleavage precedes 3' end cleavage  <cit> . the fact that we only observe reads that overlap with the 3' end suggest that cleaving of the 3' end takes place at a longer timescale, or with a considerable weaker enzymatic strength  than the 5' cleavage.

the cox i transcript
inspecting the position-wise est coverage for the individual genes, we observe that the cytochrome oxidase i ,  gene differs from the remaining genes as its central region  has a profound dip in coverage with a low number of ests covering this region, see figure  <dig>  this is even more obvious when looking at the coverage of cox i in specific libraries .

quantifying this we have created expression profiles for the individual libraries, based on the est coverage along the gene. the expression profiles were created by calculating the average coverage for each window of  <dig> basepairs , thus, each library has  <dig> numbers linked to coverage of each part of the cox i gene. these expression profiles were clustered using gene-cluster  <cit>  resulting in three groups of libraries .

for the first group , we observe the drop in est coverage ), splitting the expression profile in two, with elevated coverage of the first part of the region, whereas for the second group  ) we observe est coverage mainly in the region corresponding to the second part of the region. for the final group  a more uniform coverage is present, . furthermore, we observe that group a has an over-representation of developmental libraries, whereas groups b and c contains an over-representation of muscle libraries . furthermore, group b contains an over-representation of brain related libraries. these observations, of developmental and brain/muscle specific patterns, are in accordance with the similar type of observations made for the mitochondrial genome expression presented above.

we specifically investigated cdna libraries from brain and spinal cord for cox i patterns. the sub-clustering of these libraries , shows that libraries established from early developmental stages  have a distinct group a expression pattern, while the remaining libraries have groups b and c pattens. this grouping fits well with the clustering of expressed non-mitochondrial brain related genes recently reported  <cit> .

the known mitochondrial processing mechanisms work on rna structures. we investigated whether any structural rna signals were present in the gene by aligning the gene from different organisms , and look for compensating mutations. we found weak signals, but were not able to draw any conclusions from those.

discussion
here, we investigated expression of porcine mitochondrial genes based on in depth est sequencing. the ests were generated from one normalized and  <dig> non-normalized cdna libraries representing in total  <dig> tissues of which  <dig> were from developmental stages  <cit> . we investigated  <dig>  ests which yielded an average coverage of  <dig> est per mitochondrial nucleotide position. the main observation was that there was great variability in expression between genes within different tissues and developmental stages. interestingly, the differences in expression are particularly profound between  developmental and adult tissues, which in itself might explain why this previously has been overlooked, since apparently there are only a limited number of mitochondrial studies involving many developmental and adult tissues. the observations of differences in the expression pattern between genes and between tissues seem also to challenge the current knowledge of mitochondrial gene expression  <cit> . since, mitochondrial genes are transcribed as long polycistronic transcripts  <cit>  and the steady state level of the mrnas is governed by degradation  <cit> , the expectation is a fairly regular homogeneous expression pattern where the relative level of two genes  would be tissue independent. however, our observations suggest that there exist mechanisms whereby the individual mrnas are degraded in a tissue-specific fashion. the mitochondrial genes belonging to respiratory complex iv are clearly expressed at a higher level in tissues representing early developmental and new born stages. conversely, the genes belonging to complex i are differential expressed in the two groups of tissues . this might imply that there is a mutual dependence between full expression of the mitochondrial genome and adjustment to the adult cardio vascular circulation, ie. the differences are related to maturation of the energy metabolism. however, as all the mitochondrial genes are part of the same metabolic pathway, the direct biological interpretation is unclear, though the differences may suggest that the mitochondria plays a role in developmental stages beyond simple energy metabolism.

the differences between gene expression in developmental and adult tissues were also present in cox i. for this gene we observed  a sudden drop of est coverage within the gene itself, indicating post-transcriptional processing. based on the different expression patterns within the cdna libraries we conducted a clustering that led to three main patterns of expression. one main group is dominated by cdna libraries from developmental stages, whereas the others are dominated by brain and muscle libraries. furthermore, for brain libraries we found cox i expression patterns in agreement with expression patterns from non-mitochondrial genes previously found  <cit> , lending further credibility to our observation.

one could speculate that these patterns represent a cleavage event of the cox i gene. the putative cleavage event does not appear to be ubiquitous, and seems to be followed by specific degradation of one of the cleave-forms in some cases. the cleaving might represent a new mode of regulation of the mitochondrial processes where the cox i gene is involved. a previous study  <cit>  suggested regulation of mitochondrial cox genes, emphasizing differences in developmental stages , and suggested a link to the different isoforms of cox via and cox viia.

we do not have any biological interpretation of how this mechanism works. conventional mitochondrial processing would require the mrna to be spliced due to secondary rna structures  <cit> , and though we have found weak rna structure signals in the cox i gene , we can not conclusively say what mediates this processing. extensive laboratory work could hopefully shed some light on the possible biological mechanism, but is beyond the scope of the work presented here.

CONCLUSIONS
the discovery of large expression differences between individual mitochondrial genes is surprising. in particular the observation that there are large differences between mitochondrial gene expression in developmental and adult tissue is of potential great biological interest. regulation of the mitochondrial genes is expected to some degree. however, the known mechanisms regulate the transcription of the full polycistronic transcript, and degrade the mitochondrial encoded rna, dependent on the features of the rna specie  <cit> , leading to an expectation of uniform patterns across tissues. our work indicates that there must be some mechanism that selectively degrades specific gene transcripts in specific tissues. these mechanisms could partly be related to metabolic differences in adult and developmental tissues. our study also demonstrates the usefulness of in-depth sequencing for expression studies, supporting that expression studies can be carried out by raw sequencing, such as the recent  <dig> and solexa parallel sequencing methods  <cit> .

