BACKGROUND
the non-random arrangement of genes in the genome is intimately connected to the pattern of gene expression across the genome  <cit> . while the connection between gene location and expression has been known for some time in prokaryotes  <cit> , a similar genome-wide connection between gene order and gene expression has relatively recently been identified in eukaryotes  <cit> . clusters of physically adjacent genes that are co-expressed are now known to be common in eukaryotic genomes and have been reported in yeast  <cit> , plants  <cit> , worms  <cit> , fruit flies  <cit> , mice  <cit> , and humans  <cit> .

a number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the existence of these co-expression clusters including the presence of duplicate genes that are in close physical proximity, shared regulatory regions, chromatin-level regulation, and common pathway or tissue regulated expression of physically clustered genes  <cit> . similarly, a number of hypotheses have been proposed concerning the interplay between transcriptome evolution and genome organization that can explain the existence of co-expression clusters including positive selection for genomic rearrangements leading to close physical proximity of co-expressed genes  <cit>  and purifying selection against genomic rearrangments that break-up co-expression clusters  <cit> . the possibility that co-expression results in correlated rates of sequence evolution among cluster genes has also been proposed  <cit>  and a recent analysis has found evidence of co-evolution of tissue specific expression of adjacent genes  <cit> . although not fully resolved, these analyses have led to a clearer picture of both the pattern of co-expression clusters within species and explanations concerning why gene expression is often coordinated among physically adjacent genes.

if there is a physical clustering of coordinated gene expression within species, then it is likely that gene expression can also evolve in a coordinated manner  <cit> . a block of consecutive genes where expression evolves in a coordinated manner will leave an evolutionary signature that can be detected by non-zero expression correlation among neighboring genes when analyzing multiple species. therefore, just as correlated expression profiles are used to identify co-expression among genes within species  <cit>  the same approaches can be used to analyze co-evolution of expression in gene clusters when comparing gene expression among species. instead of analyzing the correlations in gene expression among developmental stages, environments, tissue localizations, etc.  <cit> , we consider the correlations among mean gene expression levels estimated for each species. this approach will identify clusters of genes where the evolution of expression is not a gene independent process.

our goal is to identify clusters of genes that show consistent patterns of coordinated expression evolution among species of drosophila. we assayed genome-wide gene expression levels using affymetrix genechip arrays in three-day-old male adults under standardized environmental conditions  <cit> . the following seven species in the d. melanogaster subgroup were analyzed: d. melanogaster, d. simulans, d. sechellia, d. mauritiana, d. santomea, d. teissieri, and d. yakuba. the relationships among these species are well established  and represents a taxonomic sampling that spans ~ <dig> million years  <cit> . clusters identified for these species are therefore of value for understanding how the transcriptomes of species evolve across time scales on the order of one-hundred thousand to several million years.

a number of methods have been applied to the identification of co-expression clusters within species using microarray expression data  <cit> . the most common of these is calculation of a statistic based on the estimated correlation matrix for blocks of consecutive genes, generally the mean of n*/ <dig> correlations when considering n consecutive genes  <cit> . for the current study, we use a different statistic to summarize the correlations among n genes: the fraction of variation explained by the leading eigenvalue of the correlation matrix. this statistic describes the maximum fraction of variation that can be explained by a linear function of the original variables after scaling the variance of each variable to one. this statistic therefore provides an intuitive description of the degree to which a set of genes act as a single unit because the closer this ratio is to "1" the greater the degree that expression of the genes are completely correlated, regardless of whether the correlations among any gene pair are positive or negative. while this statistic has not been explicitly applied to the analysis of co-expression, the leading eigenvalue of a correlation or covariance matrix are commonly used to summarize the structure of correlated variation  <cit> .

our analysis shows that a considerable proportion of transcriptome evolution among species in the d. melanogaster subgroup occurs via co-evolution of expression in clustered genes. comparison of the locations of clusters that reflect coordinated evolution of gene expression across taxa to clusters of coordinated expression within the species d. simulans demonstrated a lack of correspondence in locations. this implies that different mechanisms may be responsible for producing co-expression clusters within species and those producing co-expression clusters that evolve in a coordinated manner. we additionally analyze a number of genome organization, functional, and evolutionary aspects to identify over- representation with clusters displaying coordinated expression within d. simulans or coordinated expression evolution among the seven species. of these, the most interesting are genes that show a signature of adaptive evolution in their coding sequences. a previous analysis of tissue co-expression within mice and humans did not find a significant positive correlation between rates of non-synonymous substitutions  and co-expressed genes  <cit> , although the ~ <dig> million years since humans and mice diverged likely limited the power of this analysis  <cit> . here, we find that co-expression clusters that vary within d. simulans are not enriched for adaptive evolving loci. however, genes with an adaptive evolutionary signature are over-represented in clusters where expression is co-evolving among species. this result points to a connection between coordinated gene expression evolution and adaptive evolution in coding regions of genes, although the exact nature of this connection is still unknown.

RESULTS
clusters of genes evince coordinated evolution of expression across the seven species . on all chromosomes at all scales, there were far more windows with significant coordinated expression evolution than expected at random . many of these significant windows were identified across multiple window sizes and likely reflect a single larger block of genes where expression evolution is coordinated  <cit>  . these windows were also robust to the removal of individual species and therefore were not being driven by evolution in a specific lineage . in addition, there was no detectable difference between the absolute level of transcript abundance as measured by the arrays for neighboring genes where expression displays co-evolution compared to other groups of neighboring genes . because we used the d. melanogaster as the reference genome for ordering genes along chromosomes there is the possibility that genome re-arrangements would lead to some of these significant clusters to include non-physically adjacent genes in some of the species. our results are, however, robust to this issue as we found that breakpoints between d. simulans-d. melanogaster or d. yakuba-d. melanogaster interrupted clusters where expression is co-evolving no more frequently than expected by chance, which is consistent with a previous analysis of co-expression within species  <cit> .

the total number of significant tests obtained from the sliding window analysis for even numbered window sizes are presented with the expected numbers assuming a null distribution in parentheses.

the use of a sliding window approach to identify co-evolution of expression in gene clusters means that tests at a given scale will be correlated with neighboring windows and these tests will also be correlated across window sizes. there is not a clear optimal approach for dealing with the multiple testing problem and the properties of strategies such as estimation of false discovery rates   <cit>  are not clear in such cases. to assess whether there was a clear genome-wide tendency for coordinated expression evolution, we therefore used a permutation approach using total number of significant tests at a given window size  as a test statistic to assess the null hypothesis that there are no more gene clusters where expression is co-evolving than we would expect at random  <cit> . with only seven species  these tests are not expected to be particularly powerful. however, the test was still rejected at a window size of  <dig>  and at a window size of  <dig>   indicating that at least on genomic scales spanning  <dig> to  <dig> genes, there is genome level co-evolution of gene expression in neighboring genes.

similar results were obtained for the analysis of within species co-expression for d. simulans . many windows on all chromosomes at all scales were significant. interestingly, the test of a genome-wide pattern produced significant results for window sizes of  <dig>  and  <dig> . while this could be interpreted as an artifact of microaray design  <cit> , there is no regular spacing to the distribution of significant windows  <cit> . interestingly, there was little overlap between the significant windows identified as evolving across species and being co-expressed within d. simulans . the number of overlapping windows obtained when comparing repeated analysis of mean expression levels for all species and the number of overlapping windows for repeated analysis of the d. simulans data  are presented for comparison. given that many of the co-evolving expression clusters and the co-expression clusters identified within d. simulans may reflect false positives, a small fraction of overlap between these cluster types might be expected. however, even at a conservative cutoff  the absolute number of overlapping clusters is still very low  indicating that there is little correspondence. it therefore appears that completely different sets of genes are involved in the pattern of co-expression within species compared to those where expression evolves in a coordinated manner across species.

the total number of significant tests obtained from the sliding window analysis for even numbered window sizes are presented with the expected numbers assuming a null distribution in parentheses.

the first number in parentheses is the number of overlapping significant windows when comparing repeated analysis of the mean expression data for all species and the second number in parentheses is the number of overlapping windows when comparing repeated analysis of the d. simulans data.

while the mechanisms underlying the existence of clusters of co-evolution of expression among species and co-expression clusters within species cannot be resolved from these data, the existence of paralogous genes in close proximity can be ruled out as the major factor for the observed pattern. paralogous genes in close proximity may be expected to produce the evolving clusters or within species co-expression clusters as a result of shared regulatory elements and/or maintained common functions. however, paralogs may also produce the pattern by cross-hybridizing to common probes on the microarray. if the second of these possibilities can explain a considerable proportion of clusters, this could mean the observed pattern was an artifact of the microarray assay. however, we find that very few paralogous gene sets are within either evolving clusters or co-expression clusters . the majority of evolving clusters and co-expression clusters cannot therefore be explained by paralogous genes.

spatial, adaptive, and functional distribution of co-expression clusters
to determine if co-expression or co-evolution of expression is related to the physical organization of genes within clusters, we investigated the spatial distribution of the clusters across the genome of d. melanogaster. while order of genes in clusters where expression is co-evolving are conserved across species in our analysis , the physical location of these clusters relative to d. melanogaster need not be. fortunately, the local spatial organization of genes is highly conserved across these species, which allows us to again use the heavily annotated d. melanogaster genome as a reference for our spatial analysis.

there are fewer co-evolving expression clusters in centromere proximal regions . this was also observed for the within species co-expression clusters. two hypotheses may explain this pattern. first, gene density tends to decline in regions proximal to the centromere  <cit> , which may reduce the total number of gene clusters observed in these relatively gene depauperate regions. second, centromere proximal regions have higher amounts of heterochromatin, which can dramatically affect gene expression  <cit> . most euchromatic gene expression is suppressed in heterochromatin and natively heterochromatic genes are typically only expressed when surrounded by heterochromatin. therefore, local shifts over evolutionary time in the heterochromatin content – which are common in centromere proximal regions – may inhibit the formation of clusters near centromeres  <cit> .

most genes in the genome are physically grouped together on the chromosome as determined by the coefficient of deviation . in contrast, clusters of genes where there is co-expression or where there is co-evolution of expression tend to be more dispersed, which suggests that co-expression is not simply a function of gene density. nor is it the result of local recombination rate; there is no relationship between the rate of recombination in d. melanogaster and the density of clusters . this conflicts with the hypothesis that lower recombination tends to evolve among co-expressed genes  <cit> . this result may however be confounded by variation in recombination rate across the species analyzed.

see methods for full description. typically, values around  <dig> suggest a random spatial distribution; values above  <dig> indicate clustering. due to our masking approach, this was limited to genes included in our analysis. interleaved and nested genes were ignored. "within species" refers to the co-expression clusters found within d. simulans. "between species" refers to the clusters found to be evolving among species. "genome" refers to the genome wide estimate from the d. melanogaster genome.

in contrast to these large scale patterns, genes within evolving clusters do not show unusual local structural organization relative to the rest of the genome. for example, the genes in clusters where there is co-evolution of expression are not physically closer to each other relative to the rest of the genome . likewise, there is no strand bias – genes are equally likely to be on either strand of dna . when considering pairs of genes – "window 2" clusters – there was no significant difference in the strand orientations of these pairs. pairs of genes were essentially equally likely to both be on the same strand or on opposite strands in either the + - or -+ orientation . nor were there significant runs of genes on the same strand among genes within the largest clusters . there was similarly no unusual structural organization for clusters of co-expression within d. simulans compared to the rest of the genome.

however, as noted above, clusters where there is coordinated evolution of expression among species seldom correspond to clusters where there is co-expression within species. this fact suggests that the evolutionary and genetic forces affecting coordinated expression within and between species are distinct. if the evolution of co-expression clusters reflected a neutral process, we would expect the patterns of co-expression within species to be reflective of the patterns of co-expression between species. instead, we see very different patterns within and between species. between species, our analysis identifies groups of genes whose expression is correlated across evolutionary time. natural selection, directional or purifying, could drive or preserve patterns of co-expression among genes. directional selection, however, is the more likely explanation for the diversification in expression we observe across species. we tested this idea using data from begun et al.  <dig>  <cit> . using polymorphism data in d. simulans in conjunction with divergence data from d. melanogaster and d. yakuba, begun et al.  <dig> identified genes evincing recurrent directional selection using a mcdonald-krietman test  <cit> . these genes had normal levels of within species polymorphism, but high levels of between species divergence. we compared the frequency of genes with significant mcdonald-krietman tests  within the clusters where there is co-evolution of expression to the whole genome empirical distribution . genes within clusters have 27% more adaptively evolving genes than the genome average using a polarized mktest, which does not confound evolution on two branches . this result suggests that recurrent directional selection may be the evolutionary force shaping the evolution of co-evolving expression of neighboring genes. recent work looking at a subset of the species we analyzed also suggests a tie between adaptive evolution of coding sequences and changes in gene expression  <cit> . the phenomena observed here may reflect that larger evolutionary process.

our within species analysis of d. simulans identified clusters where expression is coordinated and we applied the mktest analysis to these blocks of genes. in contrast to the among species analysis, the within d. simulans clusters lack genes evidencing recurrent adaptive amino acid evolution . this paucity of significant mktests may indicate a role for balancing selection in maintaining some, but not all, of these polymorphic within-species clusters. regardless, distinctly different evolutionary forces appear to be operating to produce co-evolution of expression in clusters compared to co-expression clusters within species.

the seven species that we analyze are morphologically almost indistinguishable except for differences in male genitalia and in the case of d. santomea which has distinct pigmentation  <cit> . the co-evolving expression clusters are therefore not likely to be related to tissue specific expression of clustered genes underlying morphological divergence. we do, however, find there are more statistically over-represented go categories involved in reproduction in clusters where there is co-evolution of expression and more genes involved in immune response for clusters evincing co-expression within species clusters . recurrent selection has repeatedly been shown to drive evolution of reproduction related genes, especially in males  <cit> . thus it makes sense that our co-evolving expression clusters are enriched for both adaptively evolving and reproduction related genes. similarly, a subset of immune response genes have high levels of nucleotide polymorphism within species  <cit> , which is also consistent with our mktest analysis of within species clusters.

classes presented are those with a p-value <  <dig>  as determined by david  for the clusters identified with a window size of  <dig> and a p-value cutoff of p <  <dig> .

CONCLUSIONS
to understand how complex phenotypes evolve, we need to understand how interacting genes evolve. we have analyzed expression microarray data from species in the drosophila melanogaster subgroup, including data from ten distinct d. simulans lines and identified blocks of genes where there is coordinated evolution of expression among species. we have also identified clusters where there is co-expression within the species d. simulans. our work shows that coordinated evolution of expression among physically adjacent genes among species and co-expression among adjacent genes within species is common. in general, there is little correspondence between clusters where there is co-evolution of expression and those clusters where there is co-expression within species for the species analyzed. the evolutionary forces shaping these two types of clusters are clearly different. our analysis of co-expression within a species showed no relationship between adaptive evolution at the sequence level and expression of genes within clusters. in contrast, adaptive sequence evolution is associated with those genes in clusters where expression is evolving in a coordinated manner. in sum, we find that just as expression of genes is not independent of physical location of genes within a species, the evolution of expression of many genes is not independent of the evolution of their neighbors. we also show that this result is not simply the byproduct of clusters of duplicated genes. our analysis suggests that clusters of genes where there is co-evolution of expression may be natural units for quantifying and understanding the evolution of transcriptomes.

