BACKGROUND
sequencing the genome of the african malaria mosquito, anopheles gambiae  <cit> , has fueled many large- and small-scale investigations of the biology of this important vector, in an effort to develop more effective interventions to limit its harmful impacts on human health  <cit> . functional genomic studies using microarrays have described basic biological processes and stimulus-responsive gene expression by detailing transcriptome profiling during the an. gambiae life cycle, in specific tissues, across zeitgeber time, following blood feeding and infection, and coincident with insecticide resistance  <cit> . more recent rna sequencing  studies in an. gambiae have described odorant receptor expression in various contexts  <cit>  and other rnaseq efforts in vector insects have enabled generation of the first de novo transcriptome for anopheles funestus  <cit> . because they are designed based on existing genome annotations, gene expression microarrays cannot facilitate the discovery of unannotated genes. rnaseq is not constrained in this way, but high read depths are required for significant increases in analytical sensitivity. most previous rnaseq studies have focused on using reads as a measure of expression of previously annotated genes, rather than discovering new genes, including new classes of genes such as lncrnas  <cit> . indeed, recent rnaseq of the an. gambiae midgut transcriptome demonstrated that high-depth sequencing can uncover many novel intergenic transcripts, including putative lncrnas  <cit> .

large-scale functional genomic projects such as encode and modencode, as well as high-throughput genomic screens, have revealed the presence of extensive sets of lncrnas in humans , as well as in model organisms   <cit> . the functions of these lncrnas, however, remain largely unknown, with a few exceptions that include lncrnas with defined roles in embryogenesis, development, dosage compensation and sleep behavior  <cit> . part of the difficulty in deciphering the functionality of lncrnas lies in their rapid evolution and the consequent reduction in levels of primary sequence conservation for lncrnas among different organisms  <cit> . while this divergence presents some challenges, the lack of conservation could be exploited in species-specific targeted therapeutics. indeed, it has been proposed that lncrnas could be used as targets to regulate gene expression and development, as an alternative to the standard model of using small molecule drugs as antagonists of mrna-encoded proteins  <cit> . this premise may also be extended to controlling vector-transmitted infectious diseases by identifying and perturbing non-coding rna  targets in vector insects  <cit> .

previously successful vector control methods have begun to wane in efficacy with the development of singly and multiply insecticide-resistant mosquitoes in disease-endemic regions . future malaria vector control will have to rely on new approaches, some of which may become apparent only as we develop a more complete understanding of the repertoire of mosquito coding and non-coding genes  <cit> . using rnaseq across multiple mosquito life stages and both genders, our study has developed the most comprehensive deep rnaseq data set for an. gambiae to date, encompassing more than  <dig> million alignable sequence reads. differential gene expression analysis confirms the roles of different classes of annotated protein-coding genes during key developmental phases, and quantification of protein-coding potential of previously unannotated transcripts identifies  <dig> new protein-coding genes and  <dig>  putative lncrnas. we find that the lncrna gene set exhibits much lower sequence conservation across anophelines, when compared with either previously annotated protein-coding genes or protein-coding genes discovered in our study. while these lncrna genes exhibit low sequence conservation, we provide evidence that the secondary structural features for many lncrnas have been conserved. these newly identified lncrnas provide a basis for an expanded understanding of lncrnas in dipterans, and for future studies of ncrnas within the genus anopheles.

RESULTS
alignment and validation of rnaseq data sets
our transcriptome analysis for each life stage was supported by two rnaseq data sets: one “high read depth ” set with more than  <dig> million reads/stage that was used for subsequent lncrna discovery, and one “low read depth ” set that contained approximately  <dig> million reads/stage that constituted biological replicates for the validation of our hrd data sets. in total, over  <dig> million hrd reads and over  <dig> million lrd reads were aligned to the an. gambiae pest genome assembly agamp <dig> . first, cufflinks fragments per-kilobase of exonic length per million base pairs mapped  expression values were validated against sailfish, an alignment-free quantification method that uses k-mers and defines expression levels based on reads per-kilobase of exonic length per million base pairs mapped   <cit> . the average fpkm and rpkm values between the two biological replicates produced by cufflinks and sailfish show pearson correlation coefficients that were all above  <dig>  , indicating a high level of confidence that cufflinks fpkm values are comparable to other, reference-free quantification methods. using cufflinks fpkm values, the number of differentially expressed  genes identified varies greatly depending on the life stages compared, as shown by the clustered fpkm values in figure 1b . concordant with physiological changes, fewer de genes were identified between similar life stages, i.e., between larval stages  or between adult genders, than between larval and adult stages.table  <dig> 
read alignment of rna-sequencing data sets



data set
raw read count
percentage mapped
aligned read count


only three protein-coding genes  exhibit significant decreases in expression in l <dig> compared to l <dig>  while  <dig> are significantly up-regulated. in an adult male to adult female comparison,  <dig> protein-coding genes are down-regulated, while  <dig> are up-regulated. adult to larval comparisons range between  <dig> genes up-regulated between females and l3s, the lowest such difference observed, and up to  <dig> genes down-regulated between males and l3s, the greatest such difference observed. when these de genes are grouped based on their go_slim <dig> categories  <cit> , a total of  <dig> major categories are identified, each of which constitutes greater than two percent of the total gene count for a given comparison . those categories with greater than  <dig> percent of the gene count are distributed across all life stage and gender comparisons. any category that is present in less than two percent of the total de genes for the given comparison is grouped into the “less than  <dig> percent” category; this category is the largest group for many of our comparisons. due to the expansive nature of these categories, the de genes were analyzed for functional enrichment using david  <cit>  to define biologically relevant groups that are differentially expressed.

across the adult to larval comparisons,  <dig> categories possess an enrichment score greater than  <dig>  . genes associated with cuticle, peptidase activity, chitin/carbohydrate binding and detoxification are enriched during larval stages, when compared to adults. genes associated with odorant recognition, immunity and visual stimuli are enriched in adults, when compared to larval stages. overall, differentially expressed genes and their associated david-enriched terms  are congruent with past studies of an. gambiae  <cit> .

de novo identification of transcripts
cufflinks and scripture were utilized to produce a reference annotation-based transcript  assembly – using a merged data set of all hrd rnaseq data sets – in order to identify previously unannotated rna transcripts . as the aim of this study was not to identify potential isoforms of previously annotated transcripts, only gene classes of i, u and x  as identified by cufflinks, were analyzed. a total of  <dig>  transcripts possessed assembled transcript support by both cufflinks and scripture . after implementing a length cutoff of 200 nt, a set of  <dig>  potential transcribed loci was identified. all genes were given the identifier “merged” , based on the use of merged hrd life stage rnaseq data sets to enable the annotations.figure  <dig> flow chart of lncrna and potential coding gene identification and expression/exonic structure of defined gene classes. a. flow chart of lncrna and novel protein-coding gene identification. rnaseq data sets were merged and used to produce a transcriptome that was supported by both cufflinks and scripture. length, phylocsf score, maximum peptide length, protein domain and total coding-sequence length were used to set inclusion and exclusion criteria for the sets of lncrnas and putative protein-coding rnas, among the previously unannotated transcripts. b. density plot of exons per-gene for lncrnas  and novel protein-coding rnas . c. expression values  calculated by cufflinks for previously annotated genes in vectorbase , lncrnas , and newly identified putative protein-coding rnas  for all genes that had an fpkm greater than zero for the merged rnaseq data set.



potential protein-coding mrnas and lncrnas were identified based on sequence and amino acid lengths, percent coding sequence and protein-coding potential , as described in materials and methods. this yielded  <dig> potential protein-coding transcripts  and  <dig>  potential lncrnas . among the  <dig>  putative lncrnas we have identified, most are intergenic transcripts  , while  <dig> are in an anti-sense orientation with respect to an exonic region of an overlapping, protein-coding mrna , and  <dig> map within an intron of a protein-coding gene  . for transcripts consisting of a single exon, it may be difficult for cufflinks to predict the correct strandedness of transcript, and the pipeline may generate complementary-strand duplicate gene calls by calling the inferred transcript twice, on each of the complementary strands to which rnaseq reads align. to determine the number of genes that may have been defined as such complementary-strand duplicates we compared all genes identified and found that only  <dig> genes  exhibited 50% total overlap . this implies that only a very small proportion of the transcripts identified may constitute complementary-strand duplicates rather than single gene calls. potential protein-coding genes possess an average of  <dig>  exons/gene , while the lncrna genes have, on average,  <dig>  exons/gene. to further characterize the organization of the newly-annotated genes, respective fpkm expression levels were analyzed . the fpkm values for the newly annotated protein-coding genes we have identified tend to be lower than those for previously identified protein-coding genes in the reference agamp <dig>  gene set, while newly identified lncrnas tend to have mean/median fpkm values lower than those for newly annotated protein-coding genes  . figure  <dig> illustrates examples of a novel protein-coding gene , an intronic lncrna  and an anti-sense lncrna  and an intronic lncrna  that were identified in our study. of the  <dig>  lncrna genes,  <dig> exhibit significant differences in expression patterns  among life stages . comparison of our lncrna gene set to that recently described based on a gut transcriptome  <cit>  identifies  <dig> genes that possess at least  <dig> percent overlap .figure  <dig> examples of newly annotated protein-coding and lncrna genes. read count profiles of rnaseq alignments to a selected set of newly annotated genes, viewed using igv   <cit> . chromosomal coordinate scales vary among panels. agap designations are given for genes encoding mrnas  that are complementary to newly annotated antisense lncrnas . strandedness of lncrnas is determined by cufflinks and based on output gtf file . each panel consists of the top graph indicating read depth  with a phylocsf track below , followed by the gene gtf track. colored triangles indicate the orientation of the given gene. a. putative protein-coding gene merged. <dig>  maps antisense to the 3’ untranslated region of protein-coding gene agap <dig>  regions with red boxes of merged. <dig>  indicate the protein-coding segments of the gene . b. lncrna merged. <dig>  maps intronically with respect to agap <dig>  c. lncrna merged. <dig>  is antisense and overlapping to agap <dig> 



evolutionary conservation of lncrna sequences and secondary structures
in light of recent studies of the evolutionary conservation, and the lack thereof, among lncrnas in tetrapods  <cit> , we examined the conservation of an. gambiae lncrnas across the anopheles genus. first, we quantified the presence/absence of lncrna-homologous genomic regions in whole genome multiple sequence alignments across the anopheles phylogeny, based on the presence/absence of an alignable region in our whole genome alignments  . of the lncrnas we have identified in an. gambiae, almost all exhibit conserved homologous regions within the genomes of the closely-related species within the gambiae complex, e.g. approximately  <dig> percent are found in the genome of anopheles merus . at this close evolutionary distance, similarly high percentages of homologous regions are found for the previously annotated protein-coding genes  and the newly annotated protein-coding genes . in the more distantly-related species, anopheles minimus, of the myzomia series, the percentages of protein-coding genes with identifiable homologs drop to  <dig> percent  and  <dig> percent , respectively. in the most distantly related species, anopheles albimanus, from the nysorrhynchus series, these percentages decline even further to  <dig> percent and  <dig> percent, respectively, for previously and newly annotated protein-coding genes . strikingly, while  <dig> percent of the an. gambiae lncrnas detect identifiable homologous regions in an. minimus, the number of conserved lncrna-homologous regions drops dramatically, to only  <dig> percent, in the distant species an. albimanus.figure  <dig> evolutionary conservation across the genus anopheles. percentage of previously annotated protein-coding genes , newly annotated protein-coding genes  and newly annotated lncrnas  that could be aligned among an. gambiae and other comparator species using whole genome alignments. percentages represent percent of total gene class that could be aligned to the genome of each species . number of models for each class of gene, for an. gambiae, listed at the top of each column.



to further characterize the conservation of lncrnas, phylop was utilized to determine per-nucleotide conservation p-values across all of the genus members studied . previously annotated genes in an. gambiae possess higher –log scores compared to both newly identified protein-coding and lncrna gene classes identified in this study. the previously annotated protein-coding genes exhibit a mean  value of  <dig>  , newly identified protein-coding rnas exhibit a value of  <dig>   and lncrnas exhibit a value of  <dig>  . all pairwise comparisons of the extent of conservation between all classes were significantly different .figure  <dig> sequence, structural and expression profiles of identified gene classes. a. characterization of sequence conservation across the genus anopheles performed using phylop. the –log <dig> was calculated for each gene within each respective gene class and statistical significance was determined using a mann–whitney t-test. starred bars denote p-value < <dig> . b. stacked histogram of rnaz score output from reapr analysis  for lncrna  and novel protein-coding genes . insert shows confident rna secondary structure calls with an rnaz score above  <dig> .



next, we employed reapr  to examine the conservation of rna secondary structures in our set of newly identified transcripts. the lncrna class contains  <dig>  conserved secondary structures that possess high-confidence rna secondary structures according to their rnaz scores , distributed among  <dig> distinct lncrnas . by comparison, our set of newly annotated protein-coding genes contains  <dig> conserved rna secondary structures among  <dig> distinct genes. among the high-confidence secondary structure loci identified among lncrnas in this study, we next analyzed the conservation of these structures across the genus anopheles . the genomes of species studied from the gambiae complex exhibit high numbers of conserved secondary structures, with most genomes retaining similar numbers of conserved structures . those species outside of the gambiae complex exhibit much lower numbers of conserved secondary structures compared to an. gambiae, especially those species outside of the pyretophorous series. the  <dig> lncrnas that map to genomic intervals that exhibit primary sequence conservation across all of the anopheline genomes that we analyzed possess  <dig> distinct secondary structural features. those features were present in all species within the gambiae complex, within  <dig> of the secondary structures we define . additionally, only two of the secondary structures were present in all  <dig> genomes analyzed. overall, the rate of divergence for conserved secondary structures is much greater than for the conserved lncrna-homologous genomic regions, though the observed difference is not statistically significant  figure  <dig> conservation of lncrna secondary structure and genomic regions across the anopheles genus. a. the number of lncrna secondary structures and conserved genomic regions per-species that are present within members of the anopheles genus in relation to an. gambiae. plots represent rna sequences that possess high confidence  secondary structures as identified during reapr analysis  and conserved genomic regions of the lncrna gene set . for each species in the lineage , the relative width of the plot corresponds to the number of confident rna secondary structures or number of conserved genomic regions that were predicted. b. change in the number of conserved genomic regions  and secondary lncrna structures  over time. root age of divergence times were determined by neafsey et al.  <cit>  and lines represent linear regression. differences in slopes between the linear regression lines are not significant based upon an ancova test .



discussion
our deep rna sequencing has facilitated comprehensive transcriptional profiling across four an. gambiae life stages, identified multiple previously unannotated protein-coding genes and created the most comprehensive catalog of lncrnas in any mosquito species, to date. our quantification of reads mapped to genome assemblies has enabled determination of differential expression among life stages, and our aggregate data set of such genes includes many genes that have been defined as being differentially expressed in previous microarray-based studies of an. gambiae gene expression  <cit> . first, we compared two quantification methods, cufflinks and sailfish, to determine whether an alignment-free quantification method was comparable to cufflinks and potentially preferable to currently used alignment-based methods . overall, both cufflinks fpkm and sailfish rpkm values are comparable and exhibit correlation values  <dig>  or higher . we note that we were unable to produce correlation values between cufflinks and sailfish that were reported previously when comparing the accuracies of both methods to synthetic and qpcr data sets  <cit> . combined with downstream analyses and visualization packages, we chose to use cufflinks and its component packages for our lncrna analysis.

our differential gene expression profiles  were compared to earlier microarray-based studies to validate our rnaseq data sets. these microarray-based studies identified greater numbers of differentially expressed genes in larval-adult comparisons than in larval-larval or adult-adult comparisons, a trend of differences that is also clearly observed based on our rna sequencing approach . studies by koutsos et al.  <cit>  and harker et al.  <cit>  both identified more differentially expressed genes, especially in the l1-l <dig> comparisons, which can be attributed to the greater number of replicates performed in their microarray studies. similar to the koutsos et al.  <cit>  study, we identify more de genes between males and larvae than between females and larvae. functional classes of differentially expressed genes include many cuticular, peptidase and chitin-binding genes that are up-regulated during larval stages, and odorant recognition and immune class genes that are up-regulated in adults . similar life stage-related expression patterns have been observed for immunity genes in the pollen beetle, meligethes aeneus  <cit> . harker et al.  <cit>  described similar larval up-regulation of various gene ensembles in their study of an. gambiae using microarrays, including the cuticular gene agap <dig> and peptidase-associated genes agap <dig>  agap <dig>  agap <dig> and agap <dig>  koutsos et al.  <cit>  found genes that contain immune-related domains and fall within the pheromone-sensing go class are up-regulated in adults, and our rnaseq-based analyses have identified similar expression patterns. the consistencies we observe in differential gene expression patterns between life stages, and in functional classes up-regulated during larval and adult life stages, respectively, engender confidence in the quality of our data set.

while approaches for the alignment of rnaseq reads to genomes are relatively mature, the task of grouping such aligned reads into lncrnas or other gene classes remains challenging and is less well-defined. previous classifications of lncrnas have been based on their lengths, protein-coding potential, and maximum orf size, and the probability of identifying full-length lncrna transcripts using rnaseq  <cit> . in our study, no fpkm cutoff was utilized, as many lncrnas have been shown to exhibit very low expression levels  <cit> . implementation of our lncrna detection pipeline  identifies  <dig>  lncrnas and  <dig> protein-coding genes . the number of lncrnas we identify in an. gambiae is more than double the number identified in d. melanogaster and other members of the genus drosophila, for which more than  <dig>  long intergenic non-coding rnas  have been identified in each species, and many fewer than have been defined in studies of mice and humans, which have identified many thousands of potential lncrnas  <cit> . as only lincrnas have been highly studied in d. melanogaster, the total number of lncrnas may be comparable in an. gambiae. additionally, our putative set of lncrna genes is smaller than that recently described for the gut transcriptome of an. gambiae  <cit> . one of the major reasons for this difference in identified lncrnas between the two studies is that padron et al.  did not use a peptide length cutoff, and their protein-coding potential analyses did not take advantage of whole genome alignments. by utilizing our peptide length cutoff on their lncrna data set and only using cufflinks codes ‘i’,’u’, and’x’, the number of lncrnas identified from their data set is reduced by  <dig> percent, to  <dig>  lncrna. among these, only  <dig> genes exhibit at least  <dig> percent sequence overlap between the two studies. this limited overlap indicates that tissue-specific rnaseq analysis can yield a vastly different lncrna population compared with whole organism rnaseq, which will be an important consideration for the eventual identification of a complete lncrna gene set in an. gambiae and other vector insects.

members of the lncrna and putative protein-coding gene classes identified in our study have lower average fpkm levels and lower dna sequence conservation, in general, than those observed for previously annotated an. gambiae protein-coding genes . this trend of lower observed levels of expression and sequence conservation may explain why genome annotation pipelines have previously missed the putative protein-coding genes that we have defined. in addition, the average number of exons per lncrna is much lower than the average number of exons per novel protein-coding gene that we have identified in this study . this is similar to the trend in exon number per transcript that has been characterized for human lncrnas, which have been shown to possess significantly fewer exons per gene compared to protein-coding genes  <cit> .

previous studies of lncrna sequence evolution have indicated that primary sequence conservation is very low across tetrapods  <cit> , while only a few such studies have considered conservation of secondary structure in assessing net evolutionary conservation of lncrnas  <cit> . those studies that have considered secondary structure have focused mainly on comparisons between a few species and not on comparisons across complete lineages, such as is now possible within the anopheles genus  <cit> . the ability of rna to maintain secondary structural features and associated rna-protein interactions, even in the absence of primary sequence conservation  <cit> , may underlie, in part, the increased rate of divergence for lncrnas that has been observed in these previous studies.

our study illustrates that across the sequenced genomes within the genus anopheles,  <dig> percent of previously annotated protein-coding genes in an. gambiae exhibit matching genomic regions in an. albimanus . this level of conservation we observe is lower for the set of protein-coding genes we have newly annotated, e.g.,  <dig> percent for an. minimus and  <dig> percent for an. albimanus. it is even lower for the lncrna class, e.g.,  <dig> percent for an. minimus and  <dig> percent for an. albimanus. furthermore, examining sequence conservation within these genomic regions using phylop p-values of conservation scores indicates that lncrna sequences are much more divergent across the anopheles genus, compared with previously and newly annotated protein-coding classes . the reduced numbers of identifiable conserved lncrna-homologous genomic regions is in agreement with previous findings in tetrapods, which illustrated a rapid decrease in 1: <dig> orthologous lncrna families across many classes of tetrapods  <cit> . the proportions of lncrnas that identify homologous genomic regions in our whole genome alignments are similar to the proportions of conserved protein-coding genes, when considering only the closely-related species within the gambiae complex . however, beyond the pyretophorus series, the proportions of conserved lncrna-homologous regions decline much more rapidly than those for protein-coding genes. those putative lncrna-harboring genomic regions that are identifiable in other species also show much higher levels of sequence divergence compared with protein-coding genes. together, these results imply that anopheline lncrnas diverge at a much higher rate than protein-coding genes. accordingly, some an. gambiae lncrnas present in the most recent common ancestor of the pyretophorous series and the neocellia and myzomyia series, for example, may have diverged beyond recognition within the neocellia and myzomyia, while other an. gambiae lncrnas may have arisen relatively recently and are therefore restricted to species within the gambiae complex.

to extend our analysis beyond primary sequence conservation for lncrnas, we employed reapr to identify lncrna secondary structures and analyze their conservation across the anophelines . among all putative an. gambiae lncrnas we define, only  <dig> percent exhibit high-confidence rna secondary structures. although it has been proposed that all lncrnas should possess a functional secondary structure, this premise has not been validated at the genome-wide level for other sets of related organisms, nor has the conservation of lncrna secondary structures across multiple related species in other clades been analyzed and described in comparable depth  <cit> . the closely related members of the gambiae species complex, in which homologous genomic regions are found for almost all an. gambiae lncrnas, all exhibit similar proportions of high-confidence rna secondary structures within these lncrnas. while these structures are highly conserved within the gambiae species complex, the numbers of lncrna secondary structures conserved relative to an. gambiae decline rapidly for species outside of the complex, at an apparent rate even more pronounced than the decline in the numbers of conserved lncrna-homologous genomic regions . however, when corrected for the root age of divergence for each species analyzed, we see that primary sequences and secondary structures exhibit similar rates of divergence . both of these rates are much higher than those that have been described for lncrnas in chordates  <cit> . increased divergence rates in insects, as compared to chordates, have been noted previously for protein-coding genes  <cit> . rapid divergence of lncrna sequences as compared to protein-coding genes  has also been reported for rodent species  <cit> .

these differences in the number of conserved lncrna regions and number of secondary structures across the anophelines, especially evident for those lncrnas that exhibit conserved genomic regions in all species but secondary structures in only a subset of those species , imply that lncrna secondary structures tend to evolve after a most recent common ancestor for a given set of species has acquired transcriptional activation of particular genomic loci. this finding is consistent with the long-acknowledged idea of “pervasive transcription” across the genome  <cit> . pervasive transcription describes the process by which most regions of the genome are transcribed, including those that fail to encode proteins or functional ncrnas. through random mutations, these “pervasive” transcripts acquire protein-coding ability or a functional rna structure, over evolutionary time. selective pressure causes these altered transcripts to become fixed within a population if they are advantageous for the organism. given the evolutionary interval between the onset of transcriptional activation of a particular genomic region and the time at which the transcript becomes functionally beneficial, some lineages/species that have evolved during that time period may express a particular pervasive transcript before it becomes a functionally beneficial transcript within that species or lineage.

increased evolutionary rates of lncrna sequences compared to protein-coding genes may contribute to bionomic diversity that has been observed across the genus anopheles by affecting the evolution of species-specific behaviors, such as resting, mating and feeding patterns  <cit> , just as behavioral control has begun to be attributed to variation among drosophila lncrnas  <cit> . the notion that lncrnas modulate the activities of protein-coding genes is well-established  <cit> . however, we speculate that lncrna-mediated regulation of gene expression, coupled with the rapid evolution of lineage-specific lncrna ensembles in mosquitos, may underlie the rapid diversification of vector mosquito behaviors  <cit>  for which it has been, thus far, difficult to define differentiating causal mechanisms. our deep rna sequencing of an. gambiae has provided the most comprehensive catalog of lncrnas in mosquitoes to date, and presents the prospect of identifying a new generation of targets for approaches to vector control that will enable further reductions in the burden of human malaria.

CONCLUSIONS
malaria is a life-threatening infectious disease for which half of the global human population is at risk. malaria control currently relies on population control of vector mosquitos of the genus anopheles. vector control methods are becoming less effective due to the propagation of insecticide resistance alleles within and between many anopheles populations. in order to identify new prospective targets for vector control, we have identified a pan-genomic set of almost  <dig>  long non-coding rnas  in anopheles gambiae, the predominant vector of human malaria in sub-saharan africa. members of this lncrna set evolve much faster across the anopheles genus than do protein-coding genes, but they retain conserved secondary rna structural features across the genus. in contrast, we find that lncrna sequences and secondary structure are highly conserved among six species within the gambiae complex. continuing analysis of these lncrnas will provide new insights in vector biology that can be applied to develop next-generation vector control methods.

