BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer  is a major force driving the evolution of prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes  <cit> . extensive gene transfer has led to the concept of a ‘web of life’ or ‘network of life’ instead of the traditional view of a bifurcating tree of living things . in eukaryotes, hgt is best exemplified by organellogenesis, which is accompanied by the transfer of hundreds of genes from endosymbionts to the host nuclear genome  <cit> . in spite of the prevalence of hgt in eukaryotes  <cit> , such massive gene transfers from single sources are thought to be specifically associated with endosymbiosis  <cit> . other instances of hgt typically involve a smaller number of genes derived from diverse phylogenetic sources.

from the perspective of reconstructing species relationships, hgt can create gene reticulation that misleads phylogenies . on the other hand, hgt represents a form of rare genomic change  <cit>  that can be used as a phylogenetic marker  <cit> , or more generally to understand how selection distributes valuable “genetic goods” across the tree of life. here, we studied the extent and impact of hgt in magnaporthales fungi, using the following simple guiding principle: generally, fungi  contain limited amounts of foreign genes derived from distantly related sources , whereas gene transfer highways exist that allow massive gene exchanges between fungal lineages . in this context, we hypothesized that two unrelated fungal species are unlikely to acquire the same hgt gene marker from the same  donor species via independent events. when found, the more likely explanation is that the shared marker gene was transferred via hgt between the two species. the framework for this study is a recently generated comprehensive magnaporthales genome database generated by our group  <cit> .

magnaporthales is a monophyletic order in the subphylum pezizomycotina in the ascomycota. this order contains approximately  <dig> species in three major lineages that include saprobes on submerged wood as well as pathogens that infect roots and above ground tissues of monocot plants  <cit> . the latter include the well-studied rice blast fungus pyricularia oryzae  that has devastating, worldwide impacts on food production  <cit> . due to incorrect morphological identification, the rice blast fungus had been placed in the genus magnaporthe and was known as magnaporthe grisea and magnaporthe oryzae. the pyricularia/magnaporthe working group established under the auspices of the international commission on the taxonomy of fungi now recommends using pyricularia oryzae for this species, which is the older and correct name for this fungus. in spite of the urgent need to ameliorate the damaging impacts of magnaporthales on crops, the origin and genetic basis of pathogenicity in this lineage remain poorly understood.

here, we show that magnaporthales share two hgt gene markers with colletotrichum, a large genus in the order glomerelalles that includes anthracnose pathogens of various plants . this hgt connection inspired us to dig deeper and resulted in the discovery of massive gene transfers between these two lineages. we examine the nature and functional significance of hgts between magnaporthales and colletotrichum fungi and find evidence for its role in enhancing plant pathogenicity.

RESULTS
overview of magnaporthales genomes
magnaporthales comprises a group of fungal lineages with an evolutionary depth comparable to tetrapods . the magnaporthales lineages possess comparable genome sizes  and total gene numbers , which are typical of sordariomycetes . to reconstruct a robust sordariomycetes phylogeny, we identified  <dig> highly conserved single-copy genes across  <dig> taxa . a maximum likelihood  tree built using multi-protein data comprising 20 % of the genes  with the strongest phylogenetic signal  resulted in a topology with 100 % bootstrap support for all interior nodes . this result is generally consistent with previous phylogenies that showed a sister group relationship between magnaporthales and ophiostomatales .fig.  <dig> comparative analysis of magnaporthales genomes. a evolutionary rate comparison between sordariomycetes and vertebrates. all interior nodes have 100 % bootstrap support using a multi-protein concatenated dataset. magnaporthales and vertebrates are highlighted using thick branches in pink and black, respectively. b phylogenetic relationships among  <dig> lineages of sordariomycetes, showing their genome sizes  and predicted gene numbers. the outgroup species are not shown in this phylogeny. all interior nodes have 100 % bootstrap support using a multi-protein concatenated dataset . the numbers shown at the selected nodes are gene-support frequencies/internode certainty values. the black dots mark the five branches at which independent gene losses are required to explain magnaporthales-colletotrichum gene sharing under the assumption of vertical gene transmission



extended majority rule consensus and majority rule consensus  trees built using the corresponding  <dig> single-gene ml trees resulted in the same topology . of the  <dig> internodes that define or link orders ,  <dig> internodes have more than 50 % gene-support frequencies  or are supported by more than 50 %  of the single-gene ml trees . all of these internodes have more than  <dig>  internode certainties , suggesting the defined bipartitions are more than four times more likely to exist than the most likely alternative bipartitions. the same topology and ml bootstrap support values were obtained when using the  <dig>  genes with the strongest phylogenetic signal and when using the full set of  <dig> genes, although with decreasing gsf and ic values . these results show that magnaporthales and colletotrichum are distinct lineages separated in the tree by multiple, well-defined sordariomycetes lineages.

hgt marker genes derived from non-pezizomycotina sources
to search for hgt candidates, we employed a phylogenomic approach to build single-gene phylogenies for protein sequences from the specified query species. this approach is conservative because many genes do not lead to highly supported phylogenies  for different reasons such as lack of phylogenetic signal, short sequence length, and few detectable homologs in the database . from the available magnaporthales genomes, we used magnaporthiopsis incrustans  as a representative species. we used the m. incrustans proteins as query against a local database that included ncbi refseq  and genome and transcriptome data from  <dig> pezizomycotina species . we identified three instances in which m. incrustans genes and their magnaporthales orthologs were derived from non-pezizomycotina  sources via hgt  with 85 % or more sh-like branch support  <cit>  and 85 % or more ufboot support  <cit> . limited numbers of foreign gene candidates were previously reported in its sister lineage pyricularia oryzae  <cit> .

when allowing the np-derived foreign genes to be shared with one other pezizomycotina genus, we identified two np-derived genes that are exclusively shared between m. incrustans  and colletotrichum . an example is the monophyly of the magnaporthales and colletotrichum major facilitator superfamily transporter proteins that are nested within bacterial homologs . the other case represents the exclusive sharing of a putative alpha- <dig> -mannosidase that is derived from distantly related fungal lineages . these two instances of exclusive gene sharing were confirmed using a two-way phylogenomic approach. the principle behind this method is analogous to the reciprocal-best hit approach widely used with blast searches. more specifically, in this case, we subjected the colletotrichum sequences in fig. 2a, b to our phylogenomic pipeline to search its sister lineages and recovered exclusive gene sharing with magnaporthales .fig.  <dig> exclusive sharing of non-pezizomycotina-derived horizontal gene transfer gene markers in magnaporthales and colletotrichum. a maximum likelihood  tree of a major facilitator superfamily transporter. b ml tree of a putative alpha- <dig> -mannosidase that participates in carbohydrate transport and metabolism



extensive gene transfer between magnaporthales and colletotrichum
given the overall paucity of np-derived genes in m. incrustans and two instances of exclusive sharing of such foreign gene markers with colletotrichum, we tested the magnitude of gene transfers between m. incrustans and colletotrichum using the two-way phylogenomic approach. out of  <dig> single gene phylogenies generated using m. incrustans proteins as queries, we identified  <dig>  m. incrustans genes with a colletotrichum provenance with 85 % or above sh-like branch support  <cit>  and 85 % or above ufboot support  <cit>  . these  <dig> candidates represent  <dig> distinct transfer events followed by independent duplications of four different genes . these hgts are located in relatively long m. incrustans contigs  and have orthologs in other magnaporthales species. in 91 %  of the cases, at least one of the associated colletotrichum genes is located in contigs or scaffolds encoding five or more genes. in 80 %  of the instances, shared genes are present in two or more colletotrichum species. transfers of five genomic segments comprising 2– <dig> hgts were identified between the two lineages . in all but one case, only limited regions of the entire length of contigs were impacted by hgt in both lineages. one example is the transfer of a two-gene magnaporthales segment to the common ancestor of colletotrichum. the phylogenies of the two genes with magnaporthales-colletotrichum groupings are shown in additional file  <dig>  these results, corroborated by the overall high quality of the fungal genome data, suggest that most of the identified hgt instances between magnaporthales and colletotrichum are not explained by sequence contamination.

the nature and significance of hgt between magnaporthales and colletotrichum
of the  <dig> putative instances of hgt,  <dig> likely resulted from gene transfers from magnaporthales to colletotrichum . one example is the phylogeny of a putative dimethylaniline monooxygenase in which colletotrichum sequences are nested within homologs from magnaporthales . another  <dig> hgt instances were in the opposite direction  including a nacht and tpr domain-containing protein, whose phylogeny shows magnaporthales to be nested within colletotrichum and its sister-group lineage verticillium . the directions of gene transfers for the remaining instances are unclear.fig.  <dig> the nature of horizontal gene transfer  between magnaporthales and colletotrichum. a maximum likelihood  tree of a putative dimethylaniline monooxygenase. this phylogeny provides an example of a gene transfer from magnaporthales to colletotrichum. b ml tree of a nacht and tpr domain-containing protein. this phylogeny provides an example of a gene transfer from colletotrichum to magnaporthales. c random sampling analysis of hgt gene clustering in the m. incrustans genome. we randomly sampled  <dig> genes from the m. incrustans data  <dig> times  and the number of genomic segments derived from these replicates  ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  in over  <dig>  %  of the replicates, six or less genomic segments resulted. therefore, the chance is less than  <dig>  % to generate the eight genomic segments that were observed in the empirical data . similarly, the range of the genes that were included in the genomic segments was 0– <dig> with over  <dig>  % of the gene numbers being  <dig> or less. therefore, the chance is less than  <dig>  % to generate a total of  <dig> genes that are contained in genomic segments. these results suggest that the enrichment of physical linkage in our hgt data cannot be explained solely by chance. d the proportion of carbohydrate-activating enzymes, transporters, and peptidases among the hgt set  in comparison to those in complete-genome data . the results of significance test are indicated for each comparison



about one-quarter of the gene transfers occurred in the stem lineage of magnaporthales . considering the relatively recent emergence of colletotrichum, these hgts likely occurred between the magnaporthales common ancestor and an ancient lineage leading to extant colletotrichum. other hgt instances occurred more recently and are restricted to particular magnaporthales lineages . given the uncertainties that result from the varying sequencing depth and differential gene loss among magnaporthales clades, predictions about the timing of gene transfer should be treated with caution. nevertheless, these results strongly suggest that magnaporthales exchanged genes with the lineage leading to modern-day colletotrichum.

we identified eight m. incrustans genomic segments  that contain two or more physically linked genes of hgt origin  . we manually examined the genomic locations of the relevant colletotrichum genes associated with the five genomic segments without non-hgt interruption . in almost all cases, the corresponding genomic segments were also found in colletotrichum genomes. random sampling  <dig> genes  from the 9154 m. incrustans genes with single-gene phylogenies showed that the physical linkage of hgt genes is significantly more than expected by chance alone . a similar result was obtained when using the ophioceras dolichostomum  proteome as the input for the two-way phylogenomic analysis . a total of  <dig> hgts  were inferred between o. dolichostomum and colletotrichum . these results suggest that hgt between magnaporthales and colletotrichum often occurred as segmental transfers involving more than one gene.

we then asked, what is the functional significance of hgt between magnaporthales and colletotrichum? from the perspective of taxonomy, out of the  <dig> highly conserved single-copy orthologous genes that were identified across  <dig> pezizomycotina lineages , none were implicated in hgt. this suggests that magnaporthales-colletotrichum hgts have a limited impact on highly conserved genes and likely does not pose significant challenges for the reconstruction of a fungal tree of life. from the perspective of functional impacts, we examined several functional categories associated with the plant pathogenic lifestyle, including carbohydrate-activating enzymes   <cit>  involved in cell wall degradation, membrane transporters, and peptidases involved in pathogenesis  <cit> . we found a  <dig> -fold enrichment of cazymes in the m. incrustans gene set derived from hgt  when compared to the 9154-gene background data . this enrichment was statistically significant  and was not explained by post-hgt duplication of cazyme encoding genes in magnaporthales. the  <dig> transferred cazymes represent  <dig> independent hgt events with only two genes having resulted from post-hgt gene duplication. enrichment of cazymes among genes that were transferred between magnaporthales and colletotrichum  in hgts versus  <dig>  %  in genome background; χ <dig> test) were also observed when analyzing the o. dolichostomum genome data . weak or non-significant differences were however found in the distribution of transporter and peptidase genes .

given that dna transfer and integration are largely independent of gene functions, these results suggest that hgts with cell wall degradation functions were selectively retained  after insertion into host genomes. this function-driven selection is likely linked to the plant pathogenic lifestyles found in both lineages. the magnaporthales-colletotrichum hgt connection may therefore have been facilitated by a shared ecological niche and host. hgt occurs commonly between species that are in close proximity or have physical contact .

alternative explanations for magnaporthales-colletotrichum gene sharing
we examined three potential issues that might weaken our case for the  <dig> hgts between m. incrustans and colletotrichum . regarding the first issue, when the corresponding genes were absent in all other sordariomycetes lineages , the explanation for hgt due to poor sampling and extensive gene losses in closely related lineages would require the complete absence or loss of the impacted genes in all five sordariomycetes lineages  that were well-sampled in this study . when assuming the existence of the node uniting magnaporthales and colletotrichum to be the sordariomycetes common ancestor, a total of five gene losses are required to explain all magnaporthales-colletotrichum hgts . however, careful examination of the hgt gene trees derived from the m. incrustans genome data revealed a total of  <dig> independent hgt events  that require more than five gene losses when vertical inheritance with gene loss is assumed . for hgt types ii and iii, the corresponding genes are present in additional sordariomycetes lineages and form a sister group relationship  to the magnaporthales-colletotrichum monophyletic clade . this leads to phylogenetic conflicts because magnaporthales and colletotrichum are separated by additional sordariomycetes lineages in the species tree shown in fig. 1b . to explain these phylogenetic conflicts, one ancient gene duplication and  <dig> independent gene losses are required when assuming vertical inheritance and gene loss, whereas only one gene transfer  and an additional gene loss  are required when hgt is allowed . we also identified hgt cases , in which colletotrichum species are nested among magnaporthales or vice versa . the phylogenetic conflicts raised in these hgts require a total of one ancient gene duplication and  <dig> independent gene losses when assuming vertical inheritance and gene loss, whereas only one gene transfer  and an additional gene duplication  are required when hgt is allowed . whereas we cannot definitively exclude the possibility of vertical inheritance and gene loss as an explanation for each hgt candidate identified in this study, a total of  <dig> hgt cases  are highly unlikely to be explained by the vertical inheritance and gene loss scenario. the topologies and supporting values of these high confidence hgts  were confirmed via examination of gene trees generated from two-way phylogenomics and from the hgt validation procedure . a total of  <dig> independent hgts  were found in o. dolichostomum genome data .

for the second issue, we applied a novel implementation of two-way phylogenomics and an additional round of phylogenomic analysis to search for and validate hgts. these analyses involve different sequence sampling strategies  and different tree building methods  . the magnaporthales-colletotrichum hgts are therefore unlikely to be primarily explained by phylogenetic artifacts. regarding the third issue, it is possible that analysis of large genomic datasets might lead to observations of hgt that are explained solely by chance. however, random sampling of the magnaporthales gene set  is unlikely to generate as many physical linkages as we report in the empirical data . the enrichment of physical linkages among hgt candidates  is therefore unlikely to be accounted for solely by chance due to the large amount of genome data being analyzed. likewise, the observed enrichment of cazyme genes  in our hgt data is unlikely to be explained by random chance.

CONCLUSIONS
due to greater similarities in genomic properties such as gene structure and shared regulatory elements, hgt between closely related species is thought to be more frequent than between distantly related taxa. however, our understanding of recent hgt between closely related lineages is limited due to difficulties in distinguishing alternative scenarios  and the inability to resolve the topology of closely related gene sequences due to stochastic processes  operating in single-gene phylogenies. here, we show that well-resolved ancient hgts can provide a powerful marker to identify candidate species to test for more recent gene transfer events. the resulting putative hgts can be substantiated with structural and functional analyses.

what distinguishes the hgts between magnaporthales-colletotrichum from other reported cases of intra-phylum hgt among fungi  is scale and magnitude. hgt is generally thought to be highly limited in fungal species  <cit>  because of their robust chitin-rich cell walls and the loss of phagocytosis  <cit> . the conservative estimation of  <dig> putative gene transfers between m. incrustans and colletotrichum  provides a new perspective on the extent of genetic exchange between fungal pathogens and in eukaryotes in general. the only other known fungal lineage displaying a similar or higher scale of hgt is the genus aspergillus in the class eurotiomycetes . the underlying mechanisms responsible for hgt between fungal species are well documented and include anastomosis, which can lead to physical connections between cells from different species . in conclusion, our results provide novel insights into the evolution and pathogenicity in magnaporthales and colletotrichum, and suggest that many yet uncovered highways of hgt between closely related fungi remain to be discovered.

