BACKGROUND
when the great 18th-century naturalist carl linnaeus took a closer look at a the whale during the preparation of his natural classification system, he realized for the first time that it was not a fish but a mammal  <cit> . its form and fins were certainly like the fish, but it also had mammary glands and lungs and should, thus, be classified as a mammal. ever since linnaeus, what we today refer to as convergent evolution  has been advocated as a common and widespread phenomenon in nature. from single features  to whole organisms , superficial similarity has been repeatedly demonstrated to evolve independently in distantly related evolutionary lineages.

in plants, the giant lobelias from the hawaiian islands and tropical africa have been cited as remarkable examples of morphological convergence in the family campanulaceae . according to some earlier authors  <cit> , convergence from herbaceous plants into tall treelets would have occurred independently in different mountain systems in response to similar tropical alpine climates consisting of nightly frosts and rapid temperature fluctuations. the idea that many morphological features in giant lobelias represent adaptations to proximal environmental factors  <cit>  is based on the observation that the leaf rosettes of many giant species provide insulation for the central axis, protecting the shoot apex and the young leaves and inflorescences from extreme temperatures. according to hedberg  <cit> , a similar evolutionary pattern can be observed between the giant senecios of africa and the silversword alliance of the hawaiian islands , which hedberg cited as an example of convergent evolution alongside the giant lobelias .

since these pioneering works, many studies have addressed specific aspects of giant lobelioids, not only providing novel insights into the conspicuous habit of the giant forms  <cit>  but also their detailed morphology  <cit> , chromosome numbers  <cit> , conservation status  <cit>  and physiology  <cit> . based on a phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> species in subfamily lobelioideae , knox et al.  <cit>  proposed that the giant lobelioids consisted of a chilean hexaploid group and a pantropical tetraploid group, all derived from herbaceous ancestors. later, using the chilean giant species as outgroup and analysing the relationships and biogeographic history among  <dig> african and one brazilian giant lobelia, knox and palmer  <cit>  suggested that the eastern african giant lobelias arrived in africa from the asian/pacific region. more recently, givnish et al.  <cit>  used a larger data set  to demonstrate that all hawaiian lobelioids constitute a monophyletic clade, thus corroborating previous results by givnish and co-workers  <cit> 

despite these major advances, we still need to verify whether the biogeographic and phylogenetic patterns obtained so far for lobelioideae will stand the inclusion of increased taxon sampling. in order to confidently test whether the giant forms worldwide evolved independently from herbaceous ancestors, it seems vital to include a considerably larger representation of herbaceous taxa and to root the lobelioideae tree with representative taxa from outside the subfamily.

here i build on previous studies to reconstruct the life form and biogeographic evolution of lobelioideae. i focus on the following questions:  have giant lobelioids evolved from herbaceous ancestors several times independently?;  when and where did the giant habit evolve?; and  is the life form and geographic distribution phylogenetically conservative? to address these questions, i generated fast-evolving nuclear sequence data for several giant species and, in combination with all available dna sequences for selected markers, i performed phylogenetic, biogeographic, character evolution and molecular dating analyses. the results reported here demonstrate that the giant lobelioids have a very different evolutionary history than the giant asteraceae.

RESULTS
phylogeny
the maximum likelihood trees based on all campanulaceae sequences available at genbank and complemented by novel sequences generated in this study for trnl-f, its and rbcl are shown in figure 2a, c. lobelioideae is retrieved as monophyletic in all three analyses of each marker separately, providing an indication of the choice of taxa for the subsequent analyses. the results from the bayesian and bootstrap analyses on the lobelioideae data set are shown together in figure  <dig>  generally, strongly supported relationships were in agreement with, or at least did not contradict, previous phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . the few differences obtained here  are discussed below.

molecular dating
the results from the molecular dating analyses are summarized in table  <dig>  generally, node age estimations exhibited relatively large confidence intervals, both under the penalized likelihood  and the bayesian relaxed clock  methods. the tree with highest sum of clade credibilities generated under the bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling trees  analysis  did not exhibit any strongly supported phylogenetic conflict with the consensus cladogram of the mrbayes analysis . although there was great variation between the age estimates obtained in penalized likelihood as compared to beast, in all key nodes listed in table  <dig> there was considerable overlap of the 95% confidence intervals and highest probability densities. the mean covariance between parental and child lineages in the beast analysis was  <dig>  . since a covariance close to zero indicates no significant autocorrelation of rates , this indicates that the beast results reported here are probably more realistic than the ages obtained in penalized likelihood  <cit> . for comparison, both results are reported throughout the paper.

beast = bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling trees; ci = confidence interval; hpd = highest posterior density.

life form shifts
the character state reconstruction of life form is shown in figure  <dig> . the reconstruction of life form on the bayesian cladogram required  <dig> steps and the character is phylogenetically conservative . the ancestral life form of the most recent common ancestor  of lobelioideae  is ambiguous, due to an early split between a chamaephyte lineage  and a hemicryptophyte lineage .

there is great life form variation in the lobelioideae at the intergeneric, intrageneric and intraspecific levels . only in a few cases is there a homogeneous life form correlating with a certain clade, as indicated by the low consistency index of life form overall . one example of local high consistency is in the clade lobelia oligophylla - l. arenaria , in which all exhibit the hemicryptophyte habit, at least facultatively. although the overall low consistency is partly biased by an uneven taxon sampling , it does reflect a general pattern of difficulties in identifying natural taxa in lobelioideae based on morphology .

sequences produced in this study are marked with ; their origin and voucher information are available from their genbank record.

evolution of the giant lobelioids
the nanophanerophyte habit  developed early in the history of the lobelioideae, most probably several times , or, less likely, just once . present day lineages inhabiting the hawaiian islands, french polynesia, southeast asia and eastern brazil  all derive from a single ancestor . ancestral state reconstructions indicate that this ancestor was most likely confined to africa and that it was a nanophanerophyte . indeed, it is in this clade that the truly giant habit occurs, as exhibited by l. gloria-montis and l. rhynchopetalum . this corroborates previous results, based on fewer species, that giant lobelias are closely related and are ultimately derived from herbaceous ancestors  <cit>  but contradicts some earlier suggestions the giant habit would be plesiomorphic in the family  <cit> .

nanophanerophyte ancestors  have given rise to phanerophytes  several times independently. although several species are strictly phanerophytic , others often vary in height . these results indicate that, in the lobelioideae, height seems to be a more labile state than woodiness.

biogeographic history
geographic range development of the lobelioideae is depicted in figure  <dig>  as with life form, distribution is phylogenetically conservative , but even more so given its higher consistency index  and fewer parsimony steps required for reconstructing the bayesian cladogram .

the mrca of the lobelioideae, as well as those of most of the early diverging splits , are all reconstructed to africa with confidence. range shifts are unambiguously inferred from: africa to oceania ; africa to the neotropics ; the neotropics to oceania ; and oceania to southeast asia . that the brazilian giant lobelias are together sister to an african species is strongly supported, as previously suggested, by knox et al.  <cit> .

there is no support here for the hypothesis that the giant lobelias arrived in eastern africa from asia or the pacific region  <cit> . however, the resolution at the base of clade n <dig> is very poor and the relationships among the strongly supported clades within it - and possibly their biogeographic reconstructions - may substantially change with the addition of more species and sequence data. indeed, in the analysis by givnish et al.  <cit> , l. nicotianifolia  was inferred to be sister to a clade comprising french polynesian, african and hawaiian subclades. in the present analysis, that 'basal' position is occupied by african species , although the support for this placement is weak . as taxon sampling, sequence regions and phylogenetic methods have all varied considerably between different studies, further investigation is clearly needed in order to reconstruct a solid biogeographic scenario for the large lobelioids.

dispersal versus vicariance
although the exact timing for transcontinental range shifts inferred here are prone to large error margins associated with topological and branch length uncertainties , all range shifts are estimated to have occurred in the last  <dig> ma and, in several cases, presumably much more recently. given that the final break-up of gondwanaland took place around ~ <dig> ma  <cit> , these results provide evidence that long-distance dispersals must have played a major role in shaping the present-day distribution of taxa, a scenario also corroborated by the molecular dating analysis of givnish et al.  <cit> . this contrasts to early suggestions  <cit>  that distribution patterns may be the result of vicariance caused by continental drift.

long-distance dispersal seems plausible for lobelioids, since most species produce large amounts of minuscule seeds. from herbarium specimens, i calculated that  <dig> g of seed of the hawaiian endemic clermontia kakeana contains about  <dig>  seeds . although seeds of clermontia and some other hawaiian genera  are today contained in bird-dispersed berries, other hawaiian taxa  still possess wind-dispersed capsules, a condition also inferred for the mrca of the hawaiian clade by givnish et al.  <cit> . it is therefore reasonable to conclude that wind dispersal of tiny seeds was the dispersal mode for the ancestor of the hawaiian lobelioids, as suggested by givnish et al.  <cit>  and that, presumably, the same applies for other lobelioid dispersal events. millions of tons of dust are transported annually from the sahara into south america  <cit> , so it is conceivable that, given enough time, lobelioid seeds could also be carried over the  <dig>  km separating the hawaiian islands and africa and, subsequently, succeed in germinating and establishing a new population.

colonization of the hawaiian islands
the earliest diversification of lineages endemic to the hawaiian islands corresponds to the crown age of node n <dig> retrieved in the mrbayes analysis . in the pl analysis, that clade had a mean of  <dig>  ma , whereas in the beast analysis the mean was  <dig>  ma . however, in the beast analysis, where the hawaiian taxa had to be constrained as monophyletic , the crown group of the whole hawaiian clade had a mean of  <dig>  ma . these ages are only slightly older than the estimates by givnish et al.  <cit> , which varied between  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ma and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  depending on calibration methodology.

the relatively old node ages estimated here may seem surprising, given that the oldest of the modern hawaiian islands with well-developed vegetation only dates back to  <dig>  ma  <cit> . however, they are fully explainable when considering that these islands are part of a much older archipelago formed by the movement of the pacific plate over a fixed hot spot. a continuous chain of islands have been elevated since  <dig>  ma  <cit>  and lobelioid lineages could have continuously colonized the rising islands and ceased to exist in the subsiding ones. island hopping by a plant adapted to long-distance dispersal is biologically feasible and has been suggested for the hawaiian genus hillebrandia in the plant family begoniaceae  <cit>  and the fern genus diellia  <cit> .

correlates of lobelioid diversification
in order to identify possible drivers of biotic diversification, it is essential to infer when and where lineages diversified. ages and ancestral areas reconstructed here may, therefore, provide a suitable starting point for further examination of particular clades in the lobelioideae.

one appealing example of how these reconstructions can be useful concerns the scbl clade . this group of mainly nanophanerophytes and chamaephytes comprises over  <dig> species, which is about half of all lobelioideae species  <cit> . the scbl clade is entirely confined to the neotropical region, and is particularly rich in species in the northern andes. the uplift of the northern andes began at ~ <dig> ma and intensified in the last ~ <dig> ma, with several discrete phases of uplift which especially affected the eastern cordilleras  <cit> . the temporal match between the andean uplift and the ages inferred here is striking: onset of diversification was inferred at ~ <dig> ma  or ~ <dig> ma   and the mrca of this clade was unambiguously inferred as the neotropics . although a correlation in time and space does not necessarily imply causation, there is an emerging consensus that the andean uplift has played a major role in neotropical diversification  <cit> . further studies are clearly needed in order to disentangle the relative role of competing hypotheses of drivers of diversification in this clade, be they mainly abiotic  or biotic .

the temporal framework for the lobelioideae provided here may also contribute to the discussion on the diversification of particular lobelioideae groups, for which a fine-scale biogeographic analysis has been performed but for which no absolute divergence times have been estimated. one of these is the giant lobelias of eastern africa, which have been thoroughly studied by knox and co-workers  <cit> . crown ages for the eastern african clade, comprising lobelia columnaris, l. gibberoa, and l. gregoriana, estimated here  clearly predate the age of most of the mountains in the eastern and western african rifts  <cit> . these findings influence the interpretation of the tempo and possible processes underlying diversification in the region .

CONCLUSIONS
let us recapitulate the thought-provoking hypothesis that the giant lobelias of africa and the hawaiian islands converged into the giant life form from herbaceous ancestors in the same way as the giant senecios and the silversword alliance have . the distant relationship between dendrosenecio and the silversword alliance, and their separate diversification, has been generally accepted for more than a century. this is reflected in their taxonomic placement in different tribes based on conspicuous floral dissimilarities and was recently corroborated by molecular phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . in contrast, the results presented here show a very different evolutionary history for the giant form in the subfamily lobelioideae. the giant lobelioids of africa and the hawaiian islands, together with similarly large species from eastern brazil, french polynesia and southeast asia, are all derived from a single ancestor that was woody and probably african.

detailed comparative studies are needed in order to evaluate the morphological similarities and differences in habits among and within clades n <dig>  n <dig> and n <dig> . a different way of coding for the morphology and habits of species in those clades might affect the reconstruction of the ancestral states for the lobelioideae. eventually, more phylogenetically informative sequence data and denser taxon sampling may help elucidate the evolution of this exceedingly diverse plant group.

