BACKGROUND
one of the main challenges of post-genomic era is the accurate annotation of genes and the improvement of our knowledge of mechanisms of gene expression through the identification of cis-acting non-coding regulatory regions. comparative genomics has been one of the most successful approaches used to address this task. indeed it is well known that sequences with functional activity – such as coding sequences or regulatory regions – are subject to selective pressures that prevent the fixation of mutations and conserve sequences during evolution.

conserved non-coding sequences have been shown to act as tissue specific enhancers of gene expression  <cit>  and in particular of genes involved in control of development  <cit> . evolutionary conserved sequences have also been successfully used for the identification of new genes  <cit> .

given the great interest in this area of research and thanks to the availability of the almost complete genome sequences of many organisms, several tools to identify and collect conserved sequences have been proposed  <cit> .

the identification of a conserved sequence is only the first step in the identification of functional elements that requires further information, the most obvious being the assessment of its coding potential, i.e. to assess if the conserved sequence is likely to be part of a coding region. discriminating between coding and non coding conserved sequences is of great importance as the discovery of novel coding sequences may help the detection of unannotated genes or coding exons and the identification of splice variants. conversely, the study of non-coding conserved sequences may lead to the identification of regions that may have regulatory activity both at dna or mrna level by affecting transcription or translation thus modulating gene expression.

the usual approach is to classify conserved sequences as coding or noncoding by comparison with annotated protein sequences: if a conserved sequence is not supported by  a known protein it is labelled as non-coding.

this approach makes classification heavily dependent on the quality of the annotation of the genomes under analysis and it is obviously less applicable to new – poorly annotated – genomes.

we previously developed cstminer, a tool that does not suffer from these limitations as it identifies conserved sequences  and classifies them as coding or non-coding by evaluating the presence of evolutionary dynamics specific of coding sequences  <cit> .

we recently applied cstminer to an extensive analysis of human chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and corresponding mouse syntenic regions  <cit> . we identified more than  <dig>  csts.  <dig>  of these were labelled as coding and were used to benchmark a novel methodology – based on the identification of clusters of coding csts – to detect genomic regions which are likely to contain genes . one striking result of the work was that, despite the large efforts made towards the annotation of human genome, we were able to identify  <dig> loci potentially containing unannotated genes using a relatively simple comparative approach. interestingly  <dig> of the  <dig> predicted genes were confirmed by updated genome annotation at the time of publication – confirming the reliability of our approach.

the computational problem for the comprehensive comparison of two genomes of the size of human and mouse is not trivial. indeed, although cstminer is fairly fast, it is limited by the alignment step which implements a blast like algorithm which is not suitable to compare very long sequences.

in this paper we propose a highly parallelized system to perform a complete comparison of large genomes. this system also allows the submission of precomputed genomic alignments  to further improve the speed of the analysis.

a preliminary study of sequences conserved between human and mouse genomes allowed the identification of several clusters of coding csts that do not correspond to any annotated genes and the creation of a collection of non-coding csts possibly endowed of some functional activity.

RESULTS
the first operation performed by the cstminer algorithm is the identification of high scoring segment pairs  through a blast-like sequence comparison. a solution to the computational problem associated with whole genome comparisons is to split long sequences into smaller fragments . we empirically established a length of  <dig> kbp  as a good compromise . given the size of human  and mouse  genomes, an exhaustive comparison between all human and mouse  <dig> kbp sequences would require nearly  <dig> m comparisons. considering an average computation time of  <dig> sec for each comparison the whole analysis would require many years of computation on a single cpu. we took advantage of the high level of parallelization offered by grid technology and developed a system suitable to perform all comparisons in a "reasonable" time.

the number of tasks to be performed is very large and in a distributed environment there are many reasons that individual jobs may fail . accurate job management is therefore essential and to this end a fully automated procedure based on mysql dbms was developed to launch and monitor jobs, re-run failed jobs and to collect results of the analysis.

genome-wide detection of human-mouse conserved sequence tags 
following cstminer analysis we obtained a redundant collection  of nearly  <dig> , <dig> csts with an average length of  <dig> nt as summarized in table  <dig> where total number of csts, average and maximum length is reported for each chromosome.

the total cst length , the average  and the maximum length  is reported. numbers in brackets refer to the non-redundant cst dataset. minimum length has been limited to  <dig> nt .

the minimum cst length has been limited to  <dig> nt as shorter sequences would not allow a reliable computation of the coding potential score . chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> show some uncommonly long csts . these two csts are characterized by a high coding potential and correspond to conserved sequences of the long coding exons of ttn and sacs genes.

cstminer assesses the coding potential of csts by computing a coding potential score  based on the evolutionary dynamics observed between the two sequences. once fixed threshold values for cps derived from benchmark sets of coding and non-coding sequences a specific label can be assigned to each cst  <cit> . more than  <dig>  csts were labelled as coding,  <dig>  csts were labelled as non-coding,  <dig>  csts remained undefined as the cps fell in a twilight zone between the coding and the non-coding thresholds. finally nearly  <dig>  csts displayed more than 95% of identity and were labelled as ultra-conserved . given the low divergence, it is not possible to compute a reliable cps for these csts.

we observed that csts labelled as undefined often overlap both coding and non-coding regions corresponding to cds or to utr or intron sequences, respectively . the global coding potential score assigned by cstminer is influenced by both subregions and does not allow a clear classification of the sequence.

human mouse conservation
in order to accurately evaluate whole human-mouse genome conservation it was necessary to consider that csts may overlap one another as the same region of a genome may share similarity with more than one region of the other genome under analysis . we projected each cst onto the genome and labelled each human and mouse nucleotide according to the cst label. if the same nucleotide was contained in more than one cst it was labelled according to the ranking: ultraconserved > coding > noncoding > undefined, as depicted in figure  <dig>  in this way we obtained a non-redundant set of csts assigning to each conserved nucleotide an unambiguous annotation.

we then obtained a cleaned set of more than  <dig>  nonredundant csts  distributed across human chromosomes  and labelled as summarized in figure  <dig> 

we evaluated nucleotide conservation of each human and mouse chromosome as shown in figure  <dig>  consistent with previous data  <cit>  we observed that average conservation of human and mouse genomes  is around 5%.

previous observations showed that the majority of genes on human chromosome  <dig> have their homologues on mouse chromosome  <dig>  interestingly our data show that these chromosomes are the most conserved, with  <dig> % and  <dig> % of conserved nucleotides respectively.

conversely, both human and mouse chromosomes y are poorly conserved . this observation could be explained with the degeneration process faced by y chromosome. moreover they are unusually rich of repetitive elements that we masked before running our analysis.

only  <dig> % of human genome is labelled as coding from our comparison with mouse genome.

csts and annotated mrnas
each cst is characterized by absolute coordinates on both human and mouse genomes and this allows a comparison with mrna annotations . we then classified csts as exonic, intronic or intergenic on the basis of their overlap with the available mrnas annotation. figure  <dig> shows that 65% of ultraconserved csts and 76% of coding csts overlap with known exons, 21% and 15% respectively map within introns while the remaining 13% and 9% map outside of annotated genes. noncoding csts – as expected – show a different pattern of localization: 43% and 29% map within intronic or intergenic regions while 28% overlap with annotated exons, likely corresponding to conserved tracts of untranslated regions . a similar pattern is also shown by undefined sequences.

coding cst-clustering
to identify regions with an high density of coding conserved sequences – likely gene loci – we applied an improved version of a clustering procedure previously described  <cit>   and detected  <dig>  clusters containing  <dig>  csts.

by comparing the genomic coordinates of the clusters of coding csts with those of annotated mouse and human mrnas we observed that  <dig>  clusters  overlapped known mrnas in at least one organism. noticeably  <dig>  clusters were fully confirmed by human sequences  and  <dig>  clusters were fully confirmed by mouse sequences . these observations underline the reliability of our simple approach to localize gene loci on unannotated genomes and strongly support the idea that clusters not overlapping with known sequences are likely to represent unannotated gene loci.

clusters not corresponding to any annotated mrna sequence have been compared to ests to find evidence of their expression.

moreover, given that our approach does not require the previous availability of annotated features, it seems reasonable to think that it could prove to be a powerful tool in the annotation of genomes lacking a well curated gene annotation.

as  <dig> clusters were confirmed neither by human nor by mouse mrnas, we compared their chromosome coordinates to those of human ests to find evidence of their expression. indeed,  <dig>  of these clusters showed an overlap with ests . only  <dig> clusters  did not show any overlap with known transcribed sequences .

one of the cst clusters possibly corresponding to a novel gene locus is shown in figure  <dig>  quite strikingly, coding csts not only correspond to spliced ests but also to coding exons predicted by a variety of gene finding programs thus further supporting the inferred gene prediction

noncoding csts
several evidences have been reported about the critical role of non coding conserved sequences in regulation of gene expression  <cit>  and in particular in the regulation of genes involved in control of development  <cit> .

we are aware that – at this stage – our data are limited to the comparison of human and mouse and may not allow the precise localization of short functional motifs. nonetheless the identification of core sequence elements shared by several non-coding nrcsts might represent a powerful approach for the detection of conserved sequences that might be involved in chromatin remodelling or in the regulation of the expression of many genes while unique non-coding nrcsts might be expected to include elements with more gene-specific functions.

we performed reciprocal blastn analyses of more than  <dig>  human noncoding nrcsts and observed that nearly 92% of the sequences are unique . 7% of sequences show some similarity to up to five different nrcsts, 1% show up to  <dig> occurrences while the remaining  <dig> % show sequence similarity to more than  <dig> non-coding nrcsts. these results are summarized in figure  <dig>  the observed non-coding repeated elements do not correspond to annotated repeats as the cstminer analysis was performed on repeat masked sequences.

to investigate the hypothesis that noncoding conserved sequences  might correspond to functional regions we made a comparison with specialized databases containing known regulatory elements. the enrichment of known functional regions in our dataset of conserved non-coding sequences would support the possibility that the same dataset could contain new regulatory elements.

in particular we considered "presta-promoter", which contains a curated non-redundant set of human promoter sequences  <cit> , rfam ncrna database  <cit>  and "oreganno" database which contains manually curated known regulatory elements  <cit> .  <dig> nccsts matched with  <dig>  sequences in the prestapromoter dataset,  <dig> nccsts with  <dig>  "oregoanno" sequences and  <dig> nccsts with  <dig>  rfam elements. the finding that a sizable proportion of known functional elements are represented in our conserved non-coding set suggests that additional, still unknown, regulatory elements are represented in our nccst dataset.

cst comparison with blastz chains
pre-computed genome alignments are already available for several genomes, including human and mouse and it may make sense to take advantage of this data – provided that information loss is minimal.

we compared csts obtained from our full genome analysis with the results obtained by comparing genome regions corresponding to blastz  <cit>  chain tracts only. we adapted the grid based system we developed for the full genome comparison to allow the submission of blastz alignments  to limit the analysis to these regions. nonetheless many blastz chains are longer than  <dig> kbp  and cannot be efficiently analyzed with a direct comparison. those sequences were split in  <dig> kbp slices  and – to further reduce computational load – only slices showing at least  <dig> identical sequences of  <dig> nt on the same diagonal were compared. this procedure – which is similar to the one employed by the blat algorithm  <cit>  – remarkably reduced the number of cstminer comparisons to about 1% of all the possible  <dig> kbp comparisons.

despite the striking reduction of comparisons we observed that only 1% of total csts were completely missed by blastz chains while and additional 4% escaped detection because they did not pass the filter imposing three decamers on the same diagonal above described. however, our data suggest that the use of blastz chains can provide an acceptable reduction of the complexity of analysis with a limited  loss of information.

however, the main advantage of blastz chains in this context is their availability as pre-computed features . indeed, their computation is rather time consuming .

on the other hand, the reduction procedure based on the identification of exact matches on the same diagonal provides a significant speed up of the process as the computational requirements to perform the identification of those regions is limited .

discussion
as highlighted in  <cit>  the cstminer algorithm measures the coding potential through the evaluation of evolutionary dynamics unique to coding sequences not requiring the availability of any annotated feature. indeed, many analyses of conserved coding or noncoding sequences have been made by classifying a sequence as coding  following a comparison with protein databases  <cit> . it is clear that the reliability of such approach depends on the availability of annotated proteins. if a sequence is not supported by a protein it is difficult to decide if the sequence is really noncoding or whether the corresponding protein has simply not been identified.

moreover very few annotated proteins have been physically sequenced and the vast majority of them are conceptual translation products of available mrna sequences. this introduces a vicious circle as the hypothetical codingness of a sequence is inferred by the alignment to putative proteins.

we have developed and implemented a high performance grid-based system to perform exhaustive full genome comparisons with cstminer algorithm to identify and discriminate between conserved coding and noncoding sequences. besides the speed of the whole procedure even when entire large genomes are compared, one of the main advantages of our system is that it does not require any annotated feature for the assessment of the putative coding potential of identified conserved tracts rendering it useful for the comparison of poorly annotated genomes . it is thus possible to identify "interesting" sequences such as putative genes or regulatory regions, and use these data to drive subsequent experimental analysis or to strengthen the reliability of independent computational data .

we demonstrated – using as a reference the well annotated human and mouse genomes – that the observation of clusters of coding csts is a good indicator of the existence of a gene locus. this information can be incorporated in a gene prediction pipeline where several gene prediction tools are combined and their results compared to limit the rate of false positives and to strengthen the significance of predictions  <cit> .

collections of conserved non-coding sequences can also address specific studies on sequences that might regulate, for example, gene expression or chromatin structure. indeed, these data might also facilitate the identification of novel non-coding rnas, whose importance and prevalence are currently the subject of much debate  <cit> .

currently available sets of nonding elements are generated following the comparison of the conserved elements with annotated mrnas. it can thus be expected that following updates of databases some noncoding elements are reclassified as coding. in table  <dig> we show a comparison of publicly available conserved noncoding elements with coding csts to detect misannotated elements. it is interesting to notice that – as expected – while recent sets of noncoding elements such as condor  <cit> or ancora  <cit>  do not show any correspondence to coding csts, older sets  show a sizable  number of elements misannotated as noncoding that today we know to be part of coding region of refseq sequences.

 number of noncoding elements of the dataset;  percentage of elements of the set corresponding to a cst;  number of elements of the set which correspond to a coding cst and to the cds of a human refseq mrna.  elements of these sets refers to hg <dig> human assembly. therefore we preventively converted their coordinates to current assembly by using liftover conversion tool.

as pointed out by couronne  <cit>  local alignment tools, beside the identification of orthologous segments, lead to the identification of paralogous relationships and sequence repetitions. this information is often considered "noise" and is thus removed. this seems reasonable if the primary goal is to align genomes to find large scale orthologous regions; nonetheless repetitive elements can have functional relevance in regulation of gene expression and warrant further inspection. we have used repeat masked sequences – thus purging known repetitive elements – before cstminer analysis. nonetheless we observed many highly repetitive conserved noncoding elements that we believe to be interesting and may represent novel lineage specific repetitive elements.

our analysis system has been implemented on a grid facility  <cit> , taking advantage of the high parallelization achievable and allowing full genome comparisons in very reasonable amount of time . nonetheless many genomes have already been aligned with very sensitive algorithms like blastz and it is possible to take advantage of this information, limiting cstminer comparison to those regions only.

it is important to notice that although blastz chains are alignments of genomic sequences, the cstminer alignment step is required to detect local similarities. indeed the average length of csts detected by cstminer is  <dig> bases, while blastz tries to extend matches to find large synteny tracts, often resulting in very long alignments.

use of blastz chains only leads to the complete loss of only about 1% of total csts. however, chains longer than  <dig> kbp must be split into shorter tracts and an exhaustive comparison of all tracts must be performed. to further improve the speed of the analysis it is possible to limit cstminer comparison of chain fragments to pairs that show at least  <dig> identical matches of  <dig> nt on the same diagonal. by applying this restriction it is possible to drastically limit the number of comparisons  thus reducing the computation time to slightly more than  <dig> hours  with a further loss of 4% of csts.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we describe a grid-based system devised to perform full genome comparisons with cstminer algorithm. the main advantage of this system is that the assessment of coding potential of conserved sequences does not require any annotated feature rendering it useful for the comparative analysis of poorly annotated genomes.

the system has been benchmarked on the well-annotated human and mouse genomes where it proved its reliability.

