BACKGROUND
sleep is thought to be controlled by two processes, 1) a homeostatic process that determines sleep need , and 2) a circadian process that determines the timing of sleep and wakefulness. a robust index for sleep need is known as delta power, which refers to “delta”  oscillations in the electroencephalogram  of non-rapid eye movement  sleep. delta power increases with increased sleep pressure, and declines following sleep. therefore, sleep deprivation increases delta power, which then naturally decreases during recovery sleep. previous studies have shown that eeg delta power is under genetic control  <cit> , suggesting that specific genes contribute to sleep homeostasis. nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms that regulate sleep need remain incompletely described.

genome-wide technologies have been used to interrogate gene expression changes that follow sleep deprivation in the mouse brain  <cit> , but there is little agreement between studies. there are also no genome-wide studies that characterize transcriptional changes that occur during subsequent recovery sleep. a major challenge when analyzing genome-wide data in the brain in response to behavior is isolating the signal of interest from other factors  that simultaneously influence gene expression. we have previously shown that batch effects are widespread in genome-wide studies of gene expression in experimental neuroscience  <cit> . several data normalization strategies are available to correct these batch effects, including removal of unwanted variation . ruv adjusts for batch effects by performing factor analysis on control genes or replicate samples . we have also shown that ruv normalization leads to increased power and reproducibility of results  <cit> . we now employ ruv to generate an integrated cross-laboratory analysis of differential gene expression following sleep deprivation in the mouse brain. we also provide the first comprehensive genome-wide assessment of transcripts from mouse cortex during recovery sleep. our analysis improves detection of differentially expressed genes following sleep deprivation and shows that recovery sleep reverses the transcriptional changes it causes. this latter process occurs in waves that happen at different times during recovery sleep and affect functionally distinct classes of genes.

RESULTS
we first wanted to obtain a reliable estimate of the differential gene expression changes caused by sleep deprivation. to do this, we subjected mice to 5– <dig> h of sleep deprivation and different amounts of recovery sleep. control mice  were sacrificed at matching circadian times and cortical mrna was isolated from experimental and control groups for microarray analysis . we then integrated our data with that from three other studies performed in mouse cortex, whole brain and hippocampus  <cit> . we began with a traditional method of normalization, robust multi-array average  plus quantile normalization  <cit> , to integrate the data. the resulting principal component  analysis showed that 64 % of the variability was due to platform  while 16 % was due to different laboratories . these results show that traditional normalization methods are not well suited to integrate data across laboratories or array platforms. following ruv normalization, however, samples group according to treatment  and not laboratories, platform  or tissue type. we then evaluated the impact of normalization method in differential expression analysis. ruv restored the p-value histogram of differential expression to its expected distribution , increased detection of differentially expressed genes, and recovered 100 % of positive control genes known to respond to sleep deprivation . positive control genes used in our study  are listed in additional file  <dig>  the list of differentially expressed genes in response to sleep deprivation regardless of tissue for the integrated study is available in additional file  <dig>  our results show that a method as effective as ruv normalization is required for the proper characterization of differentially expressed genes across labs and platforms in meta-analysis studies, as we have shown for rna-seq data  <cit> .fig.  <dig> integrated analysis of the effect of 6 h of sleep deprivation in the murine cortex. a scatterplots of first two principal components  following rma and ruv normalization. percent variance explained by each pc in parenthesis. triangles denote samples from the maret et al.  <dig> study  <cit>  , square samples from the mackiewicz et al.  <dig> study  <cit>  , rhombus the samples from vecsey, peixoto et al.  <dig>  <cit>  , and circles are samples from this study . in green, samples following 6 h of sleep deprivation ; in orange, time of day matched controls . samples cluster according to array platform  and lab  following quantile normalization. after applying ruv, samples cluster according to treatment . b distribution of unadjusted p-values for tests of differential expression between sd and cc samples following quantile and ruv normalization. the distribution of p-values following quantile normalization is not uniform and biased towards  <dig>  ruv returns uniformity to the p-value distribution and increases discovery of differentially expressed genes . c volcano plot of differential expression  of quantile and ruv normalized samples. genes with an fdr < <dig>  are highlighted in blue. positive controls are circled in red; ruv increases the detection of known differentially expressed genes from  <dig> to 100 %. pca plots were performed using the r/bioconductor package edaseq . ruvs normalization was performed using the r/bioconductor package ruvseq . differential expression analysis was performed using r/bioconductor package limma




we were also interested in determining the effects of recovery sleep on sleep deprivation-induced gene expression, as this has been minimally explored. separate groups of mice were sleep-deprived and allowed to recover for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 6 h  to identify changes in genome-wide expression during recovery sleep. we again compared the effect of using traditional normalization  versus ruv on the characterization of differential gene expression after sleep deprivation or varying lengths of recovery sleep. the pc scatterplots revealed a lack of grouping of biological replicates with rma, indicative of the presence of confounding factors or “batch effects” in the data . unlike our previous analysis , no obvious grouping attributable to technical factors was found. following ruv normalization, the pca plots showed the expected segregation of groups according to treatment . the effect of data normalization is also evident in the analysis of differential expression. ruv analysis improved the detection of differentially expressed genes following one hour of recovery sleep , and recovered 86 % of the positive controls . improvement was also seen at all other time-points . these results show that ruv normalization, or similar methodology geared to address batch effects, is necessary for accurate detection of differential expression not only across but also within studies. genes differentially expressed at all time points in this study relative to controls can be found in additional file  <dig>  it is also known that time of day by itself can profoundly impact brain gene expression in the brain. to address the possible confound of circadian time in the fold changes observed following rs, we compared three controls samples to each other, cc <dig>  cc <dig> and cc <dig>  which correspond to circadian time zt =  <dig>  zt =  <dig> and zt =  <dig> respectively. the results are available in additional file  <dig> and were taken into account on the interpretation of gene expression changes brought on by rs.fig.  <dig> analysis of the effect of sleep deprivation and subsequent recovery sleep in the murine cortex. a scatterplots of first two principal components  following rma and ruv normalization. percent variance explained by each pc in parenthesis. triangles denote samples collected following sleep deprivation , circles control samples matched by time of day  and squares samples collected after recovery sleep . samples only cluster according to treatment after ruv normalization. b distribution of unadjusted p-values for tests of differential expression between one hour of recovery sleep  and control samples following rma and ruv normalization. ruv increases discovery of differentially expressed genes . c volcano plot of differential expression  of rma and ruv normalized samples. genes with an fdr < <dig>  are highlighted in blue. positive controls are circled in red; ruv increases the detection of known differentially expressed genes following recovery sleep. pca plots were performed using the r/bioconductor package edaseq . ruvs normalization was performed using the r/bioconductor package ruvseq . differential expression analysis was performed using r/bioconductor package limma. the analysis was based only on samples were collected from current laboratory




the discharge of sleep need in mammals is a gradual process, including events that normalize within the first 3 h  and others that may take 6– <dig> h to appear   <cit> . we therefore plotted the number of significant probesets altered by sleep deprivation and recovery sleep relative to their respective circadian time-point controls following both rma and ruv normalization . compared to rma, ruv analysis greatly improved the detection of significant genes for all groups examined. its impact is more pronounced on the detection of differential expression during recovery sleep. overall, the number of genes upregulated outnumbered those that are downregulated at all time-points.fig.  <dig> the effect of data normalization in differential expression following recovery sleep. a bar graph displaying the number of up and downregulated probesets detected at each time point relative to time-of-day matched controls following rma  or ruv  normalization. ruv normalization profoundly affects the detection of differentially expressed genes following various lengths of recovery sleep. positive controls for genes differentially expressed following 1 h of recovery sleep after were obtained as detailed in methods. b heatmap of differentially expressed probesets detected using ruv normalization relative to circadian time-matched controls. in red, upregulated genes. in green, downregulated genes. clustering based on patterns of gene expression is represented by the dendrogram and color coded. genes responding within 1– <dig> h to recovery sleep are indicated by black bars , while genes that respond at 6 h are indicated by grey bars . genes upregulated by sleep deprivation show two different patterns of response within the first three hours  and two different patterns of recovery at 6 h . the majority of genes upregulated by sleep deprivation respond slowly with recovery sleep. the majority of genes downregulated are fast responders , while a very small proportion recovers within 6 h . sd, sleep deprivation; rs <dig>  sleep deprivation followed by 1 h of recovery sleep; rs <dig>  sleep deprivation followed by 2 h of recovery sleep; rs <dig>  sleep deprivation followed by 3 h of recovery sleep; rs <dig>  sleep deprivation followed by 6 h of recovery sleep




we then generated a heatmap of differentially expressed genes detected using ruv normalization relative to circadian time-matched controls . the heatmap and subsequent clustering of gene expression across time-points revealed different patterns of gene expression relative to the amount of recovery sleep. we identified seven clusters of genes based on their expression pattern across recovery sleep . these seven clusters can be grouped into three categories: genes that recover within 1– <dig> h , genes that recover by 6 h of recovery sleep , and genes unaffected by sleep deprivation, but upregulated by the 6th hour of recovery. examples of genes belonging to each category can be found in fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> patterns of gene expression regulation during recovery sleep. plots of log-fold change  of differential expression relative to controls versus time since sleep deprivation. color coding corresponds to clusters on fig. 3b. plots for genes representative of different expression patterns are shown as dashed lines. the ordering of the gene names within genes of the same cluster  reflects the ordering of the plots. the average and standard deviation for each cluster is shown as solid lines and shaded area. patterns of expression are divided in two classes: ‘fast’ responders  and ‘slow’ responders . time constants for the change during recovery sleep for average of each cluster are shown




the majority of genes upregulated by sleep deprivation were slow responders, while the majority of genes downregulated by sleep deprivation were fast responders , supporting the pattern observed in fig. 3a. interestingly, a more fine-grained analysis of these results showed that transcripts known to be upregulated by sleep deprivation   <cit>  include both ‘slow’ and ‘fast’ responders. transcripts that recover by 1– <dig> h included arc, per <dig>  per <dig>  egr <dig>  and egr <dig>  while transcripts that recovered by 6 h included homer <dig>  bdnf, fosb, hspa <dig>  and npas <dig> . many of these transcripts also followed a normal circadian expression pattern, which are shown independently . the smaller set of  <dig> transcripts upregulated by the 6th hour of recovery sleep  included transcripts with less clearly defined functions, including micro rna and non-coding rna and transcripts involved in rna-binding protein sequestration   <cit> .

the identification of functional properties of differentially expressed genes associated with changes in sleep need is crucial for understanding mechanisms that regulate sleep and sleep function. in order to identify functional classes and pathways that respond to different amounts of recovery sleep, we performed functional annotation analysis of genes upregulated or downregulated by sleep deprivation within “fast” and “slow” responder groups. figure  <dig> represents clusters of enriched functional terms among the different classes of genes . genes downregulated by sleep deprivation were mostly “fast” responders  and were enriched in the following functional clusters: cell adhesion, protein catabolic process, ras gtpase binding, gtp signaling and cell cycle. in addition the following terms were enriched, although they did not cluster with other similar terms: transcriptional corepression, alternative splicing, and neurogenesis . for genes upregulated by sleep deprivation, “fast” responders  were enriched in the following functional classes: mapk signaling and regulation, gtpase signaling, and transcriptional regulation. the “slow” responders  represented nine different enriched clusters, generally with lower enrichment scores than the upregulated fast responders despite the fact that there were substantially more genes in this group.fig.  <dig> enriched functional clusters regulated by recovery sleep. a functional clusters regulated by 1– <dig> h of recovery sleep. b functional clusters regulated by 6 h of recovery sleep. functional annotation terms from the following databases: gene ontology  biological process and molecular function, kegg pathways and protein information resource keywords, were clustered based on similarity using the database for annotation visualization and integrated discovery . clusters of functional terms enriched in down- or upregulated gene lists following sd as compared with the genome as a whole  are represented as bars. height of bars represents the enrichment score of each cluster, with the scores of downregulated clusters shown as negative numbers for visualization purposes. enrichment score was calculated as − log of the geometric mean p-value among all clustered terms. only clusters with enrichment score > <dig>   were considered. for details of the functional terms included in these clusters, as well as enriched functional terms that did not cluster with other terms, see additional file 7





we also computed the decay time constant  for the changes in slow and fast responding transcripts to see if they approximated the τd for the discharge of sleep need  <cit> . as shown in fig.  <dig>  these varied across functional classes. interestingly, when we averaged τd across the different clusters of fast-responder genes the value was identical to that reported for the discharge of sleep need in this mouse strain .

discussion
the molecular determinants of sleep homeostasis are not well known. furthermore, transcriptional changes that track both the accumulation and discharge of sleep need have not been well characterized. here, we present a fully integrated meta-analysis of the effects of sleep deprivation on mouse brain gene expression, by combining our data with three other previous studies  <cit> . we also provide additional evidence for genome-wide changes in cortical gene expression following various lengths of subsequent recovery sleep. we report that discovery of gene expression changes linked to either sleep deprivation or recovery sleep, and not batch effects, requires a non-traditional method of data normalization . therefore, our study more accurately reflects true biological variance due to changes in sleep need, and vastly improves both single laboratory and meta-analysis studies of gene expression previously conducted in the absence of ruv  <cit> .

our results represent the first genome-wide examination of differentially expressed cortical genes that includes the response to sleep deprivation and subsequent changes across the recovery sleep period. the majority of genes fall into two general classes of transcriptional changes: transcripts that return to baseline values quickly  and transcripts that return to baseline values slowly . there was also a small subset of transcripts not affected by sleep deprivation, but upregulated in the 6th hour of the recovery period. genes that respond “fast” to recovery sleep may constitute the molecular signature underlying the discharge of sleep need based on electrophysiological studies. this is because these molecular changes parallel the discharge of sleep need as measured by changes in nrem eeg delta power. in mice, 6 h of sleep deprivation produces a large increase in delta power which then rapidly declines over the next 3 h of recovery sleep  <cit> . this pattern is strikingly similar to the time course we find for the ‘fast’ responder genes.

the majority of fast-responders are transcripts initially downregulated by sleep deprivation and then upregulated with recovery sleep. interestingly we find that these specific transcripts do not show time-of-day differences  suggesting that the biological functions they serve are more closely tied to sleep homeostasis. these include genes involved in synthesis and degradation of proteins. examples include ubiquitin-specific-proteases  and elongation initiation factors  . these results are consistent with previous studies , supporting the idea that one of the immediate effects of recovery sleep is to influence protein synthesis or turnover. a second class of ‘fast’ responder genes downregulated by sleep deprivation is involved in transcriptional repression linked to histone modification. histone acetylation and deacetylation modify the structure of chromosomes and influence access of transcription factors to dna. we find that histone deacetylase  <dig>  and associated co-repressor sin3a, together with the go term “transcriptional co-repression” are downregulated by sleep deprivation , as previously shown in the hippocampus  <cit> . this suggests that part of the compensatory response is a reactivation of transcriptional repression. this may be part of the restorative function of sleep; that it re-establishes a basal level of transcription required for normal neural function. while speculative, it is possible that the cognitive deficits associated with sleep deprivation result from an unchecked expression of certain transcripts; a situation reversed during recovery sleep.

fast responder genes upregulated by sd include immediate early genes previously identified as ‘induced by sleep deprivation’ . the function of immediate early genes is primarily the regulation of transcription, a functional category that is also enriched in this group. we also find that several of the fast-responder genes are traditional ‘circadian’ genes  and show time of day differences in their expression . the precise role of these immediate early and clock genes in sleep homeostasis is unclear. deletion of arntl  in mice alters baseline sleep architecture, increases nrem eeg delta-power baseline conditions, and attenuates the homeostatic response to sleep deprivation  <cit> . in addition, per <dig> and per <dig> brain expression in various inbred mouse strains correlates with changes in nrem eeg delta-power , suggesting these genes are tied to the sleep homeostat. however, per mutants have a normal response to sleep deprivation as measured by nrem delta power  <cit> , indicating they play no central role in sleep homeostasis. similarly, the expression of the immediate early gene homer1a also tracks sleep need  <cit> , but homer1a null mice have normal sleep homeostasis  <cit> . therefore it is possible that the regulation of these particular clock and immediate early genes may not be as closely linked to sleep homeostasis, as appears to be the case for other clock genes  <cit> . instead, circadian rhythms or neural activity may play more influential roles in their expression. this interpretation is consistent with earlier studies. it has been shown that several immediate early genes, such as per <dig> and arc, are also upregulated following contextual fear conditioning or object location memory for example  <cit> .

the slow responding transcripts represented the majority of all transcripts upregulated by sleep deprivation . these included genes previously linked to sleep homeostasis including homer <dig>  bdnf and npas <dig>  <cit> . there appears to be functional overlap between these slow responding transcripts and fast responding transcripts downregulated by sleep. go terms or functional clusters that overlap include: cell adhesion, neurogenesis, gtp signalling and splicing . adhesion molecules  are particularly interesting because they may link early responses to sd  with slower responses. this is because sleep deprivation induced changes in neuroligin <dig> are dependent on clock transcription factors  <cit> . a much smaller subset  was downregulated by sleep deprivation. the functions of these genes are not well understood.

lastly, we identified a small number of genes that were unaffected by sleep deprivation but were upregulated in the 6th hour of recovery sleep . the function of many of these genes is also obscure. one example is the long non-coding rna neat <dig>  neat <dig> is retained in the nucleus where it forms the core structural component of the paraspeckle sub-organelle located within the eukaryotic nucleus  <cit> . neat <dig> has been shown to regulate transcription via protein sequestration within paraspeckles  <cit> . paraspeckles are believed to function as a reservoir of mrna that are released into the cytoplasm under certain conditions  and/or provide a means of rna sequestration. the reason for this delayed expression of transcripts is unclear. in mice, 6 h sd not only increases nrem delta power in the first three hours of recovery sleep, but also leads to a delayed ‘rebound’ in rem sleep time that can occur at or after 6 h  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that the expression of this small subset of transcripts is driven by rem sleep  <cit> .

while our study represents a significant improvement over previous studies that set out to identify transcripts associated with sleep homeostasis, there are some limitations. for example, our current methods do not allow for the identification of spatial resolution of specific cortical layers, or regional differences between frontal and parietal cortices. further, the cell-type specificity for the changes in expression identified in our study is not characterized. in addition, it is difficult to differentiate which gene expression changes are responding to sleep pressure from those that are responding to stress hormones  <cit> . future studies using improved techniques, such as the use of trap technology  <cit>  will be necessary to identify cell-type specific changes in transcripts associated with sleep homeostasis.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study where ruv normalization has been used to compare multiple genome-wide data sets following sleep deprivation. we also used this approach to examine transcriptional changes during the recovery sleep period. we show that ruv vastly improves the meta-analysis of data generated in different laboratories and reveal novel changes in transcription during recovery sleep. we find that sleep produces two waves of transcription during recovery sleep. some changes occur rapidly, others more slowly across six hours of sleep. the fast responding transcripts may represent the molecular components of sleep homeostasis as they change with a time constant that is remarkably similar to the time constant for the discharge of sleep need. further characterization of these genes may reveal sleep function and the biological basis for sleep need.

