BACKGROUND
ericabatrachus baleensis largen,  <dig>  the sole member of its genus, is poorly known and critically endangered frog known only from the harenna forest in the bale mountains of ethiopia and, until recently, only from the original collection made in  <dig>  <cit> . in his description of the genus and species, largen  <cit>  noted that he intended but had not yet managed to study comparative osteology, which might have provided compelling insights into the evolutionary affinities of ericabatrachus. instead, while noting that ericabatrachus was “reminiscent of phrynobatrachus”  with “habitus phrynobatrachus-like” , largen tentatively concluded, on the basis of shared external features such as terminally t-shaped  phalanges, that ericabatrachus is a petropedetine . thus, in this view, ericabatrachus is most closely related to the east african arthroleptides nieden,  <dig> , east and west african petropedetes reichenow,  <dig>  and central/west african phrynodon, parker,  <dig>  petropedetinae/dae is a putatively monophyletic group nested within the large clade of “true frogs”  <cit>  termed “ranids”  <cit> .

uncertainty over the affinities of ericabatrachus is reflected in a period of taxonomic instability from  <dig> until present . dubois  <cit>  suggested an affiliation between ericabatrachus and phrynobatrachus, presumably based on the similar habitus and superficial resemblance noted by largen  <cit> . the same year, scott  <cit>  published the first broad-scale analysis of ranid phylogeny based on both morphology  and dna sequence data . scott’s  <cit>  analyses recovered ericabatrachus within the primarily southern african cacosternids, separate from phrynobatrachines and only distantly related to petropedetines . subsequently, substantial changes to amphibian classification were proposed  <cit>  on the basis of large-scale phylogenetic analyses of mostly or entirely dna sequence data, respectively. neither of these studies included ericabatrachus in their phylogenetic analysis, but ericabatrachus was alternatively classified within phrynobatrachidae, considered as likely nesting within phrynobatrachus based on largen’s  <cit>  comment that the taxon was “phrynobatrachus-like”  <cit>  or classified within pyxicephalidae based on scott’s  <cit>  findings  <cit> . in summary, over the past 22 years ericabatrachus has been treated as a member of three different families.
ericabatrachus baleensis 
largen, 1991


ericabatrachus 

ericabatrachus 
text in bold indicates placement of e. baleensis.

with newly collected specimens of ericabatrachus baleensis , dna sequence data can, for the first time, be used to investigate the phylogenetic relationships of this challenging taxon. inferring the phylogenetic relationships of ericabatrachus has important implications for both its biogeography and conservation. if ericabatrachus is closely related to petropedetidae, this would support the afromontane biogeographic region  <cit> . alternatively, relationships shared with predominantly southern african taxa  would provide evidence of an unusual biogeographical association. phylogeny is an important consideration in conservation prioritization  and resolution of the relationships of ericabatrachus will shed light on the validity of ericabatrachus as a monotypic genus and the degree to which this now critically endangered frog  <cit>  contributes to the genetic distinctiveness of conservation targets in the generally threatened  <cit>  bale mountains of ethiopia.

substantial steps have recently been made in resolving amphibian phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . the existence of a large and relatively well–sampled mega-alignment including more than  <dig>  amphibians  <cit> , potentially provides a useful basis for investigating the phylogenetic position of previously unsampled taxa  <cit>  such as ericabatrachus. however, what might constitute best use of prior phylogenetic work and resources is not necessarily obvious. for example, should we simply append or shoehorn data for new taxa into an existing mega-alignment, thereby accepting previous strategies employed in marker selection, alignments, and masking or should we re-evaluate some or all of these? should we accept previous phylogenetic conclusions and use these as topological constraints in order to expedite efficient placement of the newly included taxa or should we begin time-consuming unconstrained analyses de novo? here we use newly generated dna sequence data to investigate the phylogenetic relationships of ericabatrachus and some of the possible strategies for incorporating previously unsampled taxa into large-scale phylogenetic analyses.

RESULTS
saturation analysis
saturation plots  supported the inclusion of the following partitions in the large-scale phylogenetic analysis: rag <dig> codon positions  <dig>   <dig> and 3; h3a codon positions  <dig> and 2; 16s; 12s; 28s; cxcr <dig> codon positions  <dig>   <dig> and 3; slc8a <dig> codon positions  <dig>   <dig> and 3; pomc codon positions  <dig>   <dig> and 3; rhod codon positions  <dig> and 2; sia codon position 2; slc8a <dig> codon positions  <dig>   <dig> and 3; tyr codon positions <dig> and 2; and cytb codon positions  <dig> and  <dig>  an outlier species was detected in the 28s saturation plot, fejervarya limnocharis, and this marker was excluded for this taxon from the analysis.

phylogenetic analyses
the large-scale , unconstrained ml analysis recovered ericabatrachus as the sister taxon of petropedetes with a bootstrap support of 59% . this low bootstrap support is primarily a consequence of ericabatrachus being associated with other clades in 35% of the bootstrap replicates   but is contributed to also by the instability of petropedetesnewtoni which was found outside of petropedetes + ericabatrachus in 9% of the br. hence, the effective support for an ericabatrachus-petropedetes  relationship is 65% . the second most frequent position  places ericabatrachus as the sister to or nested inside pyxicephalinae . taken together these results circumscribe a relatively well-defined area of the tree within the ranoidae  in figure 2a, including the following lineages: pyxicephalidae + petropedetidae + conrauidae, in which ericabatrachus occurs with a cumulative bootstrap proportion of ~99% . this allows narrowing the set of plausible relationships for ericabatrachus, and permits more focused analyses to be performed. using pyron and wiens'  <cit>  tree as a topological constraint produced very similar results with respect to the position of ericabatrachus and the added petropedetes species, including similar bootstrap support scores .

focused, smaller-scale bayesian and ml analyses  recover ericabatrachus as most likely the sister group to petropedetes . the posterior probability for this position under the gtr + g, cat + g, or cat-gtr + g models is invariably equal to one. ml bootstrap support is only marginally increased . the topologies obtained in different analyses of the 66-taxon data set are almost identical, varying only in the positions of occidoziga lima, phrynobatrachus kreffti, and micrixalus. au tests show that the phylogenetic placement of ericabatrachus obtained in our bayesian and ml results fits the 66-taxon data significantly better than any previously proposed hypothesis.

the strict consensus of our small-scale bayesian tree and the pyron and wiens’  <cit>  tree  includes a large basal polytomy but is well resolved in the area where the new taxa  join the tree . there is a more substantial difference in log-likelihoods between these two trees with our alignment  than with the pyron and wiens’  <cit>  alignment , but results of au tests of these restricted topologies using either our alignment or that of pyron and wiens  <cit>  were not significant .

discussion
taxonomy, phylogeny and biogeography
thorough phylogenetic analyses of newly acquired molecular data for the rare and critically endangered ericabatrachus baleensis provide good support for a sister-group relationship with petropedetes reichenow,  <dig>  our results support largen’s  <cit>  original assignment of ericabatrachus to the family petropedetidae , rather than scott’s  conclusion that there is “no doubt that… ericabatrachus is a cacosternine, not a petropedetine”. largen suspected this petropedetid relationship on the basis of the presence of terminally t-shaped phalanges . alternative groupings proposed more recently by other authors are not supported by our analyses. in the bootstrap replicates ericabatrachus joins the tree only once at the base of phrynobatrachidae  and never in cacosterninae . in terms of evolutionary relationships within “ranids”, in our analysis petropedetidae forms a strongly supported sister group to a southern african radiation of ranids , with conrauidae lying outside this pairing. other possible resolutions are rejected by the au tests .

values shown for the approximately unbiased test  from consel  <cit>  tested with the 66-taxon data set . dotted line separates the non-rejected hypotheses  from the rejected hypotheses .

the genus petropedetes sensu <cit>  comprises  <dig> nominal species distributed in both east and central africa. largen  <cit>  was aware of the high degree of morphological dissimilarity between ericabatrachus and other petropedetids  and phrynodon ) and he was not drawn on any particular putative sister-group relationship. it might have been suspected that, given the geographical proximity of the highlands of kenya and tanzania, and the relative but fragmented biogeographic continuity of this area with the ethiopian highlands, ericabatrachus was most closely related to petropedetes from east africa . an east african unit  is not supported in our phylogenetic analyses. sampling of petropedetes is almost complete, but data are lacking for p. dutoiti and p. natatorthe sister of petropedates and the monophyly of petropedetes awaits to be tested fully  <cit> , and might alter our understanding of the relationship of e. baleensis relative to all known petropedetes.

ericabatrachus has been one of the most difficult genera of african ranids to classify. efforts were hampered by the lack of molecular data, and uncertainty was compounded by the fact that ericabatrachus has a suite of morphological characters that have seemingly confused understanding of its evolutionary relationships. characters that might have supported largen’s conclusion that ericabatrachus was a petropedetid were seemingly not revealed in scott’s  <cit>  analysis. a re-assessment of the morphology of ericabatrachus would clearly be interesting, particularly given the still incomplete knowledge of ericabatrachus. furthermore, as previously noted by largen , ericabatrachus would appear to be an interesting taxon to include in investigations of correlated patterns of evolution in geographically isolated localities in riverine adapted african ranid species.

on morphological grounds, ericabatrachus seems to be highly divergent from many other close relatives , and this is further supported by molecular differences outlined in this study. a phylogenetic position outside of petropedetes, the morphological distinctiveness of the taxon, and likely long period of divergence from its closest relatives  agree with largen’s  <cit>  original hypothesis that ericabatrachus should be recognized as a distinct genus. further research into the still rather complex, and fluctuating taxonomy of african ranids, will be necessary before a full and suitable nomenclatural resolution of petropedetidae can be made  <cit> .

biogeographically ericabatrachus has fascinated herpetologists since its original description. it is restricted to the high montane forest of the bale mountains, part of the fragmented chain of the afromontane region  <cit> . ethiopia is the most northerly, and therefore isolated part of an extensive chain of mountains in subsaharan africa. in addition to ericabatrachus, other monotypic amphibian endemics are known from ethiopia and, along with other animal and plant groups, give rise to the impression that the region is a refuge for old and divergent taxa – often referred to as palaeoendemics. based on branch lengths in our inferred phylogenies, we suspect that the divergence of ericabatrachus from its closest extant relatives is very old given previous estimates of divergence times with closely related pairings in petropedetidae, pyxicephalidae and conrauidae . the phylogenetic results reported here provide support for the idea that e. baleensis is a palaeoendemic species. in light of the other putative palaeoendemic taxa , the bale mountains of ethiopia appear to have an intriguing, ancient biogeographic history  <cit> .

conservation
ericabatrachus baleensis has declined substantially since its description, it has not been recorded at its type locality  since  <dig> or at the only other known historical locality  since its original collection  <cit>  and it has recently been re-assessed as critically endangered on the iucn red list  <cit> . the declines in these localities are likely to be in association with substantial human-induced habitat degradation in the rira catchment area  <cit> , but also possibly the emergent infectious disease amphibian chytridiomycosis  <cit> . we were able to locate e. baleensis only in fute, a new locality in less degraded habitat than nearby tulla negesso. our phylogenetic results demonstrate that the extinction of this frog would be a considerable loss of evolutionary history, thus adding to the demand  <cit>  that urgent conservation action is taken. this could include both ex situ or in situ approaches, but given the co-occurrence of other distinctive, potentially palaeoendemic taxa in this locality – a more integrated in situ conservation action would be welcomed.

incorporating previously unsampled taxa into large-scale phylogenetic analyses
with the collection of previously unsampled taxa of quite uncertain phylogenetic relationships, such as ericabatrachus, then  one might try to find closely related taxa to include in a phylogenetic analysis with a blast search database query, produce an alignment, and analyse it as exhaustively as seems worthwhile. however, in the age of large-scale phylogeny projects, researchers are increasingly likely to have access to relevant mega-alignments and trees from previous phylogenetic studies. such resources might greatly simplify and speed up the inference of phylogenetic relationships of previously unsampled taxa. for example, expanding the data through profile alignment and using previous trees as topological constraints can greatly reduce the computational complexity and expense of large-scale phylogenetic inference.

of course, relying upon previous alignments and trees carries the risk that they are not optimal, particularly given that the inclusion of additional taxa  has the potential to change the inferred interrelationships of other taxa. in the absence of resource limitations  we might consider de novo alignment and unconstrained phylogenetic analyses to be the optimal use of the new data because it would avoid such risks. but resources are always limited. practical strategies must address the trade off between seeking to use previous results to speed up analysis  and seeking to avoid suboptimal inferences.

here, our main strategy was to use the previous study of pyron and wiens  <cit>  as a convenient source of aligned data and as a guide as to the taxonomic content of a major clade that background knowledge suggested included ericabatrachus. we expanded pyron and wiens’ alignment with taxa and an additional marker and conducted de novo large-scale analyses that, in turn, informed taxon selection for subsequent smaller-scale analyses using additional methods and models. different from  <cit> , our de novo analyses included removal of seemingly saturated data partitions, which is generally considered to be helpful in phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . substantial topological differences between pyron and wiens’  <cit>  and our tree  result from these differences in the data and its analyses. although au tests do not allow rejection of either tree, the topological differences highlight relationships that are probably best considered uncertain. in turn, this might be taken to suggest that the alternative strategy, of using the pyron and wiens  <cit>  tree as a topological constraint, would be problematic. however, this is not the case in this instance. both our de novo analyses and use of pyron and wiens’  <cit>  tree as a topological constraint recovered the same relationships of ericabatrachus. we consider the agreement in this particular case to be a fortuitous consequence of the fact that incongruence between our and pyron and wiens’  <cit>  trees is concentrated in areas that are least relevant to the relationships of the previously unsampled ericabatrachus.

eventually it will be neither practical nor sensible to conduct large-scale de novo analyses each time a new sequence is added to an alignment. thus, we anticipate that the use of topological constraints in phylogenetic analyses aimed at placing previously unsampled taxa will increase. we recommend use of topological constraints particularly where relationships have been recovered in multiple unconstrained analyses and appear to be well supported. conversely we would advise against uncritical acceptance of previous topologies that are not well-corroborated.

when adding novel sequences for genes already present in an existing alignment, we recommend that the inclusion of new data is followed by either an analysis of saturation  or a “quick and dirty” phylogenetic analysis for each gene partition to detect potential sequencing errors or contaminations. if adding entire new gene partitions, then we recommend conducting a blast search of the available sequences for that gene, followed by an analysis of saturation and a “quick and dirty” phylogenetic tree of each gene.

CONCLUSIONS
the existence of relatively well-sampled large-scale alignments provided a potentially useful backbone to analyse the taxonomic placement of the poorly known ethiopian frog ericabatrachus baleensis. a two-tiered approach of phylogenetic analyses using ml and bayesian methods showed that ericabatrachus is the sister group of petropedetes, which is supported by limited morphological evidence. all previous hypotheses of placement are statistically rejected based on our data set. using a constrained tree yields the same phylogenetic position for ericabatrachus demonstrating how this approach may obviate the need for time consuming de novo analyses. in general, constraints should be relied upon only when they are very well-supported. the sister-group relationship of ericabatrachus and petropedetes and the validity of ericabatrachus as a separate and divergent genus support the contiguity of the afromontane region and reinforces the importance of continuing conservation efforts in the bale mountains of ethiopia.

