BACKGROUND
dermatan sulfate  is a heterogeneous glycosaminoglycan , formed by repeating disaccharide units consisting of 4-linked glucuronic acid,  <dig> -linked n-acetyl galactosamine . the extensive heterogeneity of the polymer results from variation in the degree of epimerization on carbon  <dig> of glucuronic acid, o-sulfation on carbon  <dig> or  <dig> of n-acetyl galactosamine  and on carbon  <dig> of iduronic acid   <cit> . it has been shown that regions enriched in  units in ds bind to heparin cofactor ii  , enhancing the hcii-induced inhibition of thrombin  <cit> .

previously, we reported the presence of highly sulfated dss in solitary ascidians from orders phlebobranchia  and stolidobranchia   <cit> . these polymers are composed by the same disaccharide backbone, consisting of , but differ in the position of sulfation on galnac, which can be sulfated at carbon  <dig> or  <dig>  <cit> . the ds from the stolidobranchs h.pyriformis and s.plicata are sulfated at carbon  <dig> of idoa and carbon  <dig> of galnac  <cit>  and are potent activators of hcii. on the other hand, the ds from the phlebobranch p.nigra is sulfated at carbon  <dig> of idoac and at carbon  <dig> of galnac, and is a poor activator of hcii  <cit> .

ascidians  are an ancient life form with fossils dating back to the early cambrian  <cit> . they belong to the phylum chordata, subphylum tunicata . because of their basal position on the chordate phylogeny, ascidians are key to understanding chordate evolution and the origin of vertebrates  <cit> . the traditional classification of the ascidiacea includes three orders: aplousobranchia, stolidobranchia and phlebobranchia. this traditional view has been disputed by many recent reconstructions of their evolution, gathering evidence of the paraphyly of ascidiacea, although confirming the monophyly of tunicata  <cit> . while all ascidian orders include colonial forms, solitary species are only present in stolidobranchia and phlebobranchia  <cit> .

the study of ascidians has demonstrated several ways in which these organisms can inform us about our own development and evolution. to increase our understanding about how ds sulfation evolved in chordates, we analyzed the disaccharide composition of dss obtained from two species of stolidobranch , and one species of phlebobranch ascidians . the results were further compared with our previous data on dss from other ascidians of the same orders. in addition, we investigated the ability of the ascidian dss to potentiate hcii. our results indicate that in ascidians the position of sulfation on the galnac in the disaccharide  is directly related to the taxon and that the 6-o sulfation is a novelty apparently restricted to the phlebobranchia. we also show that the presence of  disaccharide units in dss from stolidobranch ascidians accounts for their increased hcii-stimulating activity.

RESULTS
analysis of the gags from h. pallida and c. intestinalis
a qualitative analysis of the sulfated gags extracted from herdmania pallida and ciona intestinalis was carried out by agarose gel electrophoresis, before or after degradation of the glycans with specific gag-lyases or deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid. several metachromatic bands with different electrophoretic motilities were observed in the gel of the total gags extracted from each ascidian species . with the exception of the very low mobility metachromatic band present exclusively in the gel of c. intestinalis, which resists all gag-degrading enzymes and nitrous acid treatment , all other bands in the gel of h. pallida and c. intestinalis disappear after incubation with a specific gag-degrading enzyme or deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid. thus, the metachromatic band migrating slightly under that of standard heparan sulfate  in the gels of both h. pallida and c. intestinalis  disappears after nitrous acid treatment. the band migrating as standard chondroitin sulfate , which is stronger in the gel of h. pallida, disappears after incubation with chondroitinase ac . in line  <dig>  chondroitinase abc treatment degrades the top part of the band migrating as hs in figure 1a, and the band migrating at the same position as standard dermatan sulfate  in figure 1b. overall, these results point to the presence of cs, ds and hs in the ascidians h. pallida and c. intestinalis, occurring at different proportions, as differences in band densities indicate. in addition, an unidentified glycan, corresponding to the very low mobility band in figure 1b is also present in c. intestinalis.

fractionation of h. pallida and c. intestinalis gags
total gags from h. pallida and c. intestinalis were applied to an ion-exchange column and eluted with increasing nacl concentration . two main metachromatic peaks eluted from the column with  <dig>  m and  <dig>  m nacl and were named p <dig>  and p <dig> , respectively . a significant metachromatic shoulder, eluting with  <dig>  m nacl at the  <dig>  m-peak of the total gags from c. intestinalis is also observed . qualitative analysis by agarose gel electrophoresis of the peaks eluted from the column before or after  enzymatic or nitrous acid treatment indicated that p <dig>  contains mainly hs  and cs , whereas p <dig>  is composed exclusively of ds. p <dig>  is probably the non-gag sulfated polysaccharide mentioned earlier, since it resists incubation with chondroitinase ac and abc, keratanase and deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid.

characterization of the purified dss from the ascidians by agarose and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
the purified ascidian dss were analyzed by two different electrophoretic systems: agarose gel in diaminopropane buffer, where the electrophoretic motilities of the gags is related to their structural characteristic; and polyacrylamide gel in barbital buffer, where the molecules are separated according to their molecular weight. the dss from h. pallida and c. intestinalis were analyzed along with that from halocynthia roretzi, which was purified as described in the methods section, and those from s. plicata and p. nigra, that were purified as described  <cit> . as shown in figure 3a, the electrophoretic motilities of the dss from the stolidobranchs s. plicata, h. pallida and h. roretzi were very similar, migrating between ds and hs standards. these motilities differ from those of the dss from the phlebobranchs p. nigra and c. intestinalis that migrate higher in the gel, similar to that of ds standard.

analysis of the ascidian ds by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in barbital buffer, revealed that there is not a similar electrophoretic mobility pattern among the ds from different species of the same ascidian order . the dss from species of the orders stolidobranchia and phlebobranchia differ in molecular weight as well as in polydispersity. the dss from s. plicata and p. nigra have the lowest average molecular weight . on the other hand, the ds from h. roretzi has the highest average molecular weight , whereas the dss from the h. pallida and c. intestinalis have an intermediate average molecular weight . the ds from s. plicata and p. nigra have high molecular weight and are very polydisperse, similar to what is observed for porcine skin ds. it is interesting to notice that differences in molecular weight do not influence the mobility of the dss in the agarose gel electrophoresis.

disaccharide composition of the ascidian dss
the purified dss from h. pallida, h. roretzi and c. intestinalis were exhaustively degraded with chondroitinase abc. the disaccharides formed  were separated by gel filtration chromatography, as described in material and methods and analyzed on a strong anion-exchange hplc.

the disaccharides formed by the action of chondroitinase abc are shown in figure  <dig> and in table  <dig>  the method used allowed the separation of the following standard disaccharides: Δua-galnac, Δua-galnac, Δua-galnac, Δua-galnac, Δua-galnac, and Δua-galnac . the disaccharide composition of the dss from the stolidobranchs h. pallida and h. roretzi are very similar and homogeneous, showing the typical disaccharides detected in the dss from other species of this order  . they consist of about 80% and 20% of the disaccharides Δua-galnac and Δua-galnac, respectively. minor amounts of the disaccharides Δua-galnac, Δua-galnac and Δua-galnac are also present .

a data from reference  <cit> 

b data from reference  <cit> 

c data obtained in this work-the areas under the peaks in fig. <dig> were integrated to obtain the proportion of the disaccharides.

the ds from the phlebobranch c. intestinalis has a more heterogeneous disaccharide composition, when compared with the dss from stolidobranch species . whereas disulfated disaccharides prevail in stolidobranchia dss, accounting for at least 70% of the polymers, mono-sulfated disaccharides are the major units in the ds from c. intestinalis, corresponding to about 55% of the composition. these units are sulfated at either carbon  <dig> or carbon  <dig> of the galactosamine, while the mono-sulfated disaccharides in stolidobranch dss are mainly sulfated at carbon  <dig> of the galactosamine . the main disulfated disaccharide in phlebobranchia dss is the Δua-galnac, accounting for 36% and 77% in c. intestinalis and p. nigra dss, respectively. the dss from phlebobranchia ascidians differ in that the 4-sulfated galactosamine units are present in c. intestinalis and absent in p. nigra.

sulfation pattern of ascidians dss and hcii activity
as shown in figure 5b, the compositional differences and hcii inhibition activity of most dss correlates with variations in appt values. thus, higher proportion of  <dig> -disulfated units correlates with higher aptt values.

discussion
the subphylum tunicata comprises the ascidians and two other taxa, appendicularia and thaliacea. tunicates are proposed in some phylogenies as the closest living relatives of the vertebrates  <cit> , although most of the recent reconstructions still place the cephalochordata as the sister group of the back-boned animals  <cit> .

in order to study how sulfation of ds evolved in tunicates we compared the disaccharide composition of ds polymers obtained from ascidians of two different orders: stolidobranchia and phlebobranchia. the disaccharide analysis indicated a high content of disulfated disaccharide units in the dss from both taxa. interestingly, the degree of ds sulfation decreased on phlebobranchia clade. thus, 76% of the disaccharide units in the dss from stolidobranch ascidians are disulfated, compared to 53% in the dss from the phlebobranch. in fact, the two taxa probably diverged early during the evolution of tunicates. phlebobranch ascidians have a simpler pharynx, without the folds present in the stolidobranch. additionally, the phlebobranch blood contains usually vanadium, while stolidobranch has iron instead  <cit> . other important distinctions are present in terms of the development of the atrial cavity and position of the gonads  <cit> . also, the aforementioned recent hypotheses about the evolution of the tunicates place the thaliaceans within the phlebobranchia. therefore, the study of the ds composition of thaliaceans will be relevant to understand the evolutionary history of the group.

the sulfation pattern of the tunicate ds disaccharides showed interesting results, pointing to an evident structural difference: ds from phlebobranch ascidians contain mainly  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides, whereas dss from stolidobranch ascidians contain mostly  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides. although information about sulfation pattern in ds from other deuterostomia is scanty, both types of sulfation are found in vertebrates. while  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides are commonly found in extracellular ds proteoglycans, such as decorin and biglycan present in different tissues as tendon, cartilage or skin  <cit> , significant yet small proportions  of  <dig> -sulfated units have been found in mouse or pig brain  <cit>  and the biosynthetic regulation of the expression of  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides by 6-o-sulfotransferases, 2-o-sulfotransferase and c5-epimerase might play critical roles in the development of the hippocampus and cerebellum  <cit> . considering those data, our results point to the  <dig> -sulfation as a conserved feature along chordata and the predominance of  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides as the derived condition. further investigation on the ds structure of echinoderms and hemichordates should clarify this issue.

in vertebrate chordates, four groups of sulfotransferases are involved in the modification of cs/ds:  ds-specific 4-o-sulfotransferase;  chondroitin 6-o-sulfotransferase;  uronyl 2-o-sulfotransferase;  galnac-4-sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase. interestingly, a comprehensive survey of sulfotransferases in the ascidian c. intestinalis showed similarity to vertebrate cs/ds-specific sulfotransferases. from eight c.intestinalis proteins found to be closely related to ds/cs 4-o-sulfotransferases, four were proposed to have arisen by duplication during the evolution of tunicates. although eight genes encoding c6st-like proteins were also found in c. intestinalis genome, their evolutionary history was not clear. it was suggested that divergence of the c6st family genes has occurred independently during the evolution of tunicate, cephalochordate and vertebrate lineages  <cit> . c. intestinalis genome presented also four genes encoding urosyl 2-o-sulfotransferases, one of them very closely related to human 2-o-sulfotransferases. however, a galnac-4-sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase homologous gene was not found in c. intestinalis genome. in fact, no  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides were found in dss from c. intestinalis or other ascidians analyzed in the present work, despite the high content of 4-o-sulfated n-acetylgalactosamine in stolidobranch ascidians and the presence of these units also in c. intestinalis. on the other hand, albeit up 90% of disaccharide units in ds from p. nigra contains 6-o-sulfated n-acetylgalactosamine, no 4-o-sulfated units were found.

the differences in the sulfation patterns from c. intestinalis and p. nigra may also result from divergent evolution, as these species are not closely related within the phlebobranchia. our results on the structure of dss from ascidians add to tetsukawa's results, suggesting different mechanisms for gag sulfation according to taxa, which may have been emerged via gene duplication, occurring independently in each group and leading to different types of 4-o-sulfotransferases and 6-o-sulfotransferases in ascidians and vertebrates, with distinct substrate specificities.

the high affinity binding of ds to hcii requires a rare sequence consisting of  <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, ds with higher sulfation levels bind poorly to hcii, suggesting significant specificity of interaction  <cit> . corroborating with this idea, recent work has shown that a specific geometry of the -hexasaccharide, which forms a 21-helix topology , is required for high affinity binding to hcii  <cit> . this geometry allows the interaction of the -hexasaccharide with key aminoacids involved in the binding to hcii and the correct orientation for the binding to exocite ii of thrombin. extention of the high-affinity sequence in ds polymers is expected to increase the binding and the activity of hcii  <cit> .

in the present, work we observed that ascidian dss with increasing content of  <dig> -sulfated disaccharides showed increasing hcii activity, . therefore, in consonance with the previous paragraphy, it is possible to suggest that in the hcii-active dss, -disaccharides are clustered in 21-helix topology  sequences with inceasing lengh.

finally, an interesting characteristic of ascidians is their ability to rapid vessel regeneration  <cit> . such event, taken together with the fact that in vertebrates ds have been demonstrated to be involved in wound repair, raises intriguing questions concerning the molecular mechanisms underlying angiogenesis. is the presence of oversulfated ds in ascidians related to fast vessel regeneration by binding to growth factors?

furthermore, the drastic difference between the ds disaccharide units from phlebobranch and stolidobranch ascidians may also be related to an angiogenesis event. the alteration between a  <dig>  disaccharide from stolidobranchia to a  <dig>  disaccharide in phlebobranchia might be involved in the branchial vessel organization. one of the main differences between these two ascidian orders is the pharyngeal structure. phlebobranch ascidians possess a simpler pharynx, without folds and usually with less internal vessels. on the other hand, stolidobranch ascidians have a more complex structure, with a folded pharynx and a larger number of internal vessels. the ds structural differences from both ascidian orders could be related to the pharynx vascular organization.

notably the evolution of glycosaminoglycans in animals including invertebrates as well as vertebrates has also recently been reviewed in terms of their structure and biological activities  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that in ascidians the position of sulfation on the galnac in the disaccharide  is directly related to the taxon and that the 6-o sulfation is a novelty apparently restricted to the phlebobranchia. we also show that an increase in the content of  disaccharide units in ds accounts for an increased hcii-stimulating activity.

