BACKGROUND
candidatus protochlamydia amoebophila uwe <dig>  is an obligate intracellular symbiont infecting free-living amoebae  <cit> . presenting significant gene sequence similarity with sequences of chlamydia spp, this related bacterium exhibits a chlamydia-like developmental cycle, which includes i) the proliferating reticulate body observed only within amoebae, ii) the infecting elementary body that may be found in amoebal vacuoles early after internalization, and iii) the crescent body considered as an additional infectious stage  <cit> . p. amoebophila belongs to the parachlamydiaceae family, composed of, at least, two additional genera represented by parachlamydia acanthamoebae  <cit>  and neochlamydia hartmannellae  <cit> . parachlamydia was recently recognized as a novel agent of pneumonia . serological and molecular evidences suggested its role as an agent of community-acquired pneumonia  <cit>  and aspiration pneumonia  <cit> . moreover, we demonstrated that parachlamydia may survive to human macrophages  <cit> , by remaining somehow unrecognized from these major innate immune cells  <cit> , by modulating the fate of the parachlamydia-containing vacuole  <cit> , and by inducing macrophage apoptosis  <cit> .

the genome size of p. amoebophila is twice larger than the published genome sequences of chlamydiaceae  <cit> . preliminary genome analyses by horn and coworkers showed the presence of transposases and of a cluster of high g+c content genes likely transferred horizontally  <cit> . the latter genes encode a type iv secretion system, supposed to be involved in the secretion of effector proteins  <cit> . however, horn and coworkers did not identify traa, tral, trak and trav, and misannotated as traf an orf similar to trsf carried by plasmid r <dig> of proteus rettgeri  <cit> .

after reannotation, identification of the four supplementary tra genes, and additional phylogenetic analyses based either on concatenated tra genes or on gene order comparison, we proposed that this type iv secretion system can play a role in conjugative dna transfer and originated in proteobacteria  <cit> . the presence of similar tra operons on the prf plasmid of rickettsia felis  <cit>  and on the circular chromosome of rickettsia bellii  <cit> , as well as the observation of sexual pili by electron microscopy of these two obligate intracellular bacteria  <cit>  further supported that the gene products of the tra operon of p. amoebophila uwe <dig> are involved in conjugative dna transfer. furthermore, the concatenated tra genes of both rickettsia and p. amoebophila clustered in the maximum likelihood tree with a 95% bootstrap value  <cit> .

in silico comparative genomics along this genome sequence enabled us to identify for the first time the genomic island pam100g  <cit> . this inserted 100-kb mobile element is delimited by the presence of two gly-trna genes in tandem at its 5' end, and by direct repeats located at both ends  <cit> . pam100g present a modular composition of its g+c content. the first module exhibits a g+c content  similar to that of the host  and contains a set of genes likely generated by chromosomal rearrangements. then, three modules, which contain low g+c content  phage-related genes, are intercalated with three high g+c content modules   <cit> . the first g+c-rich module carried the type iv secretion system partially reported by horn et al.  <cit> . the putative mobility of pam100g as a conjugative plasmid was strongly supported by the identification of an episome carrying a similar tra unit during the genome sequence analyses of strain atcc vr <dig> of simkania negevensis, a related bacterium . the latter tra sequences are already available for blast analyses  <cit> . interestingly, the genomic island of p. amoebophila also carries a huge  <dig> -kb gene . this gene, now called lgre, is located  <dig> kb after the 3'-end of the tra unit . it corresponds to the second high g+c content module , suggesting it may, like the tra operon, have emerged in a common genomic environment similar to that of some alpha-, gamma-, delta- or epsilon-proteobacteria. this gene encodes one of the largest protein of p. amoebophila  exhibiting some similarities with the mammalian nod <dig>  a protein carrying lrr units  <cit> .

the family of eucaryotic cytoplasmic proteins defined by a nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain   <cit>  presents gene products exhibiting various functions ranging from regulators of apoptosis  to proteins implicated in resistance against pathogens in mammals  and plants . both r genes and mammalian nods are composed of effector domains such as the caspase recruitment domain  or the pyrin domain , and of a carboxy-terminal leucine-rich repeat domain  used in pathogen recognition. the nods proteins also exhibit a nod domain, which induces its self-oligomerization. lrr domains are concatenated repeats of 20- to 29-residue motifs present in all clades from viruses to eucaryotes. they have been classified in seven different subfamilies . one of them, the ribonuclease inhibitor -like subfamily  is present in intracellular proteins of eucaryotes and exhibits the longest lrr motifs: 28– <dig> residues  <cit> . the lrrs of nod proteins are the most studied ri-like lrrs. this ligand recognition domain is involved in the recognition of basic units of peptidoglycan, i.e. a common bacterial component: nod <dig> recognizes the widely spread dipeptide γ-d-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelate, and nod <dig> the universal muramyl-l-alaninyl-d-glutamate, known as muramyl-dipeptide . the function of the nod <dig> protein still remains unknown.

in this report, we described  the evolutionary history of the lgre gene and of five paralogs  present in the genome of p. amoebophila,  the structure of the corresponding gene products and, finally,  the structural and phylogenetic relationships existing between their lrr domains. since almost no tools are available for molecular biology experiments on chlamydiales, a putative regulation of these lgr genes and a possible role of these large proteins are proposed, based on various in silico analyses.

RESULTS
p. amoebophila proteins homologous to lgre
using blastp, five additional large proteins homologous to the whole lgre gene product were identified in the genome of p. amoebophila . we named the six orfs coded by large g+c rich genes lgra to lgrf according to their position on the published chromosome sequence, starting from the putative origin of dna replication indicated by gc skew analyses. figures 1a and 1e show that these genes are scattered along the chromosome of the bacterium. as revealed by cumulative gc skew analyses , lgre is associated to the local inversion of the signal that highlights pam100g, an already described genomic island  <cit> .

aa = amino acids

bp = base pairs

with more than  <dig> nucleotides, the six lgr genes are among the  <dig> largest orfs of the p. amoebophila genome. the presence of these six very similar orfs, which likely originated by serial duplications from an unique ancestral gene, and not found in other sequenced bacteria, suggests that these proteins probably play an important role in the particular biology of these bacteria.

the genomic g+c content analysis displayed on figure 1b shows that, with a g+c content ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> %, the six lgrs present a g+c content higher than that of the average of the rest of the genome, suggesting a foreign origin. due to a similar g+c content, all lgrs proteins might have a common origin with the tra operon, which most probably originated in proteobacteria  <cit> . among the  <dig> orfs of p. amoebophila,  <dig> present a g+c content of more than 40%, including among others  <dig> ribosomal protein genes and all lgrs, the latters being the only high g+c orfs encoding proteins larger than one thousand amino acids. as expected, all lgrs display a positive steep slope in the residual cumulative g+c content curve, due to their g+c content higher than the chromosome counterpart . of note, no particular gene environment of the lgrs could be highlighted by this analysis, except the already described genomic island, pam100g, associated to lgre  <cit> .

all lgrs exhibit at the third codon position an enrichment in cs characteristic of genes anti-oriented to chromosome replication  <cit> , revealing that their common ancestor was most probably unique and anti-oriented. however, lgrb, lgre and lgrf, are currently co-oriented  and seem to exhibit an adaptation to this new relative position to chromosome replication, since their third codon position is slightly enriched in gs . consequently, we may hypothesize that the currently co-oriented lgre probably duplicated recently from the anti-oriented lgra gene, and that lgrb, lgre and lgrf, changed their orientation about at the same time, suggesting intense gene re-arrangements in a recent period during p. amoebophila speciation. the source of such genes rearrangements could be similar to the intense genetic exchanges revealed in pam100g by the presence of the tra unit and the phage-related genes, i.e conjugative dna transfer and/or transduction.

furthermore, the six lgr genes show a very similar codon usage, not significantly different from the codon usage of most proteins of p. amoebophila. no particular relationships could be found by this particular analysis between lgrs and different kinds of genes: high g+c orfs such as ribosomal protein genes, large proteins encoding genes or others ), and genes of the tra unit or the other genes of the genomic island ). additional file  <dig> and its magnification ) show that the variation of the codon usage is mainly due to the lrr domain . it also reveals that lgra and lgre present a very close codon usage suggesting that both genes result from a duplication more recent than the other lgr duplications. this hypothesis is confirmed by phylogenetic analyses performed on amino acids and nucleotides sequences with various phylogenetic methods .

overall structure of lgrs
the alignment of the six lgrs showed that their  <dig> first amino acids are very similar . the more variable c-terminal part of these proteins presents gaps in the amino acid alignment, most of the latter measuring multiples of  <dig> residues, thus revealing an octacosapeptidic structure of this protein domain. this less conserved part of these proteins is characterized by the presence of concatenated leucine-rich repeats . the variation in the lrr number estimated after a precise delimitation of each unit  almost fully explain the variable length of the six lgrs: the lrr domain varied from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids while the remaining part of the proteins, designated by us as the non-lrr domain, present a very conserved length ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids .

analyses of the secondary structure of these proteins with nnpredict ) showed a succession of α-helices  and β-sheets  in the lrr domain  precisely delimited by the cumulative alignment score . in the non-lrr region , the proportion of α-helices and β-sheets are quite similar . with the exception of lgra and lgre, the percentage of amino acids involved in α-helices in the carboxy-terminal region of lgr proteins defined as the lrr domain, is higher than in the rest of the protein . the recent duplication of lgra and lgre suggested by similarity in codon usage and by phylogenetic analyses  is further supported by the very close secondary structure of these two proteins ). analyses performed by tmhmm v.  <dig>  on the six lgr proteins identified no transmembrane domain. however, when looking for conserved pfam motifs , we found a conserved domain present in mycoplasmal lipoproteins in lgra, lgrb, lgre and lgrf, suggesting that these lgrs exhibit a prokaryotic membrane attachment site probably acting as a membrane anchor  <cit> .

finally, we also analyzed the distribution of leucine within all six lgrs . while the leucine content of lgrs is higher  than that of the other proteins encoded by p. amoebophila chromosome , the leucine content of lgrs is not significantly different within the lrr- and non-lrr domains . as expected, repetitions of the leucine pattern occur in the lrr domain at a periodic 28-residue interval.

other proteins of p. amoebophila exhibiting lrr domains: 23-, 25-, and 28-meres
lrr domains are defined as concatenated leucine-rich repeats units of 20– <dig> residues that generally fold into an arc or horseshoe shape  <cit> . blastp searches in the genome of p. amoebophila of proteins homologous to the lgrs highlights the presence of other lrrs proteins:  pc <dig>  a putative small protein exhibiting two repeats of  <dig> amino acids similar to the lrrs of the lgrs proteins,  pc <dig> containing 23-meric lrrs, and  four additional proteins  presenting 25-residue repeats. further analyses based on the four latters detected  <dig> other proteins exhibiting relatively significant similarity to the four 25-meres. our results describing  <dig> lrr-carrying proteins encoded on the chromosome of p. amoebophila uwe <dig> and the length of their lrrs extend the recently published preliminary analyses performed independently that identified  <dig> lrrs proteins in the genome of this strain  <cit> .

common frame of the 28-meric lrrs determined by the cumulative alignment score
similarity analyses performed by blast allow rapid determination of lrr polypeptides in lgrs. unfortunately, a common 28-meric frame shared by the six lgrs could not be proposed by this technique. although the lrrs are abundantly discussed in the literature, there is no consensus on where each repeat precisely begins and ends. therefore, we developed the cumulative alignment score , a non a priori approach designed to unambigously define  the start of the lrr domain and  the precise limits of the common unit frame of all lgrs and of other lrr-containing proteins of bacteria, animals and plants.

the representation of the protein sequences of the lgrs versus the cas scores determined by preliminary common lrr sequences enabled us to precisely define the lrr domain of the six lgr proteins . although the cas of the six lgrs does not determine an entire number of repeats in the lrr domains, four of the six proteins present a lrr domain varying in length in lrr units by no more than three residues: lgra, lgrd, lgre and lgrf . however, the final repeat lrr15lgrd has a degenerated end and thus exhibits a lower similarity with the others. therefore, the latter unit was not taken into account by the identity analysis of the cas . all further analyses on the lrrs are based on repeats defined by the cas by at least two thirds of the consensual residues.

the lrr domain of the lgr proteins are thus composed of  <dig> to  <dig> well conserved units of  <dig> amino acids composing  <dig> different lrrs . furthermore, pc <dig> also presents two 28-residue lrrs. interestingly, only one out of these  <dig> lrrs differs in length: lrr1lgre, the first lrr of lgre, is a 30-residue unit, due to a tandem duplication of two codons  encoding the dipeptide glu-val present in the first lrr of all other lgrs, except lgrd. we confirmed the existence of this small duplication in lrr1lgre by resequencing this region, as previously described  <cit> , but using the following primers: 5'cggctccctatatcaaagga and 5'gttaccaccaaggtagagtg.

the determination of the limits of the repeats of the lgrs performed by the cas is unambiguously confirmed by the determination of a common frame for the six lgrs and by the presence of a conserved secondary structure within each repeat and no standard secondary structure at the lrr boundaries . in several lrrs, amino acids present at the c-terminal part of the repeat were also predicted to be involved in a small β-sheet made of leu <dig>  leu <dig>  and leu <dig>  no other putative β-sheet was found elsewhere. glycyl residues that could be part of a turn of the peptide backbone due to their non-stereospecific nature brought by the presence of the hydrogen atom as lateral chain, are always the 5th amino acid of the repeats, except in lrr <dig> of all lgrs except lgrc, and in lrr <dig> and lrr <dig> of lgra, and are often present at the 25th or 26th position . interestingly, these glycyl residues are located at the boundaries of the consensual alpha-helix, thus not alterating the predominant secondary structure of the 28-residue unit, showing that structural constrains are imposed on the secondary structure of the lrrs. moreover, only two prolyl residues are present in the  <dig> lrrs of the lgrs and of pc1145: one is the last residue of lrr5lgrc and the other is the 15th residue of lrr5lgrf . the two prolines are located at positions of low α-helix signal. a definition of the protochlamydial 28-meric lrrs could thus be given: the secondary structure of these leucine-rich repeat motifs consists mainly of an α-helix located at the middle of each unit, and in some repeats, amino acids present at the distal part of the repeat were also predicted to be involved in a small β-sheet containing leu <dig>  leu <dig>  and leu <dig> 

evolutionary history of the lrr
to determine how the lrrs were propagated within the lgr proteins, we inferred phylogenetic trees on nucleotide sequences of the  <dig> repeats of all lgrs and of the  <dig> repeats of pc <dig> using the neighbor-joining method, the kimura corrected p-distance  and a bayesian method ). we also drew phylogenic trees with an identity distance calculated from the proportion of conserved amino acids in pairs of repeats ). this comparison was also represented by a principal coordinate analysis .

these analyses showed that the first repeats of all lgrs except lgra cluster together. on the neighbor-joining , bayesian ) and upgma ) phylogenetic trees, only three last lrrs of lgrs for which the cas determined an almost entire last unit  clustered together. this suggests that  the lrrs were probably multimerized after serial duplications of the lgr protein genes,  that the repeats propagated independently in the six lgr genes by rearrangement/recombination of a few ancestral lrrs repeats within the lrr domains defined by the lrr units present at both ends, and  all lgrs probably originated from an ancestral protein exhibiting a few ancestral lrr units able to produce a functional lrr domain.

the distance between all six barycenters  on the two first dimensions of the pco analysis was represented by an upgma tree . based on the lrrs domain, this tree was congruent with those inferred with the non-lrr part of lgr proteins  and also confirmed that lgra and lgre duplicated recently.

close inspection of the sequence of the lrrs of lgre  showed that the variations between the repeats are locally distributed, suggesting that the multimerization of the lrrs occurred by serial adjacent duplications . in order to determine if the repeats result from serial adjacent duplications, the identity scores between peptide sequences were calculated between each lrr of lgre and i) its two closest repeats or ii) all other repeats of the protein. for all  <dig> repeats except lrr2lgre and lrr8lgre, the average of the identity scores calculated on close neighbors is higher than the counterpart estimated between each of the  <dig> lrrs and all  <dig> others, showing that most lrrs are significantly more similar to their two closest lrrs than to all other repeats of the protein taken together ). this kind of analysis performed on the nucleotide sequences showed results very similar to those conducted on the amino acid sequences ).

this identity analysis of the immediate lrr neighborhood was also performed by comparing the 28-meric units separated by  <dig> to  <dig> intercalary lrrs c). we observe on additional file 9c that immediate neighbors are the most similar. the observation performed with no intercalary sequence corresponds to those posted on additional files 9aa and 9bb. this graph also shows that after immediate neighbors, the more similar are those separated by two units. in summary, the latter results suggest that lrr duplication occurred in the lrr domain of lgre by inserting identical lrr units composed of one or three lrrs.

the average difference for the  <dig> lrrs of lgre between the scores calculated on the immediate neighboring repeats and that estimated with all other repeats  was also calculated for the lrrs of the five other proteins, i.e. lgra, lgrb, lgrc, lgrd and lgrf. it appeared that these values, although clearly lower, were all positive except for lgrf:  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and - <dig>  respectively, thus confirming that for most lgrs the immediate neighbors of all lrrs are more similar than the others of the same lgr taken together.

evolution of lrrs by adjacent multimerization
as the lrrs of the lgrs are concatenates with no intervening sequences, we observed in lgre that the lrr multimerization probably mainly results from adjacent duplications of dna stretches of a multiple of  <dig> nucleotides encoding unique or multiple 28-residue lrrs sequences. these lrr multiplications produced by rearrangements/recombination are favored by the repetition of homologous sequences. deletion could also appeared during rearrangement. since a reca gene is present on the genome of protochlamydia amoebophila uwe <dig> , the reca protein, which role in homologous recombination is abundantly documented  <cit> , might be involved in these internal gene rearrangements. in first analysis, these recombination are independent of a particular 28-residue frame. this hypothesis was suggested by the initial alignments  showing that the lrrs of the six lgrs share no obvious common 28-residues frame. however, our non a priori approach cas highlighting a common lrr frame clearly reveal that this common frame was generally respected by the recombination process during the lrr duplication.

these phylogenies and the detailed analysis of the sequence of the lrrs of lgre enabled us to propose a parsimonious evolutionary scenario for a multimerization mechanism of these lrr domains. the lrrs of p. amoebophila seem to have originated from adjacent duplications and deletions of dna stretches of a multiple of  <dig> nucleotides .

evolutionary history of lgr neigbourhood of p. amoebophila
the six lgr proteins are very similar, particularly in the non-lrr domain and seem to result from relatively recent duplications in the history of these genes in the parachlamydial genome. to further investigate the evolutionary history of the six lgrs, blast searches of sequence homologous to the genes and intergenic sequences that flanked the lgrs were performed against the genome of p. amoebophila. results are shown in additional file  <dig>  the narrow boxes of various sizes and colors represent the homologous regions present in the close environment of the six lgr genes. interestingly, a homologous sequence of  <dig> bp is present on both sides of lgra as an inverted repeat. this sequence belongs to a region that is also present downstream from lgrc, lgre and lgrf. another  <dig> bp inverted homologous sequence flanks lgrb on both side. moreover, a shorter homologous region is present immediately upstream of the six lgr genes, that likely corresponds to promoter motifs.

prediction of promoter and terminator motifs
to find the promoter motifs of the six lgr proteins, we screened the  <dig> bp upstream of the translation start site for the presence of the so-called - <dig> and - <dig> conserved elements of the escherichia coli canonical s <dig> promoter, which is also used by chlamydia spp.  <cit> : the motifs ttg and tannnt , respectively, separated in p. amoebophila by  <dig> to  <dig> bp. we found  <dig> putative promoter motifs. among them, five are very similar  and are separated by 35– <dig> bp to the start codon of the five lgr encoding genes . a similar sequence is present before lgrc but its - <dig> motif differs from a single nucleotide . calculated on the  <dig> last bp preceding the putative transcription start site, the g+c content of these six sequences ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> %, confirming a putative regulatory nature. moreover, the dinucleotide tg characteristic of promoter sequences  <cit>  is starting at the - <dig> position. other similar sequences of lgrb, lgrc, lgre and lgrf are located at a distance of  <dig> to  <dig> bp of the start codon. their g+c content on their last  <dig> bp range from  <dig>  to  <dig> %. the remaining seven sequences are not located at similar places before the different lgr encoding genes. the presence of two putative promoter motifs can reveal a complex regulation present in p. amoebophila to differentially regulate the expression of the lgr genes during different developmental stages. the presence of these promoter motifs strongly indicate that all lgrs are expressed genes. in addition, a putative terminator sequence was found in the  <dig> bp downstream of lgrb, using the findterm software.

proteins homologous to lgrs in other organisms
using blastp and psi-blast, proteins homologous to the lgr proteins of p. amoebophila were systematically searched in the non-redundant database  maintained on the ncbi website  <cit> . a large number of proteins present in the genome of different organisms are significantly similar to the c-terminal part of the lgrs proteins corresponding to the last  <dig> to  <dig> amino-acids. this region of the lgrs exhibits 28-residue motifs very similar  to the lrrs of the ribonuclease inhibitor -like subfamily, e.g. mammalian nod <dig>  the lrrs domain of lgrs also presents significant sequence similarity with deliriuma  of oryza sativa and of dictyostelium discoideum involved in the apoptosis  <cit>  and with the lrrs of related genes of ralstonia solanacearum and legionella pneumophila . blastn searches in the non-redundant database did not reveal any sequence homologous to lgrs.

since a large number of proteins presented similarity in the lrr regions, we then performed additional blastn and blastp searches using the remaining parts of each lgr proteins. no proteins of other organisms is homologous to the non-lrr region of the lgrs excepted nine proteins of d. discoideum . the latter matches found with the d. discoideum proteins corresponded to parts not characterized as catalytic sites or effector domains.

no additional hint was observed during other blast investigations  performed against all prokaryotic genomes as well as against those of d. discoideum and arabidopsis thaliana. since the chromosome sequence of simkania negevensis, another intracellular amoebal chlamydia, is now available for similarity analyses, we were also interested to determine whether similar proteins were encoded in this genome by blastn, tblastn and tblastx analyses performed at the tigr website  <cit> . no sequence larger than  <dig> nucleotides was identified showing significant similarities to lgrs. the smaller fragments that have been identified by blastn were similar to polypeptides located either in the lrr domain or in the remaining part of the lgrs.

relationship between lrrs domains of lgrs and of other organisms
we also applied the cas method to delimit the lrr domains of other lrr proteins homologous to lgr identified by blast . the same motif is conserved among all these lrr domains. the lrrs of mammals, plants and d. discoideum is composed of  <dig> amino acids, the lrr of r. solanacearum and l. pneumophila of  <dig> residues and those of tetrahymena thermophila of 30-meric units. determination of consensus lrr sequences for each protein showed that the repeats are well conserved in the lgrs of p. amoebophila, while they are more divergent within the lrr proteins of animals and plants , indicating that the latters have a longer evolutionary history than the lgrs.

phylogenetic analyses were performed on the lrr domains of the six lgr proteins and some of the lrr domain of the proteins found by blast. all proteins showing similarity  with at least one of the six lgr proteins were included in the analyses . consequently, the lrrs domains of toll and toll-like proteins exhibiting not enough similarity with lgrs were not included in these analyses. another phylogenetic tree was inferred on the lrr consensus established on each of these proteins presenting a high degree of similarity . this analysis compared the consensual amino acids at each position and was performed only on the lrr domains that exhibit relatively well conserved repeats .

both analyses indicated that the closest homologs of the 28-meric units of the lgrs seem to be carried by the 24-meres of the gala protein  <dig> , of a lrr-protein of ralstonia solanacearum, and of a hypothetical protein of legionella pneumophila.

the next closest homologous lrrs to lrrs of the lgr were nod proteins of mammals. the nods of mammals exhibited the best matches in the blast searches. moreover, analysis of the structure of the lrr domain of the lgr proteins showed that they probably belong to the same subfamily, lrr-ri. like the motifs of lrrs of the lgr proteins, lrr-ri of mammals present 28-amino acid motifs.

putative roles of lgrs
we hypothesize that like lrr-ri of mammals, the protochlamydial lrr domain might be involved in bacterial recognition and that each lgr protein might present either slightly different effector domains or be able to recognize different bacterial motifs including nucleic acids. since by blast analyses, we did not find any known effector domain in the non-lrr part of the six lgrs proteins, we searched for a putative effector domain by using the pfam collection of multiple alignments of sequences determined by hidden markov models . all six lgrs exhibited three to four matches with the lrr_ <dig> domain and one match with petn . lgra, lgrb, lgre and lgrf exhibited also a match with the lipoprotein_ <dig> domain, present on a mycoplasma protein and acting as an anchor, suggesting that these lgrs might be associated to membranes, despite the absence of transmembrane domain . interestingly, lgra, lgrc, lgrd and lgre present all a match with the duf <dig> domain, putatively involved in dna mismatch repair. in addition, each lgrs proteins exhibited a few additional matches  that were mainly domains related with dna metabolism. these putative active domains might thus be involved in the recombination necessary for the concatenation of the lrrs or might be essential in the recognition of foreign dna.

it should be pointed out that lgre is located near a tra operon likely involved in conjugative dna transfer  <cit> , which suggests that the lrr-ri motifs of lgre might be involved in the recognition of a conjugative bacterial partner or in interactions with dna/rna molecules since eucaryotic lrr domains were shown to bind double helix of nucleotides  <cit> .

little is known on the biology of p. amoebophila uwe <dig>  however, another related symbiont of amoebae, parachlamydia acanthamoebae, was shown to resist destruction by macrophages, eliciting no oxidative burst and inducing nearly no secretion of proinflammatory cytokines  <cit> . thus, lgr protein might alter the recognition of bacteria by the host cell by saturating recognition sites of the parachlamydial proteins secreted in the amoebal vacuoles containing these bacteria. however, the absence of genetic tools devoted to the study of the obligate intracellular chlamydiae prevent further genetical investigations of the biological functions of these paralogous proteins. since legionella are facultative intracellular bacteria amenable to genetic manipulation and, like the parachlamydiaceae, able to resist to both free-living amoebae and macrophages, it may be relevant to investigate the role of the legionella lrr protein to understand the role of lgrs.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we describe the evolutionary relationships existing between six large proteins encoded by homologous large g+c rich genes  of p. amoebophila. by analyzing the lrrs of these six homologous proteins of protochlamydia amoebophila, we show that these repeats evolved by adjacent multimerization. our model established on the bacterial 28-meric lrrs of the lgrs can now be challenged in related eucaryotic proteins composed of less conserved lrrs, such as nod proteins and toll-like receptors.

