BACKGROUND
in nature, environmental stressors can influence the phenotypic characteristics that individuals and populations develop over time. a challenging environment can also shape the genomic landscape that underlies a population’s adaption to weather, resources, and predators . these variables can take many abiotic and biotic forms, all with varying levels of intensity leading to a complex balance of genetics and environment. climate change, especially in the form of weather extremes, has the ability to disrupt this balance and place a population under increased environmental stress . for livestock production, this shift in climate driven environmental stressors has been detrimental to commercial traits . climate change has led to higher temperatures and drought, contributing to losses in livestock production worldwide related to reduced reproduction, growth, and immune function . for example, high ambient temperatures can operate as a primary environmental stressor. environmentally stressed chickens can experience oxidative-stress, lipid peroxidation, disruption of internal energy balance, and immunosuppression . a major cellular effect caused by multiple environmental stressors is the generation of reactive oxygen  species that leads to oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation. this is brought about by changes in intracellular oxidation, which results in a state of imbalance between ros and antioxidants . oxidative stress can be detrimental to gene expression causing post-transcriptional changes to signaling genes  <cit>  disrupting the health of an animal at the genetic level. oxidative stress in chickens can also cause endothelial dysfunction and vasoconstriction . however, the differences in how chickens respond to stressors may depend upon their evolutionary course and how it was influenced by selective pressure to adapt for survival. constant selection on these survival traits can lead to the presence of genomic signatures that indicate what genomic regions responded to selective pressure. selection for survival traits can lead to reduction in the variability around genomic regions associated with that trait. this reduction in variability, referred to as a selection signature or selective sweep, can be detected and examined for its biological importance. researchers have employed multiple methods for detecting the presence of these areas under selection by measuring the reductions in diversity of a genomic region  <cit>  both within and between populations. studies examining selection signatures within populations have used methods based on the reduction of heterozygosity to detect selection and identify important domestication loci  <cit>  for traits related to reproduction, growth, feeding behavior, and skin color. other studies have successfully used fst measurements, pooled heterozygosity, and extended homozygosity to investigate the chicken genome for signatures of selection underlying key economic traits such as growth and egg production in commercial breeds . through comparisons of both wild and domesticated chickens these studies have been able to separate traits driven by natural and artificial selection. studies have also been conducted on indigenous chicken breeds that have uncovered evidence of possible independent selection events towards pathways related to niche survival environments, such as low oxygen at high altitudes  <cit>  that would normally be considered as stressful.

the current study examined indigenous chicken ecotypes from the countries of uganda and rwanda for the presence of genomic signatures that may indicate that selective pressure from their environment helped shape the genetics underlying their adaption to various stressors. the two countries have environments that present many challenges, such as weather and food availability and quality, which may have led to chickens adapted to pressure from their environment. in addition to the indigenous birds, we also examined kuroiler chickens in uganda. kuroilers were bred in india to be tolerant of heat, dual-purpose for meat and egg production, and with the ability to scavenge when food is scarce  <cit> . studying populations that have developed under natural and artificial selection for a challenging environment may reveal genomic signatures related to these populations’ mechanisms of tolerance, resistance, or resilience. this may lead to a greater understanding of the genomic control of response to environmental stressors and aid in breeding of animals that are better able to tolerate stressors related to harsh environments and shifting climate patterns.

methods
sample collection
blood samples were collected from  <dig> african chickens: ugandan , rwandan , and kuroilers . kuroilers, originally imported from india, were sampled from farms in uganda. five physically distinct farms were sampled in each sampling area to make up a single geographically defined ecotype, in an attempt to reduce stratification. there were six ecotypes  for rwanda from the areas of huye, kicukiro, kirehe, musanze, nyagatare, and rubavu. for uganda there were three ecotypes  from the areas of kamuli, luweero, and masaka. blood was collected using fta cards .

genotyping and quality control
genotyping was conducted at geneseek  using the affymetrix axiom ® 600 k chicken genotyping array. snps were put through a quality control step in plink  <cit>  based on the parameters of > 97 % call rate  and minor allele frequency  >  <dig> . after filtering,  <dig>  total snps remained. a total of  <dig>  autosomal snps were available for downstream analyses.

population stratification analysis
hierarchical clustering analysis of the genotype data in jmp ®  was used to determine the relationships between the samples. this cluster analysis was run using the ward method  <cit> . plink  <cit>  was used to construct a multi-dimension scaling plot  to examine population structure for stratification. mds plots for this analysis were based on 196 ×  <dig> matrix of genome-wide identity-by-state  scores calculated based on pairwise comparisons of the genetic distances for all individuals. the ape  <cit>  and phangorn  <cit>  r packages were used to examine the relatedness of the birds by phylogenetic analysis using neighbor-joining  distance based tree construction methods . visualization of the corresponding trees was done using figtree  and ninja . ibs values and inbreeding coefficients were calculated within plink. principal component analysis  was done using snp and variant suite   <cit>  and jmp ® . shared ancestry was also explored using the admixture software  <cit>  set at varying values of k, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> to represent the number of ecotypes sampled, with a final optimal k =  <dig> 

runs of homozygosity analysis
runs of homozygosity  analyses were carried out in plink  <cit>  to examine genomic regions that harbor alleles driven to fixation using a snp based sliding window approach. runs of homozygosity were calculated for each individual and any roh that overlapped between individuals within and between populations. for the individual and overlapping roh analysis, a run was defined in plink as  ≥  <dig> snps, density of 50 kb/snp, allowed gap of 1000 kb, and  <dig> heterozygous calls allowed within a run. the analysis focused on the overlapping roh that were also analyzed using the additional parameters of allelic match threshold of  <dig>  identity and  <dig> or more informative snps. the overlapping roh are regions that overlapped across all populations and contained  <dig> or more individuals. consensus regions between populations were defined as the region that was common to every bird, irrespective of length of the roh, that plink assigned to a “pool” because of shared overlapping roh. the analysis of the overlapping/consensus regions was based on all samples as a whole and a “pool” of individuals sharing overlapping/consensus roh was made up of birds from all three populations. a gene ontology enrichment analysis was conducted on a gene list from the roh consensus regions  <cit> . the gene list is based only on genes mapped to within the consensus region of the roh. gene ontology enrichment analysis results were considered statistically significant at a fdr cut-off <  <dig> .

analysis of putative selection signatures
sample haplotypes were phased using fastphase  <cit>  for downstream analysis of selection signatures. the r package rehh  <cit>  was used to calculate integrated haplotype score  and standardized log-ratio of the integrated ehhs  between pairs of populations  values to examine the populations for snps that displayed signals of selection. both ihs and rsb values were log transformed to normalize the data and calculated as per the method established by voight et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . statistical significance of ihs values were determined by use of the-log p-values generated by the rehh software package. the -log p-values were not adjusted for multiple test correction because all multiple test correction procedures proved to be too conservative due to the number of tests exceeding  <dig> . to address the issue of statistical significance a very stringent nominal p-value  was set and ihs data was then ranked from lowest to highest. after ranking, the p-value  was used as the cut-off for all samples and populations. ihs values were considered extreme at ihs > | <dig> | because this was the lowest ihs value at the p-value cut-off. pairwise comparisons between populations were examined using the rsb statistic. p-values for the rsb statistic were low enough to be subjected to multiple test correction using a fdr cut-off of <  <dig> . the use of a lower fdr was also necessary to reduce the number of significant results for a more focused downstream analysis. to carry out gene ontology term enrichment, snps were annotated to genes of interest using the affymetrix netaffx™ analysis center which, when supplied with a list of markers from one genotyping platform, will give a list of genes within, upstream, or downstream of a gene in that region.

gene ontology enrichment analysis
gene ontology  term enrichment was performed using termfinder  <cit> . visualization and reduction of redundant terms of the go enrichment results were carried out using revigo  <cit> . the significant go terms were filtered for redundant terms to produce a focused list of the functions and processes under selection. the fdr for the enrichment tests was set at <  <dig> . this cut-off was set higher than the threshold for the ihs or rsb tests since it was a separate independent test. another point that prompted the use of a higher fdr was the lack of annotations for the chicken genome, which effectively reduced the overall number of genes that could be analyzed.

RESULTS
population structure analysis
the mds plot  showed overlap among ugandan, rwandan, and kuroiler populations. the ugandan and rwandan ecotypes showed the highest degree of overlap between populations, with the kuroilers showing the most discrete clustering of individuals. the amount of admixture, based upon identity by state, within each country  showed crossover between sampling areas . the clustering analysis based on the snp genotyping calls indicated that the ecotypes  assigned to the birds showed shared ancestry of genotypes between individuals across populations and ecotypes. these results were visualized as an admixture plot that also showed evidence of shared ancestry .fig.  <dig> multi-dimensional scaling plot showing distinct sampling populations. the multi-dimensional scaling plot was constructed using genomic distances to examine for the presence of population stratification

fig.  <dig> admixture plot showing mixed ancestry between populations and individuals. green denotes ugandan ecotypes, red denotes rwandan ecotypes, blue denotes kuroilers. based on optimal k = 3



examination of runs of homozygosity 
the number and extent of individual roh differed widely among the populations . kuroilers had the fewest chromosomes that contained roh, while the combined ugandan ecotypes were the only population to have roh on every chromosome except chromosome  <dig>  chromosome  <dig> showed no evidence of roh based on the parameters in any of the populations. the median length of the roh in a population was longest in ugandan and shortest in kuroiler. the amount of the genome covered by roh per individual ranged from ~2 % to 40 % .

examination of roh overlapping consensus regions
the data were also analyzed for consensus overlapping roh regions between all three populations that were identical by coordinates . for the consensus roh, the macro-chromosomes had the highest number of overlapping regions, span , and number of snps comprising the runs on a chromosome. a gene list was created for the combined consensus regions and then analyzed using go enrichment to determine over-enriched go terms. there were  <dig> consensus overlapping roh meeting criteria that harbored  <dig> genes that were used to conduct the go enrichment analysis. the consensus roh varied widely in the number of genes they contained, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> genes within a given roh. statistically significant  go terms for biological processes and molecular functions related to both endogenous and external stressors . some of the most striking over-enriched gene ontology processes included regulation of cellular response to stress , regulation of reactive oxygen species metabolic process , regulation of apoptotic process , and calcium ion transmembrane transport  . over-enriched molecular functions that may be related to oxidative stress induced by the environment included calcium ion binding , protein serine/threonine kinase activity , and transforming growth factor beta receptor binding  .table  <dig> summary of roh consensus regions present amongst all  <dig> populations, by chromosome

each population is represented in each consensus group by at least one bird. only consensus groups with  <dig> or more individuals shown. consensus regions in between flanking markers were annotated for genes and coding non-synonymous and splice site category snps


subset of go terms that could putatively affect responses to environmental stressors. aall terms were statistically significant at fdr <  <dig> . this analysis lends evidence to support that all three populations experienced selective pressures for variants effecting stress response, immune response, and behavior



genes under putative selection within populations
the strongest ihs signal  across all three populations was on chromosome  <dig> in variants annotated to intronic regions of the protein kinase c alpha  gene  . it was the strongest overall signal in the ugandan birds, and second strongest signal in the rwandan and kuroilers . there were also strong selection signals that were unique to each of the three populations. in the uganda ecotypes the gene cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor  <dig>  on chromosome  <dig> had the next highest ihs value  with  <dig> statistically significant variants . the gene deleted in liver cancer  <dig>  on chromosome  <dig> had the highest ihs value in the rwandan birds  supported by  <dig> statistically significant variants . in kuroilers, variants annotated to adrenomedullin   on chromosome  <dig> and glutamate-cysteine ligase, modifier subunit  on chromosome  <dig>  had the highest ihs values .fig.  <dig> manhattan plots of ihs values for each population. the horizontal lines represent the p-value cut-off for significance . ihs scores were recorded as absolute values. ihs cut-off for significance > |4| for variants to be considered as signal of selection

fig.  <dig> statistically significant snps annotated to prkca fall within an intronic region of the gene near a cysteine-rich domain superfamily  <cit> . variants are located near the protein kinase cysteine-rich domain, a group of small proteins that have functions possibly involved in the response to environmental stressors



putative genes under selection between populations
the populations were also compared pairwise by means of the rsb statistic to identify additional genomic regions under selection. statistical significance  and the highest rsb value  were used to determine genes under possible selection. the ugandan ecotypes vs. the rwandan ecotypes showed selective pressure on chromosome  <dig> for gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor, gamma- <dig> . also annotated to the highest rsb value on chromosome  <dig> was the gene teneurin- <dig> isoform  <dig> . on chromosome  <dig>  beta, beta-carotene  <dig> '-monooxygenase  reached statistical significance along with having a rsb above |7|. the ugandan and the rwandan ecotypes both yielded similar results when compared to the kuroilers. the strongest selection occurred on chromosome  <dig> with the gene olfactomedin  <dig> .

gene set enrichment analysis
roh
gene ontology  enrichment was conducted using a list composed of genes located between the flanking markers of the roh consensus regions . the go enrichment was subjected to a fdr <  <dig>  then filtered for redundancy of terms using the software revigo  <cit> , which produced a list of significant go terms related to selective pressures for variants effecting oxidative and cellular stress, immune response, and behavior. the go enrichment also provided information on possible molecular functions and biological processes under selection related to calcium, lipid, and kinase activity and binding. significance was also reached for processes related to uv radiation and dna repair, possibly as a result of the birds living at the equator.

ihs
a go enrichment was conducted using a list of genes annotated to statistically significant  variants on the chip. statistically significant  enriched go terms relating to a host of environmental stressors emerged from the analysis. regions of the genome in each population showed evidence of selective pressure on biological processes related to multiple stress-related signaling pathways. there was also evidence of selective pressure on molecular functions involved in kinase and lipid activity. in the ugandan ecotypes and kuroilers go enrichment showed selective pressure on protein kinase activity . the rwandan and kuroiler populations were both associated with prkca through the go term protein kinase, this was not the case in the ugandan ecotypes .table  <dig> gene ontology  enrichment of statistically significant  go terms for the ugandan ecotypes



discussion
population structure and admixture of populations indicate mixed genetic backgrounds
the observed population structure could partially be a result of using ibs values, which are based on the likelihood that identical alleles inherited by two individuals came from the same parent. this can lead to some uncertainty due to not having pedigree information, but it still allowed us to capture information on the population structure  <cit> . the amount of overlap seen across ecotype and populations may stem from flock management that allows unrestricted inter-mating of chickens from different genetic backgrounds. the admixture may be due to individuals having ancestors in multiple source groups that contribute to the shared ancestry. another contributor to this admixture may be related to the movement of trade and selection parameters used by farmers to purchase new birds at market.

possible factors contributing to signatures of selection
there are multiple environmental challenges that could lead to the occurrence of the discovered selection signals in the three populations. the geographic location of uganda and rwanda is near the equator and in tropical climates . this, coupled with smallholder farm practices, places the studied birds in situations in which they would likely contact multiple environmental stressors that may affect their fitness. this would include challenges to their immune system from pathogens in the absence of vaccination. also the equatorial locations of the samplings were exposed to high ultraviolet rays. the birds may also have experienced nutritive stress brought on by sub-optimal food in an environment in which birds must forage for food. the birds used in this study would have adapted to the environment over the years, likely through changes in allele frequency of a beneficial or detrimental allele.

evidence of common signatures of selection across ecotypes for stress response
in livestock species, as well as humans and mice, environmental stressors such as pathogens or non-optimal temperatures can create cellular oxidative stress by generating reactive oxygen and nitrogen species effecting calcium signaling, apoptosis, vascular plasticity, growth and immune functions . the chickens in our study displayed evidence of population similarities in how selection may have affected their response to environmental stress. signatures are related to genes and signaling pathways involved in the reduction of ros through utilization of ca2+, lipids, and phosphorylated kinases. if the mobilization of ca2+ is part of a prolonged response to chronic stressors it is possible that birds that scavenge for food have to make trade-offs in ca2+ usage. an eggshell can contain a concentration  <dig>  m ca2+  <cit> . signal transduction of ca2+ stored in the endoplasmic reticulum can be identified by increased cytoplasmic ca2+ concentrations of 300–500nm  <cit> . the uganda population showed go terms related to endoplasmic reticulum  stress response where ca2+ is stored. despite being such a small amount  this diversion of resources may hinder other functions dependent on calcium. this mobilization of calcium for stress tolerance could also reduce the ability of birds to produce structurally competent shells and limit egg production. pathways affected by calcium were also upregulated in heat stressed broilers  <cit> . we also uncovered selective pressure on negative regulation of multiple kinases involved in stress responses that may function to reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines. this reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines had a lowering effect on metabolism, reducing stress during an immune response . the most marked effect of the selection was the enrichment of terms related to response to stress, especially those indicating selection for or against cellular, endoplasmic reticulum , and oxidative stress  <cit> . other processes that reached significance include cell-cell signaling , vegf signaling, cytokine binding/production , and inflammatory response  . selection on the genes and processes reported may be related to cyto-protective effects being used by chickens to tolerate heat as a general stress response, because it is a constant in their environment  <cit> .

selection pressure identified by roh analysis indicate similar biological processes between populations
the results from the roh analysis indicate that the populations have experienced selective pressure on their genomes from the environment. runs of homozygosity  are defined as long stretches of homozygous genotypes within a genome, thought to be the result of consanguinity and identity by descent  inheritance . it is possible that roh carry genes or variants under positive selection or that smaller roh are related to the hitchhiking effects of selective sweeps  <cit> . analysis of roh has been used to uncover alleles detrimental to health in humans and livestock . however, it may be possible that the roh shared between the three populations point to conservation of alleles necessary for survival. these may be alleles that provide protection from oxidative and other stressors due to the environment. the existence of statistically significant hits for calcium ion activity and apoptotic regulation may, respectively, be related to kinase activation and amino acid recycling in the birds as a means of maintaining energy to put toward redox functions. it is possible that the birds are diverting resources to autophagy to conserve resources to put into increasing calcium activity to lower metabolic temperatures. this may be possible since it has been shown that blood ca2+ levels are inversely related to body temperature  <cit> .

genes putatively under selection from environmental challenges among and within ecotypes
protein kinase c alpha  found on chromosome  <dig> appears as a strong signal in all three populations. the gene prkca is a calcium activated, phospholipid dependent kinase that is involved in gene expression, inflammation, prolactin secretion, as well as, the regulation of multiple cell processes including inflammation and wounding  <cit>  . it is also upregulated in response to endothelial injury. in chicken, prkca carries out functions involved in gene expression and kinase activity, and is involved in prolactin secretion  <cit> . the selective pressure on prkca may be related to the negative effect that a challenging environment has on overall body weight and feed efficiency  <cit> , which could indicate nutritive stress. in addition to its functions in livestock, prkca acts as a messenger to stimulate prolactin secretion  <cit> , which in humans has been linked to psychosocial stress responses  <cit> .

protein kinase c alpha is also involved in the biological process of prolactin secretion  possibly through protein-protein interactions with the prolactin receptor . this is interesting due to recent studies showing evidence of prlr’s connection to heat tolerance in livestock  <cit> . the interaction between prkca and prlr indicates that both genes may contribute to the birds’ response to environmental stressors. in humans, prkca regulates induction of nf-kappa-b inhibitor alpha , which mediates host defense and inflammation responses, as well as plays a role in the activation of mapk signaling and cyclin-dependent kinase  complex formation. previous studies have indicated a role of mapk and nf-κb pathways in the regulation of heat  <cit> . regulation of nf-κb may be part of the response to inflammation triggered by ros. the possible reduction in metabolic heat by prkca may be related the protein-protein interactions it has with suppressor of cytokine signaling  <dig>  and suppressor of cytokine signaling  <dig>  . both socs <dig> and socs <dig> help to battle ros and inflammation and may play a role in the cascade needed to restore lost homeostasis  <cit> . other socs genes have also been shown to respond under heat stress, which is a possible indication of a link between heat stress tolerance and cytokines  <cit> .fig.  <dig> network of predicted functional proteins associated with prkca created using string. lines represent interactions that prkca has with predicted proteins in its network. figure shows that prkca has protein-protein interactions with socs <dig> and socs <dig> that may be related to regulation of inflammation, while its interaction with prlr may be related to stress pathways



the other kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor  <dig>  found on chromosome  <dig> only appears as a strong signal in the ugandan ecotypes. as a dual specific protein phosphatase, cdkn <dig> functions to inhibit cell cycle processes by blocking kinases targeting cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig> , which causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to stress signals. the cdk <dig> gene is also part of the foxo signaling pathway, which regulates transcription factors involved in gene activation of physiological cellular processes such as apoptosis, glucose, oxidative and nutrient stimuli stress resistance. another function of cdkn <dig> is its ability to associate with cyclin c for activation and regulate different cell cycle events  <cit> . the selection pressure on cdkn <dig> in the ugandan ecotypes may be related to its part in cell cycle regulation and ability to interact with phosphotyrosine or phosphoserine residues  <cit> . it functions to inactivate cdk <dig> which is part of a pathway engaged in dna damage/telomere stress induced senescence, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in response to stress signals. to prevent senescence caused by oxidative stress, cdkn <dig> may function to inhibit cdk <dig>  studies have shown that oxidative stress can trigger activation of protein tyrosine kinases , which leads to the release of intracellular calcium in in vitro chicken cells and rat macrophages  <cit> . the gene cdkn <dig> has also been shown to be considerably down regulated in mice undergoing oxidative stress from simulated environmental exposures  <cit> .

in addition to the strong signal on chromosome  <dig>  the rwandan ecotypes also had a strong signal on chromosome  <dig> variants connected to the rho gtpase activating protein, dlc <dig>  this gene has functions involved in lipid binding and rho gtpase activator activity and is also involved in negative regulation of stress fiber assembly. the gene dlc <dig> is also involved in the activation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in the apoptotic process, as well as positive regulation of the execution phase of apoptosis  <cit> . for the rwandan ecotypes, dlc <dig> may be involved in a population-specific mechanism of increasing cell migration and expanding cellular redox and lipid binding capabilities  <cit> .

the gene with the strongest signal in the kuroilers, adm, is a hypotensive peptide that functions in hormone activity and in chicken is part of the biological processes of vasculogenesis , positive regulation of angiogenesis , and negative regulation of vasoconstriction   <cit> . it also protects endothelial cells from cardiac stress  <cit> . in humans it is a vasodilator with functions that regulate fluid and electrolyte homeostasis and also has a role in the biological processes of response to cold , hypoxia , starvation , lps , and wounding   <cit> . other studies have shown adm to also have anti-microbial, anti-apoptosis, and antioxidant functions  <cit> . in the chicken, adm has strong vascular modulation and functions as an antioxidant. oxidative stress increases expression of inflammatory responses by endothelial cells  <cit>  and adm is shown to protect cardiovascular cells from oxidative damage  <cit> . the selective pressure on this gene seen in the kuroilers does not occur in the african ecotypes and may represent a result of artificial selection for stress tolerance in the kuroilers during their development in india. the gene gclm in chickens is part of the response to oxidative stress , apoptotic mitochondrial changes , and negative regulation of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway . in humans, gclm is also part of the response to nitrosative stress   <cit> . nitrosative stress is caused by the formation of reactive nitrogen species  from cellular nitric oxide  or it reacting with oxidative stress molecules to inflict cellular and vascular damage  <cit> . other genes of interest that were in statistically significant regions of the genome based on the ihs values included dnaj  homolog, subfamily c, member  <dig>  and collagen alpha- <dig> chain . the heat shock protein dnajc <dig> appeared in all  <dig> populations and functions as a molecular chaperone and a negative regulator of neuron apoptosis. it is also part of the gaba synthesis, release, re-uptake and degradation pathway and the protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum pathway. collagen alpha- <dig> chain  only appeared in the kuroiler samples and was the only stop-gain  variant to reach statistical significance based on the ihs analysis. it is involved in focal adhesion and is part of the collagen biosynthesis and modifying enzymes, collagen degradation, and integrin cell surface interaction pathways  <cit> .

pairwise comparisons of populations reinforced selection toward genes and functions related to oxidative stress
the comparison between the ugandan and rwandan ecotypes pointed selective pressure on gamma-aminobutyric acid a receptor, gamma  <dig> , an inhibitory neurotransmitter in vertebrates that mediates neuronal inhibition by binding to gaba receptors and opening an integral chloride channel. this is consistent with the results we observed in dnajc <dig>  gamma-aminobutyric acid a receptor, gamma  <dig>  is also involved in the response to hypoxia in chickens  <cit> . the gene teneurin transmembrane protein  <dig>  also plays a part in neural development and regulation of proper nervous system connections and carries out calcium-mediated signaling using intracellular calcium sources, hemophilic and heterophilic cell-cell adhesion  <cit> . the calcium functions of tenm <dig> may help to stimulate the necessary calcium release to activate prkca into activation when stressors appear. on chromosome  <dig>  beta, beta-carotene  <dig> ’-monooxygenase , functions as a mono-oxygenase activator involved in cellular redox reactions as scavengers of oxygen radicals for photo-protection  <cit> . bcmo <dig> might experience selection related to protection from uv-induced dna damage related to the generation of oxidative stress. when ugandan and rwandan ecotypes were compared to kuroilers, the genes with the strongest signals for selection were the same but had different markers for the same gene regions in each comparison. olfactomedin  <dig>  functions as a negative apoptotic factor and an extracellular matrix glycoprotein involved in cell adhesion. in chickens, it negatively regulates i-kappab kinase/nf-kappab signaling and the immune response. the between-population results for go enrichment also reinforce the go term results seen within population with slightly more emphasis on signaling, activation, and transport functions.

unique and shared features under selection in kuroilers compared to native african ecotypes
kuroilers showed a great deal of overlap with the african ecotypes in biological processes that reduce the effects of oxidative and metabolic stress. unique to the kuroilers were selection on prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase activity, a target of nf-κb and negative regulation of interleukin- <dig>  production. both are a part of reduction of oxidative stress and have anti-inflammatory effects. the differences in the guided selection of the kuroilers can be seen in the many growth and behavior related go terms that are enriched within the kuroiler population and not observed in the african ecotypes. in kuroilers, the go enrichment results from the ihs analysis have larger gene lists, which may signify that under artificial selective breeding for stress tolerance, larger genomic areas or qtl regions may have been selected upon. this may be the opposite of natural selection in the african ecotypes, which may be focused on smaller regions of the genome. this is reflected in the genes annotated to similar terms seen in the ugandan and rwandan populations related to stress, inflammatory responses, and apoptosis. the length of the natural selection experienced by the african populations may have affected this also. this would have led to more recombination events, leading to smaller genomic regions under selection than what was identified in the kuroilers, which is a recently developed breed. it appears that all three populations have found ways through natural and artificial selection to tolerate environmental stressors. what this overlap in go terms also shows is that both the artificial selection for stress tolerance  and natural selection  share a biological link. previous studies showed evidence that exposure to one stressor, such as heat, can lead to protection from other stressors through cyto-protective memory present in the activation of protective signaling  <cit> . it is possible that the underlying purpose of the selection seen in the populations are involved in histone and transcriptional modifications leading to cross-tolerance brought about by numerous small adaptions to a challenging environment. the regulation of these types of signaling processes  and the initiation of regulatory kinases and genes  that assist in activating processes that protect cells from oxidative damage. selective pressure on prkca also indicates the presence of prolactin signaling, shown to be a heat stress related signaling system in cattle. there is also evidence of selective pressure for protection of cardiovascular health under metabolic stress. in the sampling populations of uganda and rwanda there was some indication of adaption to environmental challenges from heat present in the some of the observable phenotypes of the birds. heat stress related phenotypes such as frizzled and naked neck were observed within the sampling populations.

CONCLUSIONS
the three populations displayed evidence of stratification, which indicated admixture among the populations and especially among the ecotypes within a country. the strong selection signal in all populations at prkca, as well as, the population-specific selection signals for cdkn <dig>  dlc <dig>  and adm, strongly indicates that these populations have developed means to maintain cellular homeostasis despite the presence of oxidative and metabolic stress. our results indicate that the birds may use calcium-mediated responses to counteract environmentally generated oxidative stress. results from the pairwise comparison, along with the over-representation of go terms related to stress responses, also support this notion. the populations shared multiple statistically significant go terms and genes related to selection pressure on kinases and calcium activity. overall, this evidence of selective pressure on genes related to kinases, calcium activity, and oxidative stress responses provides a window through which to discern mechanisms used by chickens to tolerate the effects of a challenging environment.

additional files
additional file 1: table s <dig>  table showing family, individual, and sex identification for study samples. 

additional file 2: table s <dig>  locations and relations of shared genes and statistically significant snps for ihs analysis. 

additional file 3: table s <dig>  locations and relations of unique genes and statistically significant snps for ihs analysis. 

additional file 4: figure of fst sliding window analysis showing selection pressure around prkca. 

additional file 5: figure showing regions where ugandan and rwandan chickens were sampled. 



