BACKGROUND
current proteomic investigations have greatly expanded our ability to list proteins from complex mixtures ranging from immunoprecipitated complexes to subcellular structures  <cit> . the validity of the proteomic approach depends critically on a reasonable estimation of the confidence in the identified proteins. the protein inference problem  <cit>  aside, proteins are identified based on the comparison of peptide fragmentation spectra to sequence databases. while a single matched peptide is sufficient to identify a protein, the identification of a second peptide for the same protein corroborates the first and greatly increases the statistical confidence. nevertheless, proteins identified with a non-corroborated single peptide account for a considerable fraction of all proteins identified and cannot simply be disregarded.

the confidence in peptide identifications is generally estimated by interrogating the quality of match between mass spectra and peptides. false identifications are reduced through manual interrogation of peptide-spectrum matches, by applying filters created using a training data set  <cit> , using probabilistic approaches  <cit> , or relying on machine learning  <cit> . however, a key problem is the difficulty of determining the reliability of reported identifications as we lack a field-wide standard describing identification confidence. as a result, only experts for exactly the data interpretation method used can judge if a presented list leans towards over- or under-reporting protein identifications.

the target-decoy approach, combining the ordinary  database usually with an inverted  database, offers a platform-independent method to determine the confidence of protein identifications and hence addresses the standardization problem of ms-based proteomics  <cit> . the database search is performed against a concatenated database composed of target and decoy sequences. the target sequences are of such proteins that could be present in the sample while the decoy sequences are all false and normally obtained by simply inverting the target sequences. there is no sequence overlap and the probability of a random/false identification is, at least in principle, equal in both. it is not possible a priori to tell which target matches are false identifications. however, the frequency of false positive peptide spectrum matches is revealed by the number of decoy matches. currently, a cut-off score is defined and adjusted until the ratio between the global count of decoy and target matches above the cut-off reaches a desired value, which is taken as the estimation of the false discovery rate  .

the target-decoy approach provides a universal expression of the identification confidence reached by a given data analysis and hence a possible path to standardization of proteomic results. the target-decoy approach generates peptide and protein lists that are very comparable using different search algorithms, as was shown recently for omssa, x!tandem, mascot, and sequest  <cit> . we here complement the target-decoy approach by investigating the validity of the false-positive estimation. furthermore we introduce an alteration to the target-decoy approach to maximize the number of correctly identified proteins while minimizing the number of false positives, even when single-peptide hits are included. to achieve this, we calculate the fdr locally within a score window  and separately consider matches to proteins alone or in groups. the local fdr calculation was previously discussed by käll et al.  <cit>  and is related to the posterior probability  as used by peptideprophet .

RESULTS
a true-false target database serves as a control for the success of fdr estimations
we used a test system to control the selectivity of the target-decoy method. we searched the mass spectrometric data obtained by analyzing e. coli lysate against a non-redundant database that contained arabidopsis and chicken in addition to e. coli sequences using mascot . normally, if the aim was to identify e. coli proteins, one would use an e. coli-only database as that would reduce the number of random matches, i.e. false identifications, and maximize the number of correctly identified peptides. we were, however, interested in testing how well false and correct identified peptides are discriminated from each other by the target-decoy method and thus needed a way in which to recognize the false peptide identifications. while the target-decoy approach reveals the fraction of false identifications and thus allows reducing false positives to a defined rate it does not reveal which peptides are actually false. adding the 19-times larger arabidopsis/chicken sequence databases to e. coli enables us to obtain most of that information in our experiment. theoretically, all false matches are random, and hence 95%  should occur to the non-e. coli part of the database making them recognizable. importantly, we do not choose our cut-off to minimize the number of non-e. coli matches but merely use these false target matches to reveal the success of different ways of estimating the fdr. note that we include only the highest scoring spectrum match for a given peptide sequence rather than including all peptide spectrum matches. this simplifies the computations and discussion presented below. we also tested taking all psms, as is normally done, and could not see a significant difference in the outcome of our analysis.

aiming for a 5% fdr for matches we found a score  threshold of  <dig> , to yield the desired number of  <dig> decoy matches  out of a total of  <dig> matched peptides above the threshold. at the next lower cut-off  the number of decoy matches exceeds our tolerated error rate . from the equal probability of matching randomly decoy and target peptides follows that there should be  <dig> incorrect peptides distributed amongst the target peptide matches in relation to the relative proportion of arabidopsis+chicken:e. coli database size 19: <dig> . we observed  <dig> matches  to non-e. coli peptides demonstrating that the false positive calculation is performing essentially as expected.

these  <dig> non-e. coli target peptides gave rise to  <dig>  of our identified proteins being non-e. coli. the vast majority  of these non-e. coli and thus very likely false proteins were identified with a single peptide only, while many e. coli proteins were identified with multiple peptides . this summarizes into the observation that correct peptides accumulate together in proteins while false peptides tend to remain single . discarding all proteins with a single peptide and hence reducing the number of falsely identified proteins comes at the price of also losing a significant number of proteins that are likely correct. we hence set out to extend the target-decoy approach to more accurately reflect the fdr of the identified peptides and to increase confidence into proteins identified by a single peptide.

we next asked if the non-e. coli peptides scattered randomly over the list of identified peptides or clustered and could thus be removed selectively.

locally estimated fdr to predict probabilities for individual hits
as discussed by käll et al.  <cit> , globally estimated fdr is essentially an estimate of confidence  and is a measure of the quality of a list. however, in order to estimate the probability of individual peptide spectrum matches being false, the posterior error probability is used. we calculate this as the locally estimated fdr, in which only psms falling within a score window contribute to the fdr for psms within that window. sliding the window over the entire list allows locally calculate fdr value to be assigned to each psm. since the decoy hits cluster towards lower scores, setting a cut-off for local fdr gives a much more conservative score threshold than for global fdr. this can be observed in figures 2e and 2f, which show the decoy and target distributions and corresponding local and global fdrs over the mascot score. it is important to note that whilst it is more appropriate to consider the global fdr when working with lists of matches, we are next considering relationships between individual matches, and so use of the local fdr seems more valid.

applying a cut-off to our e. coli dataset according a 5% local fdr, i.e. moving the calculation window from the high scoring matches down the list until the local fdr reaches 5%, resulted in  <dig>  non-e. coli peptides among the identified peptides. this gave  <dig>  falsely identified, non-e. coli proteins. using local fdr excluded many non-e. coli  peptides. however, just one increment below the cut-off, the peptides have almost the same fdr as above the cut-off. many peptides below the cut-off are correct but nevertheless excluded as exemplified by the excess of target over decoy peptides below the cut-off . only at much lower score values did the number of target and decoy peptides equalize indicating complete random matching. the peptides below the score cut-off could potentially be critical in expanding the depth of the analysis towards low abundant proteins. the question is how to access these peptides without compromising confidence in the identified proteins.

peptides from below the local fdr cut-off do not result in additional correct protein identifications; they increase the sequence coverage of the already identified proteins
we divided the matches with score values below the cut-off into two classes. the first class of peptides would match to proteins already identified by peptides from above the cut-off and thus increase the sequence coverage of these proteins. the second class of peptides would add novel proteins to the list if the cut-off was lowered. importantly, the chance of matching randomly to one of the proteins identified already is significantly smaller than the chance of matching randomly to one of the many remaining entries from the database. this is also exemplified by the behaviour of non-e. coli matches:  <dig>   of  <dig>  class two peptides are non-e. coli and thus false positives while it is only  <dig>  of  <dig>  class one peptides. hence, class-one peptides are much more likely correct. we observe that class one peptides largely accounted for the excess of target matches found below the cut-off, while the distribution of class two peptides closely coincided with the distribution of decoy matches . lowering the cut-off by one score unit would result in the inclusion of  <dig> class one peptides, all of which are from e. coli, and  <dig> class two peptides – and thus  <dig> proteins – of which  <dig>  are not from e. coli. clearly, including additional peptides irrespective of their class by lowering the cut-off would add a large proportion of false proteins to the list. nevertheless, correct peptides are found below the local fdr cut-off. they mostly match to proteins identified already, improving sequence coverage. however, some of these peptides will be false and we require unbiased criteria for determining what fraction of matches to upgrade onto the list of identified peptides and which to leave out.

all of the  <dig> non-e. coli proteins were identified with a single peptide and hence lack the validation by a second peptide. in effect, 8%  of the  <dig> proteins we identified with a single peptide were non-e. coli while this is the case for none of the  <dig> proteins identified with two or more peptides. this means that this fdr-based method has two deficiencies: first by excluding likely correct peptides matching to proteins identified already  and second by including likely incorrect peptides matching proteins alone . this opens the question if those two classes of matches should be treated separately for the fdr computation.

separating corroborating and non-corroborating matches in target-decoy analyses improves selectivity for correct identifications
the likelihood of falsely identifying a single non-corroborating matches is much higher than falsely identifying a peptide that is corroborated by matching together with other matches to the same protein. correspondingly, identified decoy matches match to a protein much more frequently alone than together . treating both classes of matches together distorts the fdr for both. on one hand, the score cut-off is too high for corroborating matches. a consequence is the excess of target matches over decoy matches below the local fdr cut-off, described above. on the other hand, the score cut off is too low for non-corroborating matches. false, non-corroborating matches are included above the local fdr cut-off, exemplified by the large number of non-e. coli proteins with a single match being identified in our search. hence, the two classes of matches should be considered individually for fdr estimation to improve selectivity for correct identifications. on some existing platforms such as protein prophet   <cit>  and spectrum mill the obvious step is already done of allowing one to set higher score thresholds for peptides contributing to one-hit proteins than for peptides contributing to multi-hit proteins. this concept should also be implemented in the platform-spanning target-decoy approach. by applying cut-offs corresponding to 5% local fdr separately to the two match classes the vast majority of non-e. coli target matches were rejected in our e. coli analysis. of the  <dig> proteins identified by a single peptide  <dig> were non-e. coli. in addition, the number of corroborating e. coli peptides increased from  <dig> to  <dig> and thus the sequence coverage of the proteins was optimized without lowering confidence criteria. in fact, considering corroborating  and non-corroborating  matches separately for local fdr  estimation and cut-off yields increased corroborating peptide and protein identifications over both fdr and local fdr methods. the proportion of non-e. coli to total targets among proteins identified with a single peptide is 8% but by considering these non-corroborating hits separately this percentage falls to 2%. we now can report with defined confidence the non-corroborated peptides giving rise to single-match proteins.

in order to investigate if our findings are specific for search results obtained by mascot  <cit>  we have conducted an equivalent analysis of the search results obtained by omssa  <cit>  . we find that all trends are identical and our preference for the cnc local fdr method holds across platforms. the cnc local fdr method can thus be used to express confidence in peptide identifications in cross-platform manner. note that our results do not support the recently reported clear superiority of omssa over mascot  <cit>  but find both programs performing comparably  with an overlap of 47% in peptides and 68% in proteins.

the concept of corroborating and non-corroborating matches can be expanded further beyond highest scoring psm for a given peptide matching alone or in groups to proteins. this can be done by further dividing the groups or by using other features than number of matches. such features can be charge states, modifications, sequence overlap , contiguity or vicinity in the protein sequence, or even proteins falling into related functional or localization classes, e.g. being members of a complex/pathway or being membrane associated. these and other features remain to be explored.

comparison of the target-decoy approach with the confidence assignment offered by mascot
mascot offers a confidence assignment for its peptide-spectrum matches on a per-match basis. the algorithm includes calculation of the homology value that aims to represent the 95% limit of confidence for each match. in our analysis we use the mascot score minus the homology value, so that if the resulting score is greater than zero, mascot has considered this hit statistically significant.

we find the mascot cut-off  to be in approximate agreement with the 5% global fdr cut-off , in the data we present here. however, 40% of identified peptides at this score value are false as is indicated by the local fdr  and basically all non-corroborating peptides are falsely identified as is indicated by the numbers of non-corroborating decoy and target peptides being equal at this score . it should be noted that the difference of values between global fdr and mascot was not the same under all circumstances. for the serum data discussed below the discrepancy was negative  and we have observed discrepancies of a few score units  between the 5% global fdr cut-off and the mascot cut-off using other data sets and databases.

whilst there is reasonable agreement between mascot and the target-decoy based global fdr estimation method, we can improve upon both by using the cnc local fdr. we find cnc local fdr to propose a cut-off lower than mascot/global-fdr for corroborating-peptides and higher for non-corroborating-peptides , meaning that we accept significantly more corroborating peptides than mascot  and fewer non-corroborating hits, as shown in figure 3d. the use of cnc local fdr can thus improve even on the probabilistic data evaluation done by mascot. value is added on the level of peptide identification by treating single and corroborating-peptides separately. value is also added on protein level by preventing the inclusion of a number of low confidence single-peptide hits, as basically any single-peptide protein near the cut-off used by mascot is falsely identified, and by improving on sequence coverage.

we also investigated as a base for our target-decoy based fdr analysis the mascot score or the mascot e-value . the results were practically indistinguishable to the ones obtained on the basis of the difference between mascot score and homology value.

impact of fdr method on a serum analysis is significant
human serum is a high-complexity, wide dynamic-range biological mixture of great clinical relevance. however, many serum proteins are of low abundance, making their detection challenging using current technology. proteins present at abundance levels close to the detection limit are often detected with single, low-scoring matches. this gives the match score cut-off determined by fdr estimations a decisive impact on the final protein list. we processed a large human serum dataset <cit>  using fdr and corroborating/non-corroborating  local fdr estimation, to see the impact of the two methods on a dataset of this nature.

adopting cnc local fdr increases the number of confidently identified serum proteins in our analysis by  <dig>  from  <dig> to  <dig> by allowing the inclusion of proteins identified with a single peptide without significantly increasing the expected number of false identifications . these proteins were also seen when using global fdr but mixed with a large number of false positives. using the latter method, one therefore has to choose between accepting single peptide hits and with this a large number of false positives and rejecting single peptide hits and loosing a large number of correctly identified proteins. using cnc local fdrs, many of the correct proteins can be identified with high confidence even though they were observed with a single peptide.

if one used the number of decoys  to estimate the number of false positives in the single-peptide proteins identified by the global fdr method, and subtract this number from the total , there are about  <dig> additional single-peptide proteins identified by the global fdr method than by our cnc local fdr method using a 5% cut-off. some of these  <dig> peptides may be additional false positives in the global fdr method that the decoy approach has failed to model, whilst the remainder will be false negatives in the cnc local fdr method, that simply did not score highly enough to meet the 5% cut-off criterion. these peptides may nevertheless be reported, albeit with a defined higher local fdr using the cnc local fdr method. researchers can then pick biologically meaningful candidates for subsequent study or intersect the list with the results of alternative, orthogonal high through-put studies and thus exploit the information gained by mass spectrometry-based proteomics to completion.

CONCLUSIONS
current target-decoy methods average the probability of false identification over all reported peptides and thereby significantly increase the frequency of false identifications. we show that this leads to the effective loss of proteins identified with a single peptide. the use of a 19-times larger false-target database allows to asses the quality of the target-decoy based fdr method used, separating the cyclic redundancy of using decoy matches to calculate fdrs as well as evaluating the method of calculating fdrs. we obtain a better separation between correct and incorrect peptide spectrum matches thus minimizing false identifications, by using local fdrs to treat peptides separately that fall alone or in groups into proteins. as a result, we gain confidence into single peptide proteins and optimize the sequence coverage for multi-peptide proteins. we thus maximize the results that can be obtained with the available data at a defined fdr using the cross-platform compatible target-decoy approach. we furthermore show that the cnc local fdr method improves in confidence and number on the results obtained by mascot and omssa parameters alone and that standardization does hence not compromise the quality of obtained results. this is valuable contribution towards the standardized presentation of proteomics data.

