BACKGROUND
daily consumption of a mere 50– <dig> extra kilocalories without compensatory expenditure has been proposed to be a main cause of the increasing incidence of overweight and obesity  <cit> . as this trend has been occurring over the past  <dig> years, environmental factors such as increased food availability and the power of sensory food-associated sensory cues in the modern environment  may ultimately be responsible for the initiation and maintenance of increased energy intake  <cit> .

it has been known for some time that food-related cues are capable of increasing food consumption beyond homeostatic needs and that this effect is enhanced when subjects are hungry  <cit> . functional imaging studies indicate that regional cortical, limbic, striatal, thalamic or hypothalamic activation in response to presentation of food images is greater in food-restricted than in satiated subjects  <cit> . subjects will also increase their intake of a preferred food, but not other foods, when they are presented with sensory cues specific to that food  <cit> . furthermore, presentation of cues associated with preferred versus non-preferred foods increases activity in cortical areas and the amygdala  <cit> , and images of high-calorie versus low-calorie foods activate regions of the cortex and the thalamus  <cit> . overall, these studies demonstrate that food preference, caloric density, and short-term energy balance can influence regional neuronal activity and food intake resulting from exposure to food-related stimuli. interestingly, stress can also increase self-reported liking and overall intake of food, yet the neuroanatomical substrates of these phenomena remain largely uninvestigated  <cit> .

while it is clear that increased food intake results from exposure to food-related stimuli and stressors, little is known about the functional circuits mediating this behavior. to further characterize the ability of food-associated cues to activate central circuits, we employed a classical conditioning paradigm in which rats were exposed to an environment that had previously been repeatedly paired with access to chocolate ensure  or to control cues . in situ hybridization  for the immediate early genes  homer1a, arc, zif <dig>  ngfi-b, and c-fos were used to map alterations in neuronal activity in cortical, striatal, thalamic, and hypothalamic regions . the early response genes fall into different subclasses serving differing functions, therefore parallel or divergent changes in their expression offer insight into specific cellular and molecular processes occurring within individual brain regions. for example, the arc and homer1a proteins are involved in trafficking α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid  and metabotropic glutamate receptors, respectively  <cit> . zif <dig>  ngfi-b, and c-fos are transcription factors with differing promoter specificities. measuring the expression of multiple iegs also allowed us to perform a statistically powerful interregional gene expression correlation analysis to identify functional circuits recruited by food-associated cues compared with control-associated cues.

our findings demonstrate that cues associated with palatable food elicited a state of motivational arousal associated with robust ieg expression within the prosencephalon, including basal diencephalic areas responsible for the detection of peripheral energy homeostasis signals and integration of these signals into autonomic and behavioral outputs. the differing patterns of correlated gene expression elicited by food-associated versus control-associated cues suggests that the generation of this state involved major shifts in functional connectivity between cortical, amygdalar, and striatal regions. in addition, we found that striatal expression of proenkephalin, an endogenous opioid that plays a role in food consumption and cue-elicited reward-seeking behavior, was enhanced by food-associated cues  <cit> .

RESULTS
in a counterbalanced design, rats fed ad libitum on standard chow received access to ensure, a palatable, high-calorie liquid, or water in one of two environments with distinct sensory cues  for  <dig> days . three days after the end of training, rats were acutely food-deprived for an average of  <dig>  hours and then placed in context a, but received neither water nor ensure in order to assess conditioned behavioral, endocrine, and regional cerebral transcriptional responses to food-associated cues . the daily intake of ensure and water in contexts a and b is shown in figure 2a. rats in both the ensure cues and water cues groups drank significantly more ensure than water in their respective contexts over the training period . rats consumed very little water, as they were not water deprived. there was no observed significant effect of context on either ensure or water intake between the groups  and there was no observed significant interaction between ensure or water intake and context . the ensure and water cues groups initially consumed increasing daily amounts of ensure, as illustrated by a significant effect of training day on intake  and an interaction between training day and intake . rats in both groups gained weight over the course of the experiment without significant difference between the groups .

during the 15-day training period, access to ensure had no significant stimulatory effect on total horizontal activity in context a compared with locomotor activity in the group receiving water access in this context . there was a significant effect of day on total horizontal activity , indicating a gradual habituation to the environment but there was no treatment × day interaction, as activity in both groups declined similarly over days.

on the test day, rats in the ensure cues group exhibited higher levels of total horizontal activity compared with rats in the water cues group . there was a significant decrease in locomotor activity over the intervals  but no interaction between treatment and interval . total horizontal activity was significantly different between the groups during intervals  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  but not during intervals  <dig>  or  <dig> . there was also a conditioned increase in plasma corticosterone in the ensure cues group on the test day .

food cues induced immediate early gene expression in the telencephalon
ensure cues elicited homer1a expression in a variety of forebrain regions . the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the homer1a data revealed a significant effect of context  and a significant context × region interaction . further analysis revealed significant increases in homer1a in all of the cortical regions analyzed except for the cingulate cortex . an increase in homer1a expression was also found in limbic regions including the dorsal hippocampus and the basolateral amygdala, but not in the central nucleus of the amygdala. significant increases in homer1a expression were observed in striatal regions including the nucleus accumbens core and shell and the ventral and medial regions of the striatum.

the expression pattern of arc was similar to that of homer1a. ensure cues increased arc levels in a variety of forebrain regions . the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the arc data revealed a significant context effect  and a significant context × region interaction . there were significant increases in arc in all of the cortical regions analyzed. ensure cues increased arc expression in limbic regions including the dorsal hippocampus and the basolateral amygdala, but not in the central nucleus of the amygdala. in addition, arc was also induced regionally in the striatum.

the mrna levels of zif <dig> were increased in the forebrains of rats in the ensure cues group . the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the zif <dig> data revealed a significant effect of context  and a significant context × region interaction . further analysis revealed significant increases in zif <dig> in the ensure cues group in all of the cortical regions analyzed except the cingulate cortex. ensure cues also increased zif <dig> expression in limbic regions including the dorsal hippocampus, the basolateral amygdala, and the central nucleus of the amygdala. significant increases in zif <dig> expression were observed in regions of the striatum including the shell and core of the nucleus accumbens.

ensure cues increased ngfi-b mrna levels in telencephalic regions . the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the ngfi-b data revealed a significant effect of context  and a significant context × region interaction . further analysis revealed significant increases in ngfi-b in several prefrontal and primary sensory cortical areas. ensure cues also increased ngfi-b expression in limbic regions including the dorsal hippocampus and the basolateral amygdala but not in the central nucleus of the amygdala. striatal regions also exhibited ngfi-b induction in response to ensure cues.

food cues increased c-fos in telencephalic areas . measurement of c-fos expression in frontal cortical regions was limited to the cingultate cortex, because more anterior sections were lost during processing. the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the c-fos data revealed a significant context effect  and a significant context × region interaction . regional analysis revealed significant increases in c-fos in the cingulate cortex and primary sensory cortical areas. similarly, c-fos expression was increased in the limbic regions including the dorsal hippocampus, the basolateral amygdala, and the central nucleus of the amygdala. the striatum exhibited region-specific increased c-fos levels in response to ensure cues.

food cues induced immediate early gene expression in the diencephalon
only zif <dig>  ngfi-b, and c-fos were detected at appreciable levels within the analyzed diencephalic regions. expression of zif <dig> was increased in all of the analyzed thalamic and hypothalamic regions in response to ensure cues , while ngfi-b was increased by ensure cues in some thalamic regions but not in any of the hypothalamic regions analyzed . ensure cues increased c-fos in all of the analyzed thalamic and hypothalamic regions .

food cues elicited fewer regional gene expression correlations with locomotion and more correlations with plasma corticosterone
in order to assess whether regional gene-expression measurements have a context-dependent, patterned relationship with locomotor activity, plasma corticosterone, or gene expression within other regions, we performed a series of correlation analyses. the results indicated that food-associated cues changed the relationship of regional activity with conditioned locomotor activity and plasma corticosterone levels and dramatically altered the pattern of functional connectivity.

test day locomotor activity was less often correlated with regional early-response gene expression in the ensure cues group compared with the water cues group . total horizontal activity was not significantly correlated with gene expression in any of the analyzed regions in the ensure cues group. in contrast, within the water cues group, there were several markedly positive correlations between total horizontal activity and gene expression in the cingulate, piriform, and agranular insular cortices and the dorsal hippocampus and centromedial region of the thalamus. there was also a significant negative correlation between total horizontal activity and gene expression in the lateral hypothalamus within this group.

in direct contrast, test day plasma corticosterone levels were more often correlated, albeit inversely, with regional gene expression in the ensure cues group than in the water cues group . early response gene levels in the infralimbic, cingulate, piriform, agranular insular, primary sensory, and sensorimotor cortices, the basolateral amygdala, nucleus accumbens shell and core, anterior and posterior ventrolateral striatum, and the posterior medial striatum all exhibited significant negative correlations with plasma corticosterone in response to ensure cues. the only region to exhibit a positive correlation between gene expression and plasma corticosterone levels in the ensure cues group was the lateral hypothalamus.

food cues altered interregional gene expression correlations
the pattern of interregional gene expression correlations was markedly different between the ensure and water cues groups . the total number of correlations increased, while the number of intracortical and intrastriatal correlations decreased in the ensure cues group compared with the control cues group. primary sensory cortical engagement of the striatum almost completely accounted for the increased number of corticostriatal correlations induced by ensure cues. there was also a shift in the distribution of cortical correlations between the two nucleus accumbens regions. cortical regions correlated primarily with the nucleus accumbens core in the ensure cues group and mainly with the nucleus accumbens shell in the water cues group.

another striking difference between the groups was the pattern of inter-regional gene-expression correlations with the basolateral amygdala . in the ensure cues group, gene expression in the basolateral amygdala was correlated with all of the analyzed cortical and striatal areas  and was not correlated with the dorsal hippocampus. in contrast, only the dorsal hippocampus and the periventricular region of thalamus exhibited correlations with the basolateral amygdala in the water cues group.

food cues increased striatal hnpenk expression
appreciable expression of hnpenk was limited to the striatum . the overall between-subjects and within-subjects analysis of the hnpenk data revealed a significant context effect , and a significant context × region interaction . significant increases in hnpenk expression were restricted to the nucleus accumbens core, anterior and posterior ventrolateral and medial aspects of the striatum. total horizontal activity, irrespective of group, correlated positively with hnpenk expression in the nucleus accumbens core  but there were no such correlations in either group analyzed individually.

as cortical or thalamic deafferentation decreases striatal penk mrna expression  <cit> , we identified potential afferents regulating striatal hnpenk in this study by performing correlations between extrastriatal, regional ieg expression and striatal, regional hnpenk expression . overall, there were  <dig> positive correlations between extrastriatal immediate early gene expression and striatal hnpenk expression in the ensure cues group versus  <dig> correlations in the water cues group. these correlations were distributed in a manner consistent with anatomic patterns of cortical and thalamic innervation of the striatum.

discussion
we found that contextual cues associated with access to palatable food are capable of eliciting conditioned increases in locomotion and plasma corticosterone. this state is associated with increased ieg expression in cortical, limbic, striatal, thalamic, and hypothalamic areas. in addition, the conditioned stimuli increased striatal transcription of the penk gene, which encodes endogenous opioid neuropeptides. furthermore, this is the first study correlating the regional expression of multiple, activity-regulated genes as a means of probing functional connectivity in relation to motivation. the differing correlated patterns of gene expression suggest that food cues are capable of powerfully changing functional connectivity within circuits mediating emotion, cognition, arousal, and energy balance, which are used to guide goal-directed behavior.

the iegs analyzed here are from two classes. homer1a and arc, which have direct effects on neurophysiology, are classified as effectors. homer1a trafficks and regulates type i metabotropic glutamate receptors  <cit> . arc trafficks ampa receptors in an activity-dependent manner  <cit> . the transcription factors zif <dig> and c-fos exert their effects on neurophysiology via regulation of the transcription of downstream genes and, as with homer1a and arc, have been shown to be necessary for neuronal plasticity and, in some cases, the consolidation of long-term memory  <cit> . ngfi-b has both direct, proapoptotic effects and transcriptional, mitogenic effects, although its role in neuronal plasticity has not yet been directly assessed  <cit> . as these proteins are regulated by activity and play important roles in synaptic plasticity, their induction illustrates the possible neuroanatomical substrates of conditioned response and the potential for new learning mediated by these circuits .

palatable food cues elicit locomotor arousal and corticosterone release
exposure to food-associated cues elicited locomotor hyperactivity, an increase in plasma corticosterone, and enhanced forebrain gene expression. conditioned locomotor arousal to contexts associated with many drugs of misuse has been documented and is often accompanied by prior sensitization of, or increases in locomotor activity during training  <cit> . we observed conditioned locomotor arousal in response to contextual cues associated with food in the absence of locomotor sensitization . it is important to determine whether the changes in gene expression that we observe reflect the locomotor component of this conditioned response. locomotor activity was less often correlated with regional gene expression in the ensure cues group compared with the water cues group. this lack of correlation cannot be a result of gene expression reaching an upper limit as we have documented higher levels of regional immediate early gene expression in rats with comparable levels of locomotor activity  <cit> . we have also demonstrated that conditioned locomotor arousal is not sufficient to elicit the pattern of gene expression observed here and that increased gene expression, for example in the prefrontal cortex, is not necessary for locomotor arousal  <cit> . these considerations indicate that the observed patterns of gene expression are not simply caused by increased locomotion.

exposure to ensure cues also elicited an increase in plasma corticosterone, possibly due to surprise or frustration elicited in the animals by the expectation of food in a hungry state. the increases in plasma corticosterone reported here are higher than in our previous studies, but are in line with the food-deprivation enhancement of corticosterone release documented in the literature  <cit> . although not addressed here, a time course of plasma corticosterone levels following cue exposure would give important information concerning the directionality of the corticosterone response and the activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal  axis in these experiments. the increased number of negative correlations between plasma corticosterone and regional ieg expression in the ensure cues group suggests that the gene-transcription response may be dampened by circulating corticosterone or another stress-related neuromodulator. alternatively, forebrain activity on the test day may be involved in suppressing the conditioned activation of the hpa axis. the decreased number of regional gene-expression correlations with locomotion and the increased number of these correlations with plasma corticosterone suggests that neuronal activity in the ensure cues group is increasingly involved in psychological processes such as controlling stress or anxiety rather than simply a result of increased locomotor activity per se. interestingly, conditioned increases in plasma corticosterone associated with locomotor hyperactivity have also been observed in rats exposed to a cocaine-associated  <cit>  but not a nicotine-associated context  <cit> .

food cues alter functional connectivity as assessed by interregional gene expression correlations
exposure to food-associated contextual cues has been shown to increase locomotor activity and to potentiate food intake by rats, and both of these effects are dependent on an intact prefrontal cortex  <cit> . when rats are allowed to eat beyond satiety in the presence of a discrete cue that had been previously paired with food delivery when hungry, lateral hypothalamus projection neurons in the basolateral amygdala and prefrontal cortex exhibit increased homer1a and arc expression  <cit> . furthermore, basolateral amygdala and prelimbic cortical inputs to the lateral hypothalamus, but not those from the central amygdala or nucleus accumbens, have been demonstrated to be necessary for cue-induced overeating in satiated rats  <cit> . our gene expression results are consistent with these findings despite some methodological differences. a similar pattern of c-fos induction to that which we observed was also evident in a recent study assessing regional gene expression in response to shifts in the incentive value of sucrose  <cit> . these findings suggest that the gene expression changes observed in the present study may play a role in altering the valuation of reward-paired cues used to guide behavior.

the contrasting patterns of gene expression correlations between the experimental groups suggests that exposure to a food-predictive versus a neutral context selectively recruits and activates specific corticolimbic circuits, resulting in the generation versus suppression of a motivational state. this notion is schematically illustrated in figure  <dig>  food-associated cues elicited an increased number of interregional gene expression correlations between the cortex and the basolateral amygdala and the striatum. of special interest are the correlations between orbitofrontal cortical regions and the basolateral amygdala as these regions cooperate to encode the representations of outcome expectancies based on experience that are used to guide adaptive behavior  <cit> . the coordinated expression of plasticity-related genes in these areas suggests that unreinforced presentation of the conditioned stimuli may prompt an adaptive reevaluation of cued, expected outcomes. furthermore, the basolateral amygdala may be involved in updating not only affective information but wide-ranging types of encoded feature representations concerning the environment since sensory as well as frontal cortical areas exhibited correlations with this area .

in contrast, gene expression in the basolateral amygdala in the water cues group exhibited no correlations with the cortex but instead exhibited this type of relationship with the dorsal hippocampus . the hippocampus normally inhibits contextually conditioned locomotor arousal in response to food-paired cues  <cit> . in addition, varied lines of research have suggested that correlated activity between the hippocampus and basolateral amygdala is involved in learning to suppress conditioned responses and to ignore unimportant events or stimuli  <cit> . as low threshold stimulation of the hippocampus elicits inhibition and higher threshold stimulation elicits excitation of basolateral amygdala projection neurons  <cit> , our observations suggest that, in the water-paired context, low levels of hippocampal activity inhibit cortical engagement of the basolateral amygdala while, in the ensure-paired context, higher levels of hippocampal activity overcomes this feed-forward inhibition, allowing cortical excitation of amygdala output neurons. this type of competition between the cortex and the hippocampus for engagement of the basolateral amygdala has also been proposed to account for the the ability of the cortex to support contextual fear conditioning after pre-training, but not post-training hippocampal lesions  <cit> . in addition, hippocampus and basolateral amygdala interactions have been implicated in appetitively-driven contextual conditioning  <cit> .

within the ventral striatum, correlations between the cortex and nucleus accumbens core predominated in the ensure cues group, as opposed to the nucleus accumbens shell in the water cues group. the nucleus accumbens core, but not the shell, is essential to cue-elicited, goal-directed behaviors including cued reinstatement of cocaine-seeking  <cit> . in contrast, inactivation of the nucleus accumbens shell, but not the core, during acquisition of a rule-based strategy facilitates later set-shifting to another rule-based strategy  <cit>  and also decreases the ability of pre-exposure to inhibit future conditioning to a stimulus known as latent inhibition  <cit> . as the water cues did not have motivational value, the correlations between the cortex and the nucleus accumbens shell in the water cues group may reflect a conditioned inhibitory process or activity within a circuit that mediates the expression of learned irrelevance. these findings suggest that cortical engagement of the striatum and a shift from cortical engagement of the nucleus accumbens shell to the core is associated with conditioned motor arousal indicative of a cue-elicited motivational state.

although zif <dig>  ngfi-b and c-fos were increased in the diencephalon in the ensure cues group, there was a paucity of thalamic and hypothalamic interregional gene-expression correlations . the lack of correlations may simply reflect a decrease in the statistical power of the analyses, as there were fewer usable observations within these structures. with regard to the thalamic gene expression in response to food cues, it appears that the midline and intralaminar nuclei in particular were strongly activated, although critical sensory areas of the thalamus were also involved. as these latter regions transmit primarily taste, visceral, and somatosensory information to the neocortex, one can speculate that this network may be involved in conveying sensory information to the cortical regions that were also strongly activated. in particular, the barrel fields are clearly activated by food cues, suggesting recruitment of sensory, and attentional and executive thalamocortical networks.

gene expression patterns in the food cues group also indicated an activation of hypothalamic networks including the arcuate, dorsomedial, ventromedial, and lateral hypothalamic regions. this last observation is supported by electrophysiological recordings in non-human primates, showing clear activation of lateral hypothalamic neurons during presentation of food cues only when the animals were hungry  <cit> . in a related study, orexin/hypocretin-positive neurons of the lateral hypothalamus were clearly activated during the expression of food-conditioned or drug-conditioned place preference  <cit> . additionally, to our knowledge, this is the first report of cue-elicited activation of the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, where direct energy-balance signals from the periphery  are integrated with motor and autonomic effector systems  <cit> . the direct projections from forebrain regions such as the amygdala and cortex to the arcuate nucleus may underlie the cue-elicited activation of this region  <cit> .

food cues elicit striatal hnpenk expression
the present study revealed a marked increase in penk expression in striatal subregions. the striatum receives cortical and thalamic glutamatergic inputs and its gamma-aminobutyric acid ergic outputs target motor action systems and premotor brainstem areas, positioning it to organize goal-directed behavior. it is composed primarily of two distinct neuronal populations distinguished by their expressed dopamine receptor subtype and neuropeptide complement and their anatomic projections. one subpopulation expresses the d <dig> dopamine receptor, dynorphin, and substance p, and projects to the internal segment of the globus pallidus  while another expresses the d <dig> dopamine receptor and enkephalin and projects to the external segment of the globus pallidus . cortical or thalamic deafferentation selectively decreases striatal penk mrna expression  <cit> . furthermore, cortical or thalamic excitation results in increases in penk expression  <cit> . in addition to the increase in penk mrna, excitation of cortical afferents results in immediate early gene expression almost exclusively within enkephalin-containing projection neurons and non-projection interneurons of the striatum  <cit> . food cues increased corticostriatal ieg correlations and corticothalamic ieg correlations with striatal hnpenk, suggesting that food cue-induced activity within cortical and thalamic afferents to the striatum activated the indirect pathway and penk transcription  <cit> . this profile is in agreement with our recent results showing specific engagement of the indirect pathway by food-related motivational states  <cit> .

enkephalin and its μ-receptor have been widely implicated in the hedonic aspects of food and drug intake  <cit> . stimulation of μ-opioid receptors in the ventral striatum increases the intake of palatable food  <cit> . in addition, morphine-paired cues have been shown to increase, while saline-paired cues decrease, extracellular enkephalin levels within the striatum in morphine-conditioned rats  <cit> . furthermore, blockade of μ-opioid receptors inhibits cue-elicited alcohol-seeking, methamphetamine-seeking, and food-seeking behaviors  <cit> . as striatal enkephalin levels are also highly correlated with recovery of motor function after 6-hydroxydopamine lesions  <cit> , these lines of evidence suggest that striatal enkephalin may play a role in the conditioned locomotor arousal to food-associated cues observed in this study. these findings and evidence from recent genetic studies suggests that the corticothalamic activation of the indirect pathway and the resulting enkephalin signaling are intimately linked to conditioned motivated behavior  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report documenting a widespread neuroanatomic activation throughout the diencephalon and telencephalon in response to food-associated cues. using a novel application of statistical methods, we found that cues associated with palatable food produced dramatic changes in the functional connectivity of circuits that are known to modulate adaptive behavior. salient  cues elicited widespread cortical engagement of the basolateral amygdala, whereas irrelevant  cues elicited hippocampal engagement of the basolateral amygdala. in addition, compared with innocuous cues, salient cues increased cortical engagement of the striatum and shifted cortical functional connectivity away from the shell towards the core of the nucleus accumbens. food cues also increased the striatal expression of enkephalin, a neuropeptide modulator of affective processing. these findings suggest that food-associated cues are capable of powerfully influencing neuronal activity and gene expression in areas mediating higher-order, executive functions and in areas mediating basal functions, such as energy-balance sensing and motor arousal. these processes are integrated to produce behavior, but our understanding of these interactions is incomplete, at best. this work increases our understanding of the powerful effects of food cue-exposure on activity and plasticity-related gene expression within, and functional connectivity between forebrain circuits mediating emotion, cognition, arousal, and behavior.

