BACKGROUND
as a novel mechanism of coevolution, cross-kingdom interactions have recently been discovered in many studies . cell communication can cross species through transmitting signals such as hormones, cytokines and small rnas   <cit> . for instance, pseudomonas aeruginosais, a symbiotic gram-negative bacterium, can produce hsl autoinducers to modulate gene expression in humans  <cit> . some of these autoinducers activate epithelial cells to induce generation of neutrophil chemotatic factors and then, these migrated factors will be triggered to produce toxin which are detrimental to the bacteria  <cit> . meanwhile, some hosts’ mirnas can also influence these bacteria. mir- <dig> and let-7i, which are highly enriched in human hbas and hbss erythrocytes, can negatively regulate the growth of the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum  <cit> . certain botrytis cinerea small rnas , like bc-sir <dig> , can silence arabidopsis and tomato genes to inhibit their hosts’ immunity  <cit> . it is also reported that milk-derived mirnas can target infants’ specific transcripts that are involved in cytokines and immunity  <cit> . such a cross-species communication also exists in virus-host interaction. studies have shown that viruses can utilize the hosts’ mirna machinery to produce their own mirnas, and further manipulate both virus and host gene expression  <cit> . similarly, a cluster of cellular mirnas, including mir- <dig>  mir-125b, mir- <dig>  mir- <dig> and mir- <dig>  target the 3′ ends of hiv- <dig> mrnas in cultivated resting cd4+ t cells to affect hiv- <dig> latency, and potently inhibit hiv- <dig> production  <cit> . recently, zhang et al.  <cit>  reported that the exogenous plant mirna, mir168a, which is enriched in rice, could target the human/mouse low-density lipoprotein receptor adapter protein  <dig>  mrna, and inhibit ldlrap <dig> expression in the liver. further research  has also demonstrated that a variety of exogenous plant rnas can be found in plasma and serum of mammals through ingestion.

though more and more exogenous plant mirnas are experimentally detected in the serum and plasma of human and animals, cross-kingdom regulation of human gene by plant mirnas is not well understood. it is unclear how exogenous mirnas evade the rnases and phagocytosis, and maintain stable structures and activity in a low-ph environment when passing through the mammalian gastrointestinal tract to reach the target organs. however, all the above evidence suggests that dietary mirnas might remain active to regulate the ingesters’ specific genes. although a number of experimental studies have demonstrated the discoveries of cross-species mirna regulation, the effect of this event and the underlying mechanism are still unclear. due to the complexity of srnas-mrnas regulations, current experimental studies have some limitations in filling the gaps of those mechanisms. hence, we carried out a computational study to exploit the functions and effects of plant-mammal cross-kingdom regulations, given the assumption that exogenous mirnas exist in plasma and serum of mammals. for this purpose, we systematically predicted the targets of the documented cross-species mirnas, and we conducted function enrichment analysis of the target genes in both humans and plants, by which we could explore the gene sets’ shared functions, such as similar pathways, regulators, or related diseases. in particular, we gathered  <dig> plant mirnas, which have been detected in the serum and plasma of human and animals. we collected the entire human mrnas 3′utr regions from the utrdb  <cit>  and predicted the targets of the  <dig> plant mirnas from these regions. interestingly, we found that our predicted cross-species targets might have a close association with the digestive, urinary organs and the daily human metabolic gene ontology  process. in order to better understand the functions of the above  <dig> mirnas, we also evaluated their targets in plants as a reference. due to lack of experimental validations on targets and high-quality gene function annotations for common food crops, we used arabidopsis thaliana for plant target prediction and functional analyses. we found the arabidopsis targets share some functional similarity to human targets. our study might provide some useful hypotheses for discovering the cross-species regulatory mechanism in future research.

RESULTS
target prediction on human and arabidopsis for  <dig> mirnas
due to the limitation of existing studies, it is difficult to exactly define the matching model between plant mirnas and human targets. given the notion that most mature mirnas act as the rna interference  mechanism by binding to certain sites on target mrnas in both plants and animals  <cit> , we took a basic target prediction approach to retain the maximum potential targets on humans by using rnahybrid  <cit>  . meanwhile, we used the same protocol to predict the mirnas’ targets in arabidopsis thaliana for comparative analysis and then, we achieved an initial dataset with nearly  <dig>  possible human targets and  <dig> arabidopsis targets. after a screening process conducted by selecting filtering parameters regarding targeting attributes, such as the minimum free energy, p-value, the length of bulge and loop and so on, finally about  <dig> human and  <dig> plant targets were selected for further study.

predicted target validation on arabidopsis
in order to verify the reliability of our target prediction method, we collected  <dig> validated arabidopsis targets of these  <dig> mirnas from tair  <cit>  and pmrd  <cit> . the results of the arabidopsis target prediction not only showed a high consistency but also shared the exact same binding regions  or 3′utr) with validated targets. out of  <dig> validate targets,  <dig>  ranked within the top  <dig> of each mirna. more strikingly,  <dig> out of  <dig> validated targets ranked in the top ten among the predicted targets. for example, mir <dig> and mir <dig> are from the same family, which mainly target squamosa-promoter binding protein-like  genes’ coding sequence in arabidopsis thaliana, except for spl <dig>   <dig>   <dig> located in the 3′utr  <cit> . it is reported that members of a plant mirna gene family often share high sequence similarity and the target site  <cit> . as shown in table  <dig>  not only the filtered target genes and the target regions are consistent with this report, but also all validated targets rank on top of predicted targets.table  <dig> mir <dig> target validation



we examined whether the validated genes exist in the original mrna dataset, the primary predicted target set by rnahybrid, and the refined targets after screening. we also listed the rank of each validated target in our refined target set, which is sorted by minimum free energy  and p-value.

reconstruction of cross-species regulatory network
we extracted experimentally verified interactions and signaling networks/pathways for our  <dig> filtered targets  using genemania  <cit> , and then created a primary regulatory/interaction network containing  <dig> genes and  <dig> interactions in total .fig.  <dig> integrated network of human target genes. the nodes with bigger size represent the bridge genes  in the reconstructed network



the pagerank algorithm was adopted to assign weights to the  <dig> nodes and thereby measure their importance. the results were convergent after  <dig> iterations , when the perturbation of the weights could be controlled within  <dig> . then, we selected the top  <dig> nodes as the bridge genes to reconstruct the initial network by extracting modules. we extracted  <dig> modules by taking the bridge genes as the central nodes to decompose the whole network, which can be regarded as a critical link in the biological network.

three functional categories of modules
in our study, functional enrichment analysis was applied to the above modules individually using mosaic and noa cytoscape apps  <cit>  and david  <cit> , and we found seven modules highly enriched in certain functions. these modules could be classified into three functional categories: 1) transport: ion transport and homeostasis process, 2) other metabolic process: macromolecule biosynthetic and metabolic process and 3) stress response: immune and stress response . major commonly enriched biological processes functions of the main modules are shown in fig.  <dig> . the ion transportation and homeostasis process includes chemical, di- and tri-valent inorganic compounds , which are often enriched in fruits, leafy vegetables, and cereal. metal cations such as iron, calcium, and sodium are also present. all of these compounds are closely linked with dietary habits. meanwhile, we found a tight connection between the predicted human tissue targets as they relate to fatty acids, amino acids, alcohol, glycerolipids, cellular polysaccharide, and oxoacid metabolic processes. for the response process, one is the metal ion, inorganic ion and the nutrient substance related response, and the other is a type of defense response to the external stimulus, such as virus, bacterium and wounding. for the immune process, the identified modules show positive regulation of leukocyte and lymphocyte activation with response to the immune effector process as well as inflammation. m <dig> is related to vesicle targeting and transportation as well, which has been regarded as a carrier of the uptake mirnas in the human body.table  <dig> parts of the functions of selected modules

fig.  <dig> heatmap of common biological process functions in different modules



functional analysis of tissue-specific predicted human targets
the range of the protein expression level varies greatly in different tissues; thus, we took tissue specificity as a basis to measure our targets, which could largely reduce the false positive rate of the predicted results. to investigate the relationship between our cross-species targets and the eight tissues , we categorized our target genes into three levels, the ubiquitous level , for which genes would express in most of the tissues; highly expressed level, meaning these genes would have a high expression level in several but not all tissues; and the tissue-specific level, which can be specifically expressed within one certain tissue. to characterize the set of three-level expressed genes that we had identified, we conducted functional enrichment analysis, and for the third level we collected verified specific gene sets of the eight tissues from tisged  <cit>  as the background. the protein products of the first level expressed genes were more likely to be involved in the actin filament-based process, ion transport and signaling , metabolism process such as those found in macromolecule  biosynthetic and metabolic processes, general cell morphogenesis and apoptosis processes, and vesicles localization and targeting.

as shown in fig.  <dig>  genes with a specific tissue expression level in the brain and heart were more likely to be connected with general cell development as well as the neurological system related process, and cardiac muscle tissue morphogenesis. while the second and third level targets in kidney, liver, and spleen were often involved in specialized biological processes, like metal ion transportation, homeostasis and response in kidney, immune system process and wounding response in spleen, alcohol and macromolecule metabolic processes, and insulin signaling pathway, as well as the catabolic process in the liver, which suggests a high enrichment both in the digestive and urinary system, and also indicates a close link between our targets and these systems.fig.  <dig> function distribution of the high level targets among five tissues. pie graphs show fractions of cellular biological processes  derived from genes belonging to the second expression level in six human tissues. names of bp categories are shown at the right. a the bp terms of brain and heart are more likely to be related with regulation of cell proliferation. b for liver, kidney and spleen, functions related to transportation, the metabolic processes and immune-related processes are highly enriched



functional similarity: ion transport and stress response between arabidopsis and human
as arabidopsis and human are two very different species, there is no established method to compare gene functions of them and no single cross-species platform or algorithm can perform the pathway analysis on both arabidopsis and human. the “functions” mentioned in this paper refers protein functions annotated in gene ontology. according to our enrichment analysis results , ion transport and stress response exist in most modules from both arabidopsis and human. in plants, there are two ways to acquire iron ions: based on iron reduction and iron chelation. arabidopsis activates the reduction-based strategy of fe uptake upon fe deficiency, and this process is partly induced by an acidification of the root hair zone through the extrusion of protons to solubilize fe chelates; hence, this iron ion transport pathway can regulate the growth of root. also, some transporters are expressed in shoots and seedlings. fe distributes in three main organelles in cell: vacuole, chloroplast and mitochondria, and the iron ion transport process can influence mitochondrial respiration and chloroplast photosynthesis  <cit> . in arabidopsis, the fe uptake pathway appears to be regulated at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level. at the transcriptional level, the transcription of irt1genes is strongly up-regulated, irt <dig> is the founding member of the large zip family  <cit> , and our predicted target genes involved in metal ion transport include zip family gene. two genes atnramp <dig> and atnramp <dig> are also involved in this pathway  <cit> . in human, extracellular fe3+ is reduced to the more soluble fe2+ by reductases embedded in the cell’s plasma membrane. the fe2+ generated then becomes the substrate for two different uptake systems, a high-affinity system expressed in iron-limited cells and a low-affinity system active in iron-replete cells. the high-affinity system is just the same as in arabidopsis. in the human iron transport pathway, some genes involved may influence organs such as livers and so on  <cit> . one mainly gene is nramp <dig>  <cit> , and atnramps show homology to the nramp family  <cit> . we find a predicted target gene fer involved in human iron transport is also involved in the plant iron transport pathway according to our prediction result.

plants and animals both suffer from external stimuli and pressure all the time, which helps them to constantly adapt to environmental stressors by improving the ability to respond to threats during evolution  <cit> . by applying the same module extraction and functional analysis method to our arabidopsis targets , we found two aspects of stress response: 1) response to stimulus, , and 2) the more specific defense response as exhibited by the protein mos <dig> resisting bacterium. the putative dna repair protein rad23- <dig> responds to dna damage with stimulus reactions. the other defense response could be seen in the pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig> component subunit alpha- <dig> and mitochondrial protein, which helps to repel salt stress and osmotic stress. meanwhile, we found that predicted human targets could play a prominent role in both the stress response and immune process related to  <dig> relevant go processes, of which  <dig> pieces are external response processes, which shows a high similarity to that of plants. similarities can be seen in plant responses to metal ions, inorganic salt and unhealthy nutrient levels as well as starvation. all of these processes can be compared to biotic and abiotic stresses whose main factors are water and nutrients. we also found a high rate of external stimulus response in plants including cellular responses to molecules of bacterial origin, responses to lipopolysaccharides , which are the main component of the gram-negative bacteria that can protect them from chemical attack. gram-negative bacteria also respond positively to wounding and inflammation. module m3/axin <dig> , which is associated with  <dig> genes, which involve myeloid leukocyte mediated immunity, activation of blood coagulation via a clotting cascade, glucagon secretion, and immune response-inhibiting signal transduction, which forms the immune system process.

discussion
arabidopsis and human are very different species, and it is hard to define “functional similarity” between them according to current computational tools and databases. we used three most comprehensive function/pathway databases, go, kegg and biocyc to perform function enrichment analysis. we understand that most go terms present very generic functions, but so far go is the most comprehensive functional annotation database for both arabidopsis and human. in kegg database, the number of pathways for arabidopsis and human are  <dig> and  <dig>  and those pathways only covered  <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively. due to the unbalance of annotations between arabidopsis and human, we cannot compare involved pathways between them. but according to our enrichment analysis results and literature search, we still find some interesting results, which infer that the pathways between arabidopsis and human are not only common at the generic level, but also have a similar mechanism in the specific process.

according to our enrichment analysis results, one of the enriched functions is ion transport  in arabidopsis and some go terms about metal ion transport also exist in human, such as iron ion transport . in plants, iron is potentially highly toxic to cells, and hence, iron homeostasis needs to be tightly regulated. similarly, dietary fe deficiency affects many human beings on earth, leading to asthenia, increased sensitivity to diseases, and even death. we predict human targets using arabidopsis mirnas in our research, and then we find some predicted targets involved in iron transport process both in human and plant, such as fer. as we use arabidopsis mirnas to predict human targets, we find a predicted target gene fer involved in human iron transport, and this gene is also involved in the plant iron transport pathway.

plants have to endure various stresses such as drought, salt, low temperature, etc. these adverse abiotic and biotic environmental factors force plants to develop their stress response mechanisms through cell signaling, genetic regulatory adaptation, and other defense responses. the human body can also respond to stresses and external stimuli, a state of perceived threat to homeostasis, by activating the immune system. in our research, we found that potential cross-species targeted by the exogenous mirnas are highly related to the immune system and stress response process in the human body, such as the response to chemical stimulus and the defense response to bacterium. these responses are in the same category of the genes targeted by mirnas in native plants. in other words, the exogenous mirnas in humans may mimic the indigenous mirnas in plants in terms of biological functions. so far, there exists no connection between these two response mechanisms. it is reported the stress response is generally transient because its accompanying effects can be harmful in the long term. however, if these exogenous mirnas exist in the human chronically from the daily food consumption, they may have lasting evolutionary effects on a human population with similar food sources.

the cross-species regulatory mechanism was not proposed until  <dig>  and significant discussion  continues on the validity of this proposal. to the best of our knowledge—up to now—no validated method has been developed to predict mirna targets across species for the exact binding site. given the common mechanism of mature mirnas:rnai binding, we only applied basic target binding principles in our primary prediction step. meanwhile, we used the same method to predict the arabidopsis targets as a test benchmark. the significant consistency between our predicted plant targets and the validated ones for this benchmark strongly supports the effectiveness of our method and parameters. our method tuned using arabidopsis target validation gives a remarkable reduction of the noisy points in our data  and, hence, provides a valid guidance to explore the new mechanism of cross-species mirna targets.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we present a novel computational method to study the cross-species regulation between human genes and plant mirnas. according to the target genes in both human and arabidopsis we predicted for the same  <dig> mirnas and the cross-species regulatory network we built, we summarized the functions to several major categories. from these functions, we found that there are some similar functions between human and plant target genes, such as ion transport and stress response. these findings may provide a hint of transcriptional regulatory interactions between human and plants through mirnas. and it might point a new direction to understand the biological processes in human body through the cross-species regulatory mechanism in the future.

