BACKGROUND
the numerous eukaryotic microorganisms present in the environment potentially represent a rich source of genes encoding for novel enzymes or other proteins of interest in biotechnology. in this respect, functional metatranscriptomics has been demonstrated as a powerful tool in discovery of these genes  <cit> . functional metatranscriptomics first requires the extraction of total rna from environmental samples. eukaryotic 3′ polyadenylated  messenger rnas can then be purified from total rna to remove the ribosomal rna, other non-coding rnas as well as the bacterial mrnas that largely dominate environmental metatranscriptomes  <cit> . poly-a mrnas are then converted into cdnas which are cloned in an appropriate expression vector. such eukaryotic-specific environmental cdna libraries, first described by grant et al.  <cit> , thus encompass protein coding genes expressed by the different eukaryotic microorganisms present in the original environmental sample  <cit> . genes of interest can then be screened by expressing them in an appropriate eukaryotic system such as the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> .

expression cloning of eukaryotic genes using reverse transcribed poly-a mrna is a fundamental technology in molecular biology. however, obtaining libraries enriched in long cdnas remains challenging for the production of functional proteins. the first step is the reverse transcription of mrnas into cdnas. this step is adversely affected by many factors and as a consequence, a large proportion of long mrnas  is represented by 5′ truncated cdnas  <cit> . being small in size, these truncated cdnas are preferentially amplified and cloned. furthermore, functional metatranscriptomics most often involves the use of very low quantities of environmental eukaryotic mrnas. this necessitates a highly efficient cdna cloning approach which can make long eukaryotic transcripts available for functional studies.

various library construction methods that enrich long cdnas have been proposed. for example, several approaches that use the 5′ end-specific cap structure of eukaryotic poly-a mrnas have been devised  <cit> . all these approaches however require many enzymatic and purification steps and as a consequence, relatively large quantities of starting poly-a mrnas are needed which, once again, are difficult to obtain from environmental samples where eukaryotic mrnas are diluted among predominant bacterial rnas. cdna size fractionation by agarose gel electrophoresis is an alternative strategy which requires few enzymatic steps and allows the preparation of different sized cdna libraries from a single rna sample. libraries enriched in long cdnas were for example constructed by agarose gel mediated size fractionation of cdna synthesized from mouse embryo and human brain  <cit> . however, despite the application of all these strategies, all of them also require microgram amounts of poly-a mrnas and numerous clones in these cdna libraries still represent truncated transcripts.

reverse transcriptase  template switching is another approach for generation of cdnas resulting from the reverse transcription of entire rnas  <cit> . this technique, implemented in the commercial smart  or mint  kits, makes use of two activities of mmlv rt. the first one is to add a few deoxycytidines  at the end of single strand  cdnas. the second one is to switch template and to reverse transcribe an oligonucleotide whose 3′ deoxyguanosine-rich sequence anneals to the dc stretch artificially added at the end of the ss cdna. as a consequence all cdnas are bordered at their 3′ end by the same oligonucleotide sequence which can be used for their amplification by pcr in combination with a primer sequence added to the poly-dt primer used to initiate reverse transcription the mrna.

in the present investigation, we demonstrate an efficient method of construction of sized eukaryotic cdna libraries from environmental samples such as soil. this method is adapted from wellenreuther et al.  <cit>  who combined template switching in combination with agarose gel mediated size fractionation prior to full cdna pcr amplification to isolate long full-length genes using microgram amounts of purified human poly-a mrna. in this study, we modified this method to accommodate small limiting amounts of total environmental rna.

RESULTS
eukaryotic cdna synthesis from total soil rna
we extracted total rna from three soil samples coming from contrasted geographic localities . the presence of sharp bands in the bioanalyser electrophoregram, corresponding to small and large subunits rrna and of a wide mrna smear  suggested that these rna samples were not degraded . extraction yields ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> ng.g- <dig> of soil and at least  <dig> μg of total soil rna were obtained from each sample.

according to urich et al.  <cit> , soil rna can be constituted of up to 90% of non-coding sequences  and approximately only 7% of the coding sequences can originate from eukaryotes. although these figures certainly differ from one soil to another, bacterial biomass seems to always dominate in soil  <cit> . as a consequence, purification of μg amounts of poly-a mrnas, as recommended in most cdna library construction protocols, can hardly be met. we therefore developed a protocol which makes use of  few μg of total rna as starting material and  includes long range pcr amplification for the synthesis of long cdnas. this protocol, implemented in the mint- <dig> kit  allowed us to obtain ds cdnas of eukaryotic origin from as low as  <dig> μg of total soil rna. such a quantity may contain only a few ng of poly-a mrna. success of cdna synthesis was demonstrated by pcr amplification of an ef1α gene fragment .

size fractionation and pcr amplification of eukaryotic cdnas
getting a high number of clones having long inserts  is one of the main challenges in cdna library construction. as suggested in  <cit> , we performed size fractionation of cdna prior to their amplification to facilitate both the synthesis of long cdna and minimize the preferential amplification of short ones from complex mixtures of long and short cdnas. in the current protocol, ds cdnas were first amplified through three pcr cycles, to slightly increase cdna quantities without affecting significantly their average length. pre-amplified cdnas were then separated by bi-dimensional agarose gel electrophoresis  to maximize complete separation of cdnas and minimize cross-contamination of size fractions. the cdna containing gel was left unstained to prevent the adverse effect of uv irradiation but also because of the low quantity of loaded cdnas which prevented their visualization. three different size fractions  were recovered and amplified by pcr using between  <dig> and  <dig> cycles. while amplified cdnas without size fractionation gave a broad smear throughout the gel lane , three distinct and discrete dna smears  corresponding to the different cdna fractions were clearly visible . fractions were tested for the absence of cross contaminations by pcr amplification of four eukaryotic genes of different length classes. for the 1– <dig> kb class, the conserved genes encode β-tubulin  and ef1-α whose coding sequences are of about  <dig> and  <dig> bp respectively, while for the  <dig> – <dig> kb class, they encode 40s ribosomal protein s <dig>  and peptide methionine sulphoxide reductase  whose coding sequences are of about  <dig> and  <dig> bp respectively. as expected, positive amplifications of β-tub and ef1-α fragments were only obtained for fractions c , while ribs <dig> and msra fragments were only detected for the intermediate b fractions  and no amplification was visible for the lowest a fractions  . these results demonstrate that the method can not only be used for obtaining long cdnas but also in getting high quality eukaryotic cdna size fractions from very low amounts of starting total rnas.

construction of sized cdna libraries
the three cdna fractions from soil sample pl and the largest fraction c from sample bb were used for construction of cdna libraries by directional cloning in the pfl <dig> yeast expression vector. all four libraries contained at least  <dig> independent clones , but many more could have been obtained. after sfii digestion of the library plasmid pools and their separation by agarose gel electrophoresis, the released cdna insert pools of each library were detected as a smear whose size range corresponded to the original cdna fraction size . the cdna inserts of  <dig> random colonies from each of the three libraries from pl soil and  <dig> from library bb-c were pcr amplified. absence of inserts was found for less than 1% of the plasmids and all of the pcr products fell within their expected size range . for the  <dig> pl libraries, ten inserts per library were sequenced from their 5′-ends. globally, 60% of the sequences returned a positive result upon blastx searches against the eukaryotic genbank protein database .

CONCLUSIONS
we established a robust protocol to generate high quality eukaryotic sized cdna libraries from total rna extracted from environmental samples. we demonstrated that the original protocol developed by wellenreuther et al.  <cit>  using micrograms amounts of purified poly-a mrna extracted from human tissues can be considerably scaled down and implemented on total rna from environments dominated by bacterial rna. this protocol fulfils several requirements. firstly yields of rna extraction directly from environments are usually low  and therefore isolation of μg amounts of poly-a mrna appears, in most cases, almost unfeasible. secondly, two dimensional electrophoretic separation of cdnas leads to isolation of sized cdna pools almost free from contaminations by either longer or shorter cdnas. most importantly these pools of amplified cdnas allow production of large cdna libraries necessary to capture the gene diversity which characterizes microbial communities. thirdly, the production of sized cdna libraries is of direct relevance in the context of functional metatranscriptomics as it should reduce the screening effort for gene categories of defined length which, as a result of size selection, will not be diluted among shorter or longer transcripts. as an example, most glycoside hydrolases , implicated in organic matter degradation, are encoded by transcripts 1– <dig> kb in length and screening for these genes can be limited to the corresponding sized cdna libraries. in conclusion, we believe that the protocol presented in this paper should facilitate and promote studies of environmental eukaryotic communities, which in a context of environmental biotechnology represent a promising and almost untouched source of genes of interest.

