BACKGROUND
nitric oxide  is a signalling molecule in multicellular, eukaryotic organisms, where it coordinates the function and interactions between cells of the cardiovascular, neuro, and immune system  <cit> . these cells have the ability to synthesize no with the enzyme no synthase  using arginine and o <dig> as substrates  <cit> . the targets of no signalling are mainly no-mediated protein modifications, such as iron-nitrosylation and s-nitrosylation of active site cysteine thiols. these modifications critically depend on the apparent no concentration and the redox conditions. thus, no signalling is considered to be a redox-based signalling event  <cit> .

functional nos was also found to be encoded and expressed in certain, predominately gram-positive, bacteria including the well-studied model organisms bacillus subtilis  <cit> . until now, only few studies reported on the function of nos-derived no in bacteria. gusarov and nudler  <cit>  showed that nos-derived no in b. subtilis provides instant cytoprotection against oxidative stress imposed by h2o <dig> with two different mechanisms. firstly, no activates catalase, the h2o <dig> degrading enzyme. secondly, no suppresses cytotoxic fenton chemistry - the formation of dna damaging oh· radicals from the oxidation of fe2+ with h2o <dig>  here, no interrupts the re-supply of fe2+ by inhibiting the enzymatic reduction of cysteine, which controls the reduction of intracellular fe3+ to fe2+. this alleviation from oxidative stress by nos-derived no has been shown to be partly responsible to protect bacteria against a range of antibiotics that induce oxidative stress  <cit> . a completely different function of nos-derived no was described in streptomyces turgidiscabies, where it is involved in the biosynthesis of a secondary metabolite  by the site-specific nitration of a tryptophanyl moiety  <cit> .

in addition, no is an established signalling molecule in bacteria interacting with many bacterial regulatory components, such as oxyr, soxr, nsrr, norr and regulators of the fnr family  <cit> . in these systems, the no signal is mainly thought to be produced as an intermediate or by-product of catabolic reactions of the nitrogen cycle or from eukaryotic host cells that attack pathogens with no. however, the fact that certain bacteria encode and express nos prompted the hypothesis that nos-derived no is involved in intercellular signalling between bacteria to exert multicellular functions  <cit> .

signalling in bacteria is especially important for the coordination of their multicellular traits. remarkable multicellular traits in bacteria are swarming motility and biofilm formation, both of which have been intensively studied in b. subtilis ncib <dig>  <cit> . this strain was isolated ~ <dig> and is probably the progenitor of the sequenced laboratory strain b. subtilis  <dig>  which does not exhibit swarming motility and formation of structural complex biofilms, because it is thought to have lost these traits by intense laboratory use for decades   <cit> .

swarming motility is a multicellular movement of bacteria that migrate above solid substrates in groups of tightly bound cells  <cit> . swarming motility is dependent on cellular differentiation processes of sessile or swimming cells into swarm cells, which are longer, more flagellated and can assemble into multicellular rafts. the differentiation into swarm cells and the swarm expansion is thus a multicellular process that is governed by signals that coordinate the interaction between individual cells. b. subtilis displays many of the classical features of swarming motility. when centrally inoculated on nutrient-rich agar  cells differentiate into swarm cells and, after a lag phase of a few hours, expand rapidly over the entire agar surface  <cit> . the swarm edge consists of poorly motile cells that are driven forward by motile, highly flagellated cells that are organized in multicellular rafts.

biofilm formation in b. subtilis is characterized by the formation of robust pellicles at the air-liquid interface and the formation of structurally complex spot colonies on agar surfaces. within biofilms b. subtilis forms aerial projections called fruiting bodies, because their tips are the preferential sites for sporulation  <cit> . a hallmark of biofilm development in b. subtilis is the differentiation of the b. subtilis population into different subpopulations. phosphorylation of the master regulator spo0a controls differentiation. the subpopulation with low intracellular levels of phosphorylated spo0a produces the extracellular matrix, while the subpopulation with high intracellular levels of phosphorylated spo0a differentiates into spores  <cit> . a set of specific sensor kinases  controls the level of spo0a phosphorylation, but the extra- or intracellular signals that affect these kinases remain largely unknown  <cit> . signalling molecules for b. subtilis differentiation events that are known to date are mostly specific peptides, such as comx, sufactin, and phrc. in this study, we hypothesized that biofilm formation in b. subtilis is controlled by the redox-based signal of nos-derived no, in addition to a response to structurally specific signalling molecules.

another important aspect of biofilm physiology is the dispersal of cells from the biofilm. biofilm dispersal is defined as a process in which initially sessile cells undergo phenotypic modifications, which enable them to actively leave the biofilm and finally convert to planktonic cells  <cit> . active biofilm dispersal contrasts the process of passive sloughing of cells from the biofilm by hydrodynamic stress. pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important model system for studying biofilm dispersal. here, previous studies have shown that dispersal can be considered a multicellular trait as it involves quorum sensing  <cit> . however, the underpinnings of biofilm dispersal are the metabolic state of the biofilm cells, as regulatory systems for dispersal are controlled by nutrient availability  <cit> . dispersal of b. subtilis biofilms has not been investigated to date even though its apparent fruiting bodies have led to the speculation about their function in spore dispersal  <cit> .

in this study we hypothesized that nos-derived no coordinates multicellular traits of b. subtilis  <dig>  we examined the effect of exogenously supplied no and of nos inactivation on biofilm formation, swarming motility and biofilm dispersal in b. subtilis. the results show that nos and no do not affect biofilm formation and swarming, but unambiguously show an influence of nos on biofilm dispersal.

RESULTS
no formation in b. subtilis 3610
we tested intracellular production of no in b. subtilis  <dig> grown in lb and in msgg medium by staining cells with the no sensitive dye cufl. the results show that wild-type b. subtilis produces no in both media . incubation of wild-type cells with the no scavenger c-ptio decreased no production to 7% in lb and 33% in msgg as compared to untreated wild-type cells . this confirms that no signals measured in the untreated wild-type are specific to no and were not derived by unspecific reactions of the dye with other cellular components. incubation of wild-type cells in lb with the no synthase  inhibitor l-name and of a mutant that lacked the nos gene decreased in both cases no production to ~ 7% as compared to untreated wild-type cells . in contrast, supplementing msgg medium with the nos inhibitor l-name and growing the nos mutant in msgg decreased no production to only 85% and 80%, respectively, as compared to untreated wild-type cells .

the data shows that b. subtilis uses nos to produce no in lb and indicates that no production via nos is low in msgg. furthermore, the no scavenger c-ptio effectively reduces intracellular no and the nos inhibitor l-name inhibits no formation by nos. hence, both compounds are suitable tools to test the effect of no and nos-derived no, respectively, on multicellular traits of b. subtilis. moreover, the data indicates that b. subtilis produces significant amounts of no with an alternative mechanism besides nos when grown in msgg. an alternative pathway of no formation in b. subtilis could be the formation of no as a by-product during the reduction of no2- to ammonium  by the no2- reductase nasde  <cit> . both lb  and msgg  contained traces of oxidized inorganic nitrogen , which might be a sufficient source for low nanomolar concentrations of no even if most nox is reduced to nh4+. gusarov et al.  <cit>  showed that nasde actively reduces nox in lb-cultures at the end of the stationary phase. however, no production from ammonifying no2- reductases has so far only been reported for the ammonifying no2- -reductase nrf of e. coli  <cit> , but not for nasde of b. subtilis. the potential ability of nasde to generate no may be an interesting subject for further research directed toward the understanding of how b. subtilis controls no homeostasis under different environmental conditions.

no is not involved in biofilm formation of b. subtilis 3610
we tested the influence of nos-derived no and exogenously supplemented no on biofilm formation of b. subtilis  <dig> by monitoring the morphology of agar-grown colonies and the development of biofilms on the air-liquid interface  in msgg medium. the results show that the development of structured colonies on agar surfaces is not influenced by an nos inhibitor, an no scavenger, the addition of no with an no donor and by deleting the gene that encodes for nos . furthermore, the treatments did not affect the development of structures described earlier as fruiting bodies  <cit>  in the colony biofilms . in addition, we monitored the developmental sequence of pellicle formation on the cellular level with phase contrast microscopy . pellicles developed regardless of the treatment from motile cells of unit length, over non-motile cells aligned in long chains, to densely packed cells and spores, which resemble the developmental sequence described by branda et al.  <dig>  <cit> .

the quantitative growth kinetics of vegetative cells in the pellicle biofilms was not affected by the presence of nos inhibitor, no scavenger, no donor, and a mutation in the nos gene . spore counts in the pellicles showed that the presence of nos inhibitor and no scavenger did not change the kinetics of spore formation . in contrast, the presence of no donor approximately doubled the number of spores in the early stages  of pellicle formation . measurements with no and o <dig> microelectrodes showed that the addition of no donor led to ~ <dig> μm no after 3- <dig> d of incubation in the anoxic medium underlying the pellicle, while no could not be detected in the other treatments. the high no concentration can exert toxic effects on the cells and might enhance spore formation. however, the structural assembly of spores in the biofilm was not affected  and the differences in spores were not significant between treatments in the mature biofilms after  <dig> days of incubation.

intracellular measurements of no in b. subtilis indicated that no production from nos is low in msgg medium , which is typically used to induce formation of structurally complex b. subtilis biofilms  <cit> . this might explain the absence of an effect of nos inhibitors and nos knock-out on biofilm formation. in addition, biofilm formation is not affected by no produced by other no-producing pathways, as neither the no scavenger nor the addition of exogenous no had an effect on mature biofilm structures.

previous studies have shown that cellular differentiation and biofilm formation in b. subtilis are controlled by intracellular concentrations of the phosphorylated master regulator spo0a  <cit> . two sensor kinases  that control the level of spo0a phospohrylation possess cytoplasmic pas sensor domains, which have been implicated to sense redox potential and o <dig>  in turn, a mutational study of the cytoplasmic pas domain of b. subtilis' sensor kinase rese suggested that it senses no under anaerobic conditions  <cit> . thus, it is conceivable that kina and kinc are affected by no signalling. however, our study indicates that nos-derived no and exogenously supplied no do not affect the pas domains of kina and kinc such that biofilm formation and differentiation is significantly altered. this supports the notion that biofilm formation and differentiation in b. subtilis are rather controlled by specific extracellular molecules, such as signalling peptides  <cit> , as opposed to more broad range redox-based signals like no.

no is not involved in coordinating swarming of b. subtilis 3610
we tested the influence of no and nos activity on the swarming motility of b. subtilis  <dig> on lb-based swarm agar . swarm expansion of wild-type b. subtilis on  <dig> % lb agar was  <dig> mm h- <dig>  and agrees well with swarm expansion of  <dig> -  <dig> mm h- <dig> reported by kearns and losick  <cit> . swarm expansion was not significantly affected by the presence of nos inhibitors, no scavenger, no donor and for the nos mutant. this shows that neither nos-derived no nor exogenously supplied no influences swarming motility in b. subtilis.

nos-derived no inhibits biofilm dispersal of b. subtilis 3610
we tested the influence of nos-derived no and exogenously supplied no on the dispersal of b. subtilis  <dig> from spot colony biofilms of wild-type and nos mutant cells . first, biofilms were grown on msgg agar or msgg agar supplemented with nos inhibitor or no scavenger. to assay dispersal, we mounted a drop of msgg medium containing a similar treatment as the underlying agar onto mature colony biofilms. the cell number in the drop was determined after short-term incubation  to minimize growth in the drop. while it is not expected that considerable growth occurs, any minor growth will proceed with a similar rate in all treatments . in addition, placing the drop on the biofilm may cause some cells to enter the liquid by mechanical forces. however, those will be similar in all treatments and in the control that is done with msgg only. thus, differences in cell number in the drop entirely reflect differences in active dispersal of cells from the biofilm into the drop. using flow cytometry we distinguished vegetative cells and spores, which presumably have no means of active dispersal as they are in an inactive state.

the results showed that dispersal is ~ <dig> fold enhanced in the nos mutant and when the wild-type strain is subjected to nos inhibitors . additionally, the presence of the no scavenger c-ptio increased the dispersal  <dig> fold. these results suggest that nos is involved in a mechanism that facilitates the maintenance of cells in the biofilm. the fact that both nos inhibitor and nos deletion increased dispersal argues against an unspecific effect of the deletion of the nos gene on dispersal.

the amount of vegetative cells present in the drop would increase if inhibition of no synthesis increases the germination rate, because spores that are abundant in the tips of the fruiting bodies would germinate faster and release more vegetative cells. to exclude this possibility we measured germination of spores - derived from a defined spore solution - inside an msgg drop without underlying biofilm. the results show that germination does not occur during  <dig> h incubation time in msgg and that neither nos inhibition nor deletion of the nos gene accelerated germination . this confirms that any difference in the dispersal assay is caused by effects of no and nos on active dispersal of vegetative biofilm cells and not on germination of spores.

interestingly, the addition of exogenously supplied no with the chemical no donor snap to the nos mutant and l-name-inhibited wild-type cells did not restore dispersal to wild-type levels. we used no microsensors to measure whether the extracellular no concentrations established by the no donor during the dispersal assay were sufficient to complement for the loss of nos synthesis. we found that addition of  <dig> μm snap to the dispersal drop resulted in an no concentration between  <dig> to  <dig> nm . no was consumed within the biofilm resulting in no concentrations around the lower detection limit . apparent no consumption did not depend on the ability of b. subtilis to synthesize no with nos. no concentrations within biofilms not exposed to the no donor were also around the lower detection limit and could not be quantified with confidence. thus, we could not discern if similar extracellular concentrations of no were present during the different treatments in the biofilm microenvironment.

taken together the results show that the addition of the no donor during the dispersal experiment potentially provided a sufficient flux of extracellular no to complement the deficiency for no synthesis. the apparent failure of complementation suggests that nos-derived no is not an intercellular signalling molecule for the maintenance of cells in the biofilm. rather, it mediates its effect on dispersal at defined intracellular concentrations, which cannot be restored by the exogenous addition of no. defined intracellular no concentrations would be particularly important if nos-mediated signalling proceeds via redox-based modifications of enzymes  <cit>  or when it is used for biosynthesis of other signalling molecules  <cit> . our results suggest that one of these two mechanisms might act within b. subtilis cells to facilitate the maintenance of cells in the biofilm.

kolodkin-gal et al.  <cit>  described the disassembly of b. subtilis biofilms triggered by self-produced d-amino acids. in this study, disassembly was characterized by a complete breakdown of the macroscopic biofilm structure upon accumulation or experimental addition of certain d-amino acids, because their insertion into the cell wall disrupted the bonding between cells and the extracellular matrix protein tasa. generally, active dispersal of cells from biofilms does not necessarily involve complete biofilm disassembly, which might be viewed as an extreme case of dispersal. thus, it is likely that other nos-affected mechanisms exist that enable biofilm-residing b. subtilis to disperse without disrupting the entire biofilm structure.

the results are in contrast to earlier observation with p. aeruginosa and other bacteria which showed that exogenous addition of non-toxic no concentrations led to a marked dispersal of biofilms that grew adhered to a solid surface  <cit> . this suggests that the effect of no on dispersal is a species-specific phenomenon with different bacteria using no for opposing dispersal strategies. thus, no and nos inhibitors might be used in medical or technological applications to selectively induce dispersal of certain  bacterial groups in multi-species biofilms, while other  bacteria may be selectively maintained in the biofilm. alternatively, the different effects of no on dispersal might be explained by the different types of dispersal assays and no donors used in our study as compared to the study with p. aeroginosa  <cit> .

well-known bacterial regulatory systems that respond to no as a signal are commonly associated to the onset of anaerobic respiration of nox during the transition form oxic to anoxic conditions  <cit> . also dispersal from biofilms can be considered a response to anoxia considering that a significant part of the biofilm cells resides in the anoxic layer of a biofilm. this might explain why the transition from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism and biofilm dispersal are both affected by no signalling. for example, no produced by denitrification in p. aeruginosa biofilms has been shown to control expression of denitrification genes  <cit>  and to mediate dispersal  <cit> . comparably, in b. subtilis it is already known that no regulates the expression of nasd and hmp, a no2- - reductase and an no detoxifying enzyme, respectively  <cit> , while our findings link nos-derived no to dispersal of b. subtilis. the specific function of nos in this context might be fine-tuning the cellular decision for either onset of anaerobic respiration or dispersal form the biofilm.

no connections between bacterial and metazoan multicellularity?
numerous enzymes and regulators are involved in biofilm formation and swarming of b. subtilis. from our data it can be concluded that these traits of b. subtilis are remarkably stable against no-mediated protein modifications, such as iron-nitrosylation and s-nitrosylation of cysteine thiols. interpreted from an ecological perspective, multiple targets of no signalling might be too unspecific for mediating specific cellular differentiation events, because in nature b. subtilis and other bacteria typically exist in multi-species biofilm communities. in other words, bacterial signalling systems that coordinate specific cellular differentiation events might be stable against no modifications to avoid detrimental cross-talk with no production by community members. likewise, we showed that b. subtilis consumes exogenously supplied no, maintaining extracellular no levels . specificity of no as an intercellular signal for coordination of multicellular functions might have evolved in multicellular eukaryotes with the onset of the immune system, which guaranteed predictable sender and receivers of no signals. this major evolutionary transition might have rendered certain proteins sensitive to no-mediated post-translational modifications to use the wide potentials of redox-based no signalling.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that bacterial nos is not involved in developmental processes and coordination of multicellular traits that are essential for biofilm formation and swarming motility in b. subtilis. nos activity affects biofilm dispersal of b. subtilis warranting further investigations toward nos-derived no as an important mediator of bacterial responses to changing environmental and metabolic conditions. moreover, our study supports the specificity of nos-derived no in cytoprotection against oxidative stress  <cit>  and for specific nitration reactions biosynthetic pathways  <cit> .

