BACKGROUND
phosphatidylinositol  phospholipids are quantitatively minor but functionally significant membrane lipid components which have been shown to be involved in regulating diverse aspects of cellular function, such as proliferation, survival, growth, cytoskeletal reorganization, and various membrane trafficking events. the inositol ring can be phosphorylated at the d <dig>  d <dig> or d <dig> position to produce a set of seven distinct phosphorylated derivatives, which are preferentially located in various cellular membranes or microdomains, specifying their identity, and mediating cellular functions by recruiting various effector proteins with specialized lipid-binding domains  <cit> . the homeostasis of these phosphorylated ptdins lipids is mediated by a number of specific kinases and phosphatases.

myotubularins are members of the protein tyrosine phosphatase  superfamily, which feature a characteristic hcxr catalytic motif, where the cysteine is the catalytic residue, the histidine is important for the nucleophilic properties of the cysteine, and the arginine is important in coordinating the substrate phosphate group. myotubularins have been shown to be specific lipid phosphatases, cleaving the d <dig> phosphate from ptdins3p and ptdinsp <dig>  there is a large myotubularin family in humans  which encode both catalytically active and inactive members. mutations in either active or inactive members of this family bring about human disease, which involves chiefly skeletal muscle  or peripheral neurons   <cit> . previous phylogenetic studies have reported the presence of myotubularin genes in plants, fungi and some protists, with the latter group only containing both active and inactive forms  <cit> .

this study presents a systematic survey of myotubularin genes in a large number of completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes, representing a broad array of taxonomic groups. most genomes contain one to a few myotubularin genes, though they are absent in certain groups. the evidence is consistent with the independent appearance of inactive myotubularin genes, featuring novel domain combinations, in different taxonomic groups. the greatest expansion of the myotubularin gene family yet observed occurs in the pathogenic species entamoeba histolytica. functional evidence derived from published gene expression studies indicates that these genes may be important in pathogen transmission and host infection.

RESULTS
phylogenetic distribution, gene evolution, domain architecture
recent work in eukaryotic systematics has increasingly defined large organismal "supergroups" encompassing many traditional smaller groups  <cit> . we have conducted a broad survey of fully sequenced genomes amongst these large organismal groups for the presence of myotubularin gene homologues. only the rhizaria were excluded as there is as yet no completed genome in that group. our results are summarized in figure  <dig>  we searched  <dig> genomes, and identified  <dig> sequences. we found that myotubularin genes are nearly ubiquitous in eukaryotes, being readily identifiable in all the major eukaryotic groups and in all genomes examined with the notable exception of the obligate intracellular parasites encephalitozoon cuniculi  and plasmodium falciparum  and eukaryotic algae, both red  and green . most organisms  posses one to three genes. the notable exception to this general pattern occurs in members of the unikonta  .

we utilized domain-searching strategies detailed in methods to determine the molecular architecture of myotubularin gene encoded proteins. the results are presented in figure  <dig>  it is apparent that nearly all myotubularin proteins contain both a myotubularin phosphatase domain and a ph-gram domain . in studies of animal myotubularin proteins it has been shown that the ph-gram domain binds phosphoinositide lipids, and confers both specific subcellular localization and regulation of the phosphatase domain  <cit> . the nearly constant presence of the ph-gram domain in myotubularins across a broad range of organisms suggests that this domain architecture was established early in eukaryotic evolution. we observed, however, that there were a number of sequences where complete ph-gram domains with the characteristic architecture observed in human proteins could not be detected, despite the use of the most sensitive structural analysis methods available . this indicates that ph-gram domain sequences can be very divergent, which we also noted in multiple sequence alignments including the ph-gram domain region . this suggests that although the architectural coupling of a ph-gram along with a myotubularin phosphatase domain is a standard feature of these proteins, the specific molecular properties and functions of the ph-gram domains have the potential to be quite diverse and distinct.

the catalytic loop signature of human myotubularins is: hcsdgwdr  <cit> . inspection of the myotubularin sequence alignment presented in figure  <dig> shows that this is found invariant in most of the myotubularin sequences, indicating that they all share a common local active site architecture and catalytic mechanism. one of the notable features of human myotubularins is the presence of several catalytically inactive subunits, resulting from mutations to the key catalytic cysteine and arginine residues in the catalytic loop region. it has been previously noted that myotubularin genes with apparently inactive catalytic loop signatures can be observed in giardia and dictyostelium, suggesting that inactive subunits arose early in evolution  <cit> . our work confirms these findings, and sheds further light on the origin of these sequences. three excavate myotubularin sequences lack a ph-gram domain, the only sequences we observed with this characteristic . giardia sequence gl50803_ <dig> lacks both the cysteine and arginine residues from the catalytic loop region . leishmania sequence lmjf <dig>  and trypanosoma sequence tb <dig> . <dig> each possess both the cysteine and the arginine, but lack the histidine preceding the cysteine. since this histidine is universally conserved in active ptp phosphatases, and has been shown to be important in the catalytic mechanism by altering the nucleophilic properties of the neighboring cysteine  <cit> , it is likely that these proteins are also catalytically inactive. the lack of a ph-gram domain, unique to these excavate inactive myotubularins, suggests that they comprise a single gene lineage.

amoebozoan imlrk  genes and proteins
the amoebozoans dictyostelium and entamoeba each have a large number of myotubularin homologues . dictyostelium has nine active myotubularin subunits, and entamoeba has eight. in addition, there are a number of inactive myotubularin subunits. the dictyostelium gene pats <dig>  was previously incorrectly reported to contain an active myotubularin domain  <cit> . in addition, this protein contains a lrr domain, a recently described roco domain  <cit>  , and a protein kinase domain. the lrr/roco/kinase architecture was also known to be shared by dictyostelium sequence ddb <dig>  which also has an n-terminal rho-gap domain. by use of a sensitive myotubularin-sequence based hmm search strategy, we found that this sequence also contains an inactive myotubularin domain. further application of this hmm search revealed that entamoeba contains eleven proteins with divergent, but clearly recognizable inactive myotubularin domains . our findings confirm and extend previous observations  <cit> . further examination of the domain architecture of the newly discovered entamoeba inactive myotubularin sequences revealed that  <dig> of them also showed significant similarity to the solved structures of lrr proteins and protein kinases, and weaker but still significant similarity to the solved structure of a bacterial roco protein   <cit>  as detected by both the ffas <dig>  sequence:profile technique, and the hhpred  profile:profile technique. this indicated that these nine proteins might also share the inactive myotubularin/lrr/roco/kinase architecture previously detected in dictyostelium sequences. we suggest the acronym "imlrk" to refer to this somewhat cumbersome domain architecture.

to confirm the identity of the roco domains of these entamoeba sequences we performed iterative multiple sequence alignments, hmm construction, database searches and realignment, to assemble the data presented as figure  <dig>  during this process, we identified several previously unreported roco proteins . the alignment presents a comparison between our set of newly identified roco domain sequences and those from previously characterized dictyostelium proteins. in their report of the solved structure of a bacterial roco protein, gotthardt et al.  <cit>  identified residues important to both the function of the bacterial protein, and animal roco protein homologues. these include residues in the roc domain important for gtpase binding and residues in both the roc and cor domains important for domain interactions and gtpase activity . it is evident by inspection of the alignment in figure  <dig> that on the whole, conservation of this critical residue set for the entamoeba imlrk sequences is poor. despite the overall apparent similarity of these sequences to the rest of the comparison set, several of the entamoeba sequences have deletions in these critical residues, and would therefore presumably lack gtpase activity. only one entamoeba sequence  has a set of residues which might confer enzymatic activity.

comparison with sequence models at ncbi cdd  indicates that the protein kinase domains of the entamoeba imlrk proteins resemble both ser-thr and tyr kinases . this is consistent with previous characterization of kinase domains in roco proteins as being of the tkl  group  <cit> . we performed a multiple sequence alignment with these kinase domains, which is presented in figure  <dig>  we examined the group of ten important functional sequence positions characterized by kannan et al.  <cit> . for  <dig> of the  <dig> entamoeba sequences, all of these critical functional residues are conserved. the exceptions are: ehi_ <dig>  where there is an h to t mutation at the position corresponding to pka  h158; and ehi_ <dig>  where there is a d to n mutation at the position corresponding to pka d <dig>  and an n to a mutation at the position corresponding to pka n <dig>  thus we would predict that nearly all of these sequences are catalytically active  <cit> .

myotubularin homologue sequences were identified, and protein kinase domains identified, as described in methods. protein kinase domains were subjected to analysis at ncbi cdd  <cit> . this table summarizes the returns for those searches - the query sequences, the hit models, and e values. models: cd <dig>  s_tkc ; cd <dig>  ptkc .

five of the newly discovered entamoeba sequences have predicted n-terminal rho-gap  domains. of these five domains, however, only one  is strong enough to appear in a domain search at ncbi cdd with default settings, indicating that it is probably enzymatically active. the enzymatic activity of the other four domains is questionable, due to their evident sequence divergence. these five sequences with an n-term rho-gap domain resemble the architecture of the dictyostelium gene roco <dig> , and it is possible that they represent a distinct gene lineage.

the myotubularin domains of the imlrk proteins are divergent, as is evident by inspection of our sequence alignments . the entamoeba imlrk proteins have all suffered deletion of the α <dig> region of the phosphatase domain . sequence ehi_ <dig> is clearly the most divergent of the group. it is also missing the α <dig> and α <dig> regions, and the c-terminus of the phosphatase domain . in summary, the imlrk domain architecture is distinctive, being seen in no other taxonomic group besides the amoebozoa, which suggests that the origin of these genes comprises a second, independent event in myotubularin gene evolution.

finally, we attempted to determine, by multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree analysis  the possible origin of the two inactive entamoeba myotubularins without a roco domain. ehi_ <dig> appears to be closely related to an active subunit , and has therefore probably recently suffered inactivating mutations. the origin of ehi_ <dig> is more obscure - it does not appear to be closely related to any of the other inactive entamoeba myotubularins.

myotubularins in the choanoflagellate/metazoan assemblage
previous phylogenetic analyses  <cit>  of myotubularin sequences from human, other vertebrates, and a collection of invertebrates defined six similarity clusters - three composed of catalytically active subunits  and three composed of catalytically inactive subunits . we have extended this analysis by finding previously unreported myotubularin homologues in the metazoans nematostella and trichoplax, and the choanoflagellate monosiga. our results are presented in table  <dig>  along with bayesian and maximum likelihood clade supports for each group. bayesian support is high for all groups, with the mean posterior probability exceeding  <dig>  in every case. bootstrap support in maximum likelihood is weaker and more variable, depending more on details of alignment composition, but nevertheless the mean exceeds 80% for each group. despite repeated attempts using distinct input alignments, data-transformation techniques  and amino acid substitution models, we were unable to obtain consistent tree topologies with high support for deep interior branch points. this indicates a high degree of sequence divergence of the several myotubularin sub-types.

myotubularin homologue sequences from human  and danio rerio  were obtained from the literature and database keyword searches. for the other species represented, candidate myotubularin sequences were obtained by searching the protein datasets of fully sequenced eukaryotic genomes, as detailed in methods. the prefix "n" or "nv" followed by a numeral denotes sequences from nematostella vectensis, "tad" followed by a numeral denotes sequences from trichoplax adhaerens, and "m" followed by a numeral denotes sequences from monosiga brevicollis, . the sequences were aligned as detailed in methods. phylogenetic trees were inferred as detailed in methods. shown are the composition and clade support for the six similarity groups previously identified  <cit> . the plus and minus symbols  indicate the presence of enzymatically active or inactive catalytic loop sequence signatures, respectively. for each group, the number above the line indicates the bayesian clade support , and the number below the line indicates the bootstrap support  in maximum likelihood . results presented are the mean  of four distinct alignments.

sequences tad <dig> and m <dig> consistently clustered together as a distinct "new clade". the mean bayesian posterior probability was:  <dig>   . the mean bootstrap support in maximum likelihood  was:  <dig>   .

sequences nv <dig>  tad <dig> and mbrevi5r <dig> could not be placed into a similarity group with confidence.

the domain architecture data presented in figure  <dig> are for the most part consistent with the placement of the new myotubularin homologues into similarity clusters based on phylogenetic tree inference data. all of the new sequences placed into similarity groups have a full ph-gram domain, and a myotubularin phosphatase domain  consistent with their class placement. the myotubularins of the "r5" group characteristically possess a denn  domain n-terminal to the ph-gram domain, and a ph  domain c-terminal to the phosphatase domain. this is true for the new sequences tad <dig>  and nv <dig> . however sequence m <dig>  has an additional domain of unknown function at the extreme n-terminus, and lacks the c-terminal ph domain. this may indicate that the stable "r5" subunit domain architecture had not yet been achieved at this early stage of myotubularin gene evolution. myotubularins of the "r3" group characteristically have a fyve domain ) c-terminal to the phosphatase domain. this is true for sequence tad <dig> . however, sequence n <dig> , also classified as an r <dig> member, lacks this domain. furthermore, sequence n <dig> , classified as a member of the "r6" group, has a c-terminal fyve domain. this is characteristically absent from the members of the r <dig> group, and for example, is absent from sequence tad <dig> , also classified in this group. thus it would appear that the nematostella sequences in the r <dig> and r <dig> groups may have exchanged the fyve domain. this may represent a novel, interesting genetic event in the evolution of the nematostella myotubularin genes. alternatively, it is conceivable that this might represent an error in genomic sequence assembly and annotation. finally, the sequences m01745983c and tad <dig> are intriguing. these sequences cluster together consistently as a "new clade" in phylogenetic analysis based on alignments made from the ph-gram and phosphatase domains . in addition, each of them also possesses an n-terminal c <dig> domain , which has not been reported previously in metazoan myotubularins. this data supports the existence of a previously undescribed myotubularin architecture, perhaps restricted to choanoflagellates and early metazoa.

it is clear from the above phylogenetic analysis that even in the genome of trichoplax, the most deeply diverging metazoan known  <cit> , there is a representative in each of the six typical myotubularin similarity groups. this pattern is continued throughout the rest of the metazoans. this indicates that the gene diversification into the three catalytically active and three inactive myotubularin groups had been completed at the very base of the metazoan clade.

the situation is less clear for the monosiga genome. representatives can only be identified clearly for the r <dig>  r <dig>  and r <dig> groups. this would suggest that the split between catalytically active and inactive myotubularins characteristic of the metazoan clade had occurred already in the common ancestor of choanoflagellates and metazoans. however, it is impossible to propose a precise model for this process, as three similarity groups have no identified members. this might represent a genuine absence, and therefore have evolutionary significance. on the other hand, it is conceivable that the apparent absence of myotubularin gene types is an artefact of genome assembly and annotation. that this might be the case is supported by the discovery of the partial sequence mbrevi5r <dig>  which was manually constructed from unassembled genomic sequence reads. it therefore seems most prudent to say that the precise status of myotubularin genes in choanoflagellates will have to await the completion of genome sequencing projects for other species in this group.

accessory protein domains
nearly all animal myotubularins characterized to date possess coiled-coil domains c-term to the myotubularin domain. these have been shown to be important in mediating the protein-protein interactions between myotubularin subunits  <cit> , and might conceivably provide interaction sites for other protein partners. we find that the presence of coiled-coil domains is much more sporadic in the entire myotubularin set , with many proteins lacking them. where they occur, the most common location is c-term to the myotubularin domain, however a number of sequences, particularly in the amoebozoa, have n-term coiled-coil domains. the lack of coiled-coil domains in a number of myotubularins would suggest that potential protein-protein interactions would need to be facilitated by some other structural feature. it may be relevant in this context that ph domains, as a broad group, are known to often facilitate protein-protein interactions, as well as protein-lipid binding  <cit> . it may be that some of the structural and sequence diversity we observed in the ph-gram domains of the myotubularins in our sequence set arises due to this domain mediating protein-protein interactions. protein-protein interactions might also be mediated by the observed ank , lrr , and wd <dig> domains.

several domains are found which typically mediate membrane localization ]), which is consistent with the postulated role of myotubularin proteins in vesicle transport. the presence of rho-gap domains might indicate a role in direct regulation of the cytoskeleton.

a few sequences show a predicted transmembrane domain, and one has a predicted signal peptide. these are very unusual for myotubularin sequences, and would be consistent with localization in a particular intracellular membrane compartment, and entry into the endomembrane system, respectively.

finally, several sequences contain a predicted nuclear localization signal . this was true for nv <dig> , and several other metazoan members of the r <dig> clade. this data is presented in additional file  <dig>  amongst these sequences was the drosophila homologue of mtmr5/mtmr <dig>  this is consistent with the observation that this protein  co-localizes with the epigenetic regulatory protein trithorax  on polytene chromosomes  <cit> . the presence in several members of the r <dig> clade of a well-conserved basic sequence loop and nls prediction together suggest that nuclear localization may be possible for other members of this group. in addition, we observed predicted nls in two sequences from the plant populus trichocarpa. this data is summarized in additional file  <dig>  recently the arabidopsis myotubularin at3g <dig> was shown to participate in a partially overlapping drought-response gene regulatory network with the epigenetic regulatory trithorax homologue protein atx <dig>  <cit> . this has raised the question as to whether this protein might be able to enter the nucleus. our finding of a conserved basic sequence region supports this possibility.

myotubularin gene expression in entamoeba
the unusually large complement of myotubularin homologues in entamoeba histolytica, a well-known pathogenic organism, prompted us to explore the literature to examine patterns of myotubularin gene expression in this species. davis et al.  <cit>  reported differences in gene expression between the infective e. histolytica strain hm-1:imss and the non-pathogenic e. histolytica strain rahman. sequence ehi_ <dig>  showed an increase of  <dig> × in expression . ehrenkaufer et al.  <cit>  identified "cyst-specific" e. histolytica genes which are differentially expressed in recent clinical isolates  as compared to laboratory strains or strains isolated from the mouse colon . genes encoding two active myotubularins showed increases in expression . genes for four inactive myotubularins also showed increases in expression . the latter two sequences are imlrk proteins.

discussion
a variety of experiments in animal and fungal systems including in vitro enzymatic studies, mutational analysis, complementation assays, and in vivo overexpression, agree in characterizing myotubularins as phosphatases of the d <dig> position in the inositol headgroup of inositol phospholipids. pi3p and pip <dig> appear to be primarily localized to the cellular endomembrane system and restricted domains of the plasma membrane, mediating transitions between endosomes and lysosomes, retrograde transport between the endosomal compartment and trans golgi network, and endocytosis of some materials from the cell surface  <cit> . mutations of animal and yeast myotubularins lead to abnormal accumulations of pi3p and pip <dig>  apparently disrupting normal cellular membrane trafficking events, perhaps through abnormal concentrations and/or localizations of pi-phosphate specific membrane-binding effector proteins  <cit> . one would anticipate that such intracellular membrane trafficking processes, and the mechanisms regulating them, would be very ancient, having arisen quite early in eukaryotic evolution. this is consistent with our most common observation of a small number of myotubularin genes in organisms across a broad phylogenetic distribution, suggesting the presence of a single such gene in the last common ancestor for all extant eukaryotic groups. the ph-gram domain appears to be a very early acquisition, perhaps coincident with the divergence of a generic ptp domain into the characteristic elaborated myotubularin phosphatase domain.

inactive myotubularin subunits are one of the particularly interesting features of this gene group. our data are consistent with these having appeared on three separate occasions in eukaryotic evolution, in different taxonomic groups. the distinctive lack of a ph-gram domain in the inactive excavate myotubularins makes it likely that these represent a unique lineage. similarly, the imlrk domain architecture of the amoebozoa inactive myotubularins suggests they too have a unique origin. finally, it is likely that an active myotubularin lineage then began an independent diversification event somewhere around the base of the choanoflagellate/metazoan divergence to produce the six similarity groups characteristic of the metazoans. this is consistent with our finding of all six myotubularin subgroups being identifiable in the deeply diverging placozoan trichoplax, but only three subgroup representatives being clearly identifiable from the choanoflagellate monosiga. more completed genome sequences from choanoflagellates and even more deeply diverging protistan "animal allies"  will be necessary to precisely define this pivotal period in myotubularin gene history.

myotubularin function has been most intensively studied in humans, where a number of diseases arising from inherited mutations have been characterized. it has been suggested that a common unifying pathophysiological mechanism in these disorders may be abnormality in the membrane trafficking necessary to alter the characteristic molecular composition and identity of the plasma membrane and specialized derivative membrane structures during cellular differentiation  <cit> . in this model the disordered membrane trafficking would be secondary to perturbations in the normal levels and perhaps subcellular distribution of pi3p and pip <dig>  the normal substrates of myotubularins. this model suggests that the normal function of myotubularins becomes especially critical in situations where cells are required to turn over and alter, on a large scale, through membrane trafficking, the suites of proteins and perhaps lipids characterizing particular domains on the plasma membrane and components of the endomembrane system.

myotubularin genes have undergone an expansion in the amoebozoan species dictyostelium discoideum. nine myotubularins are predicted to be enzymatically active, and two inactive. nothing is known about the function of the myotubularins in this organism. however, it is reasonable to suggest that they are involved in the regulation of the substantial intracellular trafficking events that would accompany membrane reorganization during a complex life cycle. the two inactive dictyostelium myotubularins also possess the distinctive imlrk domain architecture. "roco" proteins  were initially characterized in dictyostelium, are biochemically best understood in this organism, but have a widespread phylogenetic distribution in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . in dictyostelium, where there are  <dig> roco genes in all, functional evidence is available for four: gene gbpc is involved in chemotaxis; genes qkga/roco <dig> and roco <dig> are involved in growth and development; and gene pats <dig>  is involved in cytokinesis. the roco proteins have recently received considerable attention because in humans the family member lrrk <dig> is involved in familial and some cases of sporadic parkinson's disease  <cit> . biochemical approaches, analysis of disease-associated mutations, and solved protein structures have revealed that the protein kinase domain is regulated by the gtpase activity of the roc domain, through protein-protein dimerization mediated by the cor domain  <cit> . thus these proteins have been likened to a "stand-alone" intramolecular signal transduction cascade, mediated by their multiple functional domains. dictyostelium pats <dig>  is essential for cytokinesis, and contains an enzymatically inactive myotubularin domain, whose function has not been experimentally tested. a reasonable proposal would be that the myotubularin-like portion of the protein could provide membrane localization via its ph-gram domain. it is known that specialized plasma membrane domains enriched in pip <dig> accumulate at the intercellular bridge during cytokinesis, where they regulate the underlying actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . the dictyostelium gene roco <dig>  also encodes an imlrk protein. nothing is known about the function of this protein, but it contains a rho-gap domain, which might indicate a role in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. once again, the myotubularin-like region of the protein could supply membrane localization. another functional possibility for the inactive myotubularin domains of both pats <dig> and roco <dig> is that they might bind to one or more of the many active dictyostelium myotubularins, and mediate regulation of their activities. several such combinations of active plus regulatory inactive myotubularin subunits are well characterized in animal cells  <cit> .

in entamoeba, another amoebozoan, there is an even larger myotubularin gene set than observed in dictyostelium - there are  <dig> active myotubularins, and  <dig> inactive myotubularins . this is the largest collection of myotubularin genes observed to date in any eukaryotic genome examined. this large repertoire of active plus inactive subunits suggests the possibility of a particularly rich network of regulatory protein-protein associations. it is particularly striking that, in contrast to the intricate multicellular associations of dictyostelium, the entamoeba life cycle is morphologically rather simple. underlying this apparently simplicity, however, is probably complex turnover and change to plasma membrane protein sets accompanying life cycle transitions and invasive contact with host tissues  <cit> . it might be hypothesized that the large complement of myotubularin genes found in this organism is necessary for precise spatial and temporal regulation of these membrane trafficking events, over and above the "constitutive" requirements of any eukaryotic cell. their numbers would suggest that the imlrk proteins might be particularly important. the data suggest that the protein kinase domains of the imlrk proteins will be active, and that the roc domains lack gtpase activity. this would indicate a change to the typical paradigm of roc gtpase-mediated control of the kinase domain. it is possible that the divergent roco domains in these proteins effect protein kinase regulation via interaction with novel accessory proteins.

in most human cases of infection with entamoeba histolytica, the organism remains in the lumen of the intestine, in contact with the epithelium. in a minority of cases, invasion of the intestinal wall occurs, which may lead to liver abscesses. the life cycle is completed by the organism forming cysts, which are released from the host in excrement, to infect new hosts. a significant increase in gene expression was noted in a myotubularin gene in a pathogenic vs a non-pathogenic strain of e. histolytica  <cit> . significant upregulation was noted in several myotubularin genes which appear to be acting specifically in the encystment stage of the life cycle  <cit> . taken together, these data suggest that myotubularin genes are important to both completion of the life cycle, and invasive disease in this organism.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a phylogenetic survey of myotubularin genes across a diverse array of eukaryotes, including distribution, domain architecture, and inferred evolutionary history. we have characterized an expansion of genes in the amoebozoa encoding proteins with the novel combination of "imlrk"  domains. this group is particularly prominent in the pathogenic organism entamoeba histolytica, which contains the largest myotubularin gene family of any eukaryotic genome yet examined. gene expression data in e. histolytica indicates that myotubularin function may be important to both critical life cycle transitions and host infection. the data indicate that pathogen myotubularin genes may be important targets for basic research, and perhaps novel strategies for disease control.

