BACKGROUND
evolutionary adaptation to a new environment leads to changes that improve function and increase fitness, but it may also result in the deterioration of functions not needed in that selective environment. these declines in function that accompany adaptation – tradeoffs – are often considered inevitable costs or constraints of adaptation  <cit> . tradeoffs can either result from antagonistic pleiotropy, when adaptive mutations in the selective environment are deleterious elsewhere, or from the accumulation of mutations that are neutral in the selective environment. a consequence of these tradeoffs is that they prevent ‘darwinian demons’: single super-genotypes that are optimally fit across a spectrum of environments  <cit> . instead, there are usually ‘generalist’ organisms that perform adequately in a variety of environments that can coexist with ‘specialist’ organisms that occupy smaller niches but with greater effectiveness.

critical to the emergence of specialization is the constancy of an environment  <cit> . by occupying the same environment for an extended period of time, the advantage of maintaining fitness in alternate environments is not realized. organisms may thus be expected to become increasingly specialized to their current, static environment. the most obvious form of specialization is a decline in the ability to utilize resources or exist in conditions that were not experienced during adaptation. many such examples have been observed during laboratory evolution, whereby organisms have evolved to narrow or shift their range of preferred temperatures  <cit> , carbon sources  <cit> , host organisms  <cit> , or even laboratory water supply  <cit> . alternatively, organisms can lose the ability to grow well in the absence of a resource that is currently available. this has been observed, in particular, for microbes infecting hosts. examples range from the long-term, dramatic losses by intracellular symbionts  <cit>  to the rapid emergence of auxotrophy during passage through a mouse gut  <cit> .

one of the most prominent examples of prolonged adaptation to a single environment is the lenski long-term evolution experiment   <cit> . in this experiment,  <dig> populations of escherichia coli were founded with either the arabinose-negative strain rel <dig>  or the otherwise isogenic arabinose-positive derivative, rel <dig> . these have evolved since  <dig> in davis-mingioli  minimal media  <cit>  batch cultures containing glucose as a growth substrate. over  <dig>  generations, the fitness of the evolved strains in the evolutionary environment has increased substantially, and appears to continue to do so  <cit> . in line with the expectation of a generalist-specialist tradeoff, evolving strains have also specialized for aspects of their static environment. evolved isolates have lower fitness in some alternative environments  <cit> , despite the fact that many such individual mutations can be generally beneficial across environments  <cit> .

perhaps the most surprising adaptive change to have occurred during the ltee was the huge increase in fitness of one population due to evolving the ability to metabolize citrate, the “inert” metal chelator present in dm minimal medium. disodium citrate  was included in the evolutionary growth media as a historical artifact of the media’s original formulation for penicillin enrichment of auxotrophs  <cit> . the common use of citrate in minimal media formulations owes to its ability to serve as a chelator of fe . indeed, no direct addition of iron is made to dm minimal media. given the quite low level of glucose used in the ltee , substantially more citrate was present  than glucose. a diagnostic trait of most e. coli strains is that they can only grow on citrate anaerobically, whereas salmonella, for example, can grow on it aerobically. this inability of the ancestral strain to grow on citrate during the aerobic conditions of the ltee therefore initially rendered this organic acid an unavailable secondary resource. incredibly, after  <dig>  generations – and in just one of the  <dig> replicate populations  – the ability emerged to utilize citrate as a sole carbon source during aerobic growth  <cit> . interestingly, this was not even the first time e. coli has acquired the ability to aerobically utilize citrate. cit+ e. coli  k <dig> had previously been observed to arise spontaneously  <cit> , and high expression. plastids has been shown to confer aerobic citrate growth upon e. coli b  <cit> .

besides the remarkable story of novel aerobic utilization of citrate, it is unclear whether any of the ltee lines may have changed in terms of use of citrate as an iron chelator. bacteria commonly have multiple acquisition systems for various metals, particularly iron, which is required for aerobic respiration due to the hemes found in cytochromes. the acquisition of iron is particularly challenging for microbes because of the low solubility of the fe  species that is available at neutral ph in oxygenated environments. consequently, metals are often growth limiting in nature in environments ranging from the open ocean  <cit>  to host infections  <cit> . in the context of infections, iron is sequestered by high-affinity eukaryotic proteins, and the pathogenesis of many infectious diseases relies on the ability of bacteria to strip iron from their host.

consistent with the fundamental role that iron plays in microbial growth, and its relative scarcity, microbes have developed an arsenal of techniques to procure it. in e. coli, transcriptional regulators sensitive to the intracellular concentrations of iron down-regulate iron uptake genes when supplies are adequate. under conditions of iron deprivation, these same regulators simultaneously up-regulate iron acquisition systems while down-regulating proteins requiring iron  <cit> . one mechanism to obtain iron is to secrete and reabsorb small molecules called siderophores that chelate extracellular fe , as well as the transporters to utilize them. e. coli also has the ability to take up fe , and a transport system to directly capture fe  from host proteins like transferrin or lactoferrin, or from heme  <cit> .

there is precedent for selection acting upon metal acquisition during experimental evolution. growing methylobacterium at low levels of cobalt repeatedly selected for transposition events upstream of a single cobalt transporter, leading to increased uptake rates  <cit> . interestingly, the selective effect of these mutations was dependent upon both the carbon source and the growth rate of cells. additionally, selection has been observed on metal acquisition as a social trait. genotypes of pseudomonas aeruginosa that fail to produce siderophores have emerged during adaption in laboratory conditions, as well as over the course of infection in the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients  <cit> . because excreted siderophores become public goods, in well-mixed environments, non-producers can have a selective advantage over producers  <cit> .

here we investigated whether other strains from generation  <dig>  of the lenski ltee have evolved to become dependent on citrate for their performance growing on glucose. there are four non-exclusive hypotheses for the dependence of glucose growth of each population upon citrate. h0: the null hypothesis is that there is no significant stimulation , h1: as disodium citrate is the sole source of sodium in the ltee media, there may be stimulation by sodium ions in a manner independent of citrate itself, h2: evolved strains use – at least partially – citrate as a growth substrate , and h3: evolved strains have come to rely upon citrate to chelate iron present in the media.

we found that the ancestors and most of the evolved populations were largely insensitive to the presence of citrate . in contrast, three lineages in addition to the cit+ a- <dig> population have evolved increased growth rate and yield in the presence of citrate. in no case was this was due to sodium ions . unlike the cit+ a- <dig> , however, these lineages neither grew on citrate directly nor incorporated isotopic label from citrate during growth on 100% u-13c-glucose. these three lineages were at least partially rescued by the direct addition of fe . these data are consistent with h3: these three populations have evolved to rely on citrate for its original intent, as a chelator of iron. as such, these three populations have evolved a novel dependence upon citrate due to reduction in citrate-independent glucose growth rather than the gain of growth on citrate as a carbon and energy source.

RESULTS
evolved strains acquired dependence on citrate
in order to test for acquired dependence upon citrate , we compared growth rate and yield on glucose either with or without citrate for the ancestors and one clonal isolate from each of the  <dig> populations of the ltee at  <dig>  generations . growth rate is known to be strongly correlated with fitness in batch cultures in general, and in the ltee in particular  <cit> . yield, while not a component of fitness during batch culture, conveys additional information about cell physiology and was therefore also analyzed. differences seen in apparent final yield were not explainable by the changed osmolarity due to the addition of citrate to the media; citrate caused no detectable change in optical density . both ‘small’ and ‘large’ clones from the a- <dig> population were included  <cit>  in the analysis. 

the cit+ a- <dig> population was seen to grow faster and to a much higher final yield in the presence of citrate, as previously reported  <cit> . the growth rate of the ancestor rel <dig> was neither significantly decreased nor enhanced by the addition of citrate , but there was a very slight, but significant increase in yield . nine of the  <dig> evolved strains had similarly small increases in rate or yield. while in some cases there were statistically significant increases, the effect was small. for the remaining three strains, however, the increase was much greater for both rate and yield. in the presence of citrate, a-2a, a- <dig> and a+ <dig> all experienced significant increases in both rate and yield . indeed, these effects were quite substantial: the growth rate of a+ <dig> with citrate was  <dig>  times faster than growth without citrate, and the final yield of a-2a increased by 80% by the addition of citrate. in comparison, at the  <dig> mm concentration of glucose used, the cit+ a- <dig> strain grew  <dig>  times faster and increased in final yield by 100% with the addition of citrate. to explore the nature of the citrate dependence, we focused on these three strains for which the effect was greatest, and omitted strains for which the effect was marginal .

disodium citrate dependence is not driven by sodium
one possible explanation for the effect of citrate could be stimulation by the addition of sodium , as disodium citrate was the only source of the cation in the medium . in order to test for this possible effect, we compared the stimulatory effect of disodium citrate to citric acid of the same concentration . both growth rates and yields with citric acid for the three citrate-stimulated evolved strains were nearly identical to those from disodium citrate . the only differences that were statistically distinguishable were those for yield for a-2a  and a- <dig> , which were in fact slightly higher on citric acid than on disodium citrate. this suggests that the growth phenotype we see in these evolved strains is related to citrate rather than a side-effect of sodium.

evolved strains are unable to utilize citrate as a carbon source
given that citrate stimulation of glucose growth was not due to sodium, we next examined whether or not strains could directly metabolize citrate . first, we asked whether any of these three citrate-stimulated strains grow with citrate as a sole carbon source. when cultured in dm containing citrate but no glucose, there was no measurable increase in od after  <dig> hours . thus, unlike the cit+ a- <dig> population, none of these isolates appear to be capable of growth on citrate alone.

although the three citrate-stimulated evolved isolates were found to still be cit-, this result did not rule out possible co-metabolic use during growth on glucose. to explore this possibility, we determined whether carbon from the citrate was incorporated into biomass during growth on glucose. we grew cells in 100% u-13c labeled glucose at  <dig> mm, both with and without unlabeled  citrate, and looked for differential incorporation of 13c into the amino acids of the growing cells under these two conditions. using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry , we compared the mass distribution vectors for fragments of derivatized amino acids from the cultures . since co2-utilizing reactions represent a source of naturally occurring carbon, it is expected to observe less than 100% 13c in amino acid fragments. if citrate were co-utilized it would enter directly into the citric acid cycle and be incorporated into biomass, which would dilute the incorporation of 13c from glucose into amino acids. we compared the peaks corresponding to fully-labeled fragments using a wilcoxon signed-rank test. for the cit+ a- <dig> population, there was a significant difference in incorporated label in the presence of unlabeled citrate , but for the other citrate-dependent strains there was no significant difference  . these data confirm that these three strains were not utilizing citrate as a carbon source to any measurable extent.

citrate dependence is related to its role as an iron chelator
having rejected hypotheses h0-h <dig> for the three citrate-dependent strains, we tested the remaining hypothesis that the effect of citrate is related to its role as a chelator in iron acquisition . e. coli can take up ferrous iron with the feo and efe transporters without the involvement of citrate  <cit> . we first tested whether providing sufficient iron  in the absence of citrate would enhance growth on glucose of the three citrate-dependent evolved isolates . for one of the citrate-dependent strains, a- <dig>  the iron greatly increased the growth rate and yield to values indistinguishable from that achieved via citrate . a similar effect was seen for a-2a, where iron increased growth rate and yield to ~90% that achieved by citrate, a small, but significant difference . for the third strain, a+ <dig>  the direct addition of iron significantly increased rate  and yield , but this increase amounted to only ~40% of the yield increase and ~13% of the rate increase seen with the addition of citrate. 

one possible explanation for the evolved strains’ acquired dependence upon citrate would be a defect in either production or uptake of iron chelating siderophores. to test whether the citrate-dependent strains had become deficient in their ability to secrete siderophores, we grew the three citrate-dependent evolved isolates in media without citrate that had been conditioned by the growth of the ancestral rel <dig> and then re-supplemented with glucose. unlike what has been observed previously for siderophore-defective strains  <cit> , none of the citrate-dependent strains grew faster or to a higher final yield on the spent media than on dm without citrate  . this argues against defects in siderophore production as the sole cause of citrate dependency, but does not rule out the possibility that it is related to the ability to transport iron-siderophore complexes.

discussion
here we report that by  <dig>  generations, three strains from the  <dig> ltee populations not previously shown to be dependent on citrate now grow on glucose in a manner that is strongly dependent on the presence of citrate. thus, eight of the populations have retained the ancestral phenotype of marginal - if any - stimulation by citrate  and one has famously become cit+ and can readily grow on it as a sole carbon and energy source . for the remaining three populations whose glucose-growth was substantially enhanced by citrate, our experiments allowed us to reject both the hypothesis that this stimulation was due to a side-effect of adding sodium  as well as the hypothesis that it was due to co-metabolism during glucose growth . the remaining hypothesis – citrate as an iron chelator – appears to best explain this phenotype, as direct addition of iron in the absence of citrate stimulated glucose growth.

what physiological mechanism may have caused this evolved dependence on citrate? the ability of ferrous iron to largely restore the phenotype of rapid growth on glucose is the strongest evidence for a loss of function in metal acquisition. the primary iron acquisition system for e. coli under aerobic conditions is via siderophores  <cit> . the fact that citrate-dependent strains did not benefit from growth on media conditioned by their citrate-independent ancestor, however, suggests that their dependence was unlikely to be due to an inability to produce or secrete siderophores. the most plausible explanation for their citrate-dependence would therefore be mutations involved in siderophore uptake. since strains a-2a and a- <dig> were almost completely rescued by ferrous iron, they appeared to have no defects in their systems for direct iron uptake. on the other hand, a+ <dig> was only mildly stimulated by ferrous iron, which would suggest this strain either has additional mutations in genes related to direct ferrous iron transport, defects in global regulators that stimulate up-regulation of iron-acquisition genes under iron starvation  <cit> , and/or another non-iron-related dependency on the presence of citrate. given the large number of genes involved in iron transport , the most useful first step for answering these questions will come from analysis of candidate causal mutations from the genome sequences from these lineages, which are in progress .

at this point, it is not possible to conclude whether the new citrate dependence during growth on glucose is the result of adaptation or the neutral accumulation of mutations. previous experiments in the ltee have suggested that the predominant mechanism for tradeoffs in the evolved strains has been antagonistic pleiotropy, and not the accumulation of mutations  <cit> . however, since this initial study,  <dig>  more generations have passed, and many more mutations have occurred. in the genome sequence published for the a- <dig> lineage, for example, there were only  <dig> nucleotide substitutions after the first  <dig>  generations, but  <dig> more accumulated in the subsequent  <dig>  generations. this striking increase in mutation rate was due to acquiring a mutator phenotype during the latter period  <cit> . in general, the respective impacts of mutation accumulation versus antagonistic pleiotropy should be revisited given the increased mutation rate in many of the strains, and the amount of time that has passed.

though definitive statements cannot be made, mutation accumulation seems like a plausible cause of the observed acquisition of citrate dependence. iron transport genes were presumably superfluous in the constant presence of high levels of citrate for  <dig>  generations. additionally, the large number of genes involved in iron uptake would provide a reasonably large mutational target. finally, all three of the strains that show strong citrate dependence during growth on glucose are amongst those that have also acquired a mutator phenotype; mutations to uvrd, mutl, and muts have increased their mutation rates 100– <dig> fold  <cit> . this result in itself is not statistically significant, as  <dig> of the parallel populations have acquired this phenotype by  <dig>  generations, so the probability by chance that all three citrate-dependent strains are mutators is  <dig> . the fact that they are all mutators, however, is consistent with the hypothesis that mutation accumulation drove the observed phenotypic changes. as with the above speculation about the identity of the mutational targets leading to citrate-dependency, the selective mechanism leading to their incorporation will require identification and introduction into the appropriate backgrounds to test the fitness effects of the dependency-inducing mutations.

CONCLUSIONS
we have uncovered a second form of interaction with citrate that occurred during the  <dig>  generations of the ltee: three of the  <dig> cit- strains we examined now required its presence as an iron chelator for maximal growth on glucose. this interaction was due to an acquired dependence on citrate to carry out a function that populations have lost, which contrasts with the gain of novel function observed in the cit+ a- <dig> population. unlike the strong selection for the ability of a- <dig> to catabolize citrate, selection was likely either weak or absent in the loss of citrate-independent glucose performance. in this regard, the constant environment of the ltee was perhaps not unlike that encountered along the evolutionary path to intracellular symbionts, whereby specialization emerges not so much from gain of new traits as from the persistent loss of traits rendered unnecessary.

a final subtext for considering the emergence of citrate-dependence during glucose growth is that subtle decisions in the design of evolution experiments can have unpredictable impacts. by addressing one complication in experimental design, one can unknowingly create new adaptive opportunities. citrate was present in dm media from the start of the experiment despite a quite small, marginal difference between growth of the ancestor in its presence or absence. this seemingly insignificant detail – combined with tens of thousands of generations of adaptation – has led to unexpected phenomena that range from the incredible acquisition of aerobic citrate metabolism, to the dependence on citrate as an iron chelator.

