BACKGROUND
vitis vinifera l. has relatively high drought tolerance  <cit> . once established in a deep soil with adequate water retention characteristics, grapevines produce root systems several meters deep enabling the vines to survive severe water deficits. grape sensitivity to water deficit depends on the timing of the application being particularly more sensitive during anthesis and just after anthesis  <cit> .

regulated-deficit irrigation has been used to improve berry and wine quality  <cit> . for instance, application of water deficit early in the season before véraison resulted in greater concentrations of anthocyanins and phenolics  <cit> . color differences were the result of increased anthocyanin synthesis caused by water deficit applied either early or late in the season  <cit> . indeed, water deficit treatment typically increases the skin to pulp ratio compared to well-watered vines  <cit> , increasing the amount of skin tannins and anthocyanins. however, it does not appear to affect the quantity or polymerization of seed tannins  <cit> . application of water deficit after véraison decreases berry weight to a lesser extent  <cit> , while still increasing substantially phenolic compounds such as anthocyanins  <cit> . in addition, the rates of accumulation of flavonoids as well as the degree of tannin polymerization may be increased  <cit> . in contrast, excessive and prolonged irrigation can reduce grape quality and yield due to late season vine growth  <cit> . prolonged irrigation can delay or reduce sugar accumulation and increase titratable acidity. in addition, prolonged irrigation can reduce anthocyanin content, in part due to continuous and excessive shoot growth that increases the shading of berry clusters  <cit> .

whereas physiological and biochemical data are numerous regarding the effect of water deficit, little is known about gene expression in grape berries exposed to water deficit. one global approach, using the affymetrix® vitis vinifera  genome array v.  <dig> , at the tissue level indicated that water deficit affected the mrna abundance of 13% of genes at grape maturity within the three tissues of the berry , with the greatest changes located in the pulp and skin  <cit> . while the function of many of the genes differentially expressed within the seed and pulp remain to be elucidated, genes over-represented in the skin were clearly associated with phenylpropanoid metabolism, ethylene, pathogenesis-related responses, energy metabolism and stress responses.

recently, water deficit was shown to accelerate anthocyanin biosynthesis, along with associated changes in transcript abundance of genes in the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway in the grape berry skin  <cit> . these authors suggested that both aba and sugar signaling might have accelerated anthocyanin development. indeed, additions of aba and rhamnose to grape berry skins have induced anthocyanin biosynthesis in a synergistic manner  <cit> .

water deficit is known to increase aba concentrations in the xylem sap and leaves of grapevine  <cit> . under normal conditions , aba concentrations in berries peak near véraison  <cit> , when berries begin to soften, and sugars and anthocyanins begin to accumulate. to the best of our knowledge, only one report has described the effect of water deficit on aba concentrations in grape berries  <cit> ; water-deficits applied after véraison significantly increased aba concentrations in chardonnay berries in one water-deficit treatment, but not in another water-deficit treatment that occurred in a later developmental stage.

in this study, we tested the hypothesis that a long-term, seasonal water deficit induces aba concentrations in the berries of red-wine grape cultivar, cabernet sauvignon, influencing berry phenylpropanoid and sugar metabolism after véraison. likewise, we expected that a long-term, seasonal water deficit would cause different metabolic responses in chardonnay, a white-wine grape cultivar that lacks anthocyanin biosynthesis. we show that there are significant differences in the response to water deficit between the two cultivars. not only were there differences in the effects of water deficit on phenylpropanoid metabolism, but also there were different effects of water deficit on aba, isoprenoid, carotenoid, amino acid and fatty acid metabolism.

RESULTS
physiological responses to water deficit
different ripening parameters  were measured throughout development in cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay berries in both well-watered  and water deficit  treatments . water deficit was administered simply by withholding water. thus, these vines developed water-deficit at the rate natural to their local conditions. note that chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon had different flowering and harvest dates due to differences in genotype and location.

stem water potentials were monitored in both cultivars, which were at different vineyards, in order to define water status conditions throughout the season and its impact on these ripening parameters. water was applied to both ww and wd vines by drip irrigation, once the desired stem water potential was reached . for chardonnay, irrigation was initiated on week  <dig> and  <dig> for ww and wd vines, respectively. for cabernet sauvignon, irrigation was initiated on week  <dig> and  <dig> for ww and wd vines, respectively. once started, irrigation was applied weekly, because there was no rainfall throughout the growing season.

differences in the stem water potentials between ww and wd vines were detected by week  <dig>  early in chardonnay berry development  just after the administration of the water deficit treatment. this difference was maintained throughout the season until harvest. in contrast, the differences in stem water potentials between ww and wd cabernet sauvignon vines were not observable until week  <dig> and reached a minimum of - <dig>  mpa at week  <dig> in wd vines. the slower rate of stress development for cabernet sauvignon could be due to a number of factors including differences in soil type, vapor pressure deficits, temperature, age of the vines, root stock, depth of roots, and trellising systems. in chardonnay, the berry diameter was smaller in berries from wd plants over the course of berry development; differences ranged from  <dig>  cm to  <dig> cm at the harvest stage . in contrast, a decrease in berry diameter of cabernet sauvignon under water deficit conditions was detectable first at the start of véraison .

soluble solids content  and titratable acidity  were significantly affected in wd vines  with varying results . °brix increased in both chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon berries for all treatments starting at véraison. there was no significant effect of water deficit on the start of véraison. °brix was increased significantly  in cabernet sauvignon berries of wd vines compared to berries of ww vines starting one week after véraison , however there was no significant effect  of water deficit on the °brix of chardonnay berries. ta  was highest just prior to véraison, and then decreased until harvest in both cultivars. wd significantly reduced ta in chardonnay berries  but not in cabernet sauvignon berries .

functional comparison of genes sets differentially expressed in both cultivars during water deficit
the effect of water deficit on the global gene expression of berries of both cultivars was examined. total rna was extracted from the berries at seven different time points for each cultivar and treatment as indicated in figure 1b. global gene expression analysis was performed using the affymetrix vitis genome array. out of the  <dig>  vitis probe sets placed on the array,  <dig>  probe sets were detected in at least two of three replicates within every experimental condition  according to the gcos software  leading to an overall specialized detection rate of  <dig> %. to validate expression profiles obtained by the vitis genome array, quantitative real-time rt-pcr  was performed on four different transcripts  that increase and decrease in abundance using gene-specific primers . transcript abundance patterns were calculated for both cultivars and treatments along the entire course of berry development. linear regression analysis resulted in an r <dig> of  <dig>  indicating a very good correlation between transcript abundance assessed by qrt-pcr and the expression profiles obtained with the vitis genome arrays . this is consistent with previous results from these arrays  <cit> .

a simple, three-way fixed effects anova was performed, to examine probe sets with a significant treatment effect, a significant treatment and cultivar interaction effect, and a significant treatment, cultivar and time interaction effect. there were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> significant probe sets  in each effect test, respectively . the genes represented by these probe sets were functionally categorized and compared to the functional categorization for the entire vitis genome array . functional categories were assigned using the munich information center for protein sequences  catalog of top arabidopsis blast hits  <cit> . because we detected some errors in the functional annotation for some unigenes, functional categorization of each unigene was verified or corrected manually using blast functions at plexdb . a complete list of functional categories for all probe sets on the vitis genome array has been constructed and is available at the grape annotation page of this website.

water deficit had significant effects on several functional categories including transport, transcription, and signaling categories . chi-square and fisher's exact tests showed a statistically significant increase in the percentage occurrence of genes in these categories. there was a significant treatment and cultivar interaction effect on the metabolism, transport and energy categories when compared to all probe sets on the vitis genome array. likewise, genes with a significant treatment, cultivar and time interaction effect had more significant increases in abundance of transcripts related to metabolism than the treatment-significant set as well as for all probe sets on the array. the metabolism category had the largest differences in transcripts that were significantly increased in the treatment and cultivar interaction effect and therefore will be the focus in the remainder of this paper.

interactive effects of water deficit and genotype on berry metabolism
a number of maps of metabolic pathways were created by matching probe sets on the vitis genome array to enzymes in known metabolic pathways . figure  <dig> summarizes how water deficit affected the major metabolic pathways and their interrelationships for each cultivar. bold colored arrows indicate those pathways and interrelationships most affected by water deficit in cabernet sauvignon  and chardonnay , including aba, carotenoid, amino acid, fatty acid and phenylpropanoid metabolism. water deficit responses differed significantly between the two cultivars. some components of these pathways were increased and others were decreased. for example, water deficit affected carotenoid, aba, amino acid and fatty acid metabolism in both cultivars, but the specific effects in these pathways were different for each of the cultivars. in other cases, only one cultivar was significantly affected by water deficit . some of the specific details of these differences are described in the following sections.

aba metabolism
there were significant effects of water deficit on the transcript profiles of genes involved in aba metabolism . the profiles of the log <dig> ratio  of the transcript abundance of the genes  matched to each enzyme in the aba metabolic pathway are shown as heat maps . boxes from left to right follow berry development over time. the upper set of boxes is for cabernet sauvignon and the lower set is for chardonnay for each probe set. a number of genes were mapped to multiple probe sets on the vitis genome array; in some cases, heat boxes for multiple probe sets were displayed for each enzyme in order to identify transcripts that might participate more in a particular pathway or process. there were significant effects of water deficit on aba metabolism for both cultivars. water deficit increased significantly  the transcript abundance for both cultivars of important regulatory enzymes in the aba metabolic pathway: β-carotene hydroxylase , nine-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase  and -abscisic acid 8'-hydroxylase . there were small but significant effects  of water deficit on xanthoxin dehydrogenase . the water-deficit responsive transcript profiles displayed for udp-glucose glucosyltransferase  and β-glucosidase  should be viewed with caution, as these have not yet been clearly identified with aba-specific functions in grape. however, these profiles are useful to identify candidate genes for further testing.

the concentrations of aba and its metabolites varied across berry development and were influenced by water deficit . water deficit increased aba concentrations significantly  in cabernet sauvignon at véraison and one week following véraison. in contrast, there was a significant decrease in aba concentrations  at and one week after véraison in wd chardonnay berries. aba concentrations peaked at or one week after véraison in chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon berries, respectively . aba concentrations were highly correlated  with the transcript abundance  of one particular nced unigene  indicating that aba concentrations in berries in general might be regulated primarily by this gene in berries and not by aba from some external source such as leaves or roots . however, additional aba metabolism steps might contribute significantly to the reduced aba concentrations in chardonnay berries .

aba can be metabolized into aba-glucose ester  and phaseic acid, which is then reduced to dihydrophaseic acid. aba-ge concentrations were relatively constant before véraison, but there was a trend towards increasing aba-ge concentrations after véraison. water deficit significantly increased aba-ge concentrations  in chardonnay berries  but not in cabernet sauvignon . there are a number of transcripts of udp-glucose glucosyltransferases represented on the vitis genome array. none have been clearly defined as encoding the enzyme involved in aba glycosylation. however, the steady-state abundance of one transcript  was increased by water deficit in both cultivars . this transcript was significantly correlated with the concentrations of aba-ge in cabernet sauvignon , but not for chardonnay . thus, this hypothesis needs additional testing before sound conclusions can be drawn.

β-glucosidases may be involved in the cleavage of glucose from aba-ge converting it to aba. none of the profiles of candidate β-glucosidases on the vitis genome array  significantly correlated with either aba or aba-ge concentrations indicating that either there is another candidate that is not on the vitis genome array or that this enzyme's activity is regulated by post-translational modifications.

abahase is the enzyme that catabolizes aba into 8'-hydroxy aba, which is nonenzymatically converted to phaseic acid, which then can be reduced to dihydrophaseic acid. water deficit slightly increased the concentration of dihydrophaseic acid in both cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay berries at maturity, but these effects were not statistically significant . water deficit had no significant effect on the concentrations of phaseic acid for either cultivar . the transcript abundance of abahase was greater in chardonnay than in cabernet sauvignon and was increased significantly by water deficit for both cultivars . there was no correlation of the transcript abundance of abahase with concentrations of phaseic acid. there was a substantial increase in transcript abundance of abahase at véraison for chardonnay, but not for cabernet sauvignon. the lack of correlation could be due to post-translational modifications or to its regulation being associated with some other transcript.

in a recent study  <cit> , transcript abundance of nced <dig>  but not nced <dig>  was shown to increase at ripening initiation or véraison in cabernet sauvignon berries. this prompted us to reexamine the probe set  on our microarray. when the probe set sequence was compared with the grape genome in the nr database at ncbi, there was 100% identity with nced <dig> and 76% identity with nced <dig>  which had no probe set match on the array. to be certain that the data for 1608022_at was that of nced <dig>  qrt-pcr was used on another set of berry extractions with the same primers as in the previous study  <cit> . the transcript abundances of nced <dig> and not nced <dig> using qrt-pcr  were correlated clearly with the probe set data and aba concentrations.

interestingly, the mrna expression of a bzip transcription factor  that is similar to athb- <dig> in arabidopsis  <cit> , was highly correlated  with nced <dig> expression on the vitis genome array . the transcript abundance of this transcription factor in arabidopsis is increased by water deficit  <cit> , inhibits growth, operating downstream in response to elevated aba concentrations  <cit> .

carotenoid metabolism and light stress
aba is synthesized from carotenoids and some transcripts in the carotenoid pathway are also affected by water deficit . bhase acts in two parallel pathways that lead to the conversion of β-carotene into zeaxanthin eventually leading to aba, and α-carotene into zeinoxanthin eventually leading to lutein. these carotenoids can act as photoprotectants under high light intensities  <cit> . the transcript abundance of bhase was increased by water-deficit in both cultivars . the transcript abundance of zeaxanthin epoxidase  was not significantly increased in wd berries in either chardonnay or cabernet sauvignon . however, in later weeks, the transcript abundance of violaxanthin de-epoxidase  was significantly increased  in wd chardonnay and decreased  in wd cabernet sauvignon relative to their respective controls . conversion of violaxanthin to zeaxanthin by violaxanthin de-epoxidase is required for the dissipation of excess light energy in the antennae of photosystem ii  <cit> . these results indicate that wd chardonnay berries may be undergoing significantly more light stress than wd cabernet sauvignon berries, presumably due to a lack of anthocyanin-derived photoprotective pigments.

to confirm these results, carotenoid concentrations were measured by hplc in the berries of both cultivars at all  <dig> time points. the two most abundant carotenoids were lutein and β-carotene . there were also detectable levels of neoxanthin, violaxanthin, lutein  <dig>  epoxide, antheraxanthin, and cis-lutein in both cultivars . zeaxanthin was detectable but not resolvable on the chromatograms for either cultivar. the relatively low levels of chlorophyll a and corresponding increase in pheophytins  were artifacts of the extraction protocol that did not alter carotenoid levels, but did alter chlorophylls. carotenoid concentrations were generally 2-fold or higher in chardonnay than in cabernet sauvignon for most carotenoids and developmental stages . this result was consistent with the higher transcript abundance of bhase  contributing to higher carotenoid biosynthesis and the lower transcript abundance of nced contributing to carotenoid catabolism  for chardonnay relative to that of cabernet sauvignon. most carotenoid concentrations were not affected significantly by water deficit for either cultivar. however, water deficit increased significantly  the antheraxanthin concentration before and after véraison in chardonnay berries . the correlation of the bhase transcript abundance with the antheraxanthin concentration was not significant at the 95% confidence level . however, if the first time point is removed from the analysis, then the correlation becomes highly significant . in cabernet sauvignon, the violaxanthin concentration was decreased significantly  by water deficit, consistent with the increased nced transcript abundance that would accelerate its catabolism.

photosynthesis and glycolysis
there was evidence that photoinhibition was induced by water deficit in chardonnay berries. this hypothesis was supported by the response of genes involved in the photosystem ii electron transport chain, rubp regeneration and glycolysis . chlorophyll concentrations of chardonnay berries were significantly increased  by water deficit before véraison, but there were no significant differences after véraison. the transcript abundance of chlorophyll a/b binding protein for chardonnay follows the same pattern as chlorophyll over time. in contrast, the transcript abundance of several genes in chardonnay berries was increased significantly  by water deficit after véraison. these include photosystem ii d <dig> protein, phosphoribulose kinase, glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and fructose bisphosphate aldolase  . the increased transcript abundances of these photosynthetic and glycolytic genes are likely indicators of repair responses to photoinhibition during water deficit  <cit> . the transcript abundance of the same genes in cabernet sauvignon berries are generally decreased or unaffected by water deficit .

isoprenoid, carotenoid, and fatty acid metabolism involved in volatile production
water deficit increased the transcript abundance of enzymes involved in volatile compound production . the transcript abundance of one terpenoid synthetase was increased significantly in wd chardonnay  at maturity, but not cabernet sauvignon at the mature stage when the grapes were harvested. however, the transcript abundance was increased significantly in wd cabernet sauvignon at earlier stages . this transcript has been shown to be important in the production of sesquiterpenoids during the late ripening stages of gewürztraminer, an aromatic white grape  <cit> .

downstream of bhase, a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase  known to increase at véraison  <cit> , cleaves zeaxanthin into a c13-norisoprenoid and a c14-dialdehyde, both volatile compounds. water deficit increased the transcript abundance of ccd in both cultivars. there was a significant increase at earlier berry stages in cabernet sauvignon , but there was no significant increase in transcript abundance above that of well-watered grapes at maturity . however, there was a significant increase  in transcript abundance in wd chardonnay berries at maturity. zeaxanthin was unresolvable due to low concentrations. we do not know if zeaxanthin concentration is the limiting factor for this reaction. more research on the rate of supply of zeaxanthin, enzyme concentration and activity, and zeaxanthin concentrations at the site of action are needed to determine the limitations of ccd activity.

the transcript abundance of several different lipoxygenases  was increased significantly by water deficit in both cultivars. for example, the transcript abundance of one lox  increased significantly  at all stages of development in chardonnay and at several time points in cabernet sauvignon, most importantly at maturity. these lipoxygenases convert the fatty acid, linolenic acid, to hydroperoxides  <cit> , which through several other enzymatic steps can lead to the formation of volatile esters in wines. in the next step of this pathway, the hydroperoxides are converted to grassy-flavored volatile aldehydes like hexenal and hexenal-3-al by hydroperoxide lyase   <cit> . the transcript abundance of this gene was also increased by water deficit for both cultivars  throughout most of berry development including at maturity . hexenal can be converted to hexanol, another grassy aroma, by alcohol dehydrogenases  <cit> . the transcript abundance for some of these enzymes was also increased in cabernet sauvignon berries by water deficit . alcohol acyl transferases  can convert alcohols to volatile esters . we have detected three-fold increases in a fruity aroma  in wd chardonnay wines, which may be derived from this pathway  <cit> . yeast metabolism during fermentation is likely to be a contributing factor in the production of this compound.

proline and glutamate metabolism
the transcript abundance of genes involved in most amino acid metabolism pathways was differentially affected by water deficit between the cultivars , including proline, glutamate, phenylalanine, tyrosine, methionine, cysteine, and glycine to name but a few. proline is the most abundant amino acid in berries and can contribute to a sweet taste. proline has many biological functions that include acting as an energy source, antioxidant and osmoprotectant  <cit> . proline concentrations increased in berries at véraison in both cultivars . there were substantially higher proline concentrations in cabernet sauvignon compared to chardonnay at harvest. water deficit significantly increased proline concentrations in cabernet sauvignon berries , increasing by 3-fold at maturity . there was no significant effect  of water deficit on proline concentration in chardonnay berries.

Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase  is considered the rate-limiting step in proline biosynthesis  <cit> . p5cs converts glutamate into glutamate 5-semialdehyde, which spontaneously converts to Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate. Δ1pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase  catalyzes the last step in proline biosynthesis, converting Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate into proline. there are no probe sets for p5cr on the vitis genome array, but there are probe sets for p5cs. water deficit increased the transcript abundance of p5cs in both chardonnay  and cabernet sauvignon  berries at véraison, but no significant effects of water deficit were observed at maturity when proline concentration was most affected by water deficit in cabernet sauvignon .

glutamate is central to amino acid metabolism and nitrogen assimilation  <cit> . key enzymes involved in glutamate metabolism are glutamate dehydrogenase , glutamate decarboxylase , glutamate synthase , glutamine synthetase , aspartate aminotransferase , and asparagine synthetase . the enzymes are responsible for assimilating ammonium into glutamate, except for gad, which irreversibly catabolizes glutamate into γ-aminobutyric acid .

glutamate concentrations in the berry were too low to provide reliable quantitative data in the gc-ms chromatograms. however, the vitis genome array data supported the hypothesis that glutamate metabolism contributes to the increased proline concentrations in wd cabernet sauvignon berries . water deficit increased significantly the transcript abundance of the cytoplasmic forms of aspat , gs , and as  in cabernet sauvignon at maturity . in contrast, water deficit had no effect on the transcript abundance of aspat  or it decreased the transcript abundance of gs  and as  in chardonnay berries at maturity. water deficit had no statistically significant effect on the transcript abundance of gdh in chardonnay , but significantly decreased the transcript abundance of gdh in cabernet sauvignon . there were no significant effects of water deficit on the transcript abundance of nadh-dependent gogat for either cultivar, but transcript abundance was much higher for cabernet sauvignon than chardonnay . water deficit might have significantly increased glutamate catabolism, because the transcript abundance of gad was increased significantly in cabernet sauvignon  and chardonnay . the data indicate that aspat might have provided the greatest contribution to the increased proline concentrations in wd cabernet sauvignon berries, because there were large differences between cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay  relative to the other transcripts.

phenylpropanoid metabolism
polyphenolic compounds play an important role in the quality of grapes and wines, and the way these substances are transformed during vinification influences the quality of wine, directly or indirectly, conferring on it some of its structure and sensorial properties  <cit> . phenolics are classified as nonflavonoid and flavonoid compounds and are derived from the phenylpropanoids. many of these phenolics, including anthocyanins and flavonols, contribute to human-health benefits  <cit> .

recently, water deficit was shown to accelerate ripening and induce changes in gene expression regulating flavonoid biosynthesis, especially the anthocyanin pathway as measured by the increase in total anthocyanins  <cit> . our results on individual anthocyanins were consistent with this study; water deficit increased approximately 2-fold the accumulation of the five major anthocyanins in cabernet sauvignon berries relative to berries from well-watered vines . the concentration of all anthocyanins increased rapidly after véraison.

anthocyanin biosynthesis is under the control of two myb transcription factors, myba <dig> and myba <dig>  <cit> . both transcription factors regulate udp-glucose 3-o-flavonoid:glucosyltransferase  in a similar manner  <cit> . ufgt catalyzes one of the last steps in anthocyanin biosynthesis. on the vitis genome array, there is a probe set  that hybridizes to the transcripts of both transcription factors. the transcript abundance for these transcription factors was increased by water deficit and also was correlated highly with ufgt transcript abundance . the rapid increase in transcript abundance of these genes after véraison correlated well with the rapid increase in the individual anthocyanins during the ripening phase . malvidin 3-o-β-glucoside was the most abundant anthocyanin under well-watered conditions, being 4-fold higher than the next most abundant anthocyanin, peonidin 3-o-β-glucoside. while all five anthocyanins were increased by water deficit, peonidin 3-o-β-glucoside was increased the most . peonidin gives purplish-red hues to grapes, whereas malvidin gives red hues. the increase in anthocyanins and their overall change in composition in the berries undoubtedly contributed to the changes in color that are observed in cabernet sauvignon wines made from wd berries  <cit> , including changes in hue, chroma and luminosity  <cit> .

another transcript that functions in an earlier step in the flavonoid pathway, flavanone 3-hydroxylase, was also affected by water deficit, but at a later stage of development . the transcript abundance of other unigenes related to myb transcription factors and potentially related to the regulation of the anthocyanin pathway in plants was increased in wd cabernet sauvignon berries compared to ww berries . one example  encodes vlmybb <dig>  whose function has been reported previously in grape berry  <cit> . transient expression of the vlmybb <dig> cdna in grape cells did not result in red pigment accumulation in the vacuole suggesting that this transcription factor was not directly involved in the regulation of the ufgt gene. ufgt catalyzes one of the last steps of color  development in grape berry skin  <cit> . the transcript abundance of this unigene was increased in wd cabernet sauvignon berries .

water deficit also increased shikimate concentrations and the steady-state mrna abundance of genes encoding key enzymes at earlier steps in the shikimate and phenylpropanoid pathway in cabernet sauvignon . for instance, the transcript abundance of 3-deoxy-d-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase , chorismate mutase  and phenylalanine ammonia lyase  was significantly increased  in wd cabernet sauvignon. in contrast, the transcript abundance of these genes was not increased by water deficit in chardonnay. in addition, shikimate concentrations were increased by wd in cabernet sauvignon, but not in chardonnay.

flavonols contribute to the bitter taste and color of red wine by stabilizing anthocyanin pigments  <cit> . in grape berries, they also play a role as uv protectants  <cit> . increasing light intensity enhances flavonol accumulation in grapes  <cit> . flavonol synthase , which catalyzes the reaction from dihydroflavonol to flavonol, is regarded as one of the main enzymes involved in flavonol biosynthesis  <cit> . the transcript abundance of a flavonol synthase  named fls <dig>  <cit>  increased  across berry development in wd plants compared to ww plants in chardonnay  and coincided with differences  in the amount of total flavonols observed in chardonnay berries at harvest stage . these increases were larger for chardonnay compared to cabernet sauvignon during the last two stages of berry development.

sugar, aba and anthocyanin metabolism
as mentioned previously, aba and anthocyanin metabolism are closely associated with sugar metabolism and transport. what is the timing of these three events? do they occur simultaneously or does one event precede another? accumulation of both fructose and glucose is first perceptible at véraison in cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay . aba concentrations in both cultivars start to increase just prior to véraison . changes in sucrose accumulation or the transcript abundance of a cell wall invertase  were not well correlated with fructose and glucose accumulation  indicating that other invertases were likely involved or that the enzyme was regulated by post-transcriptional modifications. in cabernet sauvignon, anthocyanins clearly accumulated at the start of véraison along with the transcript abundance of myba <dig>  myba <dig> and ufgt . thus, it would appear that aba concentrations increased in berries just prior to that of hexose accumulation in both cultivars and anthocyanins in cabernet sauvignon.

discussion
cabernet sauvignon  and chardonnay  are two of the most widely grown cultivars of vitis vinifera throughout the world and have different genetic backgrounds. their genetic pedigree has been clearly established. cabernet sauvignon is the progeny of two french bordeaux cultivars, cabernet franc  and sauvignon blanc   <cit>  and chardonnay is the progeny of pinot  and gouais blanc  that were widely grown in northeastern france  <cit> .

most white grapes, including chardonnay, evolved apparently from the mutation of two myb transcription factors, vvmyba <dig> and vvmyba <dig>  which regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis in the grape skin; cabernet sauvignon is heterozygous for red berry color having both a red and a white allele  <cit> . in the same paper it was shown that in shiraz , the transcript abundance of these transcription factors along with ufgt, an enzyme involved in one of the last steps in anthocyanin biosynthesis, was increased at véraison, the beginning of fruit ripening and coloring  <cit> .

in a previous greenhouse study, cabernet sauvignon shoot growth was more sensitive to water deficit and salinity than the shoot growth of chardonnay  <cit> . in stressed plants, there was a reduction of the amount of proteins involved with photosynthesis, protein synthesis, and protein destination and this was correlated with the inhibition of shoot elongation. many of the proteins that were increased by osmotic stress in chardonnay were of unclassified or of unknown function, whereas proteins specifically increased by dehydration in cabernet sauvignon were involved in protein metabolism.

in this study, the response of these two cultivars to water deficit was evaluated. given that they have different genetic backgrounds, different color compositions in their berry skins, and known differences in their tolerance to water deficits, we expected that there would be distinct differences in their metabolic responses to water deficit. analysis of this water deficit study was confounded by the fact that the cultivars were studied at different vineyard sites. any field study is imperfect in that one cannot control all experimental variables in the field. for example, the soil in a field is not uniform; there is natural soil variability within the site; therefore, the roots of each plant in a field might be exposed to a different soil environment. pot experiments in the greenhouse also suffer from their own set of experimental limitations . in this study, not only were the cultivars exposed to slightly different climatic conditions, but also they were grown in different soils with different rooting depths. consequently, the rate of application of water deficit for cabernet sauvignon was slower than the rate of application of water deficit for chardonnay. the rate of decreasing water deficit could not be controlled, but the final level of water deficit reached was controlled. the timing and rate of water deficit could affect the stress response of the vines as discussed in the introduction. a gradual application of water deficit or salinity to grapevines allowed more time for more complex responses and possible acclimation than osmotic shock treatments  <cit> . thus, while both cultivars were exposed to water deficit, there may be confounding factors in the field that limit our ability to make firm conclusions.

nevertheless, some interesting observations have been made. for example, given that there was a faster rate of development of water deficit in chardonnay and that the overall decrease in stem water potential was at least that of cabernet sauvignon relative to its control over the entire course of the season , it would be expected that chardonnay would have some water deficit responses that were more rapid and at least equal to that of cabernet sauvignon. for example, the induction of elevated aba concentrations in chardonnay would be expected to be at least as high as cabernet sauvignon, because elevated aba concentrations are generally proportional to the water deficit level imposed on the plant  <cit>  and aba concentrations can be increased with osmotic shock or with slower applications of stress  <cit> . however, while aba concentrations increased early on in chardonnay, the aba response to water deficit at véraison or one week after véraison was much more significant for cabernet sauvignon than chardonnay indicating that these diverse responses might be due to varietal differences . in the following sections, the impacts of water deficit on the most significant changes in metabolism that differ between these cultivars and how they impact important sensory attributes in grapes and wines are discussed.

is increased anthocyanin metabolism, proline and hexose accumulation regulated by aba?
our results  are consistent with earlier reports on anthocyanin biosynthesis  <cit> ; probe sets for both vvmyba1& <dig> and ufgt increased significantly at véraison in cabernet sauvignon but not in chardonnay. in addition, water deficit significantly increased mrna expression of these genes at the start of véraison in cabernet sauvignon and was probably responsible for the most part in the increased concentrations of individual anthocyanins in the berries  and in wine color  <cit> . similar findings and conclusions were presented recently for berries of cabernet sauvignon  <cit> , merlot  <cit>  and agiorgitiko  <cit> .

coincident with these changes in anthocyanin accumulation, water deficit increased hexose  and proline  accumulation at véraison in cabernet sauvignon, but not in chardonnay. hexose accumulation is not only a function of biosynthesis , but also requires transport into the cells of the berries from the apoplast and may be dependent upon starch metabolism  <cit> . there are a number of hexose transporters that have been identified in grape berries  <cit> . a hexose transporter as well as an abscisic acid, stress, and ripening  protein are synergistically upregulated by aba and sugar treatments  <cit> . thus, not only might aba trigger anthocyanin biosynthesis  <cit> , but also hexose uptake. in addition, aba is known to increase proline concentrations  <cit> . our data were consistent with these hypotheses, but the temporal spacing of time points collected in this study was inadequate to properly resolve the timing of these events. however, support for this hypothesis can be found in another study on grape berries  <cit> . aba was shown to stimulate invertase activity in the apoplast of grape berries and there was a rise of aba concentration in the berry  that clearly preceded the accumulation of soluble solids  in the berries.

aba regulation during berry development
what is regulating the increase in aba concentration prior to véraison in well-watered berries? nced represents the first committed step in aba biosynthesis  <cit>  and its transcript abundance is often correlated with aba concentrations. in addition, metabolic steps upstream of nced and aba catabolism downstream can also affect aba concentrations in some tissues and organs  <cit> .

other reports are not consistent with our results or with each other. in a study on ripening cabernet sauvignon berries  <cit> , nced <dig> but not nced <dig> was found to be up-regulated at véraison. however, aba concentrations were not measured in that study, so the significance of this change in gene expression was not clear. we did observe a slight increase in transcript abundance of nced <dig>  at véraison, but aba concentrations were correlated largely with the expression of nced <dig> .

in another study on merlot berries  <cit> , the transcript abundance of nced <dig> and nced <dig> was transiently increased by water deficit at véraison, but aba concentrations also were not measured. these authors implied that nced enzyme activity might not be significant based upon correlations of nced transcript abundance with other aba-regulated transcripts. in contrast to a previous study  <cit> , the transcript abundance of nced <dig> of the well-watered controls of merlot berries did not increase before véraison but did so for nced <dig>  <cit> . in our study we found that aba concentrations of cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay berries were highly correlated with nced <dig> transcript abundance. while other mechanisms of aba inactivation such as catabolism or glycosylation might affect aba concentration, these mechanisms did not appear to be as significant as biosynthesis in our study.

what signals might regulate nced <dig> transcript abundance? the transcript abundance of nceds and aba concentration can be increased by water deficit  <cit> . berry turgor declines at or before véraison as a result of solute accumulation in the apoplast  <cit>  and could possibly be a trigger for the increase in aba biosynthesis. however, turgor decreases appear to be the result of aba-stimulated invertase activity and the subsequent significant accumulation of hexoses in the apoplast  <cit> .

in addition, aba concentrations are affected by ethylene  <cit>  and phytochrome  <cit> . a recent study indicates that phytochrome can affect nced transcript abundance  <cit> . results from the genevestigator response reviewer  for atnced <dig> , the arabidopsis transcript with the highest homology with vvnced <dig>  indicates that its transcript abundance is significantly increased by acc  treatment, as well as by brassinolide, heat, osmotic stress, and low concentrations of k+, no3- and glucose treatments. thus, there are likely to be a number of factors that influence nced transcript abundance.

aba concentrations are regulated by nceds in avocado fruit, a climacteric fruit  <cit> . the rise in aba concentration in avocado is preceded by a rise in ethylene concentration. likewise, the expression of csnced <dig> in the peel of citrus, a non-climacteric fruit, was stimulated by ethylene and water deficit  <cit> . the ethylene receptor, etr <dig>  was found to regulate the onset of ripening in tomato fruit  <cit> . in a previous study, there was an increase in transcript abundance of acc oxidase  at stage  <dig>  <cit> , which preceded the peak of nced <dig> transcript abundance, indicating that ethylene might be a potential trigger of aba biosynthesis at or before véraison in grape berries. however, this suggestion is very tentative as the overall correlation between the transcripts was poor and no measurements of ethylene were made. further experiments are needed to clarify this hypothesis.

differential effects of water deficit on volatile compounds
water deficit affected other metabolic pathways in berries that also act in plant defense and stress responses. these pathways involve fatty acid, isoprenoid and carotenoid metabolism as well as photosynthesis. plant volatile esters can be derived from fatty acids through the activity of several enzymes including lox and hpl. loxs belong to a large gene family and are ubiquitous in plants  <cit> . in addition to their potential role in the formation of volatile compounds, loxs are involved in storage lipid mobilization, plant defense and jasmonic acid biosynthesis. these enzymes might act as a "master switch" in plant development and stress adaptation  <cit> . hpl is a cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase that is part of a small gene family, cyp <dig>  <cit> . this enzyme catalyzes the conversion of 13-hydroperoxide  to hexanal  and 12-oxo-cis-9-dodecenoic acid. hexanal can be converted into other volatile compounds. these volatiles are thought to be involved in defense signaling  <cit> . in addition, they clearly participate in human perception of flavor and aroma in wines  <cit> .

water deficit had significant effects on fatty acid metabolism for both cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay. five different lipoxygenases  were identified on the vitis genome array with four of them having significantly increased transcript abundance in response to water deficit. however, two of these loxs had decreased transcript abundance in cabernet sauvignon after véraison in response to water deficit, so the response is complex. water deficit also increased the transcript abundance of hpl for both cultivars .

there were specific effects of water deficit on isoprenoid and carotenoid metabolism in chardonnay. the transcript abundance of a terpenoid synthetase and a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase was increased by water deficit in chardonnay at maturity, but not in cabernet sauvignon . both of these enzymes are known to produce odor-active volatile compounds in wine grapes  <cit> . although these volatiles were identified in other wine grape cultivars  it is possible that they also contribute to the aroma profile of chardonnay.

we did not detect significant increased concentrations of lutein and β-carotene by water deficit in our study, however a recent study  <cit>  found small but significant increases in these carotenoids in cabernet sauvignon berries treated with partial rootzone drying, a specialized technique to induce water deficit and aba concentrations. the accumulation of lutein  <dig>  epoxide  in grape berries is of interest. this compound is associated with a novel long-term photoprotective/light harvesting cycle known as the lx cycle in the leaves of a few select species, including avocado, mistletoe, shaded leaves of tropical plants and mediterranean oaks  <cit> . its occurrence in a fruit  has only been reported once to our knowledge  <cit> . thus, this observation in grape berries presents an additional opportunity for further investigations into the physiological function of this intriguing cycle.

glycosylated c13-norisoprenoid precursors in cabernet sauvignon berries were increased by partial rootzone drying  <cit> . thus, while our data indicated that ccd transcript abundance was not increased in cabernet sauvignon by water deficit at maturity, earlier increased activity of this enzyme may have contributed to the increased storage  form. thus, early activity of this enzyme might still contribute to perceived differences in aromas in cabernet sauvignon wine, because deglycosylation during yeast fermentation could convert these precursors to odor-active forms.

aroma profiles are complex and influenced by many variables  <cit> . while it is not possible from this study to make direct connections between enzymatic activity and volatile production, one can link the effect of water deficit on the transcript abundance of enzymes involved in volatile production and there are clear effects of water deficit on fruity aromas in both red and white wines  <cit> . there were many differences between the two cultivars in response to water deficit, which might contribute to differences in their volatile and flavor profiles in the grapes and the wines. further experiments are needed to clarify the full significance of these results.

the specific effects of water deficit on the carotenoid pathway in chardonnay are probably related to volatile production and photoprotection. grape berries are usually regarded as photosynthetic organs during their first phase of development, which explains why most of the transcripts with photosynthesis-related functions are largely expressed at anthesis and two weeks after flowering and then decline steadily in abundance for the remainder of berry development  <cit> . in grapevine shoots, water stress is known to enhance the expression of genes involved in glycolysis and the electron transport chain of chloroplasts, reflecting the need to repair damaged photosynthetic components due to photoinhibition  <cit> . in wd chardonnay berries, the same response occurred with several unigenes associated with glycolysis and photosystem ii . taken together, it would appear that photosynthesis reactions were more easily damaged in wd chardonnay berries in comparison to the anthocyanin-protected wd cabernet sauvignon berries.

another fact that supports the differential occurrence of photoinhibition in chardonnay was the altered abundance of antheraxanthin and key transcripts associated with the xanthophyll cycle. xanthophylls protect chloroplasts from excessive light particularly under stress. for instance, chloroplasts are more tolerant of heat when they accumulate zeaxanthin  <cit> , antheraxanthin being an intermediate step between zeaxanthin and violaxanthin. in our experiment, the transcript abundance of β-carotene hydroxylase  and violaxanthin de-epoxidase  was increased just before maturity . conversion of violaxanthin to zeaxanthin by violaxanthin de-epoxidase is required for the dissipation of excess light energy in the antennae of photosystem ii  <cit> . thus, it would appear that chardonnay berries are more sensitive during water deficit resulting in damage to the photosynthetic apparatus. to compensate for the lack of anthocyanins, white grape cultivars, like apples  <cit> , might accumulate carotenoids to protect the photosynthetic apparatus. anthocyanin accumulation in red or black grape berries might provide sufficient protection against excess light, which might explain why the transcript abundance of npq <dig> was not increased by water deficit in cabernet sauvignon.

in addition, flavonol concentrations were increased in chardonnay, but not in cabernet sauvignon. flavonols are phenolics; the major compounds in grapes are quercetin, kaempferol and isorhamnetin  <cit> . flavonols, carotenoids and anthocyanins provide photoprotection in apples and apples with low levels of anthocyanins have increased flavonol and carotenoid concentrations  <cit> . thus, the increased concentration of flavonols in wd chardonnay berries indicates a greater need for photoprotection. an additional benefit of increased flavonol concentrations in grapes is that flavonols have important medicinal properties in humans with significant anti-inflammatory activities  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
using transcript and metabolite profiling, water deficit was shown to have a significant impact on the metabolism of both red- and white-wine grape berries. metabolic responses varied with the cultivar and the color of the grape. across berry development and in response to water deficit, berry aba concentrations were strongly correlated with the berry transcript abundance of nced <dig>  aba concentrations were increased significantly by water deficit at véraison and one week after véraison in cabernet sauvignon, but not in chardonnay berries. the rise in aba concentrations by water deficit appeared to precede and enhance anthocyanin, hexose and proline accumulation in cabernet sauvignon berries. water deficit also had large and significant impacts on the abundance of some transcripts and metabolites involved in phenylpropanoid, isoprenoid, carotenoid, amino acid and fatty acid metabolism in cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay berries. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to show that water deficit had significant effects on transcripts involved in amino acid and fatty acid metabolism in grape berries. the effects of water deficit on metabolism have important impacts on berry constituents that influence flavor and quality characteristics in grapes and wine and might contribute to increased antioxidants and human-health benefits.

