BACKGROUND
although only about 2% of the human genome encodes protein sequences  <cit> , recent advances in genomewide analyses have revealed that the majority of the human genome is transcribed  <cit> , largely from noncoding segments that used to be considered as “junk sequences” or “dark matter”  <cit> . besides well-characterized housekeeping noncoding rnas  and small regulatory ncrnas  <cit> , the transcriptome has become even more complex with pervasively transcribed long noncoding rnas   <cit> . using systematic and integrative strategies and by considering multiple biological features, thousands of lncrnas were identified from intergenic regions  in mouse  <cit> , zebrafish  <cit>  and human  <cit>  genomes. importantly, the strategy of lincrna discovery has served as a road map for the systematic annotation of other lncrnas.

in addition to intergenic regions, introns account for over 20% of noncoding sequences in the human genome and provide yet another source to generate lncrnas. by removal of redundant rrnas and poly+ rnas, a relatively pure population of non-polyadenylated and non-ribosomal -/ribo-) rnas was obtained and subjected to high-throughput deep sequencing  <cit> . this type of poly- rna-seq of the human cell transcriptomes surprisingly revealed previously-ignored rna signals in exons and introns  <cit> . interestingly, nuclear fractionation also indicated the presence of stable transcripts from intronic sequences in x. tropicalis  <cit> . what mechanism can protect these excised introns from rapid degradation after splicing? further analyses revealed a class of intron-derived lncrnas that depend on the snorna machinery at both ends for their processing   <cit> . this finding shed new light on lncrna characterization from “junk” intronic sequences.

strikingly, five sno-lncrnas derived from introns of the prader-willi syndrome  region  were highly expressed in human embryonic stem cells and strongly associated with fox family splicing regulators to alter patterns of splicing  <cit> . the pws 15q11-q <dig> region is imprinted, leading to the expression of the snurf-snrpn gene and downstream noncoding region from the paternal chromosome. all paternal transcripts downstream of the snrpn gene are noncoding and have been considered primarily as precursors for small rnas, including the snord <dig> cluster of  <dig> similar snornas  <cit> . importantly, snord <dig> deficiency has been recognized as the primary cause of pws in recent disease model  <cit> . although the function of snord116s remained elusive, the recently identification of pws region sno-lncrnas and their association with fox family splicing regulators offers a functional connection of sno-lncrnas in the molecular pathogenesis of pws  <cit> . however, it was not clear how many other sno-lncrnas may exist in the genome. given that the vast majority of snornas are encoded in introns of protein-coding genes  <cit> , it was of interest to annotate sno-lncrnas in a genomewide manner. moreover, signals of poly- transcripts from intronic regions have been widely detected in a variety of cultured cells  <cit> , which has provided a rich data source to explore sno-lncrnas from different cell lines.

here, we applied computational pipelines to identify sno-lncrnas genome-widely from poly-/ribo- transcriptomes of human, rhesus and mouse. in total,  <dig> sno-lncrnas have been identified with tissue- and species-specific expression patterns from available species/cell lines. pws region sno-lncrnas are highly expressed in human, somewhat in rhesus, and none in mouse. in contrast, a rpl13a region sno-lncrna is highly expressed in mouse, but almost absent in human. we further demonstrated that the formation of sno-lncrnas often requires alternative splicing, indicating a complex regulatory network of coding and noncoding parts of the genome.

RESULTS
genomewide identification of sno-lncrnas across species
the processing of intron-derived sno-lncrnas depends on the snorna machinery at both ends  <cit> . five such sno-lncrnas are highly expressed in introns of pws imprinted region of chr <dig> and are strongly associated with fox family splicing regulators to alter patterns of splicing  <cit> . however, sno-lncrnas from other regions of the human genome or other species were less obvious. since the vast majority of snorna genes are located in introns of protein-coding genes   <cit> , and one intron containing two snorna genes is a prerequisite for the generation of a sno-lncrna, we first surveyed genomic locations of annotated snornas in different genomes to locate snorna pairs in one intron . in total,  <dig> annotated snornas were downloaded from snornabase  <cit>  for human, and  <dig> snornas for mouse from refseq , respectively. since snornas in rhesus are not well annotated, we transposed human and mouse snorna annotations over to the rhesus genome to generate  <dig> putative rhesus snornas . we then analyzed the genomic locations of these snornas in different species.

only a small portion of snorna pairs could be found from any single refseq intron. importantly, even fewer such introns are expressed in detected cell lines by interrogating poly-/ribo- rna-seq datasets. for example, in human pluripotent h <dig> cells, only seven sno-lncrnas could be detected, including six reported sno-lncrnas <cit>  and a new one derived from the c17orf76-as <dig> region , although we identified  <dig> snornas that form pairs within single introns . in addition, no putative sno-lncrnas could be detected in rhesus or mouse by analyzing snorna pairs in annotated introns.
sno-lncrnas 
identified from human, rhesus and mouse escs

 <dig> sno-lncrnas identified in this study were listed with their species source, cell line source, genomic locations, expression level , snorna ends, parent genes, validation and other notes. it includes eight sno-lncrnas in human escs, three in encode human cell lines, seven in rhesus escs and one in mouse escs. expression levels of sno-lncrnas were evaluated using rpkm in relevant cell lines . due to the poor annotation, host genes and snorna ends in rhesus were predicted from human and/or mouse homologous sequences. *one sno-lncrna that contains a box c/d snorna at one end and a box h/aca snorna at the other end was highlighted with asterisk.

to further explore sno-lncrna candidates, we developed a custom computational pipeline to predict sno-lncrnas by integrating snorna annotations with poly-/ribo- rna-seq datasets from human  <cit> , rhesus and mouse  . by applying this pipeline to multiple poly-/ribo- rna-seq datasets,  <dig> sno-lncrnas were identified from different species and/or different cell lines . two additional sno-lncrnas were predicted in h <dig> cells and, importantly, both could be validated by northern blots in human h <dig>  hela-j and pa <dig> cells . three more sno-lncrnas were further predicted from encode cell lines , suggesting that more sno-lncrnas could be identified when this prediction pipeline is applied to other trancriptomes. furthermore, it is expected that more sno-lncrnas will be identified after improvements in snorna annotation. interestingly, only one sno-lncrna could be predicted from the entire mouse esc transcriptomes used in this study . this mouse sno-lncrna could be validated by northern blots from different murine cell lines, as indicated below, but its homolog expression was much lower in rhesus and undetectable in human.

although the majority of predicted sno-lncrnas in human contain either box c/d snornas or box h/aca snornas on both ends, we found one sno-lncrna from encode datasets that contains a box c/d snorna at one end and a box h/aca snorna at the other end . to demonstrate that the hybrid snornps at the ends are also capable of generating sno-lncrnas, we have constructed sno-lncrna expression vectors, which contain a box c/d snorna at one end and a box h/aca snorna at the other end to make artificial sno-lncrnas with hybrid snorna ends . northern blots clearly demonstrated the successful expression of such sno-lncrnas with hybrid snorna ends . thus, these data strongly indicate that either box c/d or box h/aca snornp complex at each end is sufficient to protect of internal sequences in sno-lncrnas from nuclease trimming after splicing and that multiple formats of sno-lncrnas may exist in human transcriptomes.

low conservation of sno-lncrnas with highly conserved snorna ends
compared to coding genes, lncrnas are generally expressed at low levels and are not well conserved, which have impeded their discovery and functional analyses . we examined the sequence conservation of sno-lncrnas by calculating phastcons scores from multiple alignments of primate genomes. such analysis revealed that the conservation of sno-lncrnas is the lowest among other well-characterized lncrnas  <cit>  and predicted lincrnas  <cit>  . however, the conservation of snornas themselves is much higher than internal sequences of sno-lncrnas or nearby exons . for example, pws region snornas  exhibit a remarkably higher conservation across species than either the snurf-snrpn exons or introns . however, the high conservation of genomic sequences does not necessarily imply the expression of homologous rnas at the transcriptome level, as indicated below . the expression of sno-lncrnas is highly restricted to specific species and no homology could be detected from all three species among all predicted sno-lncrnas .

pws region sno-lncrnas are highly expressed in human, but undetectable in mouse
the genomic context of the pws region is complex and the characterization of this region across species is still lacking comprehensive analysis. we first examined the genomic context of pws region sno-lncrnas by comparing their genomic sequences from different species. given that sno-lncrna formation depends on snorna sequences at both ends within a single intron, the highly conserved pws region snord <dig> snornas suggested the likelihood of the formation of pws region sno-lncrnas in other species. compared to five in human , interrogation of poly-/ribo- rna-seq datasets revealed only two pws region sno-lncrnas from alternative spliced introns in rhesus esc cells , but none in mouse cells . in addition, no clear evidence for pws region sno-lncrnas could be found in mouse brain/hippocampus in which the snurf-snrpn transcript and its downstream noncoding region are highly transcribed , further indicating the absence of pws region sno-lncrnas in mouse.

snord <dig> snornas are highly conserved from human and rhesus to mouse ; however, obvious differences in their genomic locations were observed in the pws region. in human/rhesus genomes, snord116s are located in introns of the parent snurf-snrpn transcript and some of them form snorna pairs in one alternative spliced intron, which results in the formation of sno-lncrnas . in the mouse genome, snord116s are located in introns of a series of spliced ests, which are located at least 50 kb away from the snurf-snrpn locus . although there are expressed signals of spliced ests in the mouse hippocampus transcriptome , no snord <dig> snorna pairs were found between these spliced ests, thus no sno-lncrnas could be generated from this region in mouse. taken together, although snorna ends are essential for the formation of sno-lncrnas, the existence of highly-conserved snornas alone is not sufficient for their formation.

the genomic region encoding 15q11- <dig> sno-lncrnas is specifically deleted in human pws. pws is a multiple system disorder with a minimal paternal deletion in chr <dig>  <cit> . the deficiency of snord <dig> snornas within the minimal deletion has been thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of pws  <cit> . however, mouse models with snord <dig> deletions can only partially mimic pws phenotypes, including metabolism and growth deficiency, but not obesity  <cit> . although the mechanism of pws pathogenesis still remains mysterious, the recent finding of sno-lncrnas in the pws region in human and their regulatory function in splicing has offered an additional functional layer of gene regulation underlying pws pathogenesis  <cit> . the finding of no expression of pws region sno-lncrnas in mouse indicates a possible limitation of the use of mouse models to study human pws.

characterization of pws region sno-lncrnas in rhesus revealed that they sequester fox proteins like human sno-lncrnas
we next inspected pws region sno-lncrnas in rhesus in greater detail. since the genomic context of the pws region is complex and the transcriptome annotation in rhesus is limited, we used snurf-snrpn exons to locate snord <dig> snornas and pws region sno-lncrnas in rhesus. the rhesus snurf-snrpn exons were determined by transposing the human/mouse homologous exons , and putative snurf-snrpn transcripts could be identified in rhesus by de novo assembly from a poly+ rna-seq dataset . pair-wise sequence alignments between human  and rhesus  suggested that snurf-snrpn exons exhibit high sequence similarity . interestingly, one human snurf-snrpn exon  is repeated at least eight times in the rhesus pws region; however it is unclear whether this repetitive region occurs only in rhesus or has been lost in humans during evolution.

sequence alignment of snord <dig> snornas and their parent snurf-snrpn exons revealed that two pws region sno-lncrnas in rhesus are similar to human pws region sno-lncrna <dig> and sno-lncrna <dig>  respectively. although predicted rhesus snord <dig> snornas are scattered among individual introns , de novo assembly with rhesus poly+ rna-seq revealed a variety of alternatively spliced snurf-snrpn transcripts in rhesus, thus leading to the formation of sno-lncrnas in rhesus snurf-snrpn region .

human pws region sno-lncrnas could function as molecular sponges by associating with fox family splicing regulators and altering patterns of splicing  <cit> . due to the high similarity of rhesus pws region sno-lncrnas with human in the genomic context, we reasoned that they might function similarly as well. we thus scanned the rhesus sno-lncrna sequence for fox binding motifs, and identified an enrichment of fox binding sites , further indicating that rhesus pws region sno-lncrnas might also interact with fox family splicing regulators and play a similar role in splicing regulation. on the other hand, the absence of pws region sno-lncrnas in mouse indicated that a similar regulation mechanism is absent in mouse.

in sum, pws region sno-lncrnas are highly expressed in human and rhesus, but are absent in mouse. the absence of pws region sno-lncrnas in mouse also suggests one possible reason to explain the failure of current mouse deletion models to fully recapitulate pathological features of human pws  <cit> . however, we cannot exclude other regulatory pathways or mechanisms during pws pathogenesis.

a non-human sno-lncrna and its possible association with the regulation of lipid toxicity
although none homologue of human sno-lncrnas identified in this study could be detected in mouse transcriptomes, there is one highly-expressed sno-lncrna predicted in mouse escs. this sno-lncrna is flanked by snord <dig> and snord <dig> at its ends and is located in ribosomal protein l13a  gene . northern blots with different probes demonstrated the existence of this mouse sno-lncrna of the expected size in several mouse cell lines with both native agarose gels  and denatured page gels . furthermore, this rpl13a region sno-lncrna is highly expressed in mouse esc cells, but less in other mouse lines . moreover, it can be recapitulated in expression vectors, as indicated in figure 6c. strikingly, even though both the sequences and structures of snorna ends and rpl13a exons are highly conserved from human to mouse , the sno-lncrna was not expressed in examined human cell lines, and expressed at very low levels in rhesus escs .

snornas within rpl13a introns are critical mediators of lipotoxic cell death in both hamster and mouse  <cit> . lipotoxic stress strongly induces expression of these snornas, but has no effect on the steady state levels of the parent rpl13a gene  <cit> . while it is unclear whether rpl13a region sno-lncrna is also involved in lipotoxicity like its snorna ends, our finding offers another possible regulation for gene expression in this region and it will be of interest to study the function of this rpl13a region sno-lncrna.

species-specific alternative splicing leads to the formation of the rpl13a region sno-lncrna in the mouse
the analyses of pws region sno-lncrnas and the mouse rpl13a region sno-lncrna strongly indicated that sno-lncrnas are expressed in a species-specific manner. to determine whether there are differences in the biogenesis process of sno-lncrnas in different species, we individually transfected expression vectors for mouse sno-lncrna into human cells or expression vectors for human sno-lncrna into mouse cells. interestingly, both species-specific sno-lncrnas could be recapitulated in cultured cells from other species , suggesting that species-specificity of sno-lncrnas is mainly derived from their genomic context instead of from the underlying biogenesis machinery.

as mentioned above, snornas generally are located within introns, but most of them do not exist as pairs in single introns . with known intron annotations, only a few sno-lncrnas could be identified . however, using an intron-annotation-independent sno-lncrna prediction strategy , several additional novel sno-lncrnas were identified in examined transcriptomes , suggesting that previously uncharacterized alternative splicing events can generate snornas pairs within one intron. for example, the pws region sno-lncrnas in rhesus could be generated from alternative spliced snurf-snrpn . taking the rpl13a region sno-lncrna into consideration, the gene organization of rpl13a is highly conserved across species and snord <dig> and snord <dig> are usually confined to distinct single introns. given the fact that only two snorna genes located within one intron can lead to the formation of a sno-lncrna, this suggests that the existence of a previously uncharacterized alternative splicing event in the adjacent introns of snord <dig> and snord <dig>  to test this possibility, we did de novo transcript assembly with a poly+ rna-seq dataset, and successfully identified the alternative splicing event that results in the location of snord <dig> and snord <dig> into one intron . interestingly, a similar alternative splicing event could be assembled in rhesus , but not in human , which is consistent with the lack of an expression signal for a rpl13a region sno-lncrna in human. in addition, rt-pcr results further confirmed the alternative splicing in mouse, but none in human . thus, the alternative splicing of rpl13a gene in mouse leads to the formation of a species-specific sno-lncrna. on the other hand, the lack of rpl13a alternative splicing in human likely prevents the expression of this sno-lncrna. it should be noted that there is low expression of rpl13a region sno-lncrna in rhesus, together with a low level of the necessary alternative splicing .

very interestingly, further analyses revealed that the specific rpl13a alternative splicing event that leads to the production of sno-lncrna could also generate a protein of altered amino acid sequence in both mouse  and rhesus , although the change of protein sequence and its consequence need to be further experimentally confirmed. as a 60s ribosomal subunit protein, rpl13a is highly conserved across species and plays an essential role in protein synthesis. therefore, the finding of alternative splicing of rpl13a has implicated a possible role in the regulation of 60s ribosome assembly or function in a species-specific manner. since a large diversification of splicing exists between tissues and species  <cit>  and sno-lncrnas are expressed with tissue- and species-specific patterns, it quite likely that more such rnas will be uncovered when additional tissues and species samples are examined. taken together, alternative splicing not only increases the diversity of coding mrnas/proteins, but also expands transcriptome complexity by promoting the formation of noncoding rnas from untranslated intron sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
we explored non-polyadenylated transcriptomes -/ribo-) from human, rhesus and mouse, and systematically annotated sno-lncrnas across species. although primary sequence analysis revealed that snorna ends of such molecules are highly conserved, pws region sno-lncrnas are highly expressed in human and rhesus, but absent in mouse. the absence of pws region sno-lncrnas in mouse suggested a possible reason for the failure of the current mouse model to fully recapitulate pathological features of human pws. only one mouse sno-lncrna was identified from the limited available mouse datasets in rpl13a region, and snornas themselves in this region have been suggested to be involved in lipotoxicity in mouse. our results also demonstrated that the formation of sno-lncrnas often requires alternative splicing within their parent genes, indicating a complex regulatory network of coding and noncoding parts of the genome.

