BACKGROUND
most organisms exhibit robust gene regulation at the level of transcription. among the exceptions to this rule are the trypanosomatid parasites, including trypanosoma brucei. nonetheless, as t. brucei transits its life cycle through the mammalian and insect hosts, large changes in protein expression occur . whilst previous microarray and rna-seq studies  have shown that a moderate number of transcripts are developmentally regulated, primarily as a result of differential mrna stability , much less is known about the role of translational regulation. a limited number of individual genes have been shown to be developmentally regulated at the level of translation  and numerous examples of discrepancies between stage-specific changes in mrna and protein level exist. a recent study has noted some changes in the association of mrnas with polysomes in developing mammalian bloodstream forms   <cit>  and initial work suggests that the changes in translation efficiency occur between cultured bf and cultured insect stages  <cit> . the work presented here aimed to define the role of translational control in modulating differences in gene expression during parasite development.

trypanosoma brucei spp. are the causative agents of lethal human african trypanosomiasis  and nagana, a wasting disease in cattle. the presence of t. brucei and related african trypanosomes in sub-saharan africa has had a major impact on development, affecting humans directly as well as indirectly through impact on livestock. african trypanosomes share molecular mechanisms of gene regulation with the agents of chagas’ disease  and leishmaniasis . the most striking feature of nuclear gene expression in these organisms is the organization of genes into long polycistronic clusters, such that individual genes lack promoters . the polycistronic mrnas are processed into individual transcripts by trans-splicing of a common capped mini-exon sequence  to the downstream coding sequence  and concomitant polyadenylation of the upstream gene  <cit> . thus all mrnas bear the same sequence at their 5′ terminus, upstream of the gene-specific untranslated region. despite the ubiquity of trans-splicing, cis-splicing is extremely rare, with only two known examples in t. brucei. interestingly, mrnas derived from the same polycistronic cluster are not generally expressed to similar levels, nor do they tend to show the same patterns of developmental regulation. these differences in mrna abundance are thought to be mediated post-transcriptionally, in large part by differential stability resulting from interactions with rna binding proteins  <cit> .

the extent of gene regulation at the mrna level is a major contributor to differential protein expression in most species. however, additional levels of regulation are known to yield different levels of expression of various proteins under a given condition as well as modulating how those levels change upon perturbation. for example, a recent study that dissected the contributions of level of transcription, mrna turnover, translation, and protein degradation demonstrated that translational efficiency was the largest contributor to predicting protein abundance across genes  <cit> . factors that contribute to translational efficiency include gene-specific features, such as the context of the start codon, the presence of upstream open reading frames , the length and sequence composition of the 5′ utr, and the presence of protein binding sites in the untranslated regions  . changes in the cellular milieu can also affect translation by modulating abundance or modification of translation factors , altering the abundance of different rna binding proteins or micrornas, perturbing protein folding and changing polyadenylation  <cit> . other studies have shown that translational controls play a prominent role in oncogenesis of mammalian cells  <cit> , induction of the unfolded protein response in toxoplasma gondii
 <cit> , exposure to light in arabidopsis
 <cit> , and during development in plasmodium
 <cit> , to name a few. in trypanosomatids, given the lack of transcriptional controls, we hypothesized that translational regulation would play a prominent role in parasite development.

to directly test this hypothesis, we made use of the recently developed technique of ribosome profiling  <cit> , which quantitatively interrogates the positions of all ribosomes on their mrna templates, thus providing a comprehensive picture of cellular translation. our results show extensive changes in gene-level protein production between in vivo-derived slender bf  and insect midgut stages , greater in extent and magnitude than changes in mrna abundance. of the  <dig> intact genes studied, thousands of genes show changes in protein synthesis mediated by both mrna abundance and translational efficiency, but less than  <dig> genes appear to be regulated by changes in translation efficiency. comparison with cultured bf  from another strain allowed the further definition of changes in protein production associated with growth conditions and strain variation.

RESULTS
the total protein synthetic activity devoted to a given gene is determined by both its mrna abundance and the efficiency with which its mrna is translated. to assess the extent of translational regulation during t. brucei development we pursued a genome-wide ribosome profiling approach  <cit> . our primary focus was on two rapidly proliferating life cycle stages  that are readily available for the pleiomorphic t. brucei strain  <dig>  which has retained the ability to differentiate and also has the most complete genome sequence available. we also examined cultured bf  from another often-used strain, t. brucei  <dig> . figure 1a shows an overview of the workflow, with libraries being prepared and sequenced from three biological replicates of each condition. this approach relies on the ability of the translating ribosome to protect a footprint of ~ <dig> nt from rnase digestion . ribosome-protected fragments are purified and used to generate libraries for high throughput sequencing. the read counts from these libraries reflect the extent of translation of each gene, allowing quantitative measurement of gene expression between samples. moreover, comparison with the read counts from fragmented poly + mrna libraries prepared using the same biological samples reveals the relative contributions of changes in mrna abundance and translational efficiency to regulation of protein production. we also constructed libraries that specifically captured the 5′ ends of the mrnas using sl rna-seq , assisting in refinement of the annotated cdss.figure  <dig> 
the ribosome profiling system. a) diagram of work flow. b) visualization of the sequence mapping onto the genome in artemis. this image shows the spliced leader, ribosome footprint and mrna reads mapping to the region of the stop axonemal protein gene in slbf. reads are color-coded as shown below the image; data for expression in slbf are shown in purple-pink throughout the manuscript. here and elsewhere, start codons are shown in pink in the three reading frames while stop codons are black. the numbers under the stacked reads correspond to the coordinates in the chromosome and the geneid for tritrypdb is shown. c) sl, ribosome profiling, and mrna reads mapping to the region of a deah box helicase gene in pcf. this gene is one of only two genes in the t. brucei genome that has an intron. note the lack of ribosome profiling reads in the intron even though a low level of mrna is present. data for expression in pcf are shown in blue-green colors throughout.



reads were mapped to the t. brucei  <dig> genome and assigned to individual genes , yielding 6- <dig> million uniquely mapping reads per biological sample . additional file  <dig> provides gene-level read count data for all  <dig> annotated cdss, newly identified cdss, and pseudogenes. the ribosome footprints showed the characteristic  <dig> nucleotide periodicity, being enriched for reads starting at the first nucleotide of each codon , while mrnas reads were relatively evenly distributed across the nucleotide positions. as expected, mrna reads extend from the site of the sl through the cds and terminate at the most 3′ polya site, usually ~ <dig> nt upstream of the predominant sl site of the downstream gene. in contrast, ribosome footprint reads span the cds from  <dig> nt prior to start codon to  <dig> nt past the stop codon and are absent from the 3′ untranslated region  . ribosome release scores , a metric of translation that compares the density of ribosome footprints on the cds to that in the 3′ utr, using mrna as a control, were calculated for each intact cds   <cit> . of those genes for which scores could be calculated, 87% had scores > <dig> and 60% had scores > <dig>  indicating most mrnas had considerable enrichment for ribosome footprints in the cds . technical replicates showed high reproducibility in read counts for both ribosome footprints and mrna, whereas biological replicates showed more variation . nonetheless, correlation coefficients between gene-level read counts for biological replicates were high for both ribosome footprints  and mrna  . both ribosome footprint and mrna reads were highly strand-specific , but the distributions of edger  <cit>  normalized read counts per gene were noticeably different between ribosome footprints and mrna , with the ribosome footprint read counts showing a broader spread than the mrna reads. only two t. brucei genes undergo both cis and trans-splicing. for these genes, ribosome footprint reads are abundant in the exons, but absent in the intron, whereas there are readily detectable mrna reads in the latter .

to assess whether rna binding proteins might protect the portion of the mrna with which they interact to yield similarly sized fragments as ribosome protection , we examined several transcripts with 3′ utrs known to bind specific proteins. no significant ribosome footprint peaks were observed within the 3′ utrs of the gpeet <dig>  zc3h <dig> and pgkb mrnas , despite extensive evidence that they bind multiple different proteins . as seen in figure 1b, there was often a ribosome footprint peak close to the cds start codon , possibly due to an artifact of cycloheximide treatment  <cit> , which blocks elongation but not initiation. for this reason, the first  <dig> nt of the cds were not included in the gene-level read counts . although t. brucei 5′ utrs are generally short  many of the longer 5′ utrs clearly show ribosome footprints that are distinct from the peak at the start codon . the median ribosome footprint read density in the 5′ utrs correlated with those of the corresponding cdss , but was generally lower . recent work has demonstrated that ribosome footprints on noncoding rnas and noncoding regions of mrnas  can be discriminated from translation of functional protein-coding genes because the profile does not terminate at stop codons, likely due to the presence of weak translation in multiple overlapping reading frames  <cit> . for most genes in our study, these 5′ utr footprints were not associated with any orfs starting with an atg, and they continued through the 5′ utr irrespective of the presence of stop codons; hence in most cases they do not represent specifically translated upstream orfs . these protected fragments may represent assembled 80s ribosomes, as suggested from similar observations in yeast and mammalian cells  <cit>  or possibly protection by the scanning complex.

general aspects of the translational landscape
ribosome profiling provides a comprehensive overview of the genes to which cells devote the most translational resources, which reflects a far greater biosynthetic commitment than mrna production. the mrna reads and ribosome footprint reads were plotted for each cds  for each biological sample . several features are immediately apparent. while the two parameters are positively correlated , the relationship is not strictly linear. indeed, mrnas expressed to similar levels can show a large variation in their association with ribosomes. for example, cdss with mrna read counts from 500- <dig> rpk in pcf sample  <dig> had corresponding ribosome footprint reads ranging from < <dig> to > <dig> . thus, the translational efficiency  of mrnas varies dramatically even within this narrow range of transcript abundance. in order to compare the sensitivity of ribosome profiling with standard polysome analysis, we examined four single-copy genes with varying te, but similar mrna length and abundance in pcf. northern analysis revealed the distribution of these mrnas between differently sized polysomes separated by sucrose gradient fractionation of pcf lysates . ribosome profiling indicates that tb <dig> . <dig>  has a te of  <dig>  in pcf, placing it at the 99th percentile for that stage ; while tb <dig> . <dig>  has a te of  <dig> . both mrnas were associated with higher-order polysomes, although the four-fold difference in te is barely detectable on the gradient fractionation due to compression of larger polysomes at the bottom of the gradient. in contrast, tb <dig> . <dig> , has a much lower te  and peaked in the monosome fraction, although a small amount of association with larger polysomes was seen. similar results  were seen for tb <dig> . <dig> , with a te of  <dig> . thus, as well as providing te data for essentially all genes, ribosome profiling is more quantitative and has a greater dynamic range than traditional polysome analysis.figure  <dig> 
overview of the translational landscape. a) ribosome footprint and mrna edger-normalized rpk for all genes, including pseudogenes, are shown. each panel includes all biological replicates for a given stage, which are shown in different shades. the box outlines the genes with < <dig> rpk, the dotted box is enlarged in panel b; and the circle marks a set of genes with high mrna read counts but relatively lower ribosome read counts that is referred to in the text. b) illustration of large differences in ribosome association with mrnas expressed to similar levels in pcf sample  <dig>  note that the x-axis is linear and the y-axis is log <dig>  c) expression levels of pseudogenes, vsg genes and t. brucei specific genes in pcf. the boxed area  is comprised mostly of pseudogenes  and vsg genes  and a subset of the t. brucei specific genes . d) the cluster of genes with reduced translation efficiency corresponds to structural components of the cytosolic ribosome .



it is apparent from figure 2a that there are two clusters of genes with relationships between translation and mrna abundance that are distinct from the majority. one group  likely represents genes that are expressed at only very low levels, if at all, since both their ribosome footprint and mrna rpk were < <dig>  as expected, a large proportion of pseudogenes and variant surface glycoprotein  genes, which are expressed clonally during antigenic variation in bf and not expressed in pcf, fall in this sector . while many genes encoding t. brucei-specific hypothetical proteins also have low ribosome footprint read counts, the majority show higher levels of expression.

the other cluster  is composed of mrnas with comparatively low tes, despite having high mrna expression levels. we observed that this cluster was comprised almost exclusively of genes corresponding to structural components of the cytoplasmic ribosome . while this cluster was always separate from the main set of genes, the displacement varied between samples, both within and between stages. a few other proteins that are not known to be structural components of the ribosome lie within the cluster shown in figure 2d. these include three genes  encoding subunits of the nascent polypeptide associated complex, which associates with the ribosome and assists in protein folding  <cit> , and one isoform of eukaryotic initiation factor 5a . also present are two newly identified genes described as ubiquitin fusion proteins   <cit> . these ubiquitin domains are fused to an rpl <dig> domain to generate rpl <dig>  a protein of unknown function in the 60s subunit. however, a similar ubiquitin fusion rps <dig> is required for the functional integrity of eukaryotic 40s subunits  <cit> . another three genes  encode identical  <dig> amino acid proteins that show no conserved domains or sequence similarity, except to closely related species trypanosoma vivax and trypanosoma congolense. we speculate that the functions of these novel proteins may be related to the cytoplasmic ribosome.

changes in translation between stages
high level unsupervised clustering of gene level ribosome footprint read counts from all nine samples  was performed using edger. the resulting multidimensional scaling plot showed they fell into three distinct groups, with all bf samples separated from pcf samples by the primary component, and the slbf and cbf samples separated by the secondary component . thus, stage-specific expression changes dominated any strain-specific differences between the two sets of bf samples.

gene-level ribosome footprint read counts were compared across biological conditions to assess changes in the translational landscape across stages . as shown in figure 3a, after excluding the  <dig> annotated pseudogenes,  <dig> of the remaining  <dig> genes had at least 2-fold more ribosome footprint reads in slbf than in pcf and  <dig> had at least 2-fold more in pcf than in slbf  < <dig> ). in contrast, only  <dig> and  <dig> showed a statistically significant >2-fold increase in mrna read counts for slbf and pcf respectively . thus, ~35% of all genes showed statistically supported stage-regulated expression of protein production between these two conditions, while only ~19% showed similar changes in mrna abundance. of the former, 81% showed similar differences  in the cbf to pcf comparison, providing a high level of confidence that changes reflect stage-specific changes. as will be discussed later, the vast majority of genes that were up-regulated in slbf as compared to cbf encoded vsgs or expression site-associated genes , while those that were down-regulated in slbf alone fell into several different functional categories.figure  <dig> 
ribosome profiling reveals extensive differential protein production. in this smear plot the fold change in read counts for ribosome footprint  and mrna  were plotted against average read counts per million reads of the pooled libraries for slbf and pcf. dots that lie outside the blue lines are up-regulated at least 2-fold. those that are statistically supported  are colored . note that almost twice as many genes  up-regulated for protein production as compared to mrna expression . c) stage-regulation of genes most highly expressed at the level of protein production. this dot plot depicts the gene rank for protein production in slbf and pf. the rank is based on median ribosome footprint rpk in the biological replicates. those in the top 5% for slbf are outlined in magenta, those in the top 5% for pcf are green, and those that are in the top 5% for both appear purple. the remaining genes are marked in gray. d) categorization of most highly expressed genes compared to genome-wide representation. top 5% of slbf, magenta; top 5% pcf, green; genome, black.



of the mostly highly translated genes  in slbf or pcf, 30% are shared between both stages . these include α- and β- tubulins, translation elongation factor 1α, aldolase, and glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. of the remaining genes , 19% show more than a 10-fold difference in expression levels between the two stages. as expected, these include vsgs and procyclin . additionally,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes in the top 5% for protein production in slbf, but in the bottom 50% in pcf, encode proteins of unknown function. similarly,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes that are in the top 5% in pcf, but the bottom 50% in slbf, encode hypothetical proteins of unknown function. thus, these data highlight a set of unstudied genes that may play roles in parasite development. when the most highly expressed genes were separated into functional categories , several categories showed differential protein production between slbf and pcf . proteins involved in translation were over-represented in among those up-regulated in pcf , while those involved in protein transport/modification and degradation were over-represented in those up-regulated in slbf. proteins associated with dna , metabolism , organelle biogenesis , and protein folding  were over-represented in the genes highly expressed in both stages as compared to their representation in the genome.

to visualize all substantial changes in mrna abundance and translation between stages, we performed clustering analysis  for all genes with at least a four-fold change in ribosome footprint reads between any two of the biological conditions. as shown in figure  <dig>  these genes segregated into four distinct clusters, each containing 2- <dig> sub-clusters. cluster a contains  <dig> genes that are up-regulated in pcf, while clusters b, c and d contain  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes, respectively, that are up-regulated both slbf and cbf , slbf alone  or cbf alone . cluster a shows an over-representation of genes involved in metabolism and transport , reflecting the up-regulation of oxidative phosphorylation and amino acid metabolism of pcf compared to bf  <cit> . in addition, sub-cluster a <dig> is enriched for the structural components of the cytoplasmic ribosome mentioned above, highlighting the variation in translational activity between pcf and slbf, with intermediate levels in cbf. as expected, clusters b, c and d contain a large number of esags that were up-regulated in both bf conditions . numerous vsg genes are present in clusters c and d, reflecting both antigenic variation and extensive polymorphisms between the strains used. interestingly, a disproportionate number of transporters, interacting proteins and proteases are up-regulated in either slbf, cbf or both . in addition, many genes involved in glycolysis, glycerol and lipid metabolism were up-regulated in bf , although these categories are not significantly over-represented in clusters b, c or d relative to the entire genome.figure  <dig> 
cluster analysis reveals distinct patterns of gene expression. all  <dig> genes showing > four-fold change in ribosome footprint edger-normalized read counts  between pcf and slbf or cbf were analyzed using mev . the ribosome footprint and mrna read counts in each of the nine samples were converted to log <dig> fold-change values compared to the corresponding median of the three pcf samples and segregated into four clusters  by k-means , each of which was then separated into  <dig> or  <dig> sub-sets by hierarchical clustering. genes up-regulated in pcf are shown in aqua, while those up-regulated in slbf or cbf are shown in pink. the position of genes encoding transporters , metabolic enzymes , translation machinery , vsgs/vrs  or esags  are indicated by the colored bars to the right.



changes in translational efficiency
increased protein synthesis can be mediated by a change in mrna level or translation efficiency, or a combination of both. changes in mrna levels are well known to be important during t. brucei development, with studies using different technologies and statistical cutoffs yielding estimates of 5-6%  are generally higher than those in mrna abundance, providing evidence for changes in te being involved in regulation of differential gene expression. this is the case in terms of both the number of genes that were significantly differentially expressed between pcf and slbf  and the magnitude of the change for individual genes . indeed, the sub-clusters in figure  <dig> begin to segregate genes with similar changes in translation  and mrna , from those where the change in translation was much greater than that in the mrna level , although the separation is not complete. this variation in the contribution of changes in mrna abundance and changes in te to yield differences in protein production can be more readily seen by plotting these parameters for all genes . in this representation, the grey dots  represent genes for which there was no significant change in protein production , while the colored dots correspond to genes with at least a 2-fold change. the light-colored dots near the x-axis indicate genes where changes in mrna levels accounted for most  of the change in translation, while the dark-colored dots near the y-axis represent genes where most of the change in translation was mediated by te. there are also a large number of genes  where both mechanisms appeared to play an important role.

we have identified a number of clear examples for each of these three categories of regulation. two cases that illustrate regulation  by mrna are shown in figure 5b. the mrna from tb <dig> . <dig>  which encodes a ceramide synthase-related protein, increased  <dig> -fold in slbf , accounting for most of the 4-fold increase in protein production. similarly, the mrna from tb <dig> , which encodes the δ-subunit of atp synthase, was  <dig> -fold higher in pcf, with a corresponding 5-fold increase in ribosome footprint read counts. since most of the increase in translation was due to the change in mrna abundance, the extent of protein production specified by these genes can be readily assessed by rna-seq alone. however, for the other genes, rna-seq provides only a partial  picture. figure 5c shows two examples of regulation mediated primarily by change in te. tb <dig> . <dig>  had ~16-fold higher ribosome footprint read counts in slbf, while the mrna read count increased by only ~ <dig> -fold. similarly, the mrna read count from tb <dig> . <dig>  was slightly  lower in pcf, but the ribosome footprint read count increased by ~13-fold. thus, in both cases the change in te  accounted for most  of the increased translation. finally, the two cases in figure 5d provide examples of where a combination of changes in both mrna abundance and te appear to play a role in regulating gene expression. tb <dig> . <dig>  showed a 5-fold increase in ribosome footprint reads in slbf, resulting from a 2-fold increase in mrna reads and  <dig> -fold increase in te; while tb <dig> . <dig>  had 111-fold more ribosome footprint reads in pcf, resulting from a ~12-fold increase in mrna and ~6-fold increase in te.figure  <dig> 
regulation of gene expression at the level of te and mrna abundance. a) genome-wide plot of the change in te versus the change in mrna between slbf and pcf, expressed as log <dig> ratios. b-d) examples of genes where changes in protein production are mediated by different mechanisms. panel b, regulation primarily by changes in mrna abundance; panel c, regulation primarily by changes in te, and panel d, regulation in which changes in both mrna and te contribute strongly. the histograms show the median log2-normalized fold change in read counts for ribosome footprint, mrna and the te. in the histograms, magenta tones are used for genes up-regulated in slbf while green tones are used for those up-regulated in pcf. the artemis view from pcf <dig>  and slbf <dig>  are shown for each gene, with ribosome footprint being the dark color and mrna being the light color. similar changes were seen for cbf versus pcf. the genes depicted in this figure had negligible multi-mapping reads. the bars at the edge of the graphs indicate the relative scaling of ribosome profiling and mrna read counts in the two stages. the sl reads  are not to scale. the scale bar below the first panel represents  <dig> nt, used for all images).



in order to systematically and statistically assess the role of mrna and te changes in regulating gene expression, we applied a generalized linear model  framework within deseq  <cit>  to the raw cds read count data from both mrna and ribosome footprint. the glms corresponded to the potential regulatory mechanisms based on: a) mrna abundance change only; b) te change only; c) both mrna abundance and te change and d) no significant regulation. deseq tested each gene individually for the fit to the models, and those that showed significant regulation were then assigned to model a, b, or c, as described in methods. the glm results, alone and in combination with edger criteria , are shown in table  <dig>  the results of these analyses for slbf versus pcf indicate that te  plays a substantial role in regulating stage-specific gene expression, accounting for 805/ <dig>  of the genes that were more highly expressed in pcf and 996/ <dig>  of those more highly expressed in slbf. however, only a modest number of genes  are predicted to be regulated by te alone, although these analyses are likely complicated by the complex relationship of translation to mrna decay  <cit> , which may over-emphasize the role of changes in mrna abundance. importantly, when the same analyses were applied to cbf versus pcf, we obtained similar results , except that  there were fewer stage-specific changes in gene expression in this situation, especially in terms of genes that were expressed at higher levels in pcf. nevertheless,  <dig> genes were identified where glm analysis showed that regulation of te plays a significant role in stage-specific gene expression for both slbf and cbf as compared to pcf and for which edger analysis also showed significant stage-specific changes in ribosome footprint . these included at least  <dig> cases where there was no significant change in mrna level .table  <dig> 
mechanisms of gene regulation



cbf:pcf
stage
deseq
both deseq and edger
%

astage with higher protein production.


bconcordance of edger analysis indicating 2-fold up-regulation for ribosome footprint read counts  and deseq glm model. those that were not concordant were binned into the “no change” group in this column.
genes with stage-regulated expression controlled primarily by te
a



aglm and edger both indicate te plays a significant role and that mrna change is not significant.


bpositive values indicate higher te in bf, negative indicate higher te in pcf.



to determine whether different classes of genes were regulated by te versus mrna during parasite development, we grouped them into the broad functional categories described above . as mentioned above, cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins  were over-represented in those genes more highly expressed in pcf, and te appeared to play a prominent role in their regulation, although some genes in the translation category were also regulated by mrna abundance. in contrast, genes encoding metabolic enzymes and proteins involved in protein folding that were up-regulated in pcf appeared to primarily use mrna abundance to regulate their expression. among the genes up-regulated in slbf, mrna level appeared more important for vsg and esags, while transporters were regulated more by change in te. however, almost half of the genes that were regulated by te alone encoded proteins with unknown  function. we also observed that genes with the highest levels of protein production were more likely to exhibit stage-regulation .

uorfs and translational regulation
in other eukaryotes, one of the mechanisms by which gene-specific changes in translation can be exerted is through the presence of uorfs that interfere with the translation of the main cds . not all uorfs modulate translation, but evidence indicates that those that do act through being themselves translated  . initiation at a uorf can compete with initiation at downstream translation start sites, reducing translation of the main cds. alternatively, increased translation of a uorf that overlaps with the main cds could also interfere directly with the initiation of other ribosomes at the main translation start site.

analysis of the 5′ utrs for all genes using our 5′ end mapping indicated that only  <dig> intact genes had potential uorfs, for a total of  <dig> uorfs . the percentage of genes is smaller than that cited in a previous study  <cit>   , likely due to the further refinement of 5′ utrs that we performed . additionally, manual inspection of a subset indicated that some putative uorfs we identified cannot be confidently placed on the same transcript as the cds, since there was an intervening sl site and the mrna reads dropped to near-baseline just prior to this site , suggesting that this likely represents an over-estimate of the number of genes with genuine uorfs. a similar phenomenon has been observed in budding yeast when 5′ terminus sequencing and ribosome profiling data were combined to discover apparent uorfs that actually reflected distinct short transcripts  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
predicted uorfs and translation. a) example of a translated uorf that convincingly lies on the same transcript as the main cds. a  <dig> aa uorf outlined in gold and delineated by the start codon  and a subsequent stop codon  in the reading frame  <dig> is associated with the main cds of tb <dig> . <dig>  it is translated in both stages . we do not see a significant difference in te of the main cds between stages . b) candidate uorfs may not not lie on the same transcript as the cds of tb <dig> . <dig>  predicted uorfs are seen in all three reading frames downstream of the computationally predicted 5′ end of the mrna defined by a peak in sl reads as described in methods . two of these uorfs bear ribosome footprints with rrs scores > <dig> . the blue arrow marks a dip in the mrna levels, followed by a second trans-splicing site just before the main cds . thus, it is not convincing that most transcripts bearing the tb <dig> . <dig> cds also bear these putative uorfs. data are shown for pcf <dig>  although similar profiles were seen with slbf.



of the  <dig> uorfs that did not overlap or abut the main cds, rrss could be calculated for only 458; the remainder have very low ribosome read counts on the uorf or read counts of zero for other values . a total of  <dig> genes had uorfs with an rrs >  <dig>  providing some indication of uorf translation . furthermore, as compared to mrnas with no uorfs, mrnas that contained putative uorfs with rrss > <dig> showed ~2-fold lower tes and mrna read counts  in all three biological conditions  and in mrna rpk . the te difference between the two groups persisted even when we accounted for difference in mrna read count levels by analyzing only genes with mrna read counts in the second and third quartiles . although we could not calculate the rrss of uorfs that overlap the main cds, these cdss also showed a similarly low te . thus, it is likely that uorfs reduce translation of a number of mrnas in trypanosomatids, as in other organisms. analysis of the functional category of uorf-containing mrnas revealed nothing remarkable, except for ~2-fold over-representation of t. brucei-specific genes and slight  under-representation of those involved in translation, transport, organelle biogenesis/structure, and proteolysis, as well as vsgs.table  <dig> 
the presence of uorfs and te


alla
uorf
b
no uorf
uorf
no uorf
uorf
no uorf

te
pc

mrna

mrna 
d
uorf
no uorf
uorf
no uorf
uorf
no uorf

te

mrna

aexcluding pseudogenes and genes with unknown 5′ utrs.


bthose genes with uorf rrss >  <dig> 


cmann whitney u calculation.


dthe genes were further restricted to those with mrna levels in quartiles  <dig> and  <dig> for the biological condition analyzed .



we saw no enrichment for genes with uorfs among those that were classified by glm as stage-regulated by te  . of the  <dig> genes that were regulated primarily by te and had putative uorfs, five showed somewhat higher te in the stage in which the uorf had more ribosome footprint reads, while five had very few uorf reads in both stages, two lacked a true uorf, and one was extensively multi-mapping precluding further analysis. thus, we were unable to find convincing evidence that the putative uorfs contribute to stage-regulation of translation between pcf and slbf. this data does not rule out the possibility that some uorfs confer a component of stage-regulation, which could be revealed with further refinement of the transcriptome and translatome or by examination of other developmental stages.

CONCLUSIONS
the sequencing of the t. brucei genome in  <dig>  <cit>  ushered in an era of high-throughput analyses of the transcriptome  and proteome  <cit>  of both insect and mammalian stages of this parasite. while these studies have been very informative and are transforming trypanosomatid research, both approaches have shortcomings that limit their usefulness for researchers in the field. microarray and subsequent rna-seq analyses have elucidated numerous changes in mrna levels between life cycle stages at a comprehensive genome-wide scale, but they cannot identify genes that are regulated at the level of translational control. conversely, mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses suffer from lack of coverage, interrogating less than half of all cellular proteins. the recently developed technique of ribosome profiling  <cit>  covers the middle ground by quantitatively interrogating mrnas for the presence of ribosomes, thereby revealing the rate of translation for every gene. this ribosome-centric approach provides more specific quantitation and greater dynamic range than the mrna-centric technique polysome profiling , although it does not reveal distinct pools of mrna that can be observed using latter approach.

comparison of our results with those obtained from the most comprehensive published proteomic analysis comparing bf and pcf  <cit> , shows a good correspondence between changes in translation and protein level . most  of the proteins that showed >2-fold up-regulation in bf had at least  <dig> -fold up-regulation in protein production in one or both bf conditions used in this study. there was slightly less agreement  for proteins up-regulated in pcf, perhaps reflecting differences between strains and growth conditions used in the two studies. some discrepancies are to be expected since the proteome is also modulated by individual protein stabilities, which would not be reflected in our data. while it is known that most abundant proteins are quite stable in pcf trypanosomes  <cit> , it is also likely that a subset of proteins are less stable, such as those required at specific points in the cell cycle. it is also interesting to note that changes in protein production had a greater magnitude than those in protein abundance, perhaps reflecting a larger dynamic range and sensitivity for ribosome profiling. this enabled us to detect  <dig> genes with a 10-fold or greater change in protein production between stages, of which only  <dig> were detected by the proteomics approach.

while this manuscript was in preparation, another paper describing the application of ribosome profiling to t. brucei was published  <cit> , including a comparison of single samples of cbf and pcf. that study revealed extensive changes in translation during parasite development, but lacked the biological replicates to provide a robust statistical analysis of the stage-regulated changes. here, we compared three biological replicates of pcf from one strain  to three replicates of both in vivo derived slbf from the same strain and cbf of another strain . when contrasting the two studies, r <dig> values of ~ <dig>  were seen when comparing pcf and cbf ribosome footprint data, with stronger correlations for mrna data  . of the  <dig> genes specifically noted by vasquez et al.  <cit>  as showing the highest level of translational regulation,  <dig> showed at least a 2-fold change in te in our comparison of slbf vs pcf. conversely, over 65% of genes with at least a 4-fold increase in te in bf in our experiments also showed at least a 2-fold change in the published study . given the likely differences in growth conditions, strains, and data analysis these similarities strengthen the conclusions that translational regulation is important in the development of these parasites. moreover, our use of biological replicates revealed several phenomena that were not previously apparent.

firstly, we observed that while the mrnas for genes encoding structural components of the cytoplasmic ribosome were relatively abundant under all conditions, their translation efficiency varied considerably between samples, both within and between conditions, and they were relatively poorly translated. low rates of translation for mrnas encoding ribosome-associated proteins is a well-known phenomenon in other organisms, including under conditions of cell stress  <cit> . this may explain the somewhat surprising observation that the te of ribosomal proteins was lower in slbf than pcf, since although slbf grow more rapidly than the cultured insect form, they are exposed to stresses in vivo. additionally, the commitment of some slbf parasites to exit the cell cycle to become stumpy forms  may contribute to the reduced translation of ribosome proteins. this argument is buttressed by the finding of an intermediate te for ribosomal proteins in cbf derived from a monomorphic strain , which does not differentiate into stumpy forms in vitro or in vivo, but are nonetheless highly sensitive to cell density. thus reduced translation of ribosomal proteins in t. brucei may be an early event when proliferation slows. in many mammalian cells and in maize, regulation of ribosomal protein production appears to rely on pyrimidine rich elements at the 5′ end of the mrnas known as top elements . however, in t. brucei polypyrimidine tracts are signals for trans-splicing  and mrnas are all identical at their 5′ termini. we examined the 5′ utrs of the cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins and saw no enrichment of pyrimidines . thus, the mechanism of translational regulation of these structural proteins of the ribosome must differ in trypanosomes. however, we detected no enriched motifs in the 5′ utrs as compared to the overall transcriptome , although the ribosomal protein 5′ utrs are shorter than average . as regulation of ribosome biogenesis is a central part of stationary phase development in many organisms and if the trypanosome must modulate the te of ribosomal proteins during its life cycle, then the mechanisms underlying this regulation, which appear to differ from the analogous control of animal ribosomal protein translation, may present a therapeutic target. future studies dissecting the mechanism of this control in trypanosomes will therefore prove interesting.

our results also revealed that regulation of protein production in t. brucei is more extensive than previously anticipated from changes in mrna abundance. while just under two hundred genes appeared to be regulated by changes in te alone, several thousand show changes in translation substantially larger than the changes in their mrna level. it is possible that some of these changes in te reflect alternative splicing, which can be further investigated using existing and our updated sl data, although additional experimentation will be required. it will also be interesting to compare ribosome profiling of slbf with stumpy bf, which are growth-arrested forms that are poised for transformation into pcf upon ingestion by the tsetse fly. previous microarray analyses  <cit> , demonstrated that few mrnas differ in abundance between stumpy bf and slbf, but early studies indicated that translation is much reduced in stumpy bf  <cit>  and microarray analysis of polysome fractions has identified a subset mrnas that are differentially translated between the two stages  <cit> . ribosome profiling has greater sensitivity in revealing changes in protein production than does polysome analysis, so we might expect that under conditions of limited translation , more genes will be revealed as translationally regulated. by analysis of different additional stages and conditions, it is likely that different groups of genes under translational control will be revealed, potentially operating through different mechanisms.

