BACKGROUND
subtilisin-like serine proteases play an important role in the pathogenicity of pathogenic fungi. by using subtilisin-like serine proteases, pathogenic fungi disrupt the physiological integrity of the hosts during penetration and colonization  <cit> . previous studies have suggested that pathogenic fungi with different life styles utilize subtilisin-like serine proteases as their virulence factor  <cit> . investigations into the similarities and differences of pathogenic mechanisms among these pathogenic fungi will significantly enhance our understanding of the evolution of these genes.

pezizomycotina, the largest subphylum of ascomycota, includes all filamentous, sporocarp-producing species. these organisms have diverse ecological niches and life styles  <cit> . a recent study based on six nuclear genes divided pezizomycotina into nine major clades  <cit> . among them, nematode-trapping fungi, which are conidial anamorphs of orbiliomycetes and belong to nematophagous fungi, are unique because they capture free-living soil nematodes using trapping devices   <cit> . in contrast, nematode-parasitic fungi, another group of nematophagous fungi within pezizomycotina, infect nematodes mainly using extracellular enzymes   <cit> . previous studies have suggested that subtilisin-like serine proteases are involved in the penetration and the digestion of nematode cuticles  <cit> . however, only limited studies have been done on the evolutionary pattern of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in nematode-trapping fungi so far  <cit> . in view of this, we here newly determined five subtilisin-like serine protease genes from the nematode-trapping fungi. in conjunction with the other pezizomycotina sequences obtained from previous studies and extensive database searching of available genome assembly, we perform the most comprehensive investigation to date of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in pezizomycotina.

RESULTS
new subtilisin-like serine protease genes from nematode-trapping fungi
a, number of amino acids in primary translation product.

b, molecular mass was calculated online with protparam tools http://us.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html.

generally, the subtilisin-like serine proteases from nematode-trapping fungi, together with those from nematode-parasitic fungi and entomopathogenic fungi, were classified as cuticle-degrading proteases because they were involved in the penetration and digestion of nematode or insect cuticles  <cit> . our analyses indicated that the subtilisin-like serine protease genes from nematode-trapping fungi shared a high degree of sequence similarity to those from nematode-parasitic fungi and entomopathogenic fungi. as seen from figure  <dig>  these subtilisin-like serine protease genes share a pre-pro-peptide structure. the signal peptides consisted of 15- <dig> amino acids. the potential catalytic triad residues  and the substrate-binding s <dig> pocket  were all conserved among these sequences. moreover, two cysteines which contribute to the stability of the tertiary structure of proteases  <cit>  were also conserved.

phylogenetic analyses
using various tree-building methods, our phylogenetic analyses based on a total of  <dig> subtilisin-like serine protease genes using various tree-building methods consistently showed five strongly-supported monophyletic clades. these clades are designated as a-e in the trees .

our phylogenetic tree  clustered the cuticle-degrading protease genes from entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi into clade a with the exclusion of nematode-trapping fungi . the genes from nematode-trapping fungi all grouped into clade d . clade b contained the subtilisin-like serine protease genes from fungi causing dermatosis in humans and animals. clade e comprised sequences from four classes of pezizomycotina , as well as vacuolar protease genes  <cit> , indicating the possible endocellular origin of these proteases.

although the inconsistent relationships among the five clades were produced in our phylogenetic analyses, the earliest divergence of clade e was strongly supported in all tree topologies . the alternative tree topologies, in which clade e was not the basal clade in the phylogeny, were all found to be significantly worse than our tree .

signatures of positive selection in the nematode-trapping fungi
one of the intriguing findings in our study is evidence of positive selection in the nematode-trapping fungi. maximum parsimony , neighbor-joining , maximum-likelihood  and bayesian tree reconstructions of the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of nematode-trapping fungi presented similar overall topologies . six branches  showed signs of significant positive selection in all four tree topologies . after bonferroni correction for multiple testing, we found that likelihood ratio tests  were still significant in three branches  in all tree topologies . several positively selected residues were also identified for these branches with high posterior probabilities . bonferroni correction in paml analyses may be insufficient because this correction lacks statistical power  <cit> . we also measured the patterns of selection pressures among nematode-trapping fungal genes using the bn-bs program, a relatively conservative method. the analysis using the bn-bs program also revealed that dn was significantly greater than ds for branch f, the ancestor branch of nematode-trapping fungi .

in sum, the results showed for the first time that positive selection might have acted on the subtilisin-like serine protease genes in nematode-trapping fungi, at least in the early stage of their evolution.

functional bioassays
the infection of insects and nematodes with entomopathogenic fungi and nematode-parasitic fungi
one of the interesting results inferred from our phylogenetic analysis was the clustering of the cuticle-degrading protease genes from entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi. this result suggested that entomopathogenic fungi might have nematode-parasitic activities, and nematode-parasitic fungi might have entomopathogenic activities. to test this hypothesis, functional assays were conducted to determine whether the nematode-parasitic fungi could infect insects, and whether the entomopathogenic fungi could infect nematodes. specifically, the entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi  were tested on their potential to infect the eggs of both the root-knot nematode meloidogyne sp. and the potato tuber moth phthorimaea opercullella. the phytopathogenic fungus nigrospora oryzae was used as the negative control.

a, obtained from prof. zongqi liang, guiyang, guizhou university, guizhou province, p. r. china.

b, preserved in the laboratory for conservation and utilization of bio-resources, and key laboratory for microbial resources of the ministry of education, yunnan university, kunming, yunnan province, p. r. china.

c, purchased from the agricultural culture collection of china, beijing, p. r. china.

d, used as the negative control.

our bioassay result on the eggs of the root-knot nematode meloidogyne sp. indicated that all eight entomopathogenic or nematode-parasitic fungi could infect the eggs of the root-knot nematode . as seen from the histogram of figure 4-ii, the infection rate of these eight fungi ranged from 73% to 100% after  <dig> week, while the phytopathogenic fungus n. oryzae couldn't infect any egg.

the bioassay on the eggs of p. opercullella indicated that all eight entomopathogenic or nematode-parasitic fungi could infect the eggs of the potato tuber moth . after  <dig> days of co-incubation, the juveniles hatched from the eggs. five days later, the infection rates of the eight entomopathogenic or nematode-parasitic fungi were obtained and they ranged from 80% to 100% . for the negative control, all the potato tuber moth eggs hatched into juveniles within  <dig> days .

in sum, our bioassay results indicated that entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi could infect both nematode and insect eggs, thus supporting the inference from the phylogenetic analyses.

effects of the subtilisin-like serine protease psp- <dig> on the nematode and insect eggs
subtilisin-like serine proteases are known to play a key role during penetration of nematode or insect cuticles  <cit> . in the study of bonants et al., the subtilisin-like serine protease psp- <dig> of nematode-parasitic fungus paecilomyces lilacinus was found to be involved in the infection of p. lilacinus against the eggs of the root-knot nematode meloidogyne hapla  <cit> .

based on our bioassay results, we hypothesize that the subtilisin-like serine proteases secreted by entomopathogenic or nematode-parasitic fungi should be able to digest both the nematode and insect eggs. we therefore purified psp- <dig> from p. lilacinus to test its ability to digest the nematode and insect eggs. as expected, our bioassay results showed that the amount of protein released into the supernatant in the protease treatment group  was significantly higher than those with no protease  or denatured protease  . after incubation with active subtilisin-like serine proteases, the eggshell of the root-knot nematode and the potato tuber moth were partially degraded, and some eggs were deformed , suggesting that the subtilisin-like serine protease produced by p. lilacinus degraded protein components of both nematode and insect eggs.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
our study provides new insights into the evolution of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in pezizomycotina. first, our phylogenetic results suggest that pezizomycotina subtilisin-like serine proteases most likely evolved from endocellular to extracellular proteases. as seen from the tree, the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of pezizomycotina previously identified or presumed to be endocellular proteases  <cit>  were clustered into clade e and diverged the earliest in the phylogeny. in contrast, most of those previously identified or presumed as extracellular proteases clustered into the other clades and diverged later. in addition, the protease  from the outgroup pichia stipitis was assumed as an endocellular protease  <cit> , supporting the endocellular to extracellular transition during the evolution of pezizomycotina subtilisin-like serine proteases. the evolution from endocellular to extracellular enzymes might have facilitated pathogenic fungi to utilize these enzymes as virulence factor to colonize their hosts.

second, our phylogenetic results and functional bioassays suggested that the entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi shared similar properties in parasitism. previous studies indicated that the nematode-parasitic fungi could infect nematodes while the entomopathogenic fungi could parasitize other insects  <cit> . the grouping of the cuticle-degrading protease genes of these two groups of fungi led us to believe that they might have overlapping pathogenic mechanisms against both insects and nematodes. further experimental bioassay showing that the entomopathogenic and nematode-parasitic fungi could infect both nematode and insect eggs supported this hypothesis . moreover, the subtilisin-like serine protease psp- <dig> produced by nematode-parasitic fungus p. lilacinus was observed to have the ability to digest the eggs of nematodes and insects . our finding enriches the known fungal resources for the microbial control of both types of pests.

third, our data provide further understanding about the duplications and subsequent functional divergence of subtilisin-like serine protease genes in pezizomycotina. previous studies have shown that gene duplications occurred in subtilisin-like serine protease genes of pathogenic fungi and that such duplications might have played an essential role in pathogenicity and contributed to their increased adaptability, host range, and/or survived in various ecological habitats outside the host of these fungi  <cit> .

from our phylogenetic tree, we found that frequent gene duplication events have occurred in many pathogenic fungi. for example, there were  <dig> paralogous subtilisin-like serine protease genes in metarhizium anisopliae. four of them, including pr1a, pr1b, pr1i and pr1g, clustered into clade a with the other cuticle-degrading protease genes known to serve as important virulence factors during fungal penetration of nematode or insect cuticles  <cit> . these four genes most likely perform essential functions during the infection of hosts. in comparison, pr1j, pr1d, pr1e and pr1f of m. anisopliae fell into clade c, indicating that they might have diverged to perform different as yet uncharacterized functions. our results are different from previous inferences suggesting that pr1a was a key virulence factor during degradation of insect cuticles, while all the other pr1's were of only a minor contributor to cuticle degradation  <cit> .

in the dermatophytic fungus arthroderma benhamiae, there are  <dig> subtilisin-like serine protease genes   <cit> . our phylogenetic tree clustered  <dig> of them in clade b. the only exception was sub <dig>  which is grouped into clade c. this result is consistent with the phylogeny of jousson et al.  <cit> . they hypothesized that sub <dig> was the most ancestral, while the other subs were dermatophyte-specific and might have emerged more recently through successive gene duplication events. in addition, they speculated that sub <dig> and sub <dig> were key virulence proteases of dermatophytes and playing important role in invasion of human or animal keratinised tissues  <cit> . from our analysis, the key virulence protease genes of dermatophytic fungi and nematophagous/entomopathogenic fungi were placed in different clades, suggesting that there were probably different pathogenic mechanisms between mammalian pathogens and nematode/insect pathogens.

fourth, our evolutionary analysis revealed signatures of positive selection acting on the subtilisin-like serine protease genes of the nematode-trapping fungi, suggesting that the subtilisin-like serine protease genes might have played important roles during the evolution of pathogenicity of nematode-trapping fungi against nematodes. although they both belonged to the cuticle-degrading proteases, the subtilisin-like serine protease genes from nematode-trapping fungi and nematode-parasitic fungi were not grouped together. this result supports earlier findings based on smaller data sets  <cit> . since nematode-parasitic fungi do not produce trapping devices, they likely rely mainly on the extracellular enzymes  as virulence factors to penetrate and digest nematode cuticles. in contrast, by virtue of synergistic interactions of extracellular enzymes and trapping devices, the nematode-trapping fungi can immobilize and penetrate nematodes within a few hours  <cit> . therefore, the subtilisin-like serine proteases of nematode-trapping fungi might experience special selective pressure resulted from the co-evolution of trapping structures and proteolytic enzymes. interestingly, our evolutionary analysis demonstrated evidence of positive selection acting on the cuticle-degrading protease genes in nematode-trapping fungi, at least during the early stage of its evolution. we hypothesize that the subtilisin-like serine protease genes may have played important roles during the evolution of pathogenicity of nematode-trapping fungi against nematodes. in addition, the potentially adaptive amino acid replacements discovered by our analysis will provide valuable information for functional analysis in future studies.

