BACKGROUND
rickettsia bacteria are intracellular symbionts of eukaryotes. the genus is classified in the family rickettsiaceae within the alpha-proteobacteria, and is closely related to the genera erlichia and wolbachia  <cit> . rickettsia are most noted for causing human diseases, including rocky mountain spotted fever and epidemic typhus, which has been a major source of mortality at times in human history  <cit> . however, all known vertebrate-associated rickettsia are vectored by arthropods as part of their life-cycle, and many other rickettsia are found exclusively in arthropods with no known secondary host . in recent years, arthropod rickettsia have been discovered in a diverse range of hosts, suggesting that they are more common than had been suspected  <cit> . nevertheless, research effort has tended to concentrate on the medically important vertebrate rickettsia, or on the more common arthropod endosymbionts, such as wolbachia and cardinium, and so we know little about the biology of arthropod rickettsia. even less is known about the closely related bacteria that have been recently discovered in organisms such as leeches and protists, and in metagenomic studies sequencing all dna in an environmental sample  <cit> . this neglect is unfortunate, because comparing the vertebrate pathogens with related species can help to elucidate the mechanisms of pathogenicity, transmission and virulence  <cit> . however, this requires a robust phylogeny for the genus.

historically, rickettsia were classified into three major groups based on serological characteristics, namely the 'typhus group', 'spotted fever group' and 'scrub typhus group', although subsequent dna sequencing led to the latter being reassigned to the related genus orientia  <cit> . the relationship of species within the remaining two groups of rickettsia has been the subject of intensive study over the last decade as progressively more informative genes have been sequenced  <cit>  culminating in a multi-genic approach  <cit> . as a result it has been suggested that the spotted fever group consists of two sister clades, one of which is now designated 'transitional'  <cit>  . a fourth so-called 'ancestral' clade, including rickettsia bellii and rickettsia canadensis, is thought to be basal to the other groups and is largely non-pathogenic to vertebrates. however, the position of r. canadensis remains uncertain  <cit> .

while many studies have helped to clarify the relationships between the vertebrate rickettsia, only one recent study has explored the relationship of the well classified groups to the newly discovered arthropod rickettsia  <cit> . the authors found that most arthropod rickettsia are basal to the vertebrate rickettsia and that the rickettsia associated with leeches, protists and freshwater environments fell into two phylogenetic groups, distinct from the arthropod and vertebrate groups. the only known exceptions are a small number of arthropod rickettsia that fell within the group otherwise infecting leeches  <cit> . however, perlman et al.  <cit>  were only able to provide little statistically significant support for relationships among the arthropod rickettsia. this is almost certainly because the study relied on partial sequences of 16s rdna, which is extremely slowly evolving, and so lacking in phylogenetic resolution. improving this situation is challenging because amplifying other genes in basal strains has proven problematic, perhaps because the genes in question may either be missing or too divergent for pcr amplification using existing primers. also, resolving some deep nodes in the rickettsia species tree continues to be a problem. the reasons for this are unclear but could be exacerbated by long-branch attraction. one of the best ways to minimise this effect is to sample for more taxa and add them to the tree in the hope of breaking up  the long branches.

here, to explore the diversity of arthropod rickettsia, we screened  <dig> arthropods to uncover new rickettsia strains and sequenced four genes from five known and  <dig> new bacterial strains. we use the recently published orientia tsutsugamushi genome  <cit>  to design pcr primers allowing amplification of rapidly evolving genes from strains that lie between the genera rickettsia and orientia. to include other hosts, we also searched published metagenomic databases for rickettsia sequences. with these data, we have been able to produce the first well-resolved phylogeny of the entire genus rickettsia, showing how the vertebrate rickettsia relate to the other taxa. our phylogeny has allowed us to identify and name additional novel groups. furthermore, we were able to compare host associations among these groups, identify major life history transitions, and investigate the extent of recombination within the genus.

RESULTS
strains identified and genes sequenced
our screens identified  <dig> novel strains of arthropod rickettsia from six orders of insects, and these are listed in table  <dig>  these strains were combined with five previously described arthropod rickettsia  to give  <dig> strains in total. we successfully sequenced all four of our chosen genes from  <dig> of these strains, and one or more genes from the remaining seven.

rickettsia phylogeny
to obtain a phylogeny of the genus rickettsia, we combined a concatenated alignment of the four genes we sequenced, with data from other rickettsia strains available from genbank . for most of the previously described arthropod rickettsia, only 16s rdna sequence is available, and so we allowed for missing data in the alignment where a gene had not been sequenced. missing data should not decrease phylogenetic resolution for taxa with complete data, and is likely to be a problem for other taxa only when the number of characters is very low  <cit> .

comparison of the tree topologies obtained from the four genes against the topology of the concatenated dataset using four sh tests. each dataset was forced to adopt the topology from the concatenated dataset and the log likelihood of this tree was compared with the log likelihood of the unconstrained tree. the taxa used in this analysis are shown in figure 1b.

it is also important to investigate the influence of missing data on the phylogeny. therefore, we constructed a second tree that included only taxa with complete sequences for the three genes atpa, coxa and glta . this 'complete data' tree is shown in figure 1b. overall, the topologies of the two trees are very similar , but most nodes had higher support in the tree with complete sequences. in particular, there is strong bootstrap support for the group largely composed of ladybird symbionts in the complete data tree  but not on the missing data tree . an exception is the placement of r. canadensis, which is uncertain in the complete data tree but is well supported on the missing data tree . the composition of the transitional group and the placement of rickettsia prowazekii also differ in the two trees. rickettsia within the typhus group  are striking in that they reside on longer branches than other rickettsia in the trees. this is indicative of rate heterogeneity, which can cause a long-branch attraction artefact where the taxa will appear in an incorrect place. in the missing data tree the transitional group is monophyletic, while in the complete data tree r. prowazekii groups with rickettsia akari . however, constraining r. akari and the transitional group to be monophyletic in the complete data tree only causes a marginally significant drop in the likelihood .

together, these phylogenetic analyses reveal five distinct and well-supported major clades of rickettsia , one  containing protist-associated rickettsia and a number with unknown host associations from sequences amplified from environmental samples, a second clade  containing rickettsia from amoeba, leeches and arthropods, a third  contains three beetle rickettsia, a fourth  containing a single beetle rickettsia, a fifth  containing  <dig> strains of arthropod rickettsia and a sixth clade of diverse bacteria containing both arthropod and vertebrate rickettsia. this final clade can be further subdivided into the following groups: onychiurus, adalia, canadensis, spotted fever group, typhus group and transitional group, although bootstrap support for some of these groupings is less strong .

host shifts
by mapping host species onto our phylogeny, we are able to make inferences about patterns of host-switching in the genus. it is clear from figure  <dig> that rickettsia bacteria have an extremely diverse host range, occurring in arthropods, vertebrates, plants, amoebas, ciliates, annelids and hydrozoa, and that there have been numerous shifts between these hosts. the earliest shift splits the genus into two major divisions: the hydra and torix groups and all other arthropod rickettsia. as mentioned, the hydra group are symbionts of protists and undetermined hosts. although one member of this group was found in the marine ciliate diophrys from brackish water  <cit> , and another from a deep sea octocoral, all others are from freshwater environments or damp terrestrial environments. in general it appears that marine rickettsia are rare. indeed, from over  <dig> billion open reading frames compiled from marine metagenomic datasets  <cit>  we detected no homologues of greater than 91% identity to the 16s gene of hydra group rickettsia. the next split in the tree separates all the remaining rickettsia from the torix group  which contains symbionts of leeches , an amoeba  <cit>  and arthropods . in the torix group, as with the hydra group, the vast majority of the hosts are aquatic at some stage in their life cycle .

the remainder of the arthropod rickettsia, including all strains sequenced in the present study, form a monophyletic group . parsimony suggests that the ancestral state of this clade is to infect arthropods, with one or more lineages subsequently evolving to also infect vertebrates. in addition, there have been multiple transitions between blood feeding and non blood feeding insects. perlman et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that forcing r. bellii to group with other blood feeders gives a significantly worse tree. sh tests of our phylogeny showed that forcing r. canadensis and rickettsia felis to group with other blood feeders similarly gives a significantly worse fit .

our results therefore show clearly that there have been numerous host shifts, sometimes between taxonomically distant hosts. however, it is equally clear that related rickettsia tend to share related hosts. multiple different strains were detected within ladybird beetles, ticks, lice, parasitic wasps and bee-flies, and in all cases, two or more of these strains cluster together. nevertheless, this pattern does not seem to be explained by ancestral infection followed by co-speciation of parasite and host. from figure 1a, the three different strains of rickettsia found in adalia bipunctata do not appear to be monophyletic as one of the a. bipunctata strains groups with adalia decempunctata with high posterior support. unfortunately only four parasitoid individuals from the oak gall wasp screen were infected, not allowing us to test the influence of host relatedness, host interaction frequency and geographic isolation on frequency of horizontal transfer events.

in addition to clustering according to host type, figure  <dig> also demonstrates phylogenetic clustering by ecology . for example, the two major groups of vertebrate rickettsia, the spotted fever or typhus groups, consist solely of vertebrate rickettsia, containing no arthropod rickettsia. however, the transitional group differs from this pattern containing both vertebrate rickettsia and rickettsia infecting non-blood feeding arthropods . a second ecological adaptation to increase transmission is to skew the sex ratio of the host towards females, which are the sex that most efficiently transmits the infection to offspring for vertically transmitted rickettsia. some of these rickettsia are known or suspected to kill male hosts early in their development, and there appears to be two separate origins of this adaptation on the tree . there are  <dig> strains of rickettsia that infect ladybird beetles, and nine of these cluster in a single monophyletic group. the ones that cluster elsewhere are probably not male-killers . a third possible source of ecological clustering relates to herbivorous hosts. such clustering may reflect ecology in two possible ways. firstly, many symbionts are known to supplement their hosts with amino acids that are rare in phloem sap . secondly, rickettsia may be transmitted horizontally through plants . it has previously been asserted that the bellii group consists mainly of herbivorous arthropod symbionts  <cit> . four rickettsia in this group are indeed known to infect sap sucking arthropods , and three of these group separately from the other members of the bellii group . however, we have uncovered a large number of predatory insect hosts in this group, and sap sucking insects in other groups . therefore, the view that members of the bellii group are mainly associated with herbivorous arthropods is not supported by these new data. however, it is possible that the dna signal could have come from the guts of these insects, as abdomens were sometimes extracted where there was not enough ovary tissue .

recombination
recombination events complicate the inference of species trees, and so it is important to investigate the extent of recombination in the rickettsia genus. we found one clear instance of recent recombination between different rickettsia groups . in the phylogenetic trees of the four individual genes , the symbiont of the ladybird coccidula rufa  appears in the transitional group on the 16s and glta trees, and in the bellii group on the atpa and coxa trees. an alignment of the polymorphic sites and a hybridisation network indicates that sc. rufa is a chimera of sequences from these two groups . to verify that the recombination pattern for sc. rufa was not the result of contamination, this result was confirmed by sequencing three strains from different individuals of c. rufa. this appears to be the only case of recombination between the four genes because when sc. rufa is excluded from analyses, there is little evidence of topological differences between the datasets .

we did, however, detect some evidence of recombination events within two of the four genes. the maximum χ <dig> test and phi test identified multiple recombination breakpoints in the glta and coxa genes. in coxa, the breakpoint pattern indicted that there had been some recombination between an ancestor of the adalia group and of the rhizobius group . in glta, there was evidence of recombination between r. akari of the transitional group and the adalia group . in contrast, no recombination was detected within the 16s and atpa genes ).

split networks were constructed for each of the four genes to identify possible sources of conflicting signal and recombination in the data . this method has an advantage over tree-based methods as posterior support and bootstrap values measure robustness solely with respect to sampling error , and with large sample size robustness will generally be high as noise in the data is filtered out. the split network constructed for the 16s gene was tree-like . in contrast the other three genes showed a small amount of phylogenetic conflict, with statistical support for two different trees. in all cases, one of these trees corresponded to that shown in figure  <dig>  suggesting that this tree accurately reflects the evolutionary history of most of the genome. the discrepancies were as follows. the atpa split network showed additional support for a tree where r. prowazekii is basal to the other vertebrate groups. this pattern is consistent with a tree based on protein alignments of the ten rickettsia genomes  <cit> . the coxa split network supported a closer relationship between rickettsia chrysomeloides symbiont and the adalia group, which is consistent with the recombination pattern for this gene. the glta split network also supported this same relationship although this was not reflected in the recombination breakpoint pattern.

discussion
we have identified a large number of new strains of rickettsia, including several new groups, and shown that arthropod rickettsia are both common and diverse. we have also constructed the largest and most robust phylogenetic analysis of the genus to date. importantly, we used a multiple locus approach, as using single genes to build species phylogenies can seriously confound the true relationship between strains, especially with loci that are prone to recombination  <cit> .

the evolutionary history of rickettsia
it is useful to view our results in the context of the evolution of the whole order rickettsiales. to do this, we have used a molecular clock to date the divergence of different groups, and this is shown in figure  <dig>  the common ancestor was presumably free-living, as the earliest diverging genus of the order is pelagibacter. pelagibacter species account for 26% of the bacterial rdna sequences from sea water  <cit>  and have the smallest genomes of free-living bacteria. about 525– <dig> million years ago there was a transition to living within cells, followed by a split into endosymbionts of protists   <cit>  and a clade that primarily infects arthropods. holospora species infect the nuclei of paramecium and are generally considered pathogenic to their hosts; for example, holospora undulata can sterilise their hosts, reduce the rate of asexual division and increase host mortality  <cit> . the most parsimonious interpretation of the tree, therefore, is that the transition to infecting arthropods occurred approximately 425– <dig> million years ago in this lineage , which can be compared to the first appearance of most metazoan phyla in the cambrian explosion .

all other genera in the order rickettsiales are associated with arthropods although many have other diverse hosts. the genus midichloria has only been found in ixodidae ticks, and resides inside mitochondria. bacteria in the genus neorickettsia are primarily associated with helminths, where they can be transmitted to vertebrates  <cit> . wolbachia have been described in only arthropods and nematodes, and most are thought to be vertically transmitted . ehrlichia and anaplasma are horizontally transmitted in arthropods and vertebrates  <cit>  and orientia are vertically transmitted in mites and can be horizontally transferred to humans  <cit> .

the genus rickettsia is approximately  <dig> million years old . parsimony would suggest that the common ancestor of rickettsia infected arthropods, and that species in the hydra and torix groups then switched to infect other eukaryotes such as protists, leeches and numerous unidentified hosts  . however, care should be taken with this interpretation, as symbionts of arthropods are more thoroughly sampled than those of other animals. in addition, two patterns call into question the interpretation that the ancestral state was arthropod infection. first, the genome sequence of r. bellii includes many genes that are more related to other amoeba symbionts than to other rickettsia  <cit> . this is compatible with an ancestor of r. bellii infecting amoebas and exchanging genes with other amoebal symbionts. second, of the arthropod hosts within the torix group , all of the dipteran hosts have larval stages that feed on aquatic microbiota, with the other hosts within the group also being aquatic. although host switching could occur in either direction, transmission from protist to arthropod is more intuitive given that the related genus neorickettsia is transmitted between hosts through ingestion  <cit> . further sampling of other eukaryotic hosts may resolve the question of the ancestral state.

regardless of this, we have shown that the remaining clade of rickettsia  all have associations with arthropods; either as the only known host or in conjunction with a vertebrate or plant host . the rhizobius and meloidae groups, which all infect beetles, diverged from the other taxa early in the evolution of this clade. there was then a rapid radiation about  <dig> million years ago that led to most of the strains we know of. this includes the bellii group, which is probably the largest group of arthropod rickettsia as it contains all but three strains from the worldwide sample. this sample includes both a diverse array of arthropods , and it will tend to pick up high prevalence infections .

our results show clearly that switching between arthropod hosts has been a common feature of rickettsia evolution. within the genus, closely related bacteria sometimes infect different host phyla and classes , but the genus arose long after the major arthropod orders diverged  <cit>  . however, the host phylogeny is not entirely unrelated to the bacterial phylogeny, and there are many cases of related rickettsia strains infecting related hosts. in the case of many mutualistic symbionts, the bacterial phylogeny precisely mirrors the host phylogeny, indicating that the bacteria and host have co-speciated  <cit> . however, this is not the case in the rickettsia. even in the adalia group, where a group of related bacteria all infect related hosts, the host and bacterial phylogenies are different. therefore, rickettsia symbioses are short-lived on an evolutionary scale, which is consistent with most of these infections being parasitic.

our analysis has also allowed us to reconstruct the changes in the ecology of the genus. rickettsia are almost entirely restricted to terrestrial and freshwater habitats . within the genus, there have been three major transitions in life history: becoming sex ratio distorters, arthropod vectored vertebrate pathogens and, in one case, an arthropod vectored plant pathogen. based on current data, infecting plants and parthenogenesis induction in the arthropod host has arisen only once, and male-killing twice. until the effect of r. bellii on vertebrates in the field has been properly defined, we cannot say for sure how many times vertebrate pathogenesis has evolved.

recombination
the recent discovery of plasmids in the genus rickettsia opens up the possibility that horizontal gene transfer may be common between strains  <cit> . furthermore, there have been reports of recombination between rickettsia strains  <cit> . this has important implications for the evolution of rickettsia, as genes can sweep through different genetic backgrounds of bacterial strains, thereby potentially increasing the spread of genes altering bacterial pathogenicity. recombination can also complicate the inference of relationships between strains, as recombination violates the assumption that a strain has one evolutionary history.

it is clear from our data that these different genes have very similar phylogenetic histories and recombination must therefore be infrequent . however, we detected one clear-cut case of recombination between different groups of rickettsia. in the symbiont of the ladybird beetle c. rufa  the sequences of atpa and coxa place c. rufa within the bellii group, whereas glta and 16s place it within the transitional group . in the r. felis genome , the gene sequences of atpa and coxa are approximately  <dig> kb apart. if this represents one recombination event and the genes are syntenic with the r. felis genome, it will have included approximately 45% of the genome. the biggest known recombination event in rickettsia, which occurred in rickettsia massiliae, is a  <dig> kb segment containing many genes that facilitate conjugal dna transfer. intriguingly, although r. massiliae is in the spotted fever group, this region of dna was also thought to originate from the bellii group  <cit> . as well as this, gillespie et al.  <cit>  found that many of the genes on the r. felis plasmid have a closer relationship to the bellii group. this evidence suggests that conjugation with the bellii group rickettsia may have an important role in the evolution of the groups containing vertebrate pathogens.

we also detected recombination within the coxa and glta genes. this is particularly surprising given that the individual gene topologies did not seem to conflict in any way . this can only be explained if the recombination event is ancient, and indeed the breakpoint patterns affected all members in particular groups, suggesting that the events pre-dated the divergence of the different groups. even though recombination machinery has been detected in rickettsia genomes  <cit> , this is the first evidence that housekeeping genes recombine, and could have implications for the inference of relationships, especially since housekeeping genes  are often used to build phylogenies. therefore recombination should be investigated more fully, especially when using single genes to build phylogenies. these ancient recombination events involve the adalia group and the rhizobius group, as well as the transitional group. this would seem to indicate that recombination is not unique to the bellii and vertebrate groups, and may be widespread throughout all arthropod rickettsia and possibly the other basal groups. however, the recombination signal is different from the above cases, as it is intragenic and over a small area.

transmission and population dynamics
it is clear from our data that rickettsia are common and diverse bacteria. however, the basic biology of most of these strains is entirely unknown and it is therefore unclear how these have spread through populations. as rickettsia are primarily intracellular, they cannot survive for long in the external environment . for this reason, they are most readily maintained either by vertical transmission  in their arthropod hosts or, in the case of blood-sucking arthropods, by horizontal transmission through an infected vertebrate . because infectious transmission between arthropod hosts is thought to be rare, the general view is that exclusively arthropod rickettsia are maintained within a host species primarily by transovarial transmission, and therefore must enhance the fitness of infected females  <cit> . some rickettsia raise infected female fitness in an indirect way by manipulating host reproduction towards infected daughters at the expense of sons, either by killing male offspring as embryos  or by inducing parthenogenesis  <cit> . the closely related bacterium o. tsutsugamushi also causes a female biased sex ratio in its mite host  <cit> . theoretically, arthropod rickettsia could also be maintained by directly providing a fitness benefit to infected females as shown for other bacterial groups  <cit> , eg by providing essential nutrients or protection from other infective agents. although, rickettsia are required for egg production in the booklouse liposcelis bostrychophila, and are therefore obligatory, in most cases where the arthropod relationship has been studied in depth, rickettsia are pathogenic  <cit>  or have no observable effect  <cit> , making a mutualistic role for rickettsia in those hosts unlikely.

for those rickettsia that are vertebrate pathogens but vectored by arthropods, the effects of the bacteria on their arthropod hosts are generally poorly understood  <cit> .rickettsia prowazekii is clearly pathogenic to infected lice, and transmission through humans is essential to the maintenance of the bacteria in arthropod populations. in every other case, human infections are accidental, but transmission through other vertebrates may allow the bacteria to persist in populations. many of the bacteria that can infect vertebrates are also transmitted vertically by the arthropod host  <cit> . in these cases, even very occasional horizontal transmission through the vertebrate host can enhance the maintenance of bacteria in arthropod populations.

our data also have implications for transmission. we have shown that r. felis ,r. canadensis  and r. bellii  are more closely related to rickettsia in non-blood feeding hosts than to those found in other blood feeding hosts. therefore, are these strains even transmitted horizontally? as far as we are aware, even in cases where the bacteria can infect vertebrates , there has been no recorded instance of transmission back to arthropods . therefore, while there are multiple origins of infecting blood-feeding arthropods, the ability to be transmitted from vertebrates back into the arthropod host may have arisen once only, and subsequently been lost in the transitional group after the divergence of r. akari and rickettsia australis.

we still do not have a complete understanding of how rickettsia are maintained within host populations or how they move horizontally between host species. a better understanding of these dynamic processes can be achieved by detailed studies of representatives from the different groups described here.

CONCLUSIONS
we have identified  <dig> new arthropod rickettsia and described the major transitions and life-history strategies throughout the phylogeny. this raises many questions about how these bacteria are maintained and spread throughout populations of arthropods and vertebrates. rickettsia are known to distort the sex ratio of their hosts by male-killing and inducing parthenogenesis, and are also horizontally transmitted through vertebrates and plants. however, these phenotypes are probably not manifest in the majority of strains discovered and so there may be other ways in which rickettsia are maintained in host populations. for example, there seem to be intriguing links to host oogenesis in some strains and a possible case of a beneficial effect in the torix group  <cit> . exploring the biology of these new strains is essential if we are to learn more about the genus.

