BACKGROUND
starvation and predation risks are both important in the ecology of wintering shorebirds  <cit> , and stored body fat appears central to managing these risks. it provides insurance against starvation during periods of food shortage, but increases energetic flight expenditures and reduces predator escape performance  <cit> . of course the fat reserve must also be built up in the first place, which requires extra foraging and hence predator exposure.

the trade-off theory of fat storage  <cit>  holds that the survival-maximizing level is set by its contrasting effects on the probabilities of mortality by starvation and by depredation. many temperate shorebird species for example, enlarge the fat reserve in mid-winter, increasing protection against the higher incidence of food shortage at that time of year  <cit> . decreases in the amount of mid-winter fat over recent decades, documented for both shorebirds  <cit>  and forest birds  <cit> , have been linked to the population recovery of raptors since ddt was banned in the 1970s. the interpretation is that increased raptor populations have heightened predation danger, so prey species have lowered the level of winter fat reserves to increase their predator escape ability, at the expense of diminishing their ability to withstand starvation.

predation danger effects on roosting behavior have also begun to be recognized. shorebirds are sensitive to the safety features of roost sites, and may travel long distances to utilize safe roosts  <cit> . they sometimes spend part of the high tide period in flight out over open water, rather than roosting on the ground. this has been termed 'roosting on the wing'  <cit> , 'high tide flight'  <cit> , 'airborne roosting'  <cit> , or 'over-ocean flocking'  <cit> . we use the latter term here. over-ocean flocking has been described most extensively in british columbia , but has also been observed in britain  <cit> , washington state  <cit> , california  <cit> , germany  <cit>  and the netherlands  <cit> . though generally uncommon, over-ocean flocking appears to be a normal part of the behavioral repertoire of some shorebird species. a video sequence can be watched at http://www.sfu.ca/biology/wildberg/species/wesa.html

most observers  <cit>  attribute an antipredation function to over-ocean flocking. prater  <cit>  does not specifically mention predators, but identifies disturbance as the most important factor. dekker  <cit>  interprets it as a strategy to avoid stealth attacks by falcons and other raptors  <cit>  to which shorebirds are vulnerable while roosting or foraging close to shorelines where there is cover from which raptors can attack. dekker & ydenberg  <cit>  show that over-ocean flocking increases safety from predators. it can be thought of as an energetically-expensive roosting option, analogous to expending energy to fly to a distant but safer roost site.

in this paper we compile historical information on over-ocean flocking and winter body mass of pacific dunlins  on the fraser river estuary. at this site, the abundance of peregrine falcons  during autumn and winter has risen steadily since the early 1980s  <cit> , and they are important predators of dunlins  <cit> . we therefore predicted that the winter weight and roosting behavior of pacific dunlins had changed over this period, shifting the emphasis from starvation avoidance  to predation avoidance .

RESULTS
high tide behavior
we located a total of six studies  that made observations on dunlins on the fraser estuary prior to  <dig>  participants in three of these studies never recorded over-ocean flocking in their notes, or recalled observing it when later interviewed by us. observers in the three other studies others saw it once, or on occasion. over-ocean flocking was recorded much more often by later observers. all five of the post- <dig> observers report it as a regular or frequent occurrence.

'over-ocean flocking?' asks whether the observer describes this phenomenon in the report, or, during later interview, recalled seeing it.

two experienced long-term observers documented their first observations of over-ocean flocking in the mid 1990s. richard swanston has for many years made regular birding visits to our study area, and works on the ferry that sails along the study area. he first noted over-ocean flocking by pacific dunlins in march,  <dig>  and reports  that it has since become increasingly common. dr. robert butler  first observed over-ocean flocking on april  <dig>   <dig>  butler never observed over-ocean flocking in two winters of regular surveys  <cit> , see table 1] or on many other visits to the fraser estuary prior to  <dig> 

during the extended set of observations made by dd in january,  <dig>  over-ocean flocking was frequent, and prolonged . it occurred on 15/ <dig> observation days, with the only two days on which it did not occur  being, respectively, the only windless day, and the only day with continual heavy rain. the duration of over-ocean flocking ranged from  <dig>  -  <dig>  h, and the mean duration over all  <dig> days was  <dig>  h, which is similar to shepherd's  estimate made  using radio telemetry of  <dig>  h spent in flight each day, the majority during high tide periods. these observations also indicated that over-ocean flocking did not take place at night.

winter body mass
as described in the methods, of the three winters of mist-netting effort in the late 1970s, full data are available only for 1978/ <dig> . monthly summaries remain for the preceding  and following  years; these are depicted in fig.  <dig> with an analogous monthly summary prepared from data for 1978/ <dig>  the seasonal progression of body mass is similar in all three winters, and clearly shows the pattern identified by kaiser & gillingham  <cit> . body mass is low upon migratory arrival in october, but rises steeply and remains high from november through january. body mass falls in february and remains low until late in march, when it climbs steeply prior to spring migration. this comparison shows that the 1978/ <dig> data are representative of other years at that time.

the 1978/ <dig> body mass data are compared with those from the 1990s in fig. 3a; and decade-specific third-degree splines are shown in fig. 3b. the spline fitted to the 1970s sample closely matches the pattern described above, but in the 1990s sample the november - december peak in mass has all but disappeared. the body mass difference between the decades is greatest  during the autumn, and shrinks over the course of the winter until it disappears in the pre-spring migration period.

mean culmen and winglengths differ slightly but significantly between decades, though in opposite directions . as expected  <cit> , culmen is a statistical predictor of body mass for both decades , but wing length is a significant predictor of body mass only in the 1970s, when birds were relatively heavy . to compare the winter masses of pacific dunlins shown in fig.  <dig>  we fitted a b-spline to the pooled data. controlling for culmen and wing length, residual masses are strongly and significantly lower in 1970s than in the 1990s. the overall mean difference is  <dig>  g , though as noted above, the difference is biggest in november, and falls to zero or near-zero by late march.

fig.  <dig> compares the whole-body fat content of 1990s dunlins with that reported by mcewan & whitehead  <cit>  for the 1970s. the 1990s data are too few for a definitive assessment, but show that all the birds measured in the 1990s carried less fat than the means reported for the 1970s, and that the absolute difference is about 2- <dig> g, which suggests that the change in body mass between the decades can be accounted for largely by a decline in the amount of fat carried.

peregrine seasonal abundance pattern
as documented in ydenberg et al. , peregrines were uncommon on the fraser estuary prior to the ban on ddt in  <dig>  matching the continental pattern, their numbers began to rise strongly in the late 1970s or early 1980s and have climbed steadily since  <cit> . peregrines have a marked seasonal pattern of abundance on the fraser estuary , rising steeply during august to the annual peak during october, before declining during the remainder of the winter to an annual low just before spring migration resumes. peregrines are relatively abundant during the spring migration period , but few breed locally and they are virtually absent after this time until they begin to reappear in august.

this pattern seems to have emerged as peregrine numbers recovered. monthly raptor surveys carried out in and around our study area during the winters of 1970- <dig> by the vancouver natural history society sighted only  <dig> peregrines in  <dig> surveys  <cit> . the detection rate was steady and low from october to march, indicating that seasonal pattern described by lank et al.  <cit>  was absent or greatly reduced prior to peregrine population recovery.

discussion
the data presented here show that pacific dunlins wintering on the fraser estuary in british columbia have changed aspects of their winter ecology over the past few decades. in the late 1970s they showed classic temperate shorebird winter behavior, with a regular routine of feeding at low tide and ground-based roosting at high tide, and a mid-winter peak in body mass, attributable to fat storage. after the mid-1990s, the mid-winter peak in body mass disappeared, and dunlins began to spend several hours during the high tide period in over-ocean flocking. we interpret these changes as an adaptive response to greatly increased peregrine falcon presence during the winter since the 1970s.

the data presented here also confirm that in the late 1970s dunlins were heavier than in the late 1990s, the difference being greatest  in november, and shrinking steadily over the course of the winter until the pre-spring migration period, when masses are the same. this convergence rules out the possibility that the body mass difference is attributable to some systematic bias . our measurements of total body fat are consistent with all or most of the body mass difference between the decades being attributable to a decline in fat reserves.

the slight though statistically significant differences in mean culmen length and mean wing length between the decades are likely attributable to differences in details of the measurement  or sampling  procedures . in a sample of pacific dunlins collected on the fraser river estuary in 1992- <dig> , means for both culmen  and winglength  are slightly larger than either sample reported on here. this indicates that the differences between samples do not represent an ongoing change in the size composition of the population, and supports the interpretation that the changes are attributable to minor procedural differences.

the seasonal pattern of mass decline between the decades shows a striking correlation with the seasonal pattern of peregrine occurrence on the fraser estuary. the biggest mass drop coincides with the autumn peak in peregrine abundance, with the difference shrinking as the peregrine index declines during the winter. mass in the decades is the same in march, when peregrines are at their annual  low. this correlation supports our hypothesis that pacific dunlins have shifted emphasis from protection against starvation to protection against predation. piersma et al.  <cit>  reached a similar conclusion in their analysis of changes in the mid-winter masses of golden plovers in the netherlands. as the data are correlational, we must be cautious about inferring causation, or ruling out contributing roles for any of the many other factors that must have changed at this location between these decades.

another hypothesis to explain the body mass reduction is that starvation risk has declined over recent decades as climate change reduced the severity of winter weather. to evaluate this we obtained weather records for the period  <dig> -  <dig> from the national climate data and information archive of environment canada. in table  <dig> we summarize the rate of change in average daily temperature, total precipitation, and maximum wind gust on the study area over the winter months. these data provide weak support at best for the idea that winter weather has become less severe. though the change in mean daily temperature is slightly positive for each winter month over this period, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> °c y- <dig>  neither the change in total monthly precipitation nor gustiness are consistent in direction across months, and the low r <dig> values in table  <dig> indicate that all three metrics are very noisy. in fact, the total net change over the  <dig> year record is much smaller than most of the year to year changes recorded.

summary by month of daily mean temperature, total precipitation, and maximum wind gust speed, during  <dig> -  <dig>  from the national climate data and information archive of environment canada http://www.climate.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/, recorded at the vancouver international airport, located adjacent to the fraser estuary. the table records for each winter month the overall mean, the slope of the regression on year , and the proportion of the variance explained .

neither does the seasonal pattern of change in body mass between the decades match very closely the pattern in those climate measures that do show evidence of change. the biggest seasonal mass change between the 1970s and 1990s occurs in the autumn, with the difference shrinking until march, when masses are the same. in contrast january shows the strongest rate of increase in temperature since  <dig>  followed by march. changes in precipitation and wind match even less well. overall, we feel that the reduction in winter body mass of pacific dunlins is not well-explained by an hypothesis based on reduced winter severity. neither is this hypothesis able to explain why over-ocean flocking has become commonplace.

we regard the changes in roosting behavior and body mass as adaptive adjustments to increased danger. other interpretations are that the body mass decline is a non-strategic consequence of extra flight induced by harassment from numerous peregrines, or that it is a strategic reduction of body mass made to reduce flight costs because flight time has increased for a reason unrelated to predation danger. differentiating between these competing hypotheses could be undertaken with an analysis of when strategic over-ocean flocking  ought to occur. the first study to make a strategic analysis of roost site choice is that by rogers et al.  <cit> . in their study area, distant roost sites required more travel than nearby roost sites, but birds suffered fewer disturbances there. they accounted for roost choice with a model that minimized total energy expenditure over the entire high water period, summing the energetic costs of both travel to the roost site and time spent in flight while there. we agree with this general approach, but feel that the choice is more appropriately analyzed in terms of maximizing survival than in minimizing energy expenditure. over-ocean flocking becomes worthwhile when it reduces the probability of mortality  <cit> , taking account of the extra mortality that results from the extra foraging required.

several factors may dispose dunlins on the fraser estuary to more prolonged and frequent over-ocean flocking than at other sites. first, the winter population of peregrines is high relative to other locales, and the danger they pose to dunlins wintering there is particularly great, because kleptoparasitic competition from bald eagles  forces peregrines to concentrate their foraging on dunlins instead of ducks, a favorite prey for peregrines elsewhere  <cit> . second, the nature of the fraser river estuary is such that alternative coastal and inland roosting sites are also dangerous, due to the presence of peregrines, merlins  and northern harriers , all of which prey on dunlins  <cit> . finally, the fraser estuary is large and highly productive, and the winter in southwest british columbia generally mild, which makes it possible to finance the extra energetic expenditure required. dunlins cease over-ocean flocking during extended periods of freezing weather  <cit> , on days with heavy rain  and on windless days, which suggests that increases in the energy requirement  or the cost of the gliding and hovering mode of oof flight  make it too expensive. analyzing over-ocean flocking on the fraser estuary and on other wintering areas in this way should lead to further understanding of when and why it is observed.

CONCLUSIONS
pacific dunlins  wintering on the fraser river estuary in southwest british columbia altered aspects of their wintering ecology between the 1970s and 1990s. we found that pacific dunlins were lighter by several grams in the 1990s as compared with the 1970s. the difference appears largely or entirely attributable to a reduction in fat reserves. historical observations indicate that over-ocean flocking in place of roosting at high tide was rare prior to the mid-1990s and became common thereafter. we interpret these changes as a shift by dunlins toward increased protection against predation, due to the increase since the 1970s in the abundance of peregrine falcons . fat stores offer protection against starvation, but are a liability in escape performance, and increase flight costs. 'over-ocean' or 'high tide' flocking is a relatively safe but energetically-expensive alternative to roosting during the high tide period. shifting use of these tactics alters the balance of protection against predation vs. starvation risks.

