BACKGROUND
genes usually do not act individually but form functional or structure organizations, exemplified by metabolic pathways. as metabolic pathways are essential to the survival of organisms, and their evolution has been under debate for more than half a century  <cit> , a combined phylogenetic and phenetic analysis of pathway topology might expand the understanding of the evolutionary processes molding their form and structure.

up to now, more than  <dig> organisms have been fully sequenced, and the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  has computationally reconstructed organism-specific pathways based on genome information and reference pathways, thereby making it possible to compare metabolic pathways or networks between species. several groups have carried out phylogenetic analyses based on metabolic pathways, deriving phylogenetic trees from the information of individual pathways  <cit> , the presence and absence of entire pathways  <cit> , or the reaction content of entire pathways  <cit> . other groups have reconstructed the phylogenies based on the enzyme content of entire metabolic networks  <cit> . one of these groups used a method based on the combination of sequence information and graph topology  <cit> . the combination of these two sources of information was also used for analyzing protein-protein interaction networks, known as pathblast  <cit> . these studies have provided valuable insight into the evolution of metabolism; however, as phylogenetic trees they have generally diverged substantially from trees based on 16s rrna, the most used molecule for phylogeny reconstruction. a common feature of phylogenetic trees based on metabolic information is that, owing to similar evolutionary pressures, organisms in similar habitats tend to be clustered together, and aguilar et al.  <cit>  therefore regarded such trees as phenetic rather than phylogenetic. furthermore, one group showed that trees based on different subsets of metabolic networks were different  <cit> , and another result also indicated a similar situation when several different pathways were used to construct trees separately  <cit> , just like when different molecules are used for reconstructing phylogenies  <cit> .

our study extends previous works in two ways. first, in order to elucidate to what extent the topologies of single pathways, as functional elements of an organism, provide phylogenetic information and reflect evolutionary pressures, we have subjected information on all available metabolic pathways to topological analysis. second, we have attempted to measure the phylogenetic information content of larger pathways sets, or partial metabolic networks, compared to single metabolic pathways. considering that the topologies of metabolic pathways are phenotypic features derived from heritable characters, they will necessarily contain both phylogenetic and phenetic components, and we have therefore regarded the properties derived from pathway topologies as "phylophenetic". the work has proceeded through three steps. first, a topologically based definition for metabolic pathway profiles was introduced; hence the taxonomic distributions of pathways were studied. second, for each metabolic pathway, a phylogeny based on the topological similarity was reconstructed and quantitatively compared to the corresponding 16s rrna-based tree. finally, by using the quartet method, the trees based on single pathways were combined into one comprehensive tree, which showed a much higher similarity to the corresponding 16s rrna-based tree than any tree based on a single pathway.

RESULTS
taxonomiac distributions of pathways
in order to obtain an overview of the distribution of pathways relative to the phylogenetic classification of the  <dig> organisms studied, we produced a grid showing the fraction of organisms in each kegg  <cit>  category containing a given pathway, based on the definition given in methods . organisms containing any given pathway were far from equally distributed among the phylogenetic categories. therefore, using equations  <dig> and  <dig> separately, pathway specific p-values were assigned to measure whether a pathway specific subset was enriched in or depleted of organisms from a particular category . for pathways found in only a small number of studied organisms, these organisms usually belonged to one or two phylogenetic categories. for example, the c21-steroid hormone pathway  was present only in three of the organisms studied, all animals . on the other hand, for a pathway conserved in most organisms, there were usually some phylogenetic categories in which none or only a few organisms contained the given pathway. for example, the riboflavin metabolism  was present in  <dig> of the  <dig> organisms, while only  <dig> of  <dig> archaea contained it , which is consistent with previous findings that several steps in the biosynthesis of riboflavin in archaea were absent  <cit> . in addition, many metabolic pathways were absent in obligate parasites like chlamydia and mollicutes.

phylophenetic properties of single pathways
to be able to compare to 16s rrna-based trees, for each pathway that was present in more than  <dig> prokaryotes, a phylophenetic tree was reconstructed based on the pathway topology for the pathway specific subset of prokaryotes . as little evolutionary information could be acquired from the most conserved pathways, only metabolic pathways whose topological variation between organisms is significant enough were studied. a total of  <dig> pathway specific phylophenetic trees were inferred and compared to 16s rrna-based trees for the corresponding prokaryotes. the similarity values for each pair of trees  ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , with nearly 90%  of the pathways having a similarity value of more than  <dig>  . for each of the  <dig> pathways,  <dig>  random trees for the same subset of organisms were produced. only  <dig> %  of the random trees had similarity values  of more than  <dig> , showing that topological variations in metabolic pathways contain a certain measure of phylogenetic information. when using heyman and singh's distance definition  <cit> , similar results were obtained, also with nearly 90%  pathways having similarity values above  <dig>  . the consistency in the results indicates that these two topology-based distance definitions are equally good at preserving evolutionary information. the result is similar to a previous analysis of the topology of the citric acid cycle  and glycolysis/glucogenesis , where the clustering of organisms agreed well with the ncbi taxonomy  <cit> . comparisons of trees based on glycolysis/glucogenesis to the ncbi taxonomy gave similarity values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for two sets of  <dig> and  <dig> organisms, respectively  <cit> , very close to the value of  <dig>  calculated by our method for  <dig> organisms containing this pathway. as the similarity values of these two pathways are only intermediate among all the  <dig> studied pathways, this should indicate that most single pathways contain a substantial amount of phylogenetic information.

the trees derived from topological information of each of the  <dig> single pathways generally had a different information content than those derived from 16s rrna. whereas the main phylogenetic aspects of evolution are conserved to some extent, these trees also portray how the essentiality of specific metabolic pathways has shaped the evolutionary paths of different organisms. thus, different aspects of evolutionary pressure result in the different similarity values when comparing to 16s rrna-based trees, because, as functional features, the operation of metabolic pathways is essential to the survival of organisms; and due to selection on these feature, the topologies of the same pathways in two organisms with short divergence distance might be quite different if the selection pressures differs. for example, although the divergence distance between two γ-proteobacteria buchnera aphidicola  and escherichia coli  is much shorter than that between b. aphidicola and the mollicute mycoplasma pneumoniae , due to their similar environments, the topology of the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis  for the obligate intracellular symbiont b. aphidicola is much more similar to that of the obligate intracellular parasite m. pneumoniae . another example is the phylogenetically closely related archaea halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  and aeropyrum pernix . in the tree based on the selenoamino acid metabolism , halobacterium is clustered with an actinobacteria streptomyces coelicolor , rather than with a. pernix, mainly due to the influence on pathway topology from selenocysteine lyase . this enzyme has been found in more than  <dig> studied bacteria, but among archaea only in halobacterium, most likely due to horizontal gene transfer  . thus, pathway topologies can be regarded as the results of a compromise between phylogenetic information inherited from the last common ancestor and evolutionary pressure causing more rapid shifts in metabolic structure, and varying similarity values may reflect the strength of the two factors.

calculation of various topological parameters for each of the  <dig> pathways  showed that except for vertex number, no obvious correlation could be found between the similarity values and other topological parameters, including diameter, average path length and clustering coefficient of the reference pathway graphs. nor did the similarity values display any obvious correlation to pathway category or number of pathway specific prokaryotes. however, with increasing number of vertices in a graph , the pathway-inferred trees had a tendency towards higher similarity to the corresponding 16s rrna-based tree. when considering a model of complex networks, if one new vertex is added, the number of all possible sub-networks is doubled. therefore, the amount of potential variation within a pathways graph could be expected to increase exponentially in relation to vertex number. as the opposite is observed , this implies that most of the potential topological variation in metabolic pathways is never realized, possibly due to strong evolutionary constraints on topological variation, particularly in larger pathways.

the topologies of the remaining  <dig> pathways provided little phylophenetic information, mainly for two reasons. one was that  <dig> of the pathways were either only found in a small number of specialized organisms, or were too incomplete to be regarded as present in most studied organisms. for example, although glycosphingolipid metabolism  widely exists in animals, its topology provided little evolutionary information as only  <dig> animals were available for study; given more animal genomes and proper methods, it should be possible to derive evolutionary information also from this pathway. the other reason was that the remaining  <dig> pathways were too conserved to contain any useful information for distinguishing between organisms. for example, the peptidoglycan biosynthesis  exists in  <dig> prokaryotes; however specific pathway graphs for  <dig> of these were identical, and it was therefore impossible to derive any relationships between these organisms based on the topological information.

phylophenetic properties of the pathway set based tree
based on the topologies of the  <dig> single pathway trees, a comprehensive tree was constructed using the quartet method described in methods . in order to compare this pathway set based tree to trees based on 16s rrna, gene content and gene order, we limited tree construction to  <dig> organisms for which relevant data was available in the shot server  <cit> . comparison of the pathway set based tree to the 16s rrna-based tree gave a similarity value of  <dig> , which was higher than for any single pathway . as single pathways only provided topological information of "branches" to reconstruct the pathway set based tree, the higher similarity value for the pathway set based tree might indicate the existence of global constraints working on the global metabolic networks topology, which are reflected by the individual metabolic pathways. however, with the exception of the gene order tree based on shot version  <dig> , the other three gene order and gene content based trees showed higher similarity to 16s rrna-based tree than the pathway set based tree , indicating that evolutionary influences generally not accounted for by the rrna-based phylogeny  have made a stronger mark on the topology of the metabolic networks than on the genome as a whole.

the pathway set based tree reflected both the classical taxa and the living styles of analyzed organisms . it showed a definite separation between archaea and bacteria, with all  <dig> archaea clustered in the same branch and the two-crenarchaeotan species  and a. pernix ) being separated from other  <dig> euryarchaeota on two different sub-branches. among the eubacteria, the largest branch contained  <dig> organisms which all belonged to obligate parasites or obligate symbionts with small genomes. this clustering of intracellular parasites/symbionts from various rrna based taxa is a persistent feature of metabolism-based phylogenies  <cit> , and reflects a convergence towards small metabolic networks consisting of functions that cannot be substituted by import of host-produced metabolites. of the  <dig> γ-proteobacteria,  <dig> were placed in one branch; the two exceptions were b. aphidicola , an obligate intracellular symbiont which clustered with other obligate parasites or symbionts, and xylella fastidiosa , the only plant pathogen. interestingly, the latter shared a separate branch with two other pathogens  and m. tuberculosis ), possibly indicating some relatedness in metabolic design also for extracellular pathogens. the fourth member on this branch was the hyperthermophilic aquifex aeolicus , which also cluster close to x. fastidiosa based on enzyme content  <cit> , and relatively close to the mycobacteria in the 16s rrna tree. another branch included  <dig> organisms, which, with the exception of the cyanobacterium synechocystis sp. , all belonged to non-γ proteobacteria, whereas an additional two parasitic non-γ subclass proteobacteria  and helicobacter pylori ) were grouped with the obligate intracellular parasites/symbionts. the nine gram-positive organisms were placed in two branches; two mycobacteria were clustered together in one branch, and the remaining seven in another branch also containing the hyperthermophilic organism thermotoga maritima . t. maritima is much of an orphan in bacterial phylogeny. whereas the 16s rrna-based tree places it on a branch together with the other hyperthermophilic a. aeolicus, it ends up on a separate branch on a gene content tree  <cit> , and in close proximity to the bacillales in the metabolic reaction content tree  <cit> .

the phylogenetically most interesting aspect of the pathway set based tree is that it coincides with the consensus genome tree  <cit>  in clustering chlamydiae and spirochetes among the bacteria, and methanogen and pyrococci among the archaea. both of these two 'new clades' are strongly supported by information derived from entire genome information, but not by rrna phylogenies. this strongly indicates that the combination of metabolic pathway topologies not only depicts phenotypic similarities between different groups of prokaryotes, but also contains a substantial measure of phylogenetic information.

evaluation of the approach
as one of the types of complex intracellular networks, metabolic networks have drawn much attention in recent years  <cit> . our results relate to two aspects of complex networks. first, our results show that the topological variations of metabolic pathways can reflect the adaptation to specific evolutionary pressures, indicating the possible relationships between the structure of a metabolic pathway  and organismal adaptation. secondly, the results touch upon the relation between phylophenetic properties at different levels of the metabolic networks. one of these levels refers to the metabolic pathway, or functional module, the other refers to the sets of pathways, or the partial metabolic networks. the study of evolutionary relations between different levels of networks will not be limited to metabolic networks, but may also be applicable to other types of networks like transcriptional regulation networks and protein-protein interaction networks. however, as this study mainly concentrated on the topological information of metabolic pathways, it will have some limitations. whereas our study gave insight into evolutionary pressures that might shape the topology of metabolic pathways, it could not show how the modified pathway might help the organism adapt to a specific environment. in further studies, more biochemical analysis, such as flux balance analysis  <cit> , could be used to perform more detailed studies on the relationships between pathway topology and evolutionary pressures.

though the kegg pathway reference maps and kegg enzyme annotations are probably among the most reliable available datasets of this kind, errors in reference maps or annotation may occur, and could affect our results. to test the robustness against such errors we randomly added specified errors  in either the reference graph of each metabolic pathway, or in the kegg annotation of enzymes for each organism. for each interval we repeated the whole analysis  <dig> times, thereby acquiring a consensus pathway set based tree with bootstrap-like values . to obtain a measure of the robustness, two sets of values for consensus pathway set based trees were calculated: the similarity to the original tree, and the average of bootstrap-like values of all branches. the former reflects the variation of pathway set based tree given a specific error and the latter the stability of pathway set based tree against specific errors. both values decreased when the fraction of added errors increased . however, even with an error rate up to 10% most features of original pathway set based tree were preserved; e.g. both the branch of obligate parasites/symbionts and the branch of archaea were persistent up to 10% error rate. the test indicates that a moderate amount of errors in kegg pathway maps or enzyme annotations will not influence our results substantially.

CONCLUSIONS
this analysis has clearly shown that the topologies of different metabolic pathways contain different phylogenetic and phenetic information content. this suggests that pathway topologies can be regarded as the results of a compromise between phylogenetic information inherited from the last common ancestor and evolutionary pressure causing more rapid shifts in metabolic structure, and varying similarity values might reflect the strength of the two factors. the analysis has also shown that the phylogenetic information content of the pathway set based tree is substantially higher than that of any tree based on a single pathway, which indicates that metabolic pathway evolution might be influenced by the potential constraints working on the topology of global metabolic networks. when more organisms, especially eukarya, are available in kegg, the details of the compromise between phylogenetic information and evolutionary pressure on metabolism features as well as global constraint working on metabolic networks topology might be more thoroughly studied.

