BACKGROUND
subacute ruminal acidosis , also known as chronic or sub-clinical acidosis, is a common health problem in many dairy herds  <cit> . results from field studies indicate a high prevalence of sara in high-producing dairy herds of some regions as producers respond to the demand for increased milk production with diets containing a higher proportion of grain  <cit> . dairy herds that experience sara have a decreased efficiency of milk production, impaired cow health, and high rates of involuntary culling  <cit> . a previous study showed that, in cases of sara, the escape of large amounts of undigested feed from the rumen and small intestine can result in extensive fermentation in the hindgut during grain-induced sara  <cit> . this fermentation results in increased acidity of the hindgut contents and feces. the increased acidity may result in damage to and sloughing of the epithelial cells in the large intestine. damage to the large intestine and increased concentrations of organic acids in the gut lumen may play a role in causing the diarrhea often seen with ruminal acidosis  <cit> .

in the hindgut of bovine species, the microbiota, including bacteria, protozoa and fungi, possess cellulase, protease, deaminase, and urease activities, and the products of fermentation include volatile fatty acid , ammonia nitrogen, and microbial cells  <cit> . as mentioned above, the increased amounts of carbohydrate in the large intestine during sara can stimulate fermentation by these bacteria and increase the acidity of the hindgut contents and feces; this indicates that the microbial community of the hindgut may be altered during sara. further, some studies have also shown that numbers of enterohemorrhagic e. coli are higher in the feces of grain-fed cattle. in turn, when cattle were abruptly switched from a high corn diet to a forage diet, generic e. coli populations declined 1000-fold within  <dig> days  <cit> . in general, all these studies suggest that high grain feeding will lead to the production of more volatile fatty acids  and a change in the structure of the microbial community in the hindgut, which will result in a relative increase in the number of some pathogens during sara. however, there is a lack of published studies investigating changes in the structure of the hindgut microbial community during sara in dairy cows. therefore, the main purpose of this study was to investigate the diversity of the bacterial community and to evaluate its relationship with the concentration of short volatile fatty acid  in the feces during sara in dairy cows.

RESULTS
effects of said feeding on ruminal ph and vfa concentration in feces
when compared with feeding of the cod, the fecal ph was significantly lower and the propionate, butyrate, and tvfa concentrations were significantly higher in the said group . there were no significant differences in valerate, isobutyrate, isovalerate, or the ratio of acetate to propionate between the two diets. a tendency towards increased fecal acetate production was observed in the said group when compared with the cod.


astd. error of the mean for the said group.

b95% ci for the said group.

in this study, diurnal data indicated that cows fed the cod had greater ruminal ph when compared with the said group  . ruminal ph was also affected by sampling hour . in general, the ruminal ph declined in all cows, regardless of the diet used, during the first few hours after the morning feeding. however, during the time period from almost  <dig> h after the feeding until the sampling at  <dig> h, the average ruminal ph was below  <dig>  in the said group and remained significantly lower than that of the cod cows; the duration for which the ruminal ph was less than  <dig>  was about  <dig>  hours after the first feeding in the said group.


general dna sequencing observations
the total number of high quality 16s otus recovered from each animal is listed in table  <dig>  the average number of otus returned for each diet was: cod, 503; said,  <dig>  rarefaction curves indicated that there was a high level of microbial diversity in dietary treatments . the total abundance observed for otus in the cod and said groups are indicated in box plots , and a substantial animal-to-animal variation was observed in both the cod and said groups.


the dietary treatment, animal id, and no. of otus obtained per fecal sample from each animal.

a total of  <dig> phyla were observed, distributed amongst all the cattle on the two diets . these are listed in order of average abundance and with their respective ranges: firmicutes , proteobacteria , actinobacteria , bacteroidetes , tenericutes , cyanobacteria , spirochaetes , lentisphaerae , planctomycetes , chloroflexi , and verrucomicrobia . greater than  <dig> % of the total bacterial abundance was observed in these  <dig> phyla, with the remaining abundance represented by unclassified bacteria.

.

at the genus level, overall, the sequences were assigned to  <dig> different genera. of these, the cod and said groups were represented by  <dig> and  <dig> genera, respectively . genera were present across the entire sample collection in the cod or the said group were defined as common, there were  <dig> and  <dig> common bacterial genera in cows fed the two diets, receptively.


a the total number of genera identified in the two diets, respectively.

b the number of genera that are common in cod or said.

influence of said feeding on bacterial phyla, classes, orders and families of fecal microbiota
when compared with cod feeding , said feeding decreased the percentage of cyanobacteria . however, no significant differences were observed between the dietary treatments in the abundance of actinobacteria , bacteroidetes , chloroflexi , firmicutes , lentisphaerae , planctomycetes , proteobacteria , spirochaetes , tenericutes , or verrucomicrobia .

the response of the most abundant bacteria at the phylogenetic levels of class, order and family is revealed in a series of heat maps . at the class level, the class clostridia, bacilli, bacteroidia, erysipelotrichi, and gammaproteobacteria were the most abundant in all the animals . the relative abundance of bacilli , unclassified firmicutes , and unclassified cyanobacteria  was significantly lower in the said group when compared with cod . at the level of order, the predominant orders were: clostridiales, bacillales, enterobacteriales, bacteroidales, erysipelotrichales, and lactobacillales , and the percentage of bacillales , unclassified firmicutes , unclassified cyanobacteria  and rhodospirillales  was decreased in the said group, while the order xanthomonadales  was increased in percentage in the said group  when compared with the cod. at the family level, the predominant families included planococcaceae, enterobacteriaceae, moraxellaceae, peptostreptococcaceae, lachnospiraceae, ruminococcaceae, and erysipelotrichaceae . as compared with the feeding of cod, the percentages of unclassified pseudomonadales , rhodospirillaceae , unclassified bacillales , unclassified cyanobacteria , streptococcaceae , unclassified firmicutes , and planococcaceae  were lower, while the abundance of xanthomonadaceae  was higher in the said group .

influence of said feeding on the genera of fecal microbiota
the influence of the said on the fecal microbiome was observed from double hierarchical cluster analysis on the top  <dig> most abundant genera  and clustered by dietary treatment . among these genera, unclassified peptostreptococcaceae, unclassified ruminococcaceae, unclassified lachnospiraceae and turicibacter occurred together in one cluster, whereas unclassified enterobacteriaceae, solibacillus, and acinetobacter resided in the next most distant cluster. the other  <dig> genera cohabited in another main cluster. the average abundance by treatment of the genera and the response of the taxa to diet, i.e. influenced by  or significantly associated with  diet, are presented in figure 4b. in general, when compared with the cod group, said feeding increased the percentage of unclassified lachnospiraceae , stenotrophomonas , blautia  and prevotella , while the percentages of solibacillus , lysinibacillus , unclassified planococcaceae , unclassified firmicutes , lactococcus , unclassified cyanobacteria , unclassified bacillales , thalassospira , unclassified pseudomonadale , papillibacter , and roseburia  were lower in the said group. a tendency for a decrease in unclassified peptostreptococcaceae  and clostridium  was observed in the said group, and there was a tendency for an increase in the percentage of succinivibrio .

.

influence of said feeding on fecal microbiota – otus
for otus at 3% distance ,  <dig> different phylotypes were detected among all the samples. of these,  <dig> phylotypes were found in cod and  <dig> in said samples. the percentage of species-level taxa shared by the cod and said groups was 21%  . the mean number of otus at the 3% dissimilarity level present per cod sample was  <dig> , compared with  <dig> otus  in the said samples. data on the shared genera are available as supporting information .

among the  <dig> otus detected in the present study,  <dig> otus were significantly affected by diet, and the proportion of these otus was  <dig> % and  <dig> % among the total number of sequences , respectively. when compared with the cod, the predominant species, including otu <dig>  , otu <dig>  , and otu <dig>   were increased in percentage , while the abundance of otu <dig>   and otu <dig>   were reduced in the said group.

correlations between the fecal microbiota and the fecal vfa concentration
particular genera were found to be linked to vfa concentration as follows : five genera were linked to acetate ,  <dig> genera were correlated with propionate,  <dig> genera were associated with butyrate ,  <dig> genera were correlated with valerate ,  <dig> genera were correlated with isobutyrate ,  <dig> genera were associated with isovalerate,  <dig> genera were linked with tvfa .


at the species level, the species were found to be linked to vfa concentration as follows : seven otus were linked to acetate ,  <dig> otus were correlated with propionate,  <dig> otus were associated with butyrate , seven genera were correlated with valerate,  <dig> genera were correlated with isobutyrate,  <dig> genera were associated with isovalerate,  <dig> genera were correlated with tvfa . most of these species belong to the phyla bacteroidetes and firmicutes.

discussion
effects of said feeding on ruminal ph
the presence of sara is a major concern in terms of both productivity and animal welfare. ruminal ph thresholds of  <dig>  or less are generally used to give a clinical diagnosis of sara  <cit> . in the present study, the duration for which the ruminal ph was less than  <dig>  was about  <dig>  hours in the said group after the first feed; therefore, we considered that sara occurred in the cattle fed with said.

general characteristics of bovine fecal microbial communities
deep sequencing of the fecal samples collected from the dairy cows fed with the two diets provided a detailed view of the cattle fecal microbiome in the samples tested. we detected members of  <dig> phyla of bacteria. the majority of the pyrotags belonged to the firmicutes, proteobacteria, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria, and tenericutes these phyla have been shown previously to constitute the majority of gut-associated phylotypes in a variety of different mammalian species  <cit> , which suggests that these phyla, especially the firmicutes, play a critical role in the microbial ecology of the mammalian gut, including the bovine gut. other phyla represented were the chloroflesi, lentisphaerae, planctomycetes, spirochaetes, and verrucomicrogia. this indicates that, even though all of the bacterial phyla contain a diverse range of taxa, the metabolic potential of some phyla most likely allows some to dominate in bovine feces while others remain less abundant.

a comparison of all the genera from this study identified only  <dig> and  <dig> genera that were present across the entire sample collection in the cod or the said group, respectively . the majority of these genera were classified as firmicutes and proteobacteria. in addition, the characterization of the percentage abundance of all taxa in cattle given the two diets  suggests that the population structure of the microorganisms, including those of the genera solibacillus, lysinibacillus, unclassified lachnospiraceae, stenotrophomonas, blautia, and prevotella, were dramatically different in the cod and the said group. indeed, many lachnospiraceae, blautia, and prevotella spp. are common inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tracts and feces of cattle and goats  <cit> . the shifts in the abundance of these microorganisms in the feces of the dairy cows in this study suggest that members of these taxa harbor the metabolic potential to thrive when the diet is transferred rapidly from a traditional cod to a high-concentrate diet.

effects of said feeding on fecal microbiota
the said evaluated in this study seemed to have a complex effect on the fecal microbiota, and a common set of taxa seem to be responsive to the influence of said vs. traditional cod. some of these taxa have been identified in other studies to be responsive to or seemingly influenced by a high-grain diet, regardless of the differences in experimental protocols and animals   <cit> . a more likely explanation for shifts in the microbial community structure in animals fed said may be the abundance and digestibility of starch in the said compared with that in the fibrous plant materials associated with the cod. the hindgut of cattle is ideally suited for the fermentation of sugars from fibrous plant materials  <cit> . bovine species themselves do not produce the required fiber-degrading enzymes; instead, they harbor fungi, protozoa, and bacteria in their guts that can ferment the fiber. thus, bovine digestive physiology is dictated largely by the presence of fibrous materials in the rumen. if such animals are fed fiber-deficient diets, such as a high-grain diet, normal digestive processes can be disrupted, leading to the accumulation of fermentation acids, and thus lowering the ruminal ph  <cit> . in turn, these changes in the sources of sugar and starch, combined with shifts in ph, alter the digestive habitat, resulting in a fecal bacterial community that can have an impact on vfa production and pathogen shedding  <cit> . in the present study, the concentration of starch in the feces from said-fed animals was  <dig> times higher than that in cod-fed cattle . therefore, the large amount of starch in bovine feces during said feeding may be responsible for the changes in the composition of fecal microbial species. however, it should be noted that the said used in this study does not represent all types of sara-inducing diet. a previous study showed that the rumen ph and fermentation variables obtained with wheat challenge were indicative of lactic acidosis, whereas butyric and propionic sara was observed for corn and beet pulp challenges, respectively  <cit> . in the present study, the sara was induced by a corn-based diet. thus, further work is required to determine whether particular grain sources can influence the ecology of bovine fecal bacterial communities. nonetheless, this study indicated that there were fundamental differences in the fecal microbial communities of animals in the cod and said groups.

feeding high grain to cattle has a significant effect on the animal health  <cit> . studies have indicated that varying the forage to grain ratio in cattle rations can have a marked effect on populations of e. coli. some studies indicated that over feeding grain increased generic e. coli and/or o157:h <dig> populations  <cit> . although e. coli o157:h <dig> was not detected in any of the present samples and streptococcus pluranimalium and campylobacter spp.  were only detected in one fecal sample from the dairy cows fed with the said, the data presented herein demonstrate that changes in rations can affect the microbial ecology of the intestinal tract of cattle, which could potentially affect food safety.

the correlation between composition of the bacterial community and concentration of volatile fatty acids
this study showed the presence of high concentrations of propionate and butyrate in the feces of dairy cattle fed with the said. the concentrations of volatile fatty acids in this study are similar to results obtained in other studies  <cit> . correlation analysis showed that a significant positive correlation was observed between the genus stenotrophomonas and the levels of acetate, propionate, and tvfa . a previous study showed that stenotrophomonas spp. were the predominant bacteria found in samples of feces from pigs and chickens and existed as opportunistic pathogens  <cit> . our present study showed that said feeding was significantly associated with the percentage of the genus stenotrophomonas, and tvfa production, and this indicates that said feeding of livestock may increase the risk of human infection with these opportunistic pathogens.

in the present study, genera including thalassospira, unclassified cyanobacteria, unclassified peptostreptococcaceae, spirochaeta, lysinibacillus, unclassified bacillales, and papillibacter were negatively correlated with the production of propionate, butyrate and tvfa, respectively, and we also observed that thalassospira and unclassified cyanobacteria were negatively correlated with acetate concentration, which may have been caused by the toxic effect of this vfa. this hypothesis is supported by a proposed mechanism for fatty acid toxicity, in which short-chain organic acids, including acetate, propionate and butyrate, can diffuse freely across the bacterial membrane into the cell. inside the bacterial cell, the acid dissociates, thereby reducing the internal ph, which will cause internal cell damage  <cit> .

branched-chain vfa are derived from branched-chain amino acids such as leucine, valine, and isoleucine, and some studies have shown that several species of rumen bacteria, including prevotella ruminicola, bacteroides ruminicola and megasphaera elsdenii, have a specific requirement for one or more of the bcvfa  <cit> . allison and co-workers  <cit>  have indicated the importance of isovaleric and isobutyric acids in the synthesis of amino acids and lipids in two species of ruminococcus found in the rumen. interestingly, our studies have shown that a group of genera, including holdemania, subdoligranulum, anaerovibrio, desulfovibrio, leucobacter, moryella, propionibacterium, pseudoramibacter, terribacillus, unclassified actinobacteria, unclassified anaerolineaceae, unclassified proteobacteria, and weissella, are positively correlated with isobutyrate and isovalerate. other genera, such as parabacteroides, unclassified mollicutes, solibacillus, enterobacter, paludibacter, unclassified acetobacteraceae, klebsiella, unclassified lactobacillales, phocaeicola, unclassified lentisphaerae, treponema, and unclassified planctomycetaceae, were positively associated with valerate. however, to date, we know very little about the nutritional characteristics of these bacteria, and it is uncertain whether the growth of these bacteria is stimulated by bcvfa; therefore, the mechanism behind the association between the abundance of these bacteria and the concentrations of bcvfa is still not clear. nonetheless, this study indicates that the concentrations of isobutyrate and isovalerate may be associated with a particular group of bacteria, and that valerate concentration is linked with a different bacteria group.

in the present study, although we have shown there are possible associations between some vfa and the microbial community, our data are limited and may be biased, because the vfa and the microbial community measured in this study were collected at a single time point. on the other hand, the decrease or increase in these particular genera may be dependent on many other variables . similarly, the production of vfa is dependent on other variables   <cit> . therefore, it remains uncertain whether these significant correlations were influenced by other variables, and therefore if these significant correlation are causal. however, our results have revealed that the genera associated with propionate and butyrate producers may be similar, that the genus linked with the production of valerate is very distinctive, and that the species associated with isobutyate and isovalerate concentrations may belong to one group of ruminal bacteria.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to use a barcoded dna pyrosequencing method to survey the fecal microbiome of dairy cattle during sara. our analyses indicated that the microbial community in the feces of dairy cattle was affected by said feeding, and that said feeding may increase the risk of human infection with some opportunistic pathogens. our work also identified associations between fecal ecology and vfa. from the correlation analysis, genera representing some specific groups of bacteria were shown to be associated with some vfa. a better understanding of these microbial populations will allow for improved nutrient management and increased animal growth performance.

