BACKGROUND
mitochondrial gene sequences have become a powerful tool to identify evolutionary lineages or species in animals . their application has often lead to the detection of divergent lineages within otherwise morphologically uniform recognised species  <cit> . without any additional evidence from an explicit species delimitation approach, it is however rarely clear whether these lineages constitute reproductively isolated and/or ecologically different species or whether they are fully compatible, belonging to a single species  <cit> . the study of populations within a contact zone is thus a useful approach to assess the species status of otherwise cryptic lineages. indeed, these areas bring genetically distinct individuals in contact and offer them the possibility to interbreed: the resulting genetic signature observed in the contact zone provides information on the degree of reproductive isolation between the lineages.

here, we evaluated the species status of two lineages of the trochulus sericeus/hispidus complex  in an area of co-occurrence. these divergent mitochondrial lineages had been previously identified in a phylogenetic study of character evolution on the origin and the function of the hair-like shell structures in the genus  <cit> . while some species  clearly matched a distinct genetic lineages each, other morphologically described species  appeared to consist of several divergent mitochondrial lineages ; the taxonomic status of the latter remained undefined due to the lack of other  criteria of discrimination  <cit> .

this came as no surprise as the genus trochulus has triggered a remarkably long taxonomic debate on species numbers and limits  <cit> . the large morphological variability within trochulus and the multitude of transition forms led some authors to describe dozens of species  while others, based on the same shell morphological and genital anatomical evidence, recognised only a single one  <cit> . species delimitation based on morphological features in land snails is often critical: shells have been shown in several cases to be strongly influenced by environmental conditions during growth  <cit> , whereas genital anatomic criteria, whose dependence on the environment has not yet been assessed, require minute dissections and often rely, such as for trochulus spp., on subtle differences in size ratios  <cit> .

yet, a large mitochondrial sequence divergence per se does not necessarily warrant species status in land snails. unusually high levels of genetic diversity within populations have been shown for some gastropod taxa  <cit>  while other studies have demonstrated the presence of "good" cryptic species . we used both mitochondrial and nuclear markers along with shell morphometrics to answer the following questions:  is the mitochondrial divergence between the lineages reflected in the nuclear gene-pool, i.e. what is the degree of their reproductive isolation?  are there consistent differences in shell shape among the identified lineages or are they truly cryptic?  does the combination of these three datasets provide sufficient evidence to support the hypothesis of two distinct species?

RESULTS
distribution of mitochondrial lineages
two hundred and twenty four individuals were sequenced for a 16srrna gene fragment. the mitochondrial haplotype tree clustered the sampled individuals into  <dig> haplotypes  grouped into seven lineages , all of which were also identified in a previous study  <cit> . neighbour-joining and maximum parsimony methods revealed the same clusters . genetic divergence within lineage ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> % and between lineages between  <dig>  –  <dig> %. lineages  <dig> and  <dig> included most of the observed haplotypes  and accounted for 89% of all individuals  . lineages  <dig> and  <dig> diverged by  <dig> %. finally, the mitochondrial tree pointed out a series of lineages , largely distributed among recognised trochulus species: these were individuals sampled as juveniles and misidentified ; they were ruled out from the subsequent analyses.

for each locality, the east and north geographical coordinates , the haplotypes sampled, the percentage of l <dig> and l <dig> lineages  and the nucleotide diversity  with the standard deviation  are given. for each sampled locality, the number of genotyped individuals , the average number of observed alleles over the  <dig> loci  are given.

lineage  <dig> was predominant in the northern lower parts of the sarine valley, while lineage  <dig> was preferentially found upstream in the south. there were, however, several sites in the middle of the valley where both lineages co-occurred .

in addition, as evidenced by the mismatch distributions, lineage  <dig> contained a signal of spatial expansion, while lineage  <dig> did not .

spatial nuclear clustering and cyto-nuclear association
the spatial clustering approach with k =  <dig> of microsatellite multilocus genotype data from  <dig> individuals revealed a clear pattern: one hundred and two individuals were attributed to one cluster ,  <dig> to another ; all with posterior probabilities larger than  <dig> . seven individuals had genotypes that appeared to be of mixed origin . these results were identical for the best 15% of runs. geographically, cluster α was largely distributed in the north, downstream of the sarine valley, while cluster β was preferentially found upstream in the south . the contribution of alleles to these clusters were visualised with a factorial correspondence analysis .

there was a highly significant association of nuclear clusters with mitochondrial haplotype lineages ; lineage  <dig> being associated with nuclear cluster α and lineage  <dig> with cluster β. this association remained significant when only mixed populations were considered . however, the association was not categorical:  <dig> individuals with lineage  <dig> had cluster α and one individual vice versa. finally, all seven individuals classified as nuclear intermediates had a lineage  <dig> mitochondrial genome .

results of the assignments based on the nuclear genotypes into two clusters . lineage  <dig> and  <dig> refer to the mitochondrial group. the rxc exact contingency table test on independence was highly significant .

the sampling sites with exclusively 1/α and 2/β individuals were situated in the north and south margins of the sampling area, respectively . the sampling sites where both mitochondrial lineages and/or nuclear cluster co-occurred were all in the middle section of the valley  and all were close to either the rivers or the reservoir lake .

shell variation
a principle component analysis showed no tendency to group the individuals either according to mitochondrial lineage or nuclear cluster, and this along any of the significant axes . discriminant analyses, however, with grouping according to nuclear cluster or mitochondrial lineage were both significant . grouping according to nuclear cluster differentiated the snails on variables such as hfw , hsp , dom  and aes  which tended to be slightly larger on cluster α individuals. this resulted in 78% correct posterior classifications. grouping after mitochondrial lineage was less effective with only 69% of the cases correctly classified; the same variables were important, except dom.

discussion
mitochondrial lineages constitute good species
the use of a short  <dig> bp 16srrna gene fragment for identification purposes has shown the power of this approach  <cit> . a couple of individuals morphologically similar to the trochulus complex or juveniles from other species were detected due to their genetic divergence. while it is possible that these lineages interact among each other, these individuals were excluded from further analysis to ensure a rigorous statistical analysis.

the highly significant association between mitochondrial lineage  and nuclear cluster  in the contact zone of these parapatric lineages argues for two distinct gene-pools  and, hence, a specific distinctness of these evolutionary lineages, satisfying the criteria of most species concepts, in particular the unified species concept  <cit> . such a picture might have been also produced by very recent contact. but even considering the low dispersal capacity of land snails, the lineages could have come in contact at any time in the holocene after the retreat of the glacier from the valley, given the small geographic scale of the study. the chances are thus minimal that the contact zone formed only within the last few generations . we expect therefore that free interbreeding of the lineages for many generations would have resulted in completely intermixed genotypes in the contact zone and produced a deeper zone of reciprocal introgression. the rarity of such mixed genotypes and the spatially restricted area of introgression argue for some degree of reproductive isolation. this potential reproductive isolation does not allow equating the sampling sites with freely reproducing populations, which precludes their model dependent population genetic analysis.

if one applies the fastest mitochondrial divergence rate of 5% per million years ever suggested for land snails  <cit> , a sequence divergence of more than 7% between the lineages suggests that they split at least  <dig>  million years ago. slower, more realistic rates would entail an even older divergence. this implies that the lineages were separated for at least most of the pleistocene, giving them ample time to diverge and speciate.

this distinctness is also reflected in the shell morphology. both mitochondrial and nuclear data appeared to be suitable statistical predictors of different morphological groups. the nuclear cluster performs slightly better, which we attribute to the few cases of mitochondrial introgression of lineage l <dig> haplotypes into nuclear background α, blurring the picture . one could attribute the overlap between the two morphogroups to extensive mutual introgression at the relevant genes. this is however unlikely: even the populations furthest apart from each other  have overlapping morphologies . moreover, the possibility to statistically tell the two species apart and the approximately normally distributed factor scores  suggest that at least some of the quantitative shell shape differences are governed by multiple divergently evolved genes  <cit> . the observed morphological shell differences are thus rather due to drift than different biological function.

however, a classification success rate of only 78% and 69% respectively, means that it is impossible to reliably differentiate the two species' shells based on extensive morphometric measurements , let alone to distinguish them visually. in practice, this means that the two species will remain cryptic unless molecular markers are used for identification. while the lineage 1/cluster α is yet unnamed, 2/β individuals may be attributed to trochulus piccardi  <cit> . indeed, the lineage  <dig> individuals, in addition of grouping with the type individual of that species on the mitochondrial phylogeny, have been sampled within the geographical range described for this species  <cit> .

the distribution of t. piccardi that appears to be restricted to the upper sarine valley and surrounding regions suggests in situ evolution  <cit> . such a hypothesis requires the continuous presence of suitable habitat throughout the pleistocene glaciation cycles, probably scattered over steep south-facing slopes. however, such refugia need not to be large for such poor dispersing, small animals: it has been shown that they can survive on very small areas, provided they are surrounded by other population patches  <cit> .

the current distribution of the other trochulus species  lacks preciseness as this study's sampling scheme did not reach its northern limit. it can nevertheless be argued that it probably evolved in its own, not yet located pleistocene refugium and got into secondary contact with t. piccardi in the course of a holocene range expansion .

a pattern of speciation in isolation may turn out to be quite common within trochulus: several species with very restricted ranges in mountainous regions have been described such as t. graminicola , t. montanus , t. caelatus  or t. biconicus . generally speaking, it has been repeatedly put forward that alpine areas could provide pocket refugia for gastropods  <cit> . even though a pleistocene survival of land snails in alpine or other northern refugia has not been traditionally considered  <cit> , accumulating evidence suggests their importance for gastropod biodiversity  <cit> .

mitochondrial introgression in a hybrid zone
a few individuals with apparently admixed nuclear genotypes as well as some with the "wrong" mitochondrial genome could be detected . these intermediates suggest that, despite the relatively large evolutionary distance among the species, occasional hybridisation can take place .

interestingly, the introgression of mitochondrial genomes seems to be directional: only a single lineage 1/cluster β individual was found which is little as compared to the  <dig> lineage l2/cluster α individuals; besides the admixed nuclear genotypes all carried the lineage  <dig>  even though the sample sizes of the admixed populations were too small to perform formal tests on cytonuclear disequilibrium  <cit> , the apparent directional introgression of lineage  <dig> mitochondrial haplotypes into cluster α nuclear background begets the question whether this is due to intrinsic reproductive barriers and/or unidirectional gene-flow downstream the sarine river. differential mating preference, the usual explanation for the observed pattern, is unlikely in the present case: since these snails are reciprocally mating hermaphrodites , the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes of both individuals are expected to be transmitted. given the low dispersal capacity of land snails and their more or less isolated populations  <cit> , it is anyway likely that we are dealing here with a mixed hybrid zone  <cit> , where isolated hybrid populations may take different evolutionary trajectories. a hint in this direction was the somewhat peripheral sampling site motelon , where nuclear cluster α is associated to lineage  <dig>  contrary to all other sites: it may be due to one or a few introgression events, followed by drift in isolation.

CONCLUSIONS
the application of several lines of evidence allowed rejecting the hypothesis of a single species consisting of divergent lineages, despite occasional hybridisation in a contact zone. the detection of a putative hybrid zone in trochulus adds to the surprisingly low number of cases of hybridisation in land snails  <cit> , despite the ubiquitous presence of hybridisation in animal taxa  <cit> . this system – two cryptic hermaphrodite species with a small hybrid zone – seems excellently suited for further investigations on the evolutionary forces shaping species diversity in mountainous habitat rich regions, with a focus on the evolutionary consequences of hybridisation.

