BACKGROUND
body condition is central to animal life histories because the expression of many traits critical to survival and reproductive success is condition-dependent  <cit> . condition-dependence is, therefore, a topic of broad interest in both natural and sexual selection. one particularly striking example of the fundamental role of condition-dependence is in the context of mate choice  <cit> . females often choose among males on the basis of condition-dependent signals, which honestly advertise male quality as the expression of these signals may trade-off with other life-history traits  <cit> . many explanations have been put forward to explain the ubiquity of condition-dependent life histories and signals, with one influential theory predicting that the adaptive significance of condition-dependent signals may arise from the large number of genes that may influence variation in condition, thereby offering females the opportunity to assess a substantial proportion of male genomes in determining male quality  <cit> . under this hypothesis, selection favours females who based their mate choice decisions on condition-dependent signals because such behaviour increases the females' chances of obtaining good genes for their offspring. this line of reasoning can be extended to predict that one class of genes that may be of particular interest to females are those loci that contribute to variation in parasite resistance  <cit> , a major determinant of reproductive success and survival in many species  <cit> . the condition-mediated immunocompetence-handicap hypothesis   <cit> , proposes that females base their mate choice decisions on condition-dependent male signals in order to obtain genes that confer high immunocompetence for their offspring.

a key requirement of the cmih hypothesis, and other related life history hypotheses  <cit> , is the presence of positive genetic covariance between body condition and immune response. the cmih hypothesis proposes that it is this genetic covariance that enables a condition-dependent signal to advertise the quality of the parasite resistance genes that a male carries  <cit> . although there is abundant evidence for positive phenotypic associations between body condition and immunocompetence  <cit> , phenotypic analyses are insufficient to validate the cmih hypothesis because it remains unknown whether females selecting males with good body condition simply obtain a healthy mate, or if they actually acquire genes for their offspring that confer high immunocompetence. an additive genetic component has been established in several experimental systems for both body condition  and immune response . there is also evidence of a genetic correlation between immune function and sexual signals  <cit> , between immune function and life history traits  <cit>  and between body condition and male signal  <cit> . as far as we are aware, however, it has not been empirically demonstrated that variation in immune response is mediated by genetic variation in body condition, a key element of the cmih hypothesis  <cit> .

the overall aim of this study was to test directly for genetic covariance between indices of body condition and immunocompetence in a small passerine bird, the zebra finch taeniopygia guttata. zebra finches provide an ideal opportunity to determine if this critical genetic association exists for two reasons. first, this species is a model system for the study of sexual selection, in which female choice is based on a number of condition-dependent male signals that include song rate and bill colour  <cit> . second, there is phenotypic evidence of condition-dependent expression of immunocompetence in this species  <cit> . we therefore used this system to investigate the genetic basis of covariation between an index of body condition and an index of immunocompetence using a cross-fostering experiment. here we implement the cross-fostering experimental design of riska et al.  <cit>  to estimate additive genetic components of variance. an important advantage of this method was that it allowed us to partition the genetic covariance between these traits into sources attributable to direct additive genetic covariance, additive maternal genetic covariance, and the covariance between these sources.

RESULTS
genotype-environment interaction
the interaction term  testing for a genotype-environmental interaction for equation  was not significant for our indices of either immune response  or body condition . this showed that chicks from the two sampling sites did not respond differently to nest environments from the other population. similarly, there were no significant differences between the sites for the phenotypic means of our indices of either immunocompetence  or body condition , or the breeding values of broods for either trait . as explained in the methods section, the marginally non-significant difference between the populations in our index of body condition is not sufficient to cause a spurious correlation between our indices of body condition and immunocompetence. as shown in figure  <dig>  although one population tends to have slightly higher breeding values for our index of body condition, both populations span almost the full range of values for both traits. site was not, therefore, considered in the subsequent genetic models.

genetic covariance
when we based our analyses on comparisons between siblings alone, we detected positive genetic covariance between our indices of immune response and body condition. a plot of the breeding values, based on blup methodology, for our indices of immune response and body condition visually demonstrates the positive trend indicating a positive genetic correlation .

the mixed-model approach detected positive covariances for observational components of covariance y <dig> and y <dig> for our indices of both immune response and body condition . these components accounted for the majority of additive genetic variation in the design matrix , which was relatively free of confounding non-additive and environmental effects. the estimates of additive direct genetic variance for our indices of immune response and body condition were  <dig>  ± +  <dig>   and  <dig>  ± +  <dig>  , respectively. most importantly, however, we detected significant positive genetic covariance  between our indices of immunocompetence and body condition . the estimate of the genetic correlation  between our indices of immune response level and body condition was  <dig>  ± +  <dig>  , suggesting that approximately 56% of the additive genetic variance in body condition can be explained by genetic variation in our index of immune response, which was calculated as square of the genetic correlation  <cit> . no other causal components were significant in any of the analyses.

definitions modified from riska et al.  <cit> . further details are in the methods.

σao <dig> = additive direct genetic variance, σdo <dig> = dominance direct genetic variance, σaoam = direct-maternal additive genetic covariance, σam <dig> = additive maternal  genetic variance, σ2dm+c = dominance maternal genetic variance and common environmental variance , and σe <dig> = residual environmental variance. further details are in the methods.

σao <dig> = additive direct genetic variance, σdo <dig> = dominance direct genetic variance, σaoam = direct-maternal additive genetic covariance, σam <dig> = additive maternal  genetic variance, σ2dm+c = dominance maternal genetic variance and common environmental variance , and σe <dig> = residual environmental variance. asterisks denote statistical significance 

discussion
the relative roles of genetic and non-genetic factors in determining immunocompetence in birds is controversial. although theoretical models of sexual selection tend to assume that such traits have a high genetic component, previous empirical evidence has often proven equivocal. the results of our cross-fostering experiment support claims that a part of the variation in at least one aspect of immune response is caused by genes  <cit> . since males therefore differ in genetically-based levels of this aspect of immunocompetence, females could conceivably target immunocompetence during mate choice as predicted by the cmih hypothesis.

in addition to indicating that immunocompetence is heritable in zebra finches, our experiment found substantial positive genetic covariance between our indices of immunocompetence and body condition. we found that approximately 56% of genetic variation in our index of body condition may be explained by genetic variation in our index of immune response. since secondary sexual ornaments are typically condition-dependent in zebra finches  <cit> , females that select males on the basis of well developed ornaments are likely to gain genes for their offspring which confer higher levels of immunocompetence. therefore, our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the genes that determine parasite-resistance may be a major target of sexual selection in this species.

the significant genetic covariance between our indices of immunocompetence and condition implies that the same genes underlie a proportion of the variation in both traits. however, although females selecting males with well developed ornaments are likely to gain genes that confer higher levels of immunocompetence, our genetic analysis is not sufficient to conclusively demonstrate that there are some genes that affect our indices of both immunocompetence and body condition. it is possible that linkage disequilibrium, generated by selection for both traits, may also contribute to the genetic covariance we have found between these two traits. distinguishing pleiotropy from linkage disequilibrium in such a species is difficult; one approach would be the development of a pleiotropic quantitative trait loci map of both traits, but such techniques are yet to be applied in wild passerine populations.

the magnitude of the genetic correlation between our indices of immunocompetence and condition is surprising because theory predicts that such heritable genetic variation should be eroded through selection. what factors could maintain such variation? one possible explanation is that a third trait not included in this analysis trades off with our indices of immunocompetence and condition  <cit> . for example, one aspect of growth rate displays a negative genetic correlation with our index of immunocompetence , suggesting that a more complex model of resource allocation than the simpler two-trait system of our indices of immunocompetence and condition might need to be considered to understand the maintenance of genetic variance in these traits.

our results should be interpreted cautiously as this study suffers from a number of limitations. first, although our reciprocal cross-fostering design is efficient at detecting additive genetic effects, it is less powerful in estimating other quantitative genetic components. our results indicated that none of the other causal components of covariance that we estimated were found to be significant. on first inspection, this suggests that non-additive genetic and environment effects do not play a role in generating covariance between our indices of immunocompetence and body condition, but we caution that this interpretation would be premature. because the cross-fostering experimental design and the subsequent analytical method that we have used are primarily designed to detect additive genetic components of variance and covariance  <cit> , we cannot exclude the possibility that environmental and/or non-additive components do exist and that we have simply failed to detect to them. this possibility is highlighted by the covariance estimates in table  <dig>  many of which are large in magnitude and are only non-significant because of the very large standard errors. under these circumstances, no firm conclusions about the absence of environmental or non-additive covariance between these two traits can be drawn.

a second limitation of cross-fostering designs that use full sib cross-fostering is that they can only control for those aspects of environmental variance that occur after the cross-foster manipulation itself. in the case of avian studies, chicks are typically cross-fostered within  <dig> hours of hatching. hence, although such studies can estimate variation associated with later incubation and parental feeding, they cannot deal with variance in factors such as the way mothers provision eggs or anything that happens in first few hours in the nest. there is always a risk, therefore, that cross-foster studies will inflate the estimate genetic components because these also include pre-cross-foster environmental components. nevertheless, in the case of our study such environmental covariance is unlikely to be solely responsible for the high positive genetic covariance between our indices of immunocompetence and condition because the sire-offspring observation component is large and positive, which is unaffected by this source of variation.

the third limitation of our study is the lack of information about the adults used to establish the breeding experiment. because the adults were caught from wild populations we do not know whether they were related to one another, their immunological history, or whether the parental generation experienced selection, all of which could effect the pattern of variation among individuals. in addition, although field parent and laboratory offspring relationships have been used to estimate genetic components of variance, it is not clear how differences between the lab and field environments would affect the genetic estimates in a model as complex as the one employed here.

finally, our study is also limited by the fact that we have only used a single index of body condition and a single index of immunocompetence. using residual values of body weight on skeletal size is a widely used index of body condition in birds, but it is well established that this method is not without its limitations and dangers  <cit> . such an index cannot, for instance, differentiate between different aspects of condition, such as fat deposition and muscle size, and it has been shown that such an index can retain an element of body size itself. we nevertheless used this measure for our genetic tests, firstly, because it the index of body condition that has been used widely in previous phenotypic studies and is therefore of particular interest to avian studies, secondly, because it has repeatedly been shown to be under selection in avian populations  <cit> , and thirdly, because it is not currently possible to perform multivariate analyses  using the genetic framework employed here. it would nevertheless be interesting in the future to test for genetic correlations among alternative measures of body composition, and to perform multivariate analyses if the statistical techniques are developed. similarly, like any other index of immune response, our single measure of cell-mediate immunity cannot provide information on all elements of vertebrate immunocompetence  <cit> . again, we used this index in our genetic study because it has been widely employed in phenotypic tests  <cit> , has been shown to be associated with important components of fitness such as survival  <cit> , and there is even limited evidence that variation in this measure may be positive associated with variation humoral immune response . but this should not obscure the facts that future studies of other elements of immunity are required to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the genetic basis of parasite resistance, and that multivariate models would help to tease these apart. ideally, a full genetic variance-covariance matrix is required for a series of indices of body condition and a series of indices of immunocompetence, but this is well beyond the scope of the current study.

CONCLUSIONS
our results support a key prediction of the cmih hypothesis; that there is positive genetic covariance between an index of body condition and an index of immunocompetence. more generally, although we have primarily been concerned here with the link between our indices of immunocompetence and body condition in the context of the cmih hypothesis, a genetic link between indices of condition and immune function would also have implications outside sexual selection theory. condition-dependence is a general feature of many aspects of life histories in many animal species  <cit> . the genetic correlation between our indices of immunocompetence and body condition that we have found in zebra finches suggests that the inter-relationships between many such traits may also prove to be parasite-mediated  <cit> . the prevalence of condition-dependent life histories may therefore arise, in part at least, through parasite resistance being a target of both natural and sexual selection. the ongoing challenge is to test the generality of these findings, that is whether there is significant positive genetic covariance between other indices of body condition and immunocompetence. more generally, it would be interesting to know the pattern of genetic covariance between various measures of condition and a suite of fitness-related traits.

