BACKGROUND
it is becoming increasingly clear that a mode of attached growth more closely resembles in situ conditions for many microorganisms in different environments and might likely be a universal feature that presents an important physiology to explore in addition to the typically conducted studies on planktonic cells  <cit> . the subsurface is a physically dynamic habitat where fluxes in water, nutrients, temperature, ph, and osmolarity can create challenges for microorganisms to survive and thrive, and dehydration events can inhibit motility and limit nutrient availability that can result in decreased microbial activity  <cit> . biofilms can provide a protective habitat for bacterial cells to exist, and recent work has demonstrated in situ biofilms in a variety of habitats  <cit> . biofilm matrices can retain water, sorb nutrients, and protect against rapid changes in salinity, osmolarity, ph, nutrient availability, and redox  <cit> , and we have observed the formation of biofilms  that contain desulfovibrio species in sediments placed down-well at bioremediation field sites .

biofilms produced by sulfate-reducing bacteria  have been studied under the context of metal exposure and corrosion. for example, work done with desulfovibrio desulfuricans g <dig> not only demonstrated the precipitation of hexavalent uranium and lead in the periplasm of the cell but also within the biofilm matrix  <cit> . srb populations have been observed to adhere to enteric bacteria and other aerobes that have formed biofilms on underground pipelines, allowing further corrosion to occur  <cit> . different corrosion studies indicate that the biofilms produced by srb populations can be composed mainly of proteins, with minimal exopolysaccharide present  <cit> , and this coincides with our study of d. vulgaris biofilms on glass in that the eps  was not enriched for carbohydrate compared to other bacteria  <cit> . although these studies provide insights into corrosion and metal-reducing mechanisms of srb biofilms, little is known about the general response in srbs that underlie physiological adaptation between the biofilm and planktonic growth modes.

previous studies done on aerobic or facultative pathogens have shown differential gene expression and protein profiles for biofilm cells compared to planktonic cells in different microorganisms  <cit> , and the results suggest that biofilm formation is a complex and highly regulated process  <cit> . in order to understand molecular mechanisms of d. vulgaris survival within the subsurface and the development of srb biofilms in different environments, we compared d. vulgaris hildenborough biofilm and planktonic cell transcript and protein levels. our results indicated that d. vulgaris biofilm cells altered transcript and protein abundances involved in carbon and energy metabolism, amino acid metabolism, stress response, proteases, and ribosomal proteins. these results suggested that biofilm cells were not merely analogous to planktonic cells in stationary-phase. characterization of physiological advantages and constraints of the biofilm growth state may lead to a better understanding of how to stimulate  or inhibit  srb biofilms.

RESULTS
growth and sampling
three replicates of d. vulgaris cultures were grown in a continuous reactor system  with lactate  as the growth-limiting energy and carbon source and sulfate  as the electron acceptor. the cdc reactors were maintained at a dilution rate of  <dig>  h- <dig>  planktonic and biofilm biomass was collected 70 h post-coupon insertion, and both protein and carbohydrate levels had approached steady-state under the tested growth conditions at this time point . by 70 h the biofilm had 12 ±  <dig>  μg/cm <dig> protein and the biofilm maintained a carbohydrate:protein ratio  of approximately  <dig>  . planktonic cultures had a protein level of 250 ±  <dig>  μg/ml with an approximate c:p ratio of  <dig>  . these results are consistent with the fact that d. vulgaris does not produce a carbohydrate-rich biofilm matrix under the described growth conditions  <cit> .

biofilms were compared via both transcriptomics and proteomics to the planktonic counterparts grown continuously within the reactor system and with planktonic cells grown under batch conditions. based upon the majority of studies with aerobic and facultative bacteria, the notion of heterogeneity and complexity within biofilms has become increasingly appreciated  <cit>  and can play a role in the interpretation of overall expression analyses. heterogeneity issues remain to be resolved for biofilm studies; however, models predicted that the d. vulgaris biofilms in the described study were not limited for lactate or sulfate at the given biofilm depths  based upon substrate diffusivity with a biofilm accumulation model  <cit> . in addition, complete correlation between the transcriptomic and proteomic data sets cannot be expected  <cit>  , although some genes showed similar transcript and protein trends. therefore each data set  revealed key aspects of the physiological state of the cells. while a recent study provided an estimate of translation-related sequence features to protein levels, it is still not known to what degree different mrna and protein molecules differ with respect to in vivo half-lives, although nie et al.  <cit>  predicted that protein stability only accounted for 5% of the variation.

comparison of biofilm to planktonic cells
the mrna levels between biofilm and planktonic cells were compared using hierarchical clustering analysis  and principle components analysis . hcl compared similarities between all significantly differentially expressed genes  between biofilm cells and the different planktonic cells. the growth-phase differences of batch, planktonic growth have been previously described  <cit> . the gene expression profile for biofilm cells did not cluster with exponential- and stationary-phase planktonic cells . pca showed a similar result when genes with significantly altered expression were considered .

the biofilm mrna data were then compared to planktonic cells grown with different carbon/energy sources via a gene expression correlation matrix with a centered pearson correlation based upon expression of all detected genes . biofilm cells were distinct when compared to multiple physiological states and were not highly correlated with cells grown planktonically with pyruvate/sulfate , hydrogen/sulfate , formate/sulfate , or fermentatively . in addition, the comparison of biofilm cells to either reactor- or batch-planktonic cells were more similar to each other  than the comparison of biofilm cells to the other growth states . these results suggested that the biofilm is a physiological state distinct from lactate-grown, planktonic cells , and that many genes in biofilm cells had similar expression levels regardless of being compared to reactor- or batch-planktonic cells. in addition, the lactate/sulfate-grown biofilm cells had a disticnt expression profile when compared to planktonic cells grown with different electron/carbon sources .

transcripts and proteins with increased abundances
a total of  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts had increased expression in biofilm cells when compared to batch- or reactor-grown planktonic cells, respectively . when compared to either reactor- or batch-planktonic cells, most of the same hypothetical and conserved hypothetical genes had altered expression. more motility genes were up-expressed in biofilm cells when compared to batch cells; however, the five genes up-expressed in biofilm cells when compared to reactor-planktonic cells were also up-expressed when compared to batch-planktonic cells. current work includes the elucidation of flagellar genes needed for biofilm development and maintenance. regardless of biofilm cells being compared to reactor- or batch-planktonic cells, significantly up-expressed genes in biofilm cells were involved in amino acid metabolism, energy conservation, signal transduction, and translation .

in the itraq proteome analysis, a total of  <dig> proteins passed the data filtering criteria , and there were  <dig> and  <dig> proteins that had significantly increased levels in the biofilm cells when compared to the batch or reactor planktonic samples, respectively. energy conversion, stress response, and unknown function proteins had increased abundances and amino acid metabolism and signal transduction had decreased abundances in biofilm cells when compared to either batch- or reactor-planktonic cells .

this table lists all proteins that were significantly increased or decreased  when biofilm cells were compared to batch, planktonic cells.

this table lists all proteins that were significantly increased or decreased  when biofilm cells were compared to reactor, planktonic cells.

when comparing the transcriptomic and proteomic data, some corresponding mrnas and proteins both displayed increased abundances. for example, a presumptive c <dig> cytochrome , echf/echf , hybrid cluster , and hyba/hyba  , and these respective results corroborated the other . however, as expected, there were instances that elevated mrna levels did not correspond to increased protein abundances . in addition, there were detected proteins with elevated levels and not corresponding mrna levels when compared to planktonic, reactor cells . these results are most likely a result of differences in mrna and protein half-lives and highlight the utility of both transcriptomic and proteomic analyses.

transcripts and proteins with decreased abundances
a total of  <dig> transcripts were down-expressed in biofilm cells compared to the planktonic counterparts grown in either the batch or reactor systems. similar to the up-expression patterns, numerous down-expressed genes  were annotated as hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins. interestingly, 10% of the down-expressed genes were predicted to be involved with translation and ribosomal structure/biogenesis. genes involved with translation were down-expressed for biofilm cells compared to either planktonic state .

in a previous study, ribosomal gene expression decreased by 3-fold during the exponential/stationary-phase transition for planktonic cells and remained 2-fold down throughout the stationary-phase  <cit> . correspondingly, several ribosomal genes were identified in the transcriptomic and proteomic data in the current study and displayed a similar trend in decreased abundances . however, when the log-ratios of ribosomal protein transcripts with significant expression changes  were compared between biofilm and planktonic cells in different growth phases, there was less down-expression for biofilm cells compared to stationary-phase cells .

because the production of ribosomal transcripts/proteins typically correlates with metabolic activity, we sought to confirm this result by measuring the activity levels of planktonic and biofilm cells with the respiratory indicator, 5-cyano- <dig> ,-ditolyl tetrazolium chloride  as previously described  <cit> . biofilm cells were only 2-fold less active than exponential-phase cells. however, stationary-phase cells were approximately 500-fold less active than exponential-phase cells and 300-fold less active than biofilm cells. the metabolic activity of biofilm cells might not result in ‘exponential’ cell growth  per se, but may provide the energy required for nutrient uptake and biofilm maintenance. indeed, a recent study that developed a model to explain variation in growth rate optimization and cellular stoichiometry hypothesized that resource allocation and nutrient-use efficiency was a result of distinct growth and uptake activities  <cit> . our results suggested that the biofilm physiological state should be further evaluated in the context of ‘growth’ and resource allocation in comparison to planktonic cells.

the notion that biofilm cells were different from stationary-phase cells contradicts previous work that estimates the strong gene expression similarity between these growth states for different bacteria, albeit mostly aerobes  <cit> . these results corroborated the increased expression of ribosomal transcripts and protein levels that indicated biofilm cells were active and that slower cell division  does not equate to lower metabolism. in order to determine possible functions that contributed to the distinct state of d. vulgaris biofilms, we further analyzed various functional categories of genes and proteins in biofilm cells with altered abundances.

 energy conversion
the expression of genes involved with energy conversion and carbon flow within the biofilm is a major contributor to the uniqueness of the biofilm growth state regardless of being compared to batch- or reactor-planktonic cells. biofilm cells had different mrna and protein levels related to the pyruvate to acetate and formate metabolic nodes. two annotated pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductases, which convert pyruvate to acetyl-coa, had differential expression in biofilm cells with up-expression of oor  and down-expression of por  compared to planktonic cells . expression of the mrna was verified via qpcr, and oor and por genes were up- and down-expressed, respectively.

although expression for the annotated pyruvate-formate lyase was not altered, the abundance of formate dehydrogenase  was increased . however, only protein abundance was increased for fdng <dig>  . a cytochrome c <dig> , which is the electron transfer partner for the formate dehydrogenase in d. vulgaris <cit> , had increased abundances for both mrna and protein levels . because formate dehydrogenase was increased in biofilms, enzymatic assays were done to compare activity within biofilm and planktonic cells. crude extracts of biofilm cells had an approximate 26-fold higher rate of formate-dependent methyl viologen reduction than reactor planktonic cells, and these results indicated that the increased gene expression corresponded to increased enzymatic activity.

formate, like hydrogen, has been proposed to be a mechanism of electron flow in desulfovibrio <cit> . formate cycling within lactate-respiring biofilm cells could explain the increase in expression and activity of the formate dehydrogenases and might suggest that biofilm cells are better able to cycle formate compared to planktonic cells in a stirred, homogenous environment. additional hydrogenases were also differentially expressed within the biofilm cells compared to planktonic cells . the possible route of proton and electron cycling in srb has long been debated and biofilm cells could be an additional physiological state to provide significant insights.

 carbohydrate metabolism
d. vulgaris biofilm cells had several genes involved with glycerol uptake and utilization shift in expression . these results suggested that biofilm cells may use phospholipids released from lysed neighboring cells and that these may possibly serve as a carbon backbone for amino acid biosynthesis because the overall glycolytic pathway was not significantly up-expressed. in addition, an annotated fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase  was transcriptionally down-expressed in biofilm cells compared to reactor planktonic cells and suggested a decrease in gluconeogenesis. decreased gluconeogenic activity may indicate a decreased requirement for new amino sugars for cell wall synthesis, and this observation corresponded with the decreased expression of genes involved with cell wall synthesis and cell division. it should be noted that biofilm cells did not appear to be smaller based upon electron microgrpahs .

 nitrogen metabolism
the increased expression of nrfa  may indicate the available nitrogen source  might be limited within some biofilm cells. nrfa, annotated as cytochrome c nitrite reductase , had increased mrna expression within biofilm cells compared to planktonic cells. this result is interesting because ammonia was added as the nitrogen input into the system and nitrite reduction has not been linked to growth  <cit> . d. vulgaris also up-expressed nrfa when cells were exposed to acetone, ethanol, nitrite, and alkaline ph  <cit> ; he and zhou, unpublished results], and these results suggested that nrfa expression may be part of a more general response. d. vulgaris can utilize nitrogen via the nitrogenase that is encoded on the 200-kb plasmid , but nifu gene expression did not change as detected via qpcr .

 stress response
various chaperone proteins, including uspa  and three hsp <dig> genes , had increased transcripts within the biofilm compared to both reactor and batch planktonic cells . d. vulgaris biofilms had increased transcripts for the stress response proteins superoxide dismutase , alkyl hydroperoxide reductase , msrb  and ahpc/tsa  and an increase in protein levels for sodb . however, preliminary results indicated that d. vulgaris biofilm cells do not have increased tolerance to dissolved oxygen in terms of growth initiation .

although mrna levels for stress response genes were elevated in the biofilms of other organisms , the anaerobic, hyperthermophile thermotoga maritima showed decreased expression in similar genes  <cit> . in addition, d. vulgaris grown on steel slides showed a similar trend in down-expression of related genes  <cit> . for aerobic bacteria, oxidative stress within biofilms is thought to be a result of slow growth in conjunction with a shift away from oxygen respiration at different biofilm depths  <cit> . for d. vuglaris biofilms, the relatively slower growth may be associated with lower intracellular levels of reducing equivalents that would leave the cell more susceptible to potential oxidizing agents, and a defense mechanism could be elevated levels for genes and proteins involved in potential detoxification.

these responses are also thought to increase during iron limitation due to the increase in iron sequestration and intracellular accumulation  <cit> . this is not surprising given the ability of some metals to form hydroxyl radical, metallo-oxo, and metallo-peroxo species  <cit> . the elevated abundances for genes and proteins involved in detoxification of oxidative agents also coincided with the up-expression of iron acquisition mechanisms in biofilm cells  and the possible connection between iron storage and oxidative damage response may at least partially explain the observed expression profiles.

interestingly, more genes annotated as proteases were down-expressed, including lon protease , clpx , clpb , htra peptidase , htpg , and hflc  than were up-expressed. a decrease in proteases for d. vulgaris biofilm cells contrasted with observations for stationary-phase planktonic cells  <cit> . biofilm cells might simply have a slower turnover of proteins due to the biofilm growth mode, but further research is needed to determine this characteristic.

biofilm cells had altered transcript expression profiles for methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins, histidine kinases, response regulators, and sensory box proteins . d. vulgaris contains a number of two-component signal transduction systems and methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins; however, little is known about the required signals and regulation that these proteins may impose on the cells nor how that regulation contributes to biofilm formation and/or disassembly.

 iron acquisition
d. vulgaris biofilms may be iron limited as indicated by the increase in transcripts for the subunit feoa , part of the iron transporter feo, and fepc , a presumptive abc transporter for iron uptake. however, similar genes were up-expressed in d. vulgaris stationary-phase, planktonic cells  <cit> , and it is possible that an iron acquisition response is the result of increased sulfides associated with d. vulgaris growth in general. the iron storage protein bacterioferritin  had increased transcripts within biofilm cells along with the ferritin storage protein . increased abundances of iron sequestration proteins has been reported in other biofilm studies  <cit>  but iron transport systems like feoab were transcriptionally down-expressed in d. vulgaris biofilm cells grown on steel  <cit> . several studies have indicated that iron plays different roles within biofilm formation of various organisms. p. aeruginosa uses iron as a signal to produce thick biofilms with mushroom morphology while excess iron is detrimental to s. aureus and l. pneumophila biofilms  <cit> .

 transporters
biofilm cells up-expressed four presumptive abc transporter genes  and increased abundances for two transporter proteins  . differential expression of various abc transporters has commonly been reported in different biofilms   <cit> . the putative substrates have yet to be determined, but biofilm cells may transport different small molecules and solutes compared to planktonic cells.

for d. vulgaris biofilm cells, various subunits of the sec transport system were transcriptionally down-expressed including sece , secy , and secg , and secd at the protein level. interestingly, a preprotein translocase, yajc , was increased at the protein level. different types of secretion may be increased as indicated by increased transcripts of a type i system  and increased protein levels of an annotated type iii protein secretion system . the orf, dvua <dig>  is located on the d. vulgaris plasmid , and a strain cured of the plasmid is biofilm deficient  <cit> .

biofilm cells differentially expressed two putative sulfate permeases at the mrna level; dvu <dig> was up-expressed and dvu <dig> was down-expressed. a putative lactate permease mrna  was down-expressed in biofilm cells, and a similar trend of expression was observed with exponential-phase, planktonic cells  <cit> .

 extracellular proteins
in-gel digestion analysis of the extracellular samples revealed  <dig> proteins that passed the proteomic analysis cutoff criteria. the list was screened against signal and transmembrane domain predictions generated by phobius  <cit>  and revealed a general enrichment for proteins with signal sequences and few proteins that contained transmembrane domains were identified . the most highly abundant protein in the sample was dvu <dig>  annotated to have a vonwillebrand factor domain . interestingly, vwf proteins are large, multimeric glycoproteins that can have a variety of roles with different ligands that include cell adhesion, pattern formation, and signal transduction  <cit> . however, the presumptive protein is also annotated to contain a hemolysin-type calcium-binding domain and only has 21% homology with the closest homolog. interestingly, a paralog of dvu <dig>  dvu <dig>  was also enriched in the extracellular protein fraction from biofilms. in addition, two presumptive proteins that had increased protein but not mrna levels, dvu <dig> and dvu <dig>  were also detected at significant levels in the extracellular, biofilm fraction. hence, though the function of these proteins in d. vulgaris remains obscure, participation in extracellular matrix formation in biofilm structures could be a potential role. further work is underway to determine both structural and enzymatic proteins in the extracellular biofilm.

 fatty acid and lipid synthesis
numerous genes and proteins involved in fatty acid synthesis had lower abudances in biofilm cells . the gene lpxc  that encodes udp-3-0-acyl n-acetylglucosamine deacetylase  was decreased in biofilm cells. transcripts for a tolb protein, which is part of the peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein  multiprotein complex and associates with ompa and lpp to contribute to membrane integrity and peptidoglycan turnover, were decreased. there were also decreased protein levels for undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase . these results corroborated the suggestion that biofilm cells were in a different growth state relative to exponential-phase cells in terms of cellular division .

 amino acid and nucleotide production
the decrease in amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis transcripts and/or proteins within biofilm cells corresponded well with the reduction of protein synthesis and cell division . only two genes annotated as enzymes involved with amino acid synthesis were increased in biofilm cells, glta  and cysk/cysk  that encode putative glutamate and cysteine synthases, respectively. cysteine synthase converts o-acetyl-serine and hydrogen sulfide to cysteine. transcriptional analysis of t. maritima biofilms revealed an increase in cysteine biosynthesis enzymes as well as an increase in iron and sulfur uptake systems and proteins used for the incorporation of iron-sulfur clusters  <cit> . since sulfates are usually incorporated into cells by the cysteine biosynthesis pathway, the authors suggested that an increase in transcripts for cysteine biosynthesis was a result of the demand for iron-sulfur containing proteins  <cit> . several iron-sulfur containing proteins had elevated abundances at both the transcript and protein levels within d. vulgaris biofilms. in addition, increasing amounts of cysteine are toxic to d. vulgaris planktonic cells, and growth effects are observed above 1 mm . whether the increase in enzymes involved with cysteine biosynthesis is due to a demand for sulfur acquisition and/or a means to help regulate local sulfide concentrations is yet to be determined.

genes annotated for enzymes involved in tryptophan biosynthesis were down-expressed within biofilm cells  . two enzymes that contribute to aromatic amino acid and quinone synthesis, 3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate carboxy-lyase  and type ii 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase  were also down-expressed. coinciding with these data, seven of thirteen enzymes involved with converting phosphoenolpyruvate and erythrose 4-phophate into tryptophan had decreased protein abundances . in previous studies, enzymes involved in tryptophan biosynthesis were elevated in young e. coli biofilms but declined during biofilm maturation  <cit> . in this study, the decreased levels of tryptophan genes/proteins corresponded with the decreased abundances in enzymes involved with converting tryptophan to indole, which is thought to inhibit biofilm formation in e. coli <cit> . although d. vulgaris has an annotated tryptophanase, expression did not change significantly within the biofilms. the effect and/or role of indole on d. vulgaris biofilm formation and maturation are not known; however, hydroxyindole increased the formation of d. vulgaris batch biofilms 2-fold .

CONCLUSIONS
our study compared multiple d. vulgaris transcriptomes and proteomes from different growth phases in the same defined sulfate medium with the same carbon and energy source . the data indicated that the d. vulgaris biofilm growth mode was distinct when compared to both exponential- and stationary-phases in the planktonic state. the biofilm transcriptome did have a cluster of genes  with similar expression patterns to stages of stationary-phase that included putative proteins involved in dna modification, protein turnover, signal transduction, and phage genes, but over half of the genes were annotated as hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins. the role of the hypothetical proteins  are not known but likely play a role in the distinct physiological state of the biofilm  <cit> .

in comparison, most of the genes that had similar expression values between biofilm and exponential-phase cells displayed a trend of down-expression  or no significant change. in addition, the transcript levels for  <dig> rrnas were more similar to exponential-cells as were metabolic indicator assays. these results indicated that the biofilm growth-phase was a distinct mode of growth that was not analogous to stationary-phase and this result contradicts previous studies with aerobic microorganisms.

gene expression responses in the biofilm cells included the down-expression of an operon that encoded por , acetate kinase, a possible lactate dehydrogenase, a phosphotransacetylase, and ech/ech. interestingly, preliminary results with a Δecha mutant indicated a deficiency in biofilm formation . also related to carbon flow, mrna for three of the four subunits  of a separate pfo were up-expressed in the biofilm cells . the putative por gene encodes a large , multi-domain protein whereas the oor genes encode putative subunits of a multimeric protein  <cit> . both por and oor are predicted to catalyze decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-coa, but the altered levels may result from different regulatory features of the different pfos  or different kinetic characteristics.

the respective increase and decrease of presumptive electron transfer systems suggested that electron flow is altered in biofilms compared to both exponential- and stationary-phase cells. the different patterns of gene expression for modules in electron transfer systems may reflect differences in rates of nutrient acquisition and incorporation. these results indicate that d. vulgaris biofilm has an altered metabolism not a lower metabolism. with respect to hydrogen, a recent study showed that biofilm cells grown on an electrode up-expressed hyn- <dig> and hyd,  and  hydrogenases, respectively, as well as hmc genes  <cit> . in comparison, d. vulgaris biofilms on glass slides did not up-express the same hydrogenases nor the hmc genes when grown as biofilms with sulfate and lactate.

future work is needed to discern protein interactions that control metabolic flux and cell behavior through particular nodes in order to elucidate the relationships between genotype and phenotype in the context of distinct cellular states, including young and mature biofilms. while the expression of other systems is certainly involved in biofilm physiology, the presented results indicated that sulfate-reducing biofilm cells use a unique combination of genes and proteins to establish distinct energy flow and cell associations different from sulfate-reducing planktonic cells. similar developmental states have been described in p. aeruginosa and candida albicans biofilms  <cit> . this study provides insights into the formation, growth, and development of anaerobic, sulfate-reducing biofilms, and the improved understanding of the genetic control for srb biofilms will have implications for biotechnology, the environment, and human health.

