BACKGROUND
accurately predicting the protein structure is one of the major goals of computational structural biology. in the recent years, computational methods for evaluation and modelling of proteins and their interactions have emerged and become, in some areas, a viable alternative for time and resource-consuming structural biology experiments. however, predicting the structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence is still a very challenging task and new approaches to model and evaluate protein structures are needed.

all proteins share the same backbone, with their structure and function determined solely by the side chains of the  <dig> different amino acids. therefore, a precise modelling of residue-residue and residue-backbone interactions is a crucial aspect in computational evaluation of proteins. computational methods rely on a potential function to evaluate the interactions within proteins  <cit> . in general, two types of the potential functions currently exist: physics-based  <cit>  and knowledge-based  <cit> . the former rely on the basic physical principles to describe the forces that drive structure and function of proteins. however, physical force fields applied to proteins rely on estimations and simplifications to make them computationally feasible  <cit> . knowledge-based potentials  derive statistical preferences on different features from structural and sequence databases and implicitly capture the many factors affecting the protein in its natural environment. a few problems are related to statistical potentials including the boltzmann assumption  <cit> , additivity of terms  <cit> , choosing a reference state  <cit>  and transferability of potentials  <cit> . however, knowledge-based potentials have numerous applications and were successfully used in threading  <cit> , validation of experimentally determined protein structures  <cit> , ab initio structure prediction  <cit> , decoy discrimination  <cit>  and more.

in spite of the successful use of knowledge-based potentials in many areas, they have limited applicability for high-resolution description of side chain packing. in coarse-grained potentials, various approximations are used to avoid explicit consideration of side chains; thus, a residue can be represented as a single pseudo atom located at the center of mass of side chain atoms  <cit> . such approximation limits the ability of coarse-grained potentials to reconstruct the fine details of residue-residue interactions. all-atom potentials treat side chain atoms explicitly and usually derive statistics on pairwise atom-atom distances  <cit> . however, each atom is considered separately and not as a part of a side chain. therefore, information on mutual constraints between atoms is lost. importance of orientation dependence of side chain packing was recognized and applied to fold recognition  <cit>  and to analysis of pi-pi, pi-cation, and hydrophobic interactions  <cit> . in the recent study, orientation dependence was tackled by treating residues as being composed of rigid blocks  <cit> . obtaining statistics on mutual orientation of the blocks allowed successful decoy discrimination and accurate side chain modelling  <cit> . an alternative approach for a detailed description of residue-residue interactions was recently presented by us  <cit> . this approach defines the interaction of two residues in terms of four distances between two pairs of atoms . the pairs of atoms are either chosen from the residues side chains or backbones so as to define side chain-side chain  interactions or side chain-main chain  interactions, respectively. such description allows detailed analysis of preferable geometry of residue interactions  <cit> .

in the current study, we utilise these 4-distance data to develop a novel knowledge-based potential, called hunter. the statistical preferences on the geometry of residue-residue interaction were derived from a large set of high-resolution protein structures and normalized according to a random model. we demonstrate that hunter can be successfully applied to evaluate and model protein structures. examples include the discrimination of native structures from decoys, predicting side chain conformations in protein structures and homology modelling.

RESULTS
development of the knowledge-based potential
we began by defining pairs of atoms, among which four distances were calculated, for each of  <dig> scsc and  <dig> scmc residue-residue interactions. as described in the methods, pairs of atoms with maximal number of contacts in  <dig> high-resolution protein structures were identified . more than  <dig> ×  <dig> contacts were collected, with an average of  <dig>  contacts per residue pair. as an alternative approach, we picked pairs of atoms manually based on consideration of functional group characteristics for a given amino acid . for example, carboxyl oxygens were chosen in asp and glu pairs, carbonyl oxygen and side chain nitrogen - in asn and gln pairs, terminal guanidyl nitrogens - in arg, etc. . even though the number of contacts was similar in both cases, the set of atoms defined with our first approach demonstrated slightly better performance , and was therefore used in the subsequent study. throughout hunter's development stages, we evaluated hunter's performance by its ability to remodel side chains of known protein structures and calculated the rmsd between the model and the x-ray structure. the assumption being that the accuracy of side chain modelling is directly related to the overall performance of the kbp.

to determine the best combination of parameters for the scsc term, a set of  <dig> proteins was remodelled using the scsc term only with different atom sets, bin sizes, and with or without histogram smoothing. the side chain rmsd was calculated for side chains atoms excluding cβ atoms. results for both the reduced and full rotamer libraries are presented.

given the atom contact pair, a residue-residue contact is represented by four distances {dist} = {d <dig> d <dig> d <dig> d22}, where dij is the distance between atom i of the first residue and atom j of the second residue . all contacts collected for a given residue pair provide information regarding the preferred 4-distance combinations and the probability to observe them in native protein structures. to incorporate the derived distance information into the kbp, contact data collected for a particular residue pair were used to build a 4-dimensional histogram . for a given residue-residue contact , each bin in the histogram gives the probability p for a defined set of distances. such probability distributions were used to score interactions between any pair of residues by applying inverse boltzmann relation .

the bin size greatly affects the histograms: using  <dig> Å interval per bin resulted in blurring the exact details of residue-residue interaction, however, using excessively small bins raised the level of noise because of the decreasing quanta of data points per bin. we tested bins of size  <dig>  Å,  <dig>  Å,  <dig>  Å and  <dig> Å, and came to the conclusion that  <dig>  Å best served the aims of this study. considering the rapid growth of the pdb database, smaller bin definitions may be of advantage in the future. still, even  <dig>  Å interval per bin does not produce a smooth distribution. the small amount of data results in a high level of noise. therefore, an additional step of smoothing was applied such that the bin value was recalculated as an average of values in adjacent bins and the bin itself. the different bin sizes and atom identities were tested for their accuracy to remodel the side chains of a set of  <dig> proteins . as can be seen, the best performance was achieved using atom set  <dig>  a bin size of  <dig>  Å, and data smoothing. interestingly, the reduced rotamer library performed much better than the full library, suggesting that the information content in the scsc term is not sufficiently large to handle the additional degrees of freedom given in the full library .

it should be noted that, in principle, there are various ways to chose pairs of atoms defining scsc interactions. in addition to the two described above, we examined also the possibility to choose atom pairs that would maximize kullback-leibler distance : a "distance" from a real to a random distribution in our case. this would allow deriving the most informative set of atoms for a given set of pdb structures. nevertheless, the performance of the dkl-set was worse than the two described above . among the described atom sets the preference was given to atom set  <dig> as it allows collecting better contact statistics, which is the main limiting factor in the 4-distance description. this set performed also slightly better, though, the difference between the two sets might be not very compelling .

we found that smoothing improved performance of the scsc term even though the current algorithm has the obvious drawback that the central bin value is overwhelmed by its neighbours. nevertheless, the performance of the smoothed scsc term was superior over non-smoothed one for the majority of bin sizes . the same trend is observed for both atom set  <dig> and  <dig>  it is interesting to note that the accuracy of non-smoothed scsc term increases with a larger bin size, while with the smooth term an opposite trend is observed. though non-smoothed distributions are more detailed, the current limitations in computational optimization of side chain conformations do not allow adequate sampling of such distributions .

when using only the escsc term an rmsd of  <dig>  Å was obtained for the reduced rotamer library and  <dig>  Å for the full library . as there are many other factors effecting side chain conformations in protein structures that are not covered by the escsc term, we added additional terms to hunter: a scmc contact term, a rotamer probability term and a modified lennard-jones term . our knowledge-based potential was optimized on a set of  <dig> proteins and tested on a larger set of  <dig> protein structures. we noted that the combination of erot and elj terms by itself already gave reasonable accuracy in side chain modelling. however, adding the escsc term and the escmc term further increased the accuracy. thus, using all four terms for modelling with full rotamer library gave  <dig>  Å rmsd on a set of  <dig> structures . modelling with the reduced rotamer library resulted in  <dig>  Å rmsd on the same set of structures. we found that the escmc term by itself did not perform well though combining it with escsc term gave improvement in side chain packing . two other terms were tested with the kbp, a solvation term  and an entropy term based on the move acceptance ratio at each position during monte carlo minimization. unfortunately, both terms did not improve side chain modelling accuracy and therefore were not included in the final potential .

the contribution of the different term to hunter was evaluated by rebuilding side chain conformations on a test set of  <dig> proteins. the full rotamer library was used with hunter .

recognition of native protein structures
we investigated whether the scsc term can be used to identify the native structure within a set of decoys. this would tell us about general applicability of the developed term for evaluating accuracy of residue-residue interactions in protein structures. we tested the scsc term for its ability to identify native protein structure within the decoys 'r' us decoy sets  <cit> . out of  <dig> decoy sets, the native structure was ranked first in  <dig> . in the remaining  <dig> cases, two native structures were determined by nmr. the failure of hunter in these cases may not be surprising, as nmr data do not comply with our 4-distance distributions  <cit> . for the other three cases the failure may be attributed to the low quality of the native structures . next, we compared hunter's performance to four other methods  <cit> . we found that these methods performed quite similarly to ours: hunter - 29/ <dig>  opus-psp  <cit> - 31/ <dig>  dope  <cit> - 28/ <dig>  dfire  <cit> - 27/ <dig> . most of the decoys in the decoys 'r' us sets differ significantly from the native structures . therefore, the performance of hunter was tested on additional high-resolution decoy sets  <cit> , where the cα rmsd  ranges from  <dig>  Å to  <dig> Å. hunter correctly identified the native structure in  <dig> out  <dig> decoy sets. again, for nmr structures the success rate was much lower, only  <dig> out of  <dig> .

each decoy structure and the native structure were scored and ranked using the hunter's scsc term only. rank of  <dig> corresponds to the structure with the lowest score. the z-score of the native structure was calculated to estimate hunter's ability to discriminate the native structure from decoy structures. resolution is of the x-ray structure.

a more challenging decoy set is to use casp submissions. these represent decoys that other experts found compelling enough to submit for casp. the scsc term only was tested to recognize the native structure among a large set of modelled structures submitted for each of  <dig> targets solved by x-ray for high-accuracy template-based modelling in casp7/ <dig> . our scsc term correctly identifies the native structure in  <dig> cases . considering only high-resolution targets , the scsc term scores the target structure with rank  <dig> in  <dig> cases and rank  <dig> in two cases out of  <dig> targets. this suggests a significant difference in the detailed architecture of the modelled structures relative to the native structure. we found that among other tested methods, opus-psp performed slightly better than hunter while the other methods showed much lower discriminative power . figure  <dig> shows four examples of calculated hunter scores for decoys taken from the casp7/ <dig> set. in all four cases the z-score of the wild-type structures is the lowest. it is worth noting that no correlation is observed between rmsd and score of decoy structures and/or a funnel-like shape, suggesting a qualitative difference between the real structure and the models.

see a legend of table  <dig> for details.

monte carlo side chain optimization
for side chain modelling the scsc term was combined with the scmc, the lennard-jones and the rotamer terms. simultaneous optimization of a large number of side chain conformations is a computationally demanding task. in the current study, we used monte carlo simulated annealing minimization . as a stochastic algorithm mcsa does not guarantee to identify a global minimum . however, it is known to identify near-gm solutions efficiently  <cit> . we investigated the implementation of this minimization protocol and our potential for side chain modelling. during the side chain optimization of barnase-barstar complex , the model with the lowest score has an rmsd of  <dig>  Å, while the native structure rebuilt using discrete rotamers  has an rmsd of  <dig>  Å. due to rotameric constraints of the side chain optimization, the native structure is never attainable. irrespectively of the rotamer library, mcsa never sampled the region between the best-rotameric structure and the structure with the lowest score. starting the mcsa from the best-rotameric structure did not change the outcome , indicating that the lowest scoring structure is dictated by our potential rather than by the implementation of the minimization protocol. while the best-rotameric structure is very close to the native one in terms of rmsd, its score is much higher. it might be that all structures with rmsd between  <dig>  Å and  <dig>  Å have a bad score because of the clashes resulting from the use of discrete rotamers. to further investigate this issue, a modified version of mcsa was implemented, where at each step one dihedral angle was modified arbitrarily by 5° for off-rotamer sampling. however, this did not improve significantly the results.

side chain prediction within proteins
we tested hunter's performance for side chain placement on the set of  <dig> proteins compiled by word et al.  <cit> . this set includes very high-resolution protein structures  with various minor corrections, including 180° flips of side chain amides . we excluded from our analysis six structures  since their chain length is less  <dig> amino acids, and these structures are mostly peptide-like. the side chains in  <dig> high-resolution protein structures were remodelled using the optimal combination of weights, and the modelled structures were compared to the native ones resulting in an average rmsd of  <dig>  Å . the rmsd for buried and exposed side chains was  <dig>  Å and  <dig>  Å. the χ1-angles were predicted correctly within ± 15° cutoff for 79%, 89%, and 72% of all, buried, and exposed residues respectively . even better results were obtained when using a subset of  <dig> protein structures, which are not part of a larger macromolecular assembly and do not contain ligands:  <dig>  Å for all residues and  <dig>  Å for buried ones . for most of this study we used rmsd as a measure of side chain accuracy, as we believe that it better represents the accurate position of side chain atoms.

side chains were rebuilt using five different methods in a set of  <dig> high-resolution protein structures. the average statistics on side chain prediction accuracy was calculated in terms of side chain rmsd, contact score, and chi-angle prediction accuracy. side chain rmsd was calculated for side chain atoms except cβ. a residue was considered as exposed or buried if its relative solvent exposed area is greater or less than 15%, respectively. contact score reflects amount of correctly predicted atom-atom contacts and is calculated as described in methods.

comparing hunter to other commonly used side chain placement methods  shows that hunter  performed better on the same set of  <dig> proteins than scwrl <dig> , sccomp , scap  and opus-rota . hunter is the slowest of these methods, with an average run time of  <dig> minute per protein versus  <dig> seconds for scwrl and opus-rota. however, the slowest component in hunter is the lennard-jones term, while the scsc and the scmc terms are not computationally demanding. interestingly, we noticed that prediction accuracy depends on the individual protein structure: modelling  <dig> proteins with different methods showed large differences between the proteins, independent of the method used. one common term that could explain this is the percentage of exposed residues in a protein: a correlation factor of  <dig>  was found between per protein side chain rmsd and the percentage of exposed residues.

to compare the accuracy of modelling individual amino acids we used nrmsd , which is the relation between the average rmsd of randomly placing a side chain and the rmsd for the modelled side chain . not surprisingly, hydrophobic and aromatic residues were modelled better than polar and charged residues as they tend to be more buried . figure 6a provides a visual illustration of the accuracy of side chain modelling for the protein barstar . nearly all the buried side chains were placed in their correct conformation within the limit of the rotamer library, with a few exposed side chains adopting a wrong conformation. however, these surface exposed residues adopt different side chain conformations also in the two crystal structures of barstar, suggesting that the accuracy of modelling is inherently limited. in figure 6b, we demonstrate modelled side chain conformations of barnase starting from the x-ray and nmr structures . we show that hunter's side chain prediction accuracy is within the difference between the x-ray and nmr structures, indicating that hunter provides high-resolution information.

we have shown previously that the differences between interfaces and monomeric proteins relate to the amino acid composition but not to the chemistry of the interactions  <cit> . therefore, we evaluated also the suitability of hunter for interface remodelling. we identified  <dig> non-redundant protein-protein hetero-complexes solved to high resolution  <cit>  and remodelled the side chains. in this case, the interface residues were modelled at the same level of accuracy as all residues . the overall worse rmsd values for the  <dig> protein-protein complexes comparing to the  <dig> monomeric proteins used above may be due to the lower resolution of the structures of the complexes . next, we modelled a set of  <dig> dimers which were solved to high resolution , and indeed the average rmsd for hunter improved to  <dig>  Å.

side chain prediction in comparative modelling
so far, we used the native backbone to model side chains. while this is of academic interest, the real test would be to model side chains on homology-modelled structures  <cit> . using templates always results in backbone inaccuracies in the final models that in turn affect the accuracy of side chain prediction. we collected casp <dig> predictions submitted by the six top-performing groups for each target domain in the high accuracy template-based modelling category   <cit> . then, we compared the submitted results to those generated by hunter. as can be seen in table  <dig>  hunter performed as good or better than the best side chain prediction method per model. we also remodelled the side chains of nmr structures, and found that the rmsd of the models equals that of the original nmr structures in relation with the equivalent x-ray structure .

the results of the top six groups in casp <dig>  were taken for examining hunter side chain modelling accuracy in homology modelling. best models submitted by each group for every target were collected and the average side chain prediction accuracy was determined . then, hunter was used to rebuild side chains on the set same set of submissions, and side chain prediction accuracy was evaluated and presented below. for each set of submissions two rows are given. the first row shows side chain modelling accuracy with hunter while taking backbone coordinates from the best model submitted by the corresponding group for each target. the second row shows performance in side chain modelling by the group in casp <dig>  the group name is given here according to the casp <dig> experiment.

discussion
here, we introduce hunter, a novel structure modelling method. the method relies on a detailed description of residue-residue interaction geometry as derived from high-resolution protein structures. we demonstrate that such 4-distance description can be used successfully to evaluate protein structures and model side chain interactions with high accuracy. it should be noted that it would take at least  <dig> parameters to have a truly complete description of scsc geometry. however, because of the limited size of the pdb, we opted to use four distances, which provides a good compromise between the number of parameters and the number of available data points. other authors used three parameters, as for example in the classical treatment by singh and thornton to map the position of single atoms relative to a predefined part of the side chain  <cit> . we have also tried an alternative definition with three distances but found the results less satisfactory. in this study, we used a culled list of protein structures with a resolution of  <dig> Å or better and a maximum sequence identity of 90%. the relatively relaxed threshold on sequence identity did not adversely influence the derived statistics as even small changes in protein structures result in variation of constrained distances, thus the collected data is not redundant. in spite of the large number of protein structures in the database, for some residue pairs the number of extracted contacts was low, which led to a low bin count in the histograms. a large bin size may solve this problem; however, in such situation the distance constraints become blurred. instead, smoothing was applied and the bin size of  <dig>  Å was found to be optimal . we found that even the simplest smoothing algorithm improves side chain prediction accuracy. this relates to several aspects of the 4-distance definition: one is the noise in distributions due to the limited amount of contact data, and the second is the mutual correlations in the 4-distance term. this results in rugged histograms, which in turn affects the efficiency of computational minimization. smoothing allows lowering barriers and improving mcsa performance. other computational methods like the dead-end elimination algorithm  <cit>  might be beneficial with 4-distance distributions and are being currently studied. another way to deal with histogram ruggedness is to represent probability density as a continuous function. to this end we tried the gaussian mixture model, however, no improvement was achieved. a possible way to overcome limited 4-distance data is by hierarchical splitting of the histograms depending on population density. however, as this would slow the run time we did not implement this method.

hunter was able to successfully identify native structures in multiple decoys sets. while decoys are similar to native structure, the details of residue-residue interactions are often incorrect. this is not the case for many of the protein structures determined by nmr, where the native nmr structure is already not optimal according to the kbp and therefore does not differ much from decoy structures. similarly, we find that the resolution of the x-ray structure correlates with decoy prediction accuracy . in the low-resolution structures the energy minimization has a significant contribution, suggesting that the accuracy of current minimization methods is limited  <cit> . in decoy recognition, hunter is basically used as a "scoring" device, when geometry of the interaction is evaluated according to derived statistical preferences. in this case the ruggedness of histograms does not have a significant impact. indeed, we found that smoothed and non-smoothed distributions could be used equally well for discriminating the native structure . at the same time, the smoothing is crucial for side chain modelling, which involves sampling rugged histograms with discrete rotamers. importantly, combining the scsc term and lennard-jones term for discriminating the native structure within decoys sets does not improve the results in casp7/ <dig> sets. presumably, the packing in the submitted models was optimized using the lennard-jones term while the 4-distance description is orthogonal to the commonly used terms. thus, it probably has considerable and novel merit as an after-the-fact evaluation of predicted models .

independently, the 4-distance scsc and scmc terms are insufficient to accurately model inter-residue interactions. while the escsc and escmc terms accurately define the mutual position of the constrained atoms, these terms do not define conformation of the entire side chain. therefore, to penalize unfavourable side chain conformations, the erot term was introduced. the elj term was incorporated to optimize packing of the protein. combining the four terms escsc, escmc, erot and elj produced the best results for modelling side chain conformations . we note that while adding the escmc term to escsc alone improved the results, only a small improvement was observed when the escmc term was added to the combination of escsc, erot and elj terms . we think that a partial overlap of the components in our kbp is the most plausible explanation for this fact. presumably, escmc adds only limited information over what is already counted by escsc, erot and elj terms. we also tested a solvation term, and it did not improve side chain modelling accuracy. we thought of two possible explanations: it is possible that the kbp already implicitly captures solvation effects, taking into account that the protein is surrounded by water in the crystal environment. on the other hand, solvation term might be of less importance in side chain modelling contrary to protein design, as the amino acid sequence is fixed.

hunter was effective for side chain modelling and allows modelling of different types of residue-residue contacts, such as hydrogen bonding and pi-cation interaction without explicitly introducing their geometric features. in this sense, it is similar to opus-psp. however, while in hunter the interaction between a pair of residues is defined in terms of  <dig> distances between only two pairs of atoms, opus-psp decomposes side chains into rigid blocks and derives statistics on their preferred mutual orientation. while both methods performed equally well in discriminating native structure within high-resolution decoys 'r' us and casp 7/ <dig> multiple decoys, hunter achieves better side chain prediction accuracy. we speculate that too many constraints  may be counter productive in side chain modelling.

in modelling high-resolution structures, the rmsd values obtained by hunter for buried, surface and all residues are  <dig>  Å,  <dig>  Å,  <dig>  Å for the  <dig> protein structures and  <dig>  Å,  <dig>  Å and  <dig>  Å for the clean set of  <dig> structures . those should be compared to the theoretical limit of accuracy, which is dictated by the best-rotameric structure , and by the deviation in the same structure solved multiple times   <cit> . thus, for buried residues the lower bound on the side chain prediction accuracy expected to be ~ <dig>  Å rmsd , which does not leave much room for improvement. this is illustrated in figure  <dig>  where all buried residues of barstar were perfectly modelled. the surface residues, which deviated in the model, also deviated in two barstar crystal structures or between the x-ray and nmr structures of barnase, showing the known tendency of surface residues to be flexible. interestingly, when comparing the per amino acid type or per protein performance of hunter to other methods, the different methods showed the same trends. hydrophobic and aromatic amino acids are modelled best while polar amino acids perform worse. this is expected, as polar amino acids are more frequently located on the surface.

hunter performs also as good or better than the top methods in comparative modelling when backbone coordinates are not accurate . particularly, the contact score  was better for the hunter-refined models than the submitted structures. while it is generally accepted that accuracy of the backbone coordinates affects accuracy of side chain placement, our results suggest that hunter should be less sensitive to this effect and can absorb small backbone movement. this is due to the fact that side chain placement is driven by side chain interactions and thus less influenced by backbone conformation.

one of our future goals is to employ the 4-distance method for computational protein design, which is, in general, a two-step process. first, a detailed model of a protein or protein complex is built, and then, in the second step, its energetic characteristics are evaluated. at the moment hunter is able to accurately model residue-residue contacts. the second step, however, would require dealing with additivity and independence of the terms as well as accounting for additional factors like interaction with water, entropic effects, and backbone flexibility and is the topic of future research.

CONCLUSIONS
the hunter knowledge-based potential uses a new 4-distance description of residue-residue interactions. we demonstrate that the statistical preferences on the 4-distance geometry can be extracted from high-resolution protein structures and applied to structure modelling. we show that hunter is successful in identifying native protein structure among decoy structures and in accurate prediction of side chain conformations in protein structures. we describe and discuss all the necessary steps to construct the potential and possible alternatives for the choices being made. the supporting web site http://bioinfo.weizmann.ac.il/hunter/ is developed for the scientific community to make the results of our study easily accessible. the presented methodology described can be employed in other areas involving high-resolution modelling of biomolecules such as refinement of low-resolution structures, structure prediction, protein-protein docking and modelling mutations  <cit> .

