BACKGROUND
microarray is a powerful technique for simultaneously determining the expression of thousands of genes  <cit> . such studies can quickly yield a genome-wide description of mrna expression, called transcriptomes, in a given cell or tissue at a given physiologic or pathologic condition  <cit> . even though, one of the main challenges in such genome-wide gene-expression profiling is the difficult inspection of genes with rare transcripts.

on the other hand, pcr-based suppressive subtractive hybridization  techniques are highly sensitive for identifying differences in gene expression  <cit> . however, the potentials of ssh in assaying dynamic changes of gene expression in minute levels have never been addressed before. in addition, ssh techniques are also restricted in terms of limited specificity and difficulties in identifying enriched genes. combining the ssh technique with high-throughput screening of the harvested clones through the use of cdna microarrays could greatly reduce the tedious work for northern blot analysis, as well as the likelihood of false-positive clones enriched via ssh  <cit> . such combined approaches by printing the clones obtained from the ssh amplicones on chips have been successfully used for profiling the differentiation of gene expression  <cit> . nevertheless, in such approaches, the genes of the subtracted clones remain to be sequenced for identification, and a large portion of redundancy in the enriched amplicons must also be identified. moreover, since the targets used to hybridize the amplicon clones printed on chips were the un-enriched cdna pools rather than the subtracted, enriched clones, such approaches would not increase the sensitivity for detection of the low-expression genes.

herein, we report our modifications using the subtracted amplicons as the targets to hybridize the pre-prepared microarray chips for ssh/microarray analysis. since all of the probes on the microarray chips have been well characterized, the hundreds and thousands of genes in the subtracted amplicons can be determined by a single hybridization. moreover, the relative expression status between the compared tissues for each gene can be augmented and easily determined by combining the use of the targets prepared both from forward and reverse subtractions of ssh. we named this modified approach "ssh/microarray" and used human hepatocellular carcinoma as a model to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach.

RESULTS
the ssh/cdna microarray versus regular cdna microarray approaches
to conduct the comparative transcriptomic studies on human hepatoma particularly for the genes at low-expression levels, we set out an approach as shown in figure  <dig>  we used the pcr-based suppressive subtractive hybridization to enrich the differentially expressed cdna clones between human hepatoma and non-hepatoma liver tissues. the ssh was conducted both forwards using rna prepared from hepatoma and non-hepatoma liver tissues as tester and driver, respectively, to yield the hepatoma  subtracted amplicons, and reversely using the mrna prepared from non-hepatoma and hepatoma liver tissues as tester and driver respectively to yield the non-hepatoma  subtracted amplicons as well. instead of the previously reported combination with cdna microarray approaches, in which clones in the subtracted cdna libraries were cloned and then printed on chips, we directly labeled the subtracted t-n and n-t amplicons and then used as targets to hybridize the pre-made microarray chips printed with the known  <dig>  cdna clones. we named this modified approach as "ssh/microarray". the same tissue rna pairs and cdna microarray chips were also used for the regular cdna microarray assays for comparison. since human hepatoma generally occurs in patients of chronic hepatitis with/without cirrhosis, to identify the genes implicated in the common biological processes leading to hepatocellular carcinogenesis, we selected three hepatoma patients with different underlying liver disease. the first was with chronic hepatitis c and cirrhosis, the second had chronic hepatitis b and cirrhosis, and the third had chronic hepatitis b but no clinical or histological evidence of cirrhosis.

the ssh/microarray approach on low-expression and differentially expressed genes
to further address whether the ssh/microarray approach was able to assay the expression of those genes with rare transcripts, we selectively inspected those genes with low expression. of the total of  <dig>  clones on the chips,  <dig> clones that were filtered out for further analyses in the regular cdna microarray studies due to the low hybridization intensity   were selected for examination of their hybridization intensity in the ssh/microarray assays . of these,  <dig> clones were enriched via the ssh/microarray assays and could be analyzed for differential expression  . that is, the ssh/microarray approach allowed about 100% more of the genes, most of which were low abundant, for the subsequent analyses.

since ssh specifically amplified the difference of gene expression, the ssh/microarray approach should also be able to identify more differentially expressed genes between hepatoma and non-hepatoma liver tissues, which were originally undetectable by the regular cdna microarray methods. as shown in fig 3c, of the  <dig> low-expression genes identified only by the ssh/microarray assays, we identified additional  <dig> and  <dig> genes with at least a 2-fold decrease and increase in hepatoma tissues, respectively.

we further examined the sensitivity for detection of differential expression by both approaches. we compared the ratio of cy5/cy <dig> intensity of each clone obtained from the regular cdna microarray assays to that obtained from the ssh/microarray assays. as shown in figure  <dig>  a total of  <dig> genes with a ratio lower than  <dig> folds  using the cdna microarray assays had a ratio greater than  <dig> folds  using the ssh/microarray assays . that is, using the modified ssh/microarray approaches resulted in much more differentially expressed genes, particularly for those with rare transcripts that using the regular cdna microarray approaches.

identification of differentially expressed genes with low expression in human hepatoma
a total of  <dig> and  <dig> genes differentially expressed in human hepatoma were finally identified  by the regular cdna microarray assays and by the ssh/microarray assays, respectively . that is, the ssh/microarray assays detected 10-fold more differentially expressed genes, particularly for those low-expression genes, than did the conventional cdna microarray. to confirm the differential expression of genes with low expression identified by the ssh/microarray assays , we quantified the relative expression level of nine randomly selected genes, whose differential expression was detected by the ssh/microarray assays, in  <dig> pairs of hcc and the matched non-hcc liver tissues. we found the results were consistent with those obtained from ssh/microarray assays .

gene ontology analysis of the hcc differentially expressed genes
we compared the hcc up- and down-regulated transcriptomes identified by the ssh/microarray assays in accordance with their potential molecular functions, implicated biological processes and sub-cellular localization. as presented in table  <dig>  the hcc up-regulated transcriptomes had strong association with the regulation of cell cycle progression , transcription , nucleic acid metabolism , and protein metabolism , while the hcc down-regulated transcriptomes tended to be related to loss of normal physiological function of the hepatocytes , and impairment in cellular responses to extrinsic stresses including wounding  and external biotic stimuli , in cellular defense activities , and in maintaining cell ion homeostasis . in addition, genes related to cell responses to external growth stimuli and signal transduction , and related to cell morphogenesis and biogenesis  were more frequently found in the hcc up-regulated transcriptomes. on the other hand, the hcc up-regulated transcriptomes had more genes with their products distributed in cell nucleus , while the hcc down-regulated transcriptomes had more genes of secreted proteins .

*based on  <dig> and  <dig> informative up- and down-regulated genes identified using the ssh/microarray in hcc.

© cellular components, based on  <dig> and  <dig> informative up- and down-regulated genes in human hcc, respectively.

p value was determined by fisher's exact test.

discussion
microarray techniques are limited in the detection of genes with low expression  <cit> , while subtractive hybridization methods are restricted by their specificity and the tremendous work needed for validating the results, as well as for sequencing to identify genes. there have been many reports using microarray techniques for rapid and high throughput validation of the subtraction specificity of ssh by spotting the enriched clones on the chips or membranes  <cit> . however, such approaches would not only require tremendously sequencing works to identify genes including a great number of redundant clones in the subtracted amplicons, but also lose the sensitivity of ssh techniques to detect the low abundance transcripts, since the sensitivity of microarray analysis is determined by the targets used to hybridize chips but not by the probes printed on chips.

herein we report our modified approaches. instead of using the subtracted clones as probes spotted on chips, we directly labeled the enriched amplicons and used them as targets to hybridize the pre-made microarray chips for microarray analysis . this approach allowed us not only to readily identify genes without tremendous sequencing works in the subtracted amplicons regardless of many redundant clones, but also to easily evaluate the subtraction efficiency and specificity. moreover, the ssh/microarray approach made it possible to conduct a transcriptome-wide identification of differentially expressed genes particularly for those with low expression. it has been reported that the absolute expression level is not a crucial determinant for identifying genes, while the relative difference in expression levels does impact on whether or not a gene is recovered by subtractive hybridization  <cit> . in this report using the ssh/microarray approach, we identified about ten times more of the differentially expressed genes, particularly for those with low expression, in human hepatoma. our findings successfully demonstrated the transcriptome-wide assays of differentially expressed genes at low abundance. this simple but very powerful approach would greatly facilitate future researches on functional genomics  <cit> .

one of the main concerns about ssh techniques is their specificity. however, as combined with microarray techniques, the subtraction efficiency can be readily evaluated. as shown in figure  <dig>  the subtraction efficiency was determined by the rare presence of clones with equal hybridization intensities between the forward and reverse amplicons, and by the consistent exclusion of the house-keeping genes in the subtracted amplicons. the specificity was further confirmed by quantification of the differential gene expression between hepatoma and para-hepatoma liver tissues using rt real-time pcr in the  <dig> randomly selected genes, of which six  were identified to be differentially expressed only by the ssh/microarray assays, but not the conventional cdna microarrays assays

of interest, using this novel approach, we identified many of the genes potentially implicated in hepatocellular carcinogenesis, which were not previously identified by conventional cdna microarray assays. for examples,  <dig> genes  implicated in cell cycle regulation,  <dig> genes  correlated with the regulation of cell proliferation,  <dig> genes  involved in the pathways of cell death,  <dig> genes  related to the regulation of cell differentiation and embryonic development, and  <dig> genes  associated with signal transduction in response to extra-cellular proliferation and growth stimuli were found. our findings that differentially expressed genes were related to multi-biological processes suggest the complexity of the molecular mechanisms for hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we modified the previously method of the combination of the suppressive subtractive hybridization and microarray techniques to differentially profile the low-expression transcriptomes of human hepatocellular carcinoma by directly labeling both of the reciprocal subtracted amplicons as target for cdna microarray assays. compared to ssh or previous ssh in conjunction with microarray approaches, this modified approach provided us with three additional advantages: 1) easy inspection of the subtraction efficiency, 2) avoidance of tremendous sequencing work for gene identification, 3) high sensitivity for identifying the low-expression, differentially expressed genes. this approach allowed for the detection of about ten times more of the differentially expressed genes than did the regular cdna microarray approach in human hepatoma, particularly for those with low expression. using this approach, we identified many genes potentially implicated in human hepatocarcinogenesis, which were not identified before. for its high efficiency and high sensitivity, this ssh/microarray approach is powerful for the rapid differentially profiling the low-expression transcriptomes, and most adequate for applying to functional genomic studies.

