BACKGROUND
historical mitochondrial introgression often results in the mitochondrial genome of one species being replaced by that of another species without leaving any trace of hybridization in its nuclear genome. the introgressed genome can become fixed in some populations and extend to a large portion of the recipient species' distribution. wilson and bernatchez termed this phenomenon "ghost of hybrids past"  <cit> . for example, melo-ferreira et al. found mitochondrial introgression from the mountain hare  to three other hare species, l. granatensis, l. europaeus and l. castroviejoi in the iberian peninsula  <cit> . although l. timidus is currently not sympatric with the three iberian hares, distribution range expansion and retraction during glaciation might have created opportunities for the species to hybridize. selective advantage of the l. timidus mitochondrial genome over others was attributed to the widespread presence of the introgressed mitochondrial genome. mcguire et al. also presented a case study in lizards of the genus crotaphytus  <cit> . the mitochondrial genome of c. collaris has replaced that of c. reticulatus in approximately two-thirds of its range via an ongoing selective sweep. a unidirectional mitochondrial introgression also took place from c. collaris to c. bicinctores. introgressive hybridization may have occurred repeatedly but was temporally separated throughout at least the latter half of the pleistocene. other cases of mitochondrial introgression have been reported in diverse metazoan taxa including carabid beetles  <cit> , fruit flies  <cit> , brook charr  <cit> , megophryid frogs  <cit> , sika deer  <cit> , african elephants  <cit> , and pocket gophers  <cit> .

such processes have a number of significant implications in biology.  mitochondrial gene introgression can confuse the estimated genealogy of a species, because an introgressed genome will not reveal any history before the introgression events  <cit>  and the mix of introgressed and original genomes within a species could lead to absurd inferences of the species history. therefore, cautions should always be exercised when using mitochondrial dna  alone to infer demography and evolutionary history of a species. this is important because in the last three decades, we have witnessed a great number of "phylogeographic" studies using mtdna as a sole marker  <cit> .  introgression often disrupts the co-evolution between the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. genes from both genomes encode several proteins that are critical to metabolism and an abrupt disassociation between the genomes may interfere not only their respective normal function but also the established genomic interactions and co-adaptation  <cit> .  massive introgression events were often suggested to be adaptive processes driven by natural selection  <cit> . the spontaneous breakdown and reconstruction of mitochondrial-nuclear genome associations may open a unique window to examine the adaptation process of a newly introgressed mitochondrial genome, as well as to better understand the interactive dynamics and co-adaptive functioning between mitochondrial and nuclear genomes.

kim et al. first suggested a possible mitochondrial genome introgression between two green pond frog species, pelophylax nigromaculatus and p. plancyi chosenicus  <cit> . using mitochondrial cytochrome b partial sequences, they found that the japanese p. nigromaculatus is more closely related to korean p. plancyi chosenicus than to korean p. nigromaculatus, while their nuclear gene data  unequivocally group the p. nigromaculatus populations together. subsequently, they hypothesized a possible mitochondrial genome introgression event between the two species. nevertheless, the extent, timing and directions of introgression were unresolved because of their small sample size . green pond frogs in the genus pelophylax  are no stranger to inter-specific hybridization. pelophylax esculentus, a species of hybrid origin between p. lessonae and p. ridibunda, is probably the best studied case of inter-specific hybridization  <cit> . both p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi are common and widespread in eastern asia, and their distribution ranges largely overlap . ecologically, p. nigromaculatus is a generalist and occurs in a wide range of habitats including small to large ponds and rivers. on the other hand, p. plancyi requires more specific habitats and is most commonly seen in large well-vegetated ponds, particularly those with lotus plants. both species are spring breeders and occasionally use the same breeding sites. the gross morphology of the two species is similar but they can be easily distinguished. while males of p. nigromaculatus have a pair of external vocal sacs, males of p. plancyi have a pair of internal ones or do not have vocal sacs at all. in addition, p. plancyi has a conspicuous dark line along the back of its thigh that is lacking in p. nigromaculatus. several other names have been proposed for geographic populations of p. plancyi, including p. fukienensis, p. hubeiensis, and p. chosenicus. some authors treat them as valid species  <cit>  while others treat them as subspecies of p. plancyi . in this study, we refer all populations allocated to these names as the p. plancyi complex to facilitate our presentation.

following the lead of kim et al.'s study  <cit> , we use a phylogenetic approach to explore the potential mitochondrial genome introgression between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi, and to detail its extension in both time and space by extensive sampling of both species across their ranges. recent development in dna sequencing technology allows us to obtain large amounts of sequence data from both the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. by comparing their gene genealogies, gene introgression events can be revealed. if there was no historical mitochondrial introgression between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi, both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes would group haplotypes from each of the two species respectively in the same fashion, and kim et al.'s hypothesis  <cit>  would be rejected. if introgressions occurred between the two species, a phylogeny based on nuclear genes would group haplotypes from each of the two species, but part or all of the mitochondrial haplotypes from one species would nest within the other species.

RESULTS
nuclear proopiomelanocortin gene  and tyrosinase gene  genealogies
sequence data were collected from two nuclear genes . we first conducted a recombination test for the nuclear gene data and did not detect any recombination event at both global and pairwise levels. therefore, all data were proceeded for phylogenetic analyses without modification. both bayesian inference and maximum parsimony methods were used to construct the gene genealogy.

a total of  <dig> pomc sequences from  <dig> samples for pelophylax nigromaculatus  and  <dig> sequences from  <dig> samples for p. plancyi complex were gathered. two sequences for two outgroup taxa, lithobates catesbeianus and staurois latopalmatus were gathered from genbank. a total of  <dig> nucleotide sites were confidently resolved and  <dig> haplotypes were identified, including two for the outgroup taxa. among the ingroup members,  <dig> sites were variable.

for the bayesian analysis, the hky+i+g model was selected as the best-fit model by the hierarchical likelihood ratio test. figure  <dig> shows one of the bayesian trees with posterior probabilities of the basal nodes mapped on the tree. both the resolution of the bayesian consensus tree and the posterior probabilities were low ; this was not surprising given the small number of variable sites. however, three clades were clearly depicted on the tree with moderate to high nodal supports. a p. plancyi clade included all haplotypes from p. plancyi complex except p. fukienensis, and a p. nigromaculatus clade included all haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus except cnu <dig>  cnu <dig>  was a heterozygote and its two haplotypes were grouped in the p. plancyi clade and the p. nigromaculatus clade, respectively. both clades received high posterior probabilities . a third clade, the p. fukienensis clade, included all samples from p. fukienensis, with a low posterior probability . for the maximum parsimony analysis,  <dig> sites were phylogenetically informative. the parsimony analysis found more than  <dig>  equally most parsimonious trees  with  <dig> steps, a consistency index  of  <dig>  and a retention index  of  <dig> . the strict consensus tree  was similar but less resolved compared to the bayesian consensus tree. again, a p. nigromaculatus clade and a p. plancyi clade were resolved with exactly the same membership as the bayesian tree. the relationships within each clade were largely unresolved. however, the haplotypes of p. fukienensis samples did not form a monophyletic group. rather, they formed a paraphyletic assemblage at the base of the tree.

a total of  <dig> tyr sequences from  <dig> samples for pelophylax nigromaculatus  and  <dig> sequences from  <dig> samples for p. plancyi were gathered. three sequences for three outgroup taxa, babina pleuraden, rana shuchinae, and pelophylax lessonae, were gathered from genbank. a total of  <dig> nucleotide sites were confidently resolved and  <dig> haplotypes were identified, including three for the outgroup. among the ingroup members,  <dig> sites were variable and  <dig> were phylogenetically informative.

the parsimony analysis found better-resolved trees than did the bayesian analysis, and therefore, a simplified phylogram of the strict consensus tree from the parsimony analysis is presented in figure  <dig>  the analysis found more than  <dig>  mpts with  <dig> steps . both the resolution of the tree and the bootstrap supports were low, which was not surprising given the small number of informative characters. however, two clades, a p. nigromaculatus clade and a p. plancyi clade  were clearly depicted on the strict consensus tree with moderate nodal supports . for the bayesian analysis, a sym+i+g model was selected as the best-fit model by the hierarchical likelihood ratio test. similar to the parsimony tree, the bayesian tree also had low resolution and nodal supports . all haplotypes of the p. plancyi complex, including p. p. fukienensis, were grouped together, in the same way as in the parsimony tree, with a posterior probability of  <dig> . however, the haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus did not form a clade, rather they formed a paraphyletic assemblage at the base of the tree.

both pomc and tyr genes produced two well-defined clades: a p. nigromaculatus clade that includes all haplotypes of the p. nigromaculatus samples excluding cnu <dig> and a p. plancyi clade that included all haplotypes of the p. plancyi complex excluding haplotypes of p. fukienensis. both clades received moderate to high supports from both genes. the tyr gene tree had a lower resolution than the pomc gene tree; although the bayesian analysis of tyr gene failed to group all haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus together , members of the two clades were always well separated on every tree. a third group, the p. fukienensis clade that included all samples of p. fukienensis, was weakly supported by the pomc gene data, and not supported  by the tyr gene data. examining the sequence data directly, we found several fixed differences between the three clades. there were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> sites of the pomc gene and  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> sites of the tyr gene that are fixed for the p. nigromaculatus clade, the p. plancyi clade and the p. fukienensis clade, respectively.

one individual  appeared to be an f <dig> hybrid between p. plancyi and p. nigromaculatus. two haplotypes from this individual were obtained by cloning and were grouped with the p. plancyi clade and the p. nigromaculatus clade, respectively. directly examining the sequences, we found that cnu <dig> was heterozygous at all polymorphic sites between p. plancyi and p. nigromaculatus. for example, at position  <dig> of pomc gene, all p. plancyi samples had a "c" while all p. nigromaculatus samples had a "t". cnu <dig> was heterozygous on the site with "c" and "t". however, we cannot eliminate the possibility that this individual resulted from a recent backcross, e.g. f  <dig> or f  <dig>  because we only examined two gene loci.

mitochondrial cytochrome b gene  genealogy
sequence data were collected from one mitochondrial gene, cyt-b. a total of  <dig> cyt-b sequences were gathered for the p. plancyi complex, including  <dig> new sequences from this study and two sequences from genbank. a total of  <dig> cyt-b sequences were gathered for p. nigromaculatus, including  <dig> new sequences from this study and  <dig> sequences from several published sources. in addition, four sequences for three outgroup taxa, p. saharicus, p. lessonae, and p. porosus were obtained from genbank. sequences from different studies had different lengths; approximately half of the sequences included  <dig>  nucleotide sites  while others has 670- <dig> sites at various positions. to accommodate the majority, a data set of  <dig> sites was created. a total of  <dig> haplotypes were identified, including three for the outgroup taxa, and  <dig> sites were variable and  <dig> were phylogenetically informative. a gtr+i+g model was selected as the best-fit model by the hierarchical likelihood ratio test. a bayesian tree of cyt-b along with the posterior probabilities is provided in figure  <dig> 

the bayesian tree revealed several interesting features . similar to the pomc gene trees , it resolved a p. fukienensis clade  at the very base of the tree. the member composition of the clade was exactly the same as the pomc tree. one outgroup taxon, p. porosus, was placed between the p. fukienensis clade and the other ingroup members. unlike the nuclear gene trees, haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi did not form two monophyletic groups, rather, they were intermingled and together formed one monophyletic group. within this plancyi-nigromaculatus group, a korean p. nigromaculatus clade  branched off first, which included all the p. nigromaculatus samples from the korean peninsula and adjacent locations of china . the sistergroup of the korean p. nigromaculatus clade included a paraphyletic assemblage  of haplotypes of p. plancyi from central china  at the base and a well-supported monophyletic group  nested inside the paraphyletic group c. clade d was the most interesting group and included the remaining p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi haplotypes. within this clade, again, haplotypes from p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi failed to form respective clades; haplotypes of p. plancyi sporadically nested within "bushes" of p. nigromaculatus at  <dig> different places, except at the top of the tree where a large number of haplotypes of p. plancyi formed a clade . the basal branches of clade d comprised haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus. two haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus from western sichuan and five haplotypes from japan formed two well-supported groups  at the very basal position of clade d. although the overall nodal supports within clade d were low, some close associations between haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi were well supported. eight clades, where haplotypes from both species were found, received bpps greater than  <dig>  . within each of these eight clades, haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi were found to be identical or only different by one or two base pairs. in addition, the overall clado-pattern of the haplotypes within clade d bore little association with their geographic locations, except a few well-supported sister groups in which both members came from the same area.

the parsimony analysis found more than  <dig>  mpts with  <dig> steps . similar to the bayesian tree, the mp tree also defined a p. fukienensis clade, clade , clade b, clade , a paraphyletic group c, and several other nodes within clade d. several close associations between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi within clade d were also identified. however, the other relationships among the haplotypes were poorly resolved compared to the bayesian tree.

the estimated times of divergences between the major mitochondrial lineages were mapped on the cyt-b gene tree . in general, these estimates were largely congruent with several other independent studies. for example, lymberakis et al. estimated that the european and far eastern lineages were separated  <dig> mya  <cit> , and sumida et al.'s estimate for this dichotomy was  <dig> - <dig>  mya based on allozyme data  <cit> . these results were relatively close to our estimate of  <dig>  mya . sumida et al. estimated that the split of p. nigromaculatus and p. porosus took place at least  <dig> mya  <cit> , and it was again congruent with our estimate of  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya for this event.

there were major differences between the nuclear and mitochondrial gene trees. both nuclear genes resolved both p. plancyi and p. nigromaculatus as monophyletic clades, but the mitochondrial gene tree mixed haplotypes from the two species together. on the other hand, a major agreement among the nuclear  and mitochondrial gene trees was that all of them resolved a separated p. fukienensis clade. all new sequences are deposited in genbank . aligned data sets that used to generate the phylogenetic hypotheses are presented as additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

discussion
the multiple mitochondrial genome introgression hypothesis
the haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi intertwined together on the mitochondrial gene tree , despite the clear separation between the two species on both nuclear gene trees . other evidence, such as morphological and ecological traits, also strongly supports the validity of the two species  <cit> . the conflicting patterns between the nuclear and mitochondrial gene trees support kim et al.'s hypothesis  <cit>  that there were historical mitochondrial introgressions between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi. to best explain our data, we further propose a multiple mitochondrial genome introgression hypothesis: one ancient "forward" mitochondrial introgression event from p. plancyi to p. nigromaculatus followed by rampant recent "backward" introgression events from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi.

our nuclear gene data conform to several previous studies and suggest that the p. plancyi and p. nigromaculatus are sistergroups  <cit> . the korean p. nigromaculatus clade  on the cyt-b gene tree likely represents the only "true" mitochondrial lineage of p. nigromaculatus, and its sistergroup  likely represents the mitochondrial lineage of p. plancyi . the paraphyletic group c  likely represents the "original" mitochondrial lineages of p. plancyi, which have always been associated with p. plancyi nuclear genomes. the introgression clade d, which nests within group c, represents an introgressed p. plancyi mitochondrial lineage . within this clade, p. plancyi individuals are sporadically dispersed throughout the "bushes" of p. nigromaculatus, and the four basal sub-clades comprise p. nigromaculatus individuals exclusively. the most parsimonious explanation for this pattern is that all individuals in this clade share a common mitochondrial ancestor derived from an ancient hybridization event between a female p. plancyi and a male p. nigromaculatus. the introgressed p. plancyi genome subsequently expanded to the majority of the distribution range of p. nigromaculatus except the korean peninsula and its adjacent areas. the nested p. plancyi lineages represent p. plancyi individuals, which "took back" their mitochondrial genomes from p. nigromaculatus via recent hybridization events. of the  <dig> nested placements of p. plancyi, there are cases where the closest p. nigromaculatus relatives are not identified due to the unresolved relationships on the tree. nevertheless, there are eight well-supported sub-clades  that embrace both p. plancyi and p. nigromaculatus individuals. each of these sub-clades likely represents a recent mitochondrial introgression event from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi. the introgressions between the two species appear to be bi-directional and, at present, the majority of both species possess introgressed, rather than "original", mitochondrial genomes.

overall, the multiple mitochondrial genome introgression hypothesis most parsimoniously accounts for our data and also immediately provides an explanation for the rampant introgression within the introgression clade . in this clade, all p. nigromaculatus individuals do, in fact, possess historical mitochondrial genomes of p. plancyi, and the mitochondrial introgression from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi actually results in re-union of the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of p. plancyi. the two genomes are already co-adapted, and therefore, the introgression might have little negative impact on the fitness of the hybrids.

a re-examination of the mitochondrial gene tree of the two species, by increasing the number of taxa or number of informative characters , may change the topology and favor a different explanation. however, our sampling of taxa  is robust and more taxa are unlikely to change the topology. more data could improve the resolution of the tree, particularly within clade d. those will unlikely change the essentials of the current hypothesis but will likely help to resolve the number of recent introgression events within clade d. the intertwined pattern of the mitochondrial gene tree may also be explained by incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> , however, it is probably not valid in our case. due to the maternal mode of inheritance, mitochondrial genes are expected to reach coalescence up to four times faster than nuclear genes  <cit> . in our study, both nuclear genes  have reached coalescence at the species level, and it is therefore unlikely that the more rapidly evolving mitochondrial genes have not.

diversification and introgression of the p. nigromaculatus-plancyi mitochondrial genomes in time and space
the korean nigromaculatus clade , which includes all samples from the korean peninsula and adjacent locations of china, was separated from the rest at approximately  <dig>  mya . since the korean nigromaculatus clade represents the only "true" p. nigromaculatus mitochondrial lineage while all other p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi possess a p. plancyi mitochondrial genome, this split may coincide with the speciation event that separated p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi. all other p. nigromaculatus possess an introgressed p. plancyi mitochondrial genome. this "true" p. nigromaculatus mitochondrial lineage might have survived in the korean peninsula refugium during ice ages and expanded to nearby areas of china during the inter-glaciation periods . the korean peninsula is a well-recognized refugium during several glaciation cycles and has provided shelters for many ancient lineages  <cit> . a recent phylogeographic study of p. nigromaculatus by zhang et al. also identified two major clades, a korean clade including samples from the korean peninsula and adjacent china and a main clade including the japanese and most chinese samples  <cit> . without realizing that the main clade of p. nigromaculatus was actually descended from p. plancyi, they hypothesized that the gunz glaciation  might be the cause of allopatric isolation and lineage splitting. our divergence time estimate  is older than that of zhang et al.'s  <cit> , and the observed divergence is not a lineage split within p. nigromaculatus, rather, it represents the separation between the two species.

the central china p. plancyi mitochondrial lineages share a most recent common ancestor with clade d at approximately  <dig>  mya . the central china lineages may represent the only survivors of the "original" p. plancyi mitochondrial genome. the majority members of these lineages are from sites  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> in the vicinity of da-bie-shan mountains . the persistence of these ancient lineages may be attributed to the da-bie-shan refugium. the da-bie-shan and surrounding area is hypothesized to have been a glaciation refugium since the tertiary and maintains many ancient endemic species  <cit> . these p. plancyi mitochondrial lineages may have survived in the refugium and expanded to the surrounding area .

clade d represents an ancient mitochondrial genome introgression event that occurred at least  <dig>  mya . most previous reported cases of mitochondrial introgression are recent and the introgressed mitochondrial genomes in the recipient species are identical or nearly so to those in the donor species  <cit> . the two reported exceptions are crotaphytid lizards and scutiger frogs. mcguire et al. reported repeated introgression events between crotaphytus collaris and c. bicinctores and some could be as old as  <dig>  mya  <cit> . chen et al. reported a case between two species of scutiger, which was dated at approximately  <dig> - <dig>  mya  <cit> . with increasing haplotype divergence, it becomes more difficult to discriminate between introgression and incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> , but our data provide a convincing case of ancient mitochondrial genome introgression. we could not locate where this introgression event might have occurred from our data; repeated glaciation circles and associated range expansions/contractions may have rendered it difficult, if not impossible.

within the introgression clade , multiple introgression events have taken place over time and space. there are at least eight well-supported sub-clades that demonstrate close associations between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi and represent at least eight independent introgression events. if we consider those sub-clades that did not receive high nodal supports, introgressions from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi may have independently taken place as many as  <dig> times. all these introgression events are probably recent. the common ancestor of the clade that includes most of clade d excluding d <dig> and d <dig>  is  <dig>  mya ; therefore, all divergence within this clade should be younger than this time estimate. within these eight well-supported sub-clades, the differences between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi are small: some are identical while the largest differences are two of the  <dig> base pairs that were compared. furthermore, the introgression events may have occurred at various locations. within the eight well-supported sub-clades, closely associated haplotypes of p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi are often from the same area. for example, all individuals of both species in sub-clade  <dig> are from zhang jia jie , and in sub-clade  <dig>  all individuals are from zhejiang province of china . interestingly, the korean p. plancyi is not closely related to the korean p. nigromaculatus, suggesting that the korean p. plancyi may not be indigenous, and is probably recently established. in addition, the hybridization between the two species appears to be an ongoing process and this is evidenced by an f <dig> hybrid identified in the present study.

mechanisms of mitochondrial genome introgression and replacement
asymmetrical reproductive ability of hybrids and continuous backcrossing are likely responsible for the observed mitochondrial introgression and replacement between the two green pond frogs. kawamura and nishioka reported that all male f  <dig> hybrids between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi chosenicus were sterile, but half of the female f  <dig> hybrids were probably fertile  <cit> . both field observation and lab experiments also confirmed that among crosses between p. nigromaculatus and p. porosus, females were partially fertile but males were completely sterile  <cit> . haldane's rule predicts that when in f  <dig> offspring of two animal species, one sex is sterile, the sex is usually the heterogametic sex. pelophylax nigromaculatus has an xx/xy sex determination  <cit> , and therefore, the above observations are consistent with haldane's rule. while frequent inter-specific hybridization is the necessary first step toward mitochondrial genome introgression, such asymmetrical reproductive ability of hybrids would greatly facilitate backcrossing and the disappearance of hybridization signals in the nuclear genome while the introgressed mitochondrial genomes remain intact. other mechanisms, such as asymmetries in species abundance or mating preferences and male-biased colonization  <cit>  may also play a role in promoting mitochondrial introgression between the two green pond frogs.

the introgressed mitochondrial genomes in both p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi expanded to the majority of their distribution ranges. mcguire et al. proposed two non-exclusive explanations for mitochondrial replacement across an extended geographic area: frequent hybridization events followed by genetic drift, or selective sweeps associated with rare hybridization  <cit> . the introgression from p. nigromaculatus back to p. plancyi is clearly a case of multiple rampant introgression events, and hence is consistent with mcguire et al's hypothesis  <cit> . on the other hand, the introgression from p. plancyi to p. nigromaculatus  appeared to have occurred only once, so selective sweep might have been involved but we do not have data for this hypothesis. thermal adaptation has been proposed for selection in several cases  <cit> . nevertheless, no direct evaluation of the selective advantage of introgression event has so far been conducted. theoretically, when species invade a new area, capturing an already adapted mitochondrial genome from the local species may provide the invader with a selective advantage  <cit> .

taxonomic implications
considering information from all three genes, pelophylax fukienensis is a valid species. the nuclear gene pomc indicates that all its samples form a monophyletic group and possess fixed differences at several nucleotide sites from p. plancyi. at site  <dig>  p. fukienensis, p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi are sympatric. of the  <dig> specimens that we examined, no hybrid was found, suggesting established reproductive isolation between the three species. furthermore, the p. fukienensis clade is separated from all other p. plancyi by another valid species, p. porosus, on the mitochondrial gene tree. pope first named the species, "rana" fukienensis  <cit> , but most recent authors considered it as a synonym of p. plancyi  <cit> . based on molecular data, sumida et al. recently suggested that it is a valid species, and is likely more closely related to p. porosus than to p. nigromaculatus  <cit> . its distribution may include the island of taiwan and the adjacent coast region of mainland china. however, many populations from inland of china, which were previously diagnosed as p. fukienensis , are in fact p. plancyi.

our data do not support the validity of p. hubeiensis and p. chosenicus. both mitochondrial and nuclear genes failed to reveal any distinctiveness of the populations under the two names. the korean populations of p. plancyi  may have only invaded the peninsula recently. their reported morphological differences  <cit>  are likely geographic intra-specific variations.

CONCLUSIONS
there are multiple mitochondrial introgression events between the two green pond frog species, including one ancient "forward" introgression event from p. plancyi to p. nigromaculatus followed by rampant recent "backward" introgression events from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi. the majority of individuals in the two species have either introgressed  or reclaimed  mitochondrial genomes while no trace of past hybridization in their nuclear genomes was detected. the mitochondrial introgression between these two species is unique in several ways. first, one introgression event is ancient, estimated at  <dig>  mya. most previous reported cases of mitochondrial introgression are recent  <cit> . second, independent introgression events from p. nigromaculatus to p. plancyi result in re-constitution of cyto-nuclear association of p. plancyi. this is the first such case. third, there are multiple  but spatially and temporally separated introgression events. such introgression is likely an ongoing process; the f  <dig> hybrid that we found suggests that hybridization between the two species may frequently occur.

mitochondrial genome introgression and replacement may be more common than we previously perceived. for example, inter-specific hybridization among amphibians is common, and mechanism that can produce mitochondrial introgression, such as asymmetrical reproductive ability of hybrids, is also commonly observed . the common occurrence of such hybridization events likely has produced numerous mitochondrial genome introgressions in nature populations waiting to be detected.

using mitochondrial genes alone to infer species history or to determine species status can be misleading, and mtdna only represents an incomplete history of a species  <cit> . this message has been repeatedly demonstrated by numerous studies. a large number of mtdna based phylogeographic studies and their conclusions may need to be revisited.

this mitochondrial introgression between p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi provides a unique opportunity to study cyto-nuclear interaction and co-adaptation. within p. nigromaculatus and p. plancyi, there are nuclear genomes interacting with their "original" and "co-evolved" mitochondrial genomes, and those interacting with "introgressed" foreign mitochondrial genomes. if the two genomes in every species were co-adapted, a recent mitochondrial introgression would most likely create mismatches between the mitochondrial vs. nuclear-encoded components  and cause functional disruption  <cit> . such matches or mismatches can be examined and compared for different populations. recent development in proteomics have provided us powerful tools to model the protein structure  <cit>  and investigate the potential impact of these mismatches on the function of the protein molecules, which in turn may have significant impacts on the fitness of the hybrid lineages.

