BACKGROUND
protein energy malnutrition  is the most frequent type of malnutrition, affecting at least  <dig> million people worldwide  <cit> . it is especially prevalent in certain groups as children, elderly people, patients with chronic diseases or neoplasia, and also in  <dig> to 90% of hospitalized patients  <cit> . malnutrition by itself can cause death  <cit>  but epidemiological data reveals that it greatly increases susceptibility to and severity of infections, being a major cause of illness and death from infectious diseases  <cit> . a direct correlation between higher degrees of malnutrition and higher risk of death is supported by the observation that severely malnourished children experienced substantially higher mortality rates  <cit> . increased morbidity and mortality in malnutrition is associated with decreased immunocompetence with particular involvement of cell-mediated immunity, antibody secretion and affinity and also complement components and cytokine production  <cit> . we recently demonstrated that diet restriction reduced il- <dig> and ifn-γ and also abrogated specific antibody production in balb/c mice immunized with a genetic vaccine containing the mycobacterial hsp <dig> gene  <cit> . as described above, a significant proportion of hospitalized patients are undernourished and at a greater danger to get severe hospital-infections. staphylococcus aureus has been one of the most common bacterial causes of severe pneumonia in children with nosocomial infections  <cit> . although previously considered as a purely nosocomial event, community-acquired methicillin-resistant s. aureus  pneumonia is underestimated and is spreading worldwide  <cit> . in addition, leukocytopenia and malnutrition are described as high risk factors that lead to death by nosocomial s. aureus pulmonary infections  <cit> . in spite of its relevance, the behaviour of s. aureus in undernourished subjects has not been fully investigated.

in this context, we used a pem murine model to evaluate both, the susceptibility and the ability to mount a protective immunity against a mrsa with emphasis on lung involvement.

RESULTS
alterations determined by undernutrition
we initially characterized a model of dietary restriction by determining body weight, triglyceride seric levels and leucogram. effects of two percentages  of dietary restriction were compared with parameters observed in a control group that received food ad libitum. both levels of restriction determined a significant weight loss and decreased serum concentration of triglycerides . however, only the group submitted to 20% of dietary restriction presented alterations compatible with secondary immunodeficiency as decreased lymphocyte number .

effect of dietary restriction and immunization on bacterial load
twenty-four hours after intraperitoneal infection with  <dig> ×  <dig> cfu/ <dig>  ml of s. aureus, all animals from the four experimental groups presented bacteria in the blood . determination of cfu in the spleen did not show any significant difference among these groups . however, differences were observed in lung analysis. well nourished mice immunized with formolized s. aureus presented a significant reduction in cfu in this organ. interestingly, this effect was not triggered in undernourished mice. an even increased amount of bacteria was present in undernourished immunized animals . a reduced amount of bacteria was also observed in the liver of well nourished mice that were previously immunized with s. aureus . injection of complete freund's adjuvant alone did not reduce bacterial load .

lung histopathological analysis
as expected the pulmonary parenchyma from well nourished and non infected mice showed a very well preserved alveolar structure without any inflammatory process . infection of well nourished animals determined a clear inflammatory infiltration in the lungs . this inflammatory reaction clearly subsided if the animals were immunized before infection . however, undernourished mice presented a distinct lung involvement. they already presented a pulmonary disseminated inflammatory process before infection with s. aureus. this reaction was characterized by septal thickening and a clear mononuclear cell infiltration . interestingly, the intensity and the quality of this inflammatory reaction were not altered by infection preceded or not by immunization with killed s. aureus, as documented at figure 3d and 3f, respectively.

bacterial density evaluated by gram stain
staining of lung sections by gram showed absence of the typical gram positive cocci in non infected mice , independently of their nutritional status. a great amount of cocci was, as expected, present in infected well nourished mice . immunization of these animals before infection visibly reduced the amount of these bacteria in lung parenchyma . lung evaluation in undernourished mice indicated two striking differences. comparing to well nourished group, the undernourished one presented a clear reduction in the amount of cocci in the lungs . in addition, previous immunization of these animals did not reduce lung colonization by the bacteria .

discussion
protein energy malnutrition  is the most common type of undernutrition. it leads to secondary immunodeficiency and consequently increased susceptibility to infectious agents, including to s. aureus  <cit> . in this context, this work was done to establish a murine experimental model of pem and to evaluate the effect of malnutrition on both, susceptibility and ability to mount a protective immunity against a methicillin-resistant s. aureus . to define a model of dietary restriction, balb/c female mice were submitted to a reduction of  <dig> or 20% in their food intake during  <dig> days and compared to a well nourished experimental group. both levels of restriction determined a significant decrease in weight and serum triglycerides concentration. however, immunological evaluation indicated that only the group submitted to 20% dietary restriction developed secondary immunodeficiency. initial comparison of colony forming units  obtained from spleen, liver and lung homogenates suggested that well nourished and undernourished mice were similarly susceptible to s. aureus infection. this methodology also suggested that a previous immunization with formolized s. aureus was able to partially protect healthy animals but not undernourished ones. in addition, this vaccine protective effect varied according to the evaluated organ; it was observed in the liver and lungs but not at the spleen. even though determination of cfu in organs not previously perfused have been used as a parameter to quantify bacterial colonization  <cit>  it is possible that bacteremia could interfere with the results. as lungs are critical targets during mrsa infections, a more detailed investigation was performed at the lungs by doing an histopathological analysis with h&e and gram stains. this approach would allow a direct evaluation of lung parenchyma, avoiding a possible interference by bacteria present in the blood. as expected, lung structure was totally preserved among the animals from the normal control group that presented very well defined alveolar spaces and no signs of inflammation. well nourished mice infected with s. aureus developed a clear and widespread inflammatory reaction in this organ. interestingly, there was an evident downmodulation of this inflammatory reaction in well nourished mice previously vaccinated with s. aureus. on the other hand, undernourished animals already presented a lung disseminated inflammatory process before infection. this inflammatory reaction did not change in amount or quality after infection with s. aureus preceded or not by immunization. the cause of this inflammatory process was not investigated. however, it could be due to the presence of environmental agents or, alternatively, to the overgrow of resident bacteria that could trigger a respiratory infection in these animals but not in the well nourished ones.

as expected, staining of lung sections with gram revealed a great amount of cocci in well nourished mice infected with s. aureus. immunization before infection determined a visible reduction in the amount of bacteria and this coincided with an almost complete resolution of the inflammatory process found at the lung parenchyma. comparing to these findings, two striking differences were detected in undernourished animals. they presented a much smaller amount of cocci in the lungs. this was initially unexpected because undernutrition has been more commonly associated with increased susceptibility to infectious agents  <cit> . however, this finding could be explained by competition for nutrients between host and pathogens as described by prentice & mcdermid,  <dig>  <cit> ; therefore decreasing the food supply for bacterial growth. alternatively, endogenous or environmental bacteria could, as we said before, be already present at the pulmonary parenchyma in undernourished mice, competing for nutrients. the fact that s. aureus is a poor competitor and does not grow well in the presence of other microorganisms supports this hypothesis  <cit> . previous immunization of undernourished mice, differently from the findings in the well nourished group, did not decrease the amount of cocci in the lungs. we believe that this result could be attributed, at least partially, to a decreased antibody production because they are essential to control s. aureus infections, including life-threatening conditions as pneumonia and septicemia  <cit> .

from a practical point of view, these results raise two very relevant aspects. the first one relates to the condition of malnutrition as a high risk factor for nosocomial pulmonary infections caused by mrsa. this possibility has not been directly investigated but it has been suggested by some findings as the ones described by miyake et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . our results also alert for a possible low efficacy of an mrsa vaccine in undernourished patients, mainly concerning the prevention of pulmonary involvement.

CONCLUSIONS
together these results demonstrated that a 20% dietary restriction in food intake triggered a secondary immunodeficiency in balb/c mice. this condition determined a very distinctive lung involvement in comparison to well nourished animals. this organ presented an inflammatory process that was not altered by infection with s. aureus or by infection preceded by immunization with the formolized bacteria. absence of required nutrients or a state of resistance by the previous inflammatory process could decrease s. aureus growth in lungs of undernourished animals.

