BACKGROUND
traditional experimentation in animal model systems such as the worm caenorhabditis elegans and the fly drosophila melanogaster often results in complex molecular and phenotypic outcomes. frequently a targeted deletion or ectopic expression of a single gene product results in pleiotropic phenotypes. similarly, broad high-throughput multiplex experimental strategies such as microarray based gene expression, rna interference  screens, or next-generation dna and rna sequencing, analyzing phenomena such as development, behavior, mating, diet, and life span, typically produce large datasets requiring complex analytical approaches.

gene sets are collections of keyword terms with annotated genes derived from multiple sources of a priori information. they have been used in computational analysis of gene expression data  <cit>  with the goal of identifying higher order relationships beyond simple gene list results, as well as in analysis of population based gwas in humans  <cit> . the most commonly used gene sets include those derived from go annotations  <cit> , biological pathways from kegg  <cit>  or biocarta, expression modules, dna binding sites, or other sources of molecular information  <cit> . each collection of gene sets has its own unique qualities and features which are useful in different ways. for instance, kegg emphasizes metabolic and biochemical pathways; go annotations, while having some phenotypic content, emphasizes molecular function, cellular component, and biological processes, while msigdb  <cit>  emphasizes gene expression signatures. this information is often closely related, or “proximal” to gene and molecular function, rather than more “distal” information regarding phenotypic outcomes and disease susceptibility. recently, phenotype based gene sets have been derived exclusively from genetically determined phenotypic associations for mouse phenotypes and common human disease  <cit> , resulting in gene sets for specific phenotypes, organized by a structured systematic ontology.

here, we present gene sets for worm and fly, which use the structured ontology found in the worm phenotype ontology from the c. elegans database - wormbase  <cit>  and phenotypic descriptions for d. melanogaster found in flybase  <cit> . these gene sets are derived from information on gene-phenotype relationships based on genetically determined phenotypes. we use these collections in large scale phenotypic modeling in worms and flies and demonstrate their utility in complex analysis in multiple ways, including analysis of gene expression datasets representing complex phenotypic and biological phenomena in both c. elegans and d. melanogaster. in this way, we integrate large scale genome analysis with large scale phenotypic analysis in these two model systems.

RESULTS
derivation of worm gene sets
the worm gene sets presented here are derived from two lists of genes and assigned phenotypes provided by gary schindelman and paul sternberg as a component of the worm phenotype ontology  <cit> . these two lists originated from information curated from rnai experiments and genetic variations  as archived in wormbase  <cit> .

two worm gene set files  were produced by parsing each gene list separately into non-redundant lists of unique phenotypic terms with all genes assigned to their corresponding phenotypic terms. this produced two non-redundant gene set files containing  <dig> and  <dig> gene sets for rnai and var, respectively. in addition, we developed a master worm file by combining the original rnai and var gene lists into a combined file  containing  <dig>  non-redundant phenotypes and their associated gene sets.

derivation of fly gene sets
the drosophila gene sets described here are derived from phenotypic data provided in flybase . a file containing  <dig>  phenotypic descriptions with assigned drosophila genes was collapsed and parsed resulting in a non-redundant gene set file of  <dig>  unique phenotypic terms with annotated genes. this file named dm-narrow-gs was used for systems biology and gene expression analysis.

table  <dig> shows representative examples of individual gene sets from the c. elegans and d. melanogaster gene set files. official gene symbols are shown where available, locus tags  where gene symbols are not available. as in other gene set collections, as the number of genes in any given gene set decreases, the phenotypes progress from broad categories to more specific phenotypic descriptors. the full gene set lists consist of a wide range of developmental, structural, metabolic and behavioral phenotypes, representing a large majority of the experimentally determined phenotypes found in worms and flies. they range from broad phenotype categories such as “sterile”, “slow_growth”, or “larval_arrest” in worms and “viable”, “lethal” and “fertile” in flies; to narrow phenotypic descriptors such as “flaccid”, “dna_synthesis_variant” or “no_posterior_pharynx” in worms and “ejaculatory_bulb”, “dorsal_vessel_primordium”, or “dense_body” in flies. in addition, there is often overlap of the genes found in related gene sets in both species, emphasizing the contributions of the same genes to multiple phenotypic traits. the complete c. elegans  and d. melanogaster  gene set files are available at this address http://www.grc.nia.nih.gov/branches/rrb/dna/index/worm-fly_gene_sets_5-9- <dig> html.

general uses of phenotype based gene sets in both worm and fly
as described here, a single gene set is essentially a single phenotypic term followed by a single row of genes that have been associated with that phenotype. a collection of gene sets consists of a list of phenotypic terms with their corresponding gene sets. gene sets can be used individually, as a collection, or compared across collections in a number of ways including network analysis, genome-wide model representations, hierarchical clustering, gene set analysis  of microarray data, and principal component analysis  of gene set values; among others. a property of this collection of gene sets is that they describe complex intermediate and end stage phenotypes as opposed to molecular function or lists of coordinately regulated genes. they can be used in a variety of bioinformatics applications to reveal higher order or emergent biological and phenotypic relationships and to provide insight into the biological relevance of complex molecular datasets.

network analysis
each individual gene set can be used to build networks to determine transcriptional regulation or protein-protein interactions. figure  <dig> is a representative network of six networks showing regulatory relationships analyzed by ingenuity pathway analysis   from a single  <dig> gene, c. elegans gene set, “life span variant”, found in the worm ce-combined-gs 7-28- <dig> file. this analysis identifies members of the gene set  as well as regulatory or transcriptional partners not found  in the original gene set. this network highlights the central role of insulin, erk family members, and pi <dig> kinase as important contributors to longevity in worms.

an example of a network showing regulatory relationships from a single  <dig> gene “long_lived” gene set, found in the fly gene set file , is also shown in figure  <dig>  like in the worm, insulin is central in this fly network, as well as erks, akt, and histones, demonstrating significant overlap in age related biochemical pathways between worms and flies. each individual gene set  produces multiple network diagrams showing the transcriptional neighbors and protein-protein partners of the core genes, while the entire collection of thousands of gene sets would produce many thousands of individual networks relative to phenotypic descriptions.

genome-wide phenotypic modeling in worms and flies
in addition to analysis of a single gene set, a collection of phenotypic gene sets can be compared to itself to reveal biological relationships between all members of the collection. figure  <dig> shows a dendrogram of the combined c. elegans file , using gene sets, having three or more genes, compared to each other based on the degree of gene sharing between individual gene sets. the overall worm tree  is composed of eleven large branches enriched for related biological functions. moreover, local relationships within a specific branch suggest functional relationships between closely spaced individual gene lists. for instance, in branch  <dig>  cell cycle phenotypes such as “cell cycle timing”, “cell cycle delayed” and “cell cycle variant” are closely positioned in space and close to spindle assembly phenotypes. likewise, in branch  <dig>  dauer phenotypes are closely aligned with multiple lifespan phenotypes based on individual gene sharing within their respective gene sets. close apposition of related phenotypes as determined by gene sharing between gene sets is a pervasive feature of these dendrogram displays and represents overlap of related phenotypes being influenced by shared genes.

the drosophila gene set collection also produced a similar complex dendrogram of phenotypic functional groups based on gene sharing between gene sets . like the worm dendrogram, individual branches of the fly dendrogram display a functional relatedness within subregions in each branch. for example, chromosome related phenotypes are grouped in branch  <dig>  with mitotic and meiotic phenotypes, including meiotic telophase phenotypes, being closely aligned to each other, as well as spermatid and spermatocyte phenotypes. behavioral, neuronal, and sensory response phenotypes are shown closely aligned in branch  <dig> of figure  <dig> , demonstrating overlapping genetic control of related complex phenotypes.

phenotype gene set analysis  of microarray data and principal components analysis  of gene sets
c. elegans: in addition to comparisons of gene sets either individually or collectively to themselves, these phenotype gene sets are useful in analysis of microarray based gene expression datasets in worm and fly. figure 5a illustrates statistically significant gene sets resulting from gene set analysis  of a single 4 day old larva versus 15 day old whole genome gene expression comparison in a c. elegans aging microarray dataset  <cit> . this dataset  represents a 15 day time course with incremental stages of infection with p. areuginosa. statistically significant up-regulated gene sets include germ cell gene groups, as well as meiosis and cell division gene sets, among others. down-regulated gene sets include gene groups involved in body vacuoles, as well as alae and cuticle formation. figure 5b is a heat map of the significant changes across the entire time course.

figure  <dig> shows changes in selected gene sets from a different aging time course in c. elegans over 24 days  <cit>  . aging related increases  or decreases  in gene groups related to locomotion, energy metabolism, and life span are highlighted.

in addition to gsa of microarray data the gene set values derived from gene expression data can be further analyzed by principal components analysis  using the z-score values of the original gene set data output. this is in contrast to more commonly described pca resulting from individual gene expression values. figure  <dig> shows tight grouping of individual biological samples within three groups; larvae, adult day  <dig>  and adult day  <dig>  and dramatic separation of time points within the experiment, based solely on pca analysis of the gene sets values from the previous gene set analysis. this demonstrates that there is useful biological information content in the aggregate gene set results, in addition to that found in any individual gene set, which can discriminate between discrete biological states.

d. melanogaster: in a similar fashion to the worm , microarray data from young versus aging flies was analyzed with the drosophila gene set file dm-narrow-gs containing  <dig>  gene sets. gene set analysis was performed using the web-page gene set analysis tool  <cit>  on a dataset of gene expression values from young versus old flies  <cit>  . the top  <dig> statistically significant enriched gene sets using z ratios of the expression values from day  <dig> versus day  <dig> fly heads is shown in figure  <dig>  over enriched gene sets include minute phenotypes, life span, as well as developmental growth rate phenotypes, among others. the discriminative ability of pca using gene set z-scores  is illustrated using the individual samples of day  <dig> versus day  <dig> fly heads in figure  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
here we describe genome-wide phenotypic modeling using gene sets based on gene-phenotypic assignments in c. elegans and d. melanogaster. unlike previous gene set collections such as kegg, go, msigdb, in these and other species, every gene in every gene set described here is based on genetic evidence contributing to each specific phenotype. although very useful, these gene sets should be considered a first generation. they may not be complete. some may describe certain phenotypes in different developmental contexts, or in particular applications and not in others. in addition, many subtleties and details were not included in deriving these gene sets including penetrance of different alleles, strain differences, and environmental modifiers. moreover, these gene sets may produce different results depending on the statistical algorithms used in complex analysis.

however, we have demonstrated these gene sets can be used to identify complex higher order biological and genetic relationships through network analysis, whole genome phenotypic modeling, and analysis of complex molecular datasets. they will help elucidate complex multigenic relationships between genes and phenotypes in worms and flies in many experimental and biological contexts and will provide a bridge for phenotypic comparisons between model and intermediate species.

