BACKGROUND
within systems biology, metabolomic studies have been shown to be an essential component for elucidating the interdependency between substrates and products. to date, metabolomics data have been limited to relatively standard statistical techniques including univariate analyses and multivariate analyses such as principal component analysis  <cit> . whilst these have shown potential to elucidate disease or cellular phenotypes and to discover potential predictive biomarkers, their ability to provide insights into the underlying biochemical function is limited, particularly when a system is in a perturbed state through disease or environmental stress. in this scenario, a deeper insight into a system response could be offered using novel computational approaches to allow improved interpretability of the complex large-scale metabolomic datasets generated.

the concentrations of metabolites in cells relate in part to the underlying structure of the metabolic network and thus the relative concentrations of metabolites within these networks can exhibit correlations  <cit> . there have been examples of correlation analysis for metabolomics that have allowed powerful biological interpretation of data  <cit> . although a simple interpretation of metabolite correlations would be to assume that strongly correlated metabolites must be neighbours in the metabolic network, in reality this is often not the case. for example, metabolites that are spatial or temporal neighbours may not be strongly correlated whilst apparently distant metabolites are correlated  <cit> . valcarcel et al. recently demonstrated the application of differential correlation analysis to create networks offering an insight into characterising a variety of biological states  <cit> . whilst these networks provided a snapshot of the system response and were useful to determine differences between individuals with different phenotypes, in this case normal fasting glucose and pre-hyperinsulinameia, the underlying origin of the correlation with respect to metabolic pathways was not explored. bridging the gap between analysing large-scale untargeted metabolomics data and interpreting the biological regulation in relation to the entire metabolic network may benefit from combining genome-scale metabolic networks. there are several large-scale human metabolic networks available, however popular models include the global reconstruction of the human metabolic network based on genomic and bibliomic data reconstruction  <dig>   <cit>  and the recently published recon <dig>  <cit>  as well as the edinburgh human metabolic network   <cit> . the ehmn is available as both compartmentalised or un-compartmentalised  <cit> . depending on the samples and the application, compartmentalised or un-compartmentalised forms offer different advantages. for example, if the biological samples used for the analysis are organelle specific, more specific information may be gained from using a compartmentalised model; whereas if the samples are representative of whole cells and the overall cellular phenotype is of interest then using an un-compartmentalised model can be more accurate. these models have been used previously, for example recon <dig> was used to predict alternative drug targets for treating hyperlipidaemia  <cit> .

in this study a network-based correlation analysis method has been developed as a novel method for the identification of linked metabolic pathways in the context of the entire metabolic network. pair-wise correlations were mapped onto the ehmn genome-scale metabolic network and the shortest path connecting the two metabolites was extracted and used to construct a network of the cellular response to a physiological perturbation. since all reactions present in the ehmn are reversible, all correlations were considered reversible and in this way it does not matter in which direction the path was drawn between correlated metabolites. network biology is an emerging field; however there are complex issues, which remain to be addressed. for example, the shortest path between metabolites has been previously described for escherichia coli <cit> . the average path connecting metabolites was shown to be longer than paths found by treating the metabolic system as a normal network. furthermore, there is the added influence that nodes may affect one another along multiple paths simultaneously  <cit> .

we shall illustrate this method for investigating tumour hypoxia. cancer metabolism has fascinated biologists since warburg’s experiments in the 1920s  <cit> . otto warburg was the first to note that tumour cells rely on anaerobic metabolism as a source of energy production even under aerobic physiological oxygen levels  <cit> . hypoxia is prevalent in solid tumours and is a feature associated with the aggressive disease and poor response to therapy. it arises and persists in tumorous tissue due to poor oxygen supply and rapid oxygen consumption. hypoxia generally occurs in cells that are located at a distance greater than  <dig> – 180 μm from the blood supply  <cit> . rapid cell proliferation and the presence of abnormal blood vessels in tumours contribute to creating distances greater than this threshold, thus causing hypoxia  <cit> . hypoxia can be simulated in cancer cells such that its effect on cell metabolism can be studied at the simplest level. several metabolomic studies have revealed metabolic features of hypoxia in cancer using in vitro cell models  <cit> . here a similar approach has been applied to study the role of metabolism in hypoxia, using a non-targeted metabolite profiling approach to gain a global profile of the metabolome of each sample . rather than simply to analyse the data in terms of each single metabolic feature that changes with respect to oxygen level, we have applied our novel correlation mapping onto the ehmn to reveal both correlated metabolites whose concentrations change in unison and anti-correlated discordant metabolites.

RESULTS
correlation analysis
two tumour cell lines cultured in vitro and exposed to 21% oxygen  or 1% oxygen  have been compared to assess the metabolic effect of lowering oxygen availability and to determine whether or not these effects are commonly observed across different cell lines. the cell lines used were the human breast carcinoma cell line mda-mb- <dig> and the human colon carcinoma cell line hct <dig>  cell lysates were prepared for each cell line exposed to each experimental oxygen condition and metabolites were profiled using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry . for each cell line exposed to each condition, a total of  <dig> replicates were collected. over  <dig> metabolites were detected using gc-ms in each cell line exposed to normoxia or hypoxia . some of the metabolites detected were not uniquely identified as a single metabolite, typically as a consequence of isomerisation. multiple identifications are often the result of the high-throughput nature of the metabolic profiling method where some metabolites with a similar chemical structure cannot be chromatographically resolved.

those metabolites that possess a kegg identifier are those that have been definitively identified to level of msi  <cit> .

using these identified metabolites, the approach was to reveal correlations between the metabolites that differed between the two oxygen levels. statistical outliers were identified within each experimental group as values greater than three standard deviations away from the mean for that metabolite in that group  <cit> . these were replaced with a mean and the data were observed to follow an approximately normal distribution, meeting the requirements for the pearson’s correlation method. for each experimental group of  <dig> replicates in turn, a pearson’s correlation coefficient was computed between metabolites in a pair-wise fashion. an example of the calculated correlation coefficients for metabolites detected in the mda-mb- <dig> cell line cultured in normoxia are shown as a heatmap in figure  <dig>  where green represents a positive correlation and red a negative correlation. different methods for correlation analysis can be employed and the decision is usually based upon the type and quality of the data. for example, the pearson’s product–moment correlation method computes a coefficient for normally distributed data and the relationship is linear  <cit> , or at least assumed to be. since our data were observed to follow an approximately normal distribution, it was appropriate to perform the pearson’s product–moment correlation method. when such requirements are not met it may be more appropriate to use a routine that does not use mean values in correlations such as the spearman’s rank correlation analysis.

in the mda-mb- <dig> model, a total of  <dig> correlations were found to differ significantly in response to lowering oxygen availability. for the hct <dig> cell line a total of  <dig> correlations were significantly different between normoxia and hypoxia. the five most significantly different correlations between normoxia and hypoxia are shown in table  <dig>  for mda-mb- <dig> samples and in table  <dig> for hct <dig> samples. for hct <dig> all correlations are positive in hypoxia which suggests the response to low oxygen is to up-regulate rescue pathways. by contrast the mda-mb- <dig> cells appear to no longer correlate glucose/malate metabolites and rather correlate malate/pyruvate and octadecanoic acid/glutamate to promote cell survival.

the oxygen response for mda-mb- <dig> cells cultured in normoxia shows a correlation between glucose and malate, glucose/galactose and malate and glucose and glucose/galactose. furthermore, for mda-mb- <dig> cells cultured in hypoxia there is a correlation between malate and pyruvate and octadecanoic acid and glutamate. the shift from malate being correlated with glucose in normoxia to then being correlated with pyruvate in hypoxia may represent a shift from oxidative phosphorylation metabolism to partial use of the tricarboxylic acid  cycle though glutaminolysis. the tca cycle is part of central carbon metabolism and it is widely known to be one of the main responses to hypoxia  <cit> . glutaminolysis has been suggested to be an important energy source in tumour cells  <cit> . hypoxic cells may utilise this pathway when low oxygen availability causes a shift from oxidative phosphorylation metabolism to non-oxidative phosphorylation metabolism. consequently, glutaminolysis partially uses the tca cycle resulting in the production of malate and pyruvate. this pathway can contribute towards cellular survival in low oxygenated environments through the generation of atp, nadh and synthesis of metabolic precursors such as amino acids and nucleotides required for cell growth. furthermore, acetyl-coa entering the tca cycle can be consequently guided towards de novo synthesis of fatty acids for cell growth. glutamate and octadecanoic acid are immunosuppressive metabolites that are often released by the cells to protect the system from an immunity attack  <cit> . the correlation between these two metabolites may be a consequence of the glutaminolysis pathway increasing the production of these two metabolites. potentially interfering with the pathways that connect these pair-wise correlated metabolites could lead to selectively killing the hypoxic tumour and furthermore, network mapping may help to identify effective novel targets for drugs.

although it has not previously been linked with hypoxia, the greatest difference in correlation between hct <dig> cells exposed to normoxia and hypoxia occurred in the correlation between galactose/glucose and 4-hydroxyproline. these metabolites are correlated in hypoxia but are not correlated in normoxia and must therefore be a response to hypoxia. furthermore, the 4-hydroxyproline peak was correlated with many other metabolites in hypoxia and could be potentially considered a central 'hub’ in cellular response to this oxygen condition, such that pathways involving this metabolite are changed in regulation. this highlights the potential importance of this metabolite in a hypoxic response.

many of the metabolites found to be differently correlated between normoxia and hypoxia in both cell lines were features of central carbon metabolism. such metabolites include glucose, malate and pyruvate. central carbon metabolism is obviously a feature of hypoxic response that is conserved between cell lines; however, the way the concentrations of these metabolites is affected by hypoxia is to a certain extent cell line specific. other central carbon metabolites may also have changed in the same way within the system, just that they were not detected. it is possible to measure all central metabolites and they are present in our libraries, however many can be missing from the profile if their concentrations are below the limits of detection  <cit> .

network analysis
the metabolic profiles acquired for correlation analysis here were obtained from whole cell lysates of mda-mb- <dig> and hct <dig> human carcinoma cells. for this reason it was appropriate to use a metabolic reconstruction that did not contain compartmentalisation of metabolites, for example those biochemical reactions that occur in the cytosol and those that are contained in the mitochondria. the ehmn contains approximately  <dig> non-compartmentalised reactions  <cit> . correlated metabolites were identified within the ehmn and the shortest path between these was computed from the reactions available in the network. this allowed the connection between correlated metabolites to be observed. from a list of differently correlated metabolites between two experimental groups at a time it was possible to collect pathways between them and together create new sub-networks to describe the network based origin of the differences. some metabolite pathways could not be extracted from the ehmn as the metabolite was not present in the network or the metabolites were not connected in the network. this is a result of the limitation of the reconstructed human metabolic networks as some reactions of human metabolism are currently unknown. the future constructions of more detailed metabolic networks may overcome this; note that recon <dig>  <cit>  may address this but was not available during this study. subsequently, pathways from each correlation were combined to generate a network to visualise the significant difference. the aim was to use the networks to observe variation and similarities between the cell lines with respect to lowering oxygen availability. the ehmn and other large-scale networks contain highly connected nodes from molecules such as atp, h2o and nad. when computing the shortest network path connecting two nodes the path calculates a shortcut that passes through these highly connected nodes  <cit> . these molecules are present in many of the biochemical reactions as products or substrates; however they are side reactions  and therefore these intermediates were removed prior to applying graph-theory.

metabolism is usually considered in terms of pathways in the way they are traditionally represented in databases such as kegg. many of the pathways in these databases are interconnected and it is possible to consider new pathways that cross over several 'traditional’ pathways that may potentially be more biochemically relevant than each of the traditional pathways; this is depicted as a cartoon in figure  <dig>  the method used to build sub-networks of differently correlated metabolites in this research has found interlinked pathways that connect correlated metabolites via the shortest route. this means many pathways form interactions between traditional pathways and thus cross over them . sub-networks have been built considering metabolic pathways in this different way and although this is less conventional, it has made it possible to reveal potentially more relevant pathways than if only 'traditional’ pathways were considered. this is demonstrated in figure  <dig> which is comprised of real biochemical reactions but that are not illustrated in this way in traditional pathways such as in kegg.

figure  <dig> shows a network of pathways connecting differently correlated metabolites in normoxia and hypoxia for cell lines mda-mb- <dig>  and hct <dig> ; where metabolites common in both the cell lines are shown in grey. this global view of both cell lines enables the comparative study of the metabolic connectivity. the grey nodes could potentially be central metabolites, marking a change in metabolism in response to hypoxia that is qualitatively the same between the two cancer cell lines. the network encompasses a range of kegg pathways including glycerolipid metabolism ; glycine, threonine and serine metabolism ; glycolysis/gluconeogenesis ; fructose and mannose metabolism  and the tca cycle  to name a few. in this way, figure  <dig> describes how the underlying mechanisms of a real biological system can be more complex than considering individual pathways in isolation as they are traditionally represented.

from this network in figure  <dig> it can be seen that malate, pyruvate, 2-oxoglutarate, glutamate and fructose-6-phosphate are conserved features of metabolic response to hypoxia in both mda-mb- <dig> and hct <dig>  these five metabolites can be connected via a single pathway between malate and fructose-6-phosphate using pyruvate, 2-oxoglutarate and glutamate as intermediates. however the network also shows that all five of these metabolites interact with other metabolites via different reactions. they are central to this network depicted in figure  <dig> and describe differential metabolic regulation between normoxia and hypoxia. the shortest network path connecting these metabolites occurs in the tca cycle. as previously suggested for mda-mb- <dig> cells, the hypoxia cells may be producing glutamate as an immunosuppressive response which would protect the hypoxic cells from immune attack. this metabolite is shared in the network and it may be that the hct <dig> cells also synthesise glutamate as an immunosuppressive response through an alternative mechanism to glutaminolysis  <cit> . furthermore, glutamate is also a precursor for nucleic acid synthesis and may have the potential to drive the uptake of other amino acids from the extracellular environment  <cit> .

hypoxic cells are expected to rely on increasing non-oxidative phosphorylation metabolism to promote survival due to the decreasing oxygen availability limiting oxidative phosphorylation metabolism. one of the interesting observations of the network  is that lactate does not feature in the network suggesting non-oxidative metabolism is not an important feature of cellular survival at 1% oxygen compared to cells cultured in normal oxygen levels. it may be that this process is induced at lower than 1% oxygen and therefore was not observed in this experiment. the network suggests that cells are using mechanisms other than non-oxidative phosphorylation metabolism to promote survival such as shunting off into the tca cycle.

CONCLUSIONS
within systems biology, metabolomics is an essential tool as it allows the establishment of interdependency between metabolites. metabolic profiling generates large-scale datasets, with complexity that makes interpretation difficult with respect to providing an insight into cell physiology. here, the network visualisation of the biochemical connectivity between metabolite concentrations using correlation analysis has been demonstrated as a novel method to generate hypotheses about the regulation and cellular response to an environmental perturbation in the context of systems biology. the topological differences in the network offer a further dimension to the understanding of the regulation of key metabolites.

network-based correlation analysis offers a complementary tool to statistical and multivariate analysis methods typically applied to metabolomics datasets to identify metabolite differences in physiological state. additionally, this method could be readily applied to metabolic profiling data from different biological systems or to other profiling datasets such as those acquired in proteomics and transcriptomics. its application in systems biology could therefore be of paramount importance.

