BACKGROUND
in the last two decades ancient dna  has been successfully extracted from fossil plant material, and the results from the specimens of late quaternary remains  have provided insights into many evolutionary processes  <cit> . these studies represented the first attempts in linking extant and fossil plant populations and provided important information on genetic changes through time. parducci et al.  <cit>  did a promising attempt to analyze short chloroplast dna  regions in fossil pollen extracted from a holocene lake sediment in sweden. fossil pollen grains are abundant in lake sediments. under ideal preservation conditions  the study of pollen dna allows studying past demographic events by analyzing neutrally evolving regions of the organelle genome, such as microsatellites and introns  <cit> . during the quaternary  climatic oscillations have dramatically influenced the distribution of plant species  <cit> . repeated range expansions and contractions in response to warming and cooling resulted in large-scale demographic changes with consequent impact on their genetic composition  <cit> .

progress in adna-based phylogenetic and population genetic studies have been very rapid in animal species and lately several specific primers have been designed to study population-level changes . rohland et al.  <cit>  have for example detected divergence events between mammoth and the two extant elephant species. barnes et al.  <cit>  and valdiosera et al.  <cit>  successfully reconstructed population movements during the last glaciation in brown bears and detected frequent events of extinctions and recolonizations. unfortunately, similar studies on woody plants are still in their infancy with few attempts done on fossil pollen and wood  <cit> . this is despite the many questions that plant adna analyses are amenable to answer  <cit> .

in this study we focus on picea abies , one of the ecologically and economically most important forest tree species in europe. pollen and macrofossil evidence combined with genetic surveys of the current european populations of this species showed that its wide-ranging distribution in central and south-eastern europe originated from several glacial refugia  <cit> . one such refugium was identified in the south carpathians, where several unique cpdna and mitochondrial dna  haplotypes suggested long-lasting isolation  <cit> . populations from these regions showed lower level of genetic variation compared to other refugial populations in central europe, and north- and westward postglacial expansion from this area showed to be limited, as these haplotypes do not appear in the central and northwest european populations today. in addition, the genetic diversity increased north of the carpathians, probably as a result of admixture of expanding populations from two separate refugia. tollefsrud et al.  <cit>  suggested that the dry plains of central and south-eastern europe, including the hungarian plain, formed an ecological barrier to any expansion, whereas humid mountain ranges elsewhere in central europe facilitated the northward spread of other spruce lineages. the lateglacial and early holocene warming also brought major altitudinal displacements of the species range in the south carpathians  <cit> . in addition, fossil pollen records indicate that a large proportion of glacial lowland coniferous woodlands went destroyed by fire in the early holocene as summer temperatures rose  <cit> . an ongoing pollen and plant macrofossil study of a sediment sequence retrieved from a lake located in the retezat mountains  in the south carpathian range demonstrates that at the onset of the early holocene warming  a rapid population expansion of norway spruce took place around this lake  <cit> .

based on all this knowledge, we hypothesized two possible population demographic scenarios during the holocene in the south carpathian refugium.  the spruce populations of the retezat mountains remained constrained to this region with a relatively constant population size. in this case we expect to find the same haplotypes and similar levels of diversity in extant and ancient samples.  the population of the retezat mts underwent significant demographic changes, most probably due to climatic shifts and anthropogenic influences. in this case we expect altered haplotype frequencies in the extant population relative to the ancient population, and different levels of genetic diversity.

to asses the consistency of the two scenarios, we analyzed fossil spruce pollen and other macrofossils  from the early holocene section of a sediment core extracted at lake tăul dintre brazi  in the retezat mountains . we analyzed cpdna from material retrieved from two radiocarbon dated sediment layers   and compared results with genetic data obtained from the extant spruce population of the retezat mountains. population genetic inferences from the past were then linked to a  <dig> -year record of spruce pollen accumulation rates  obtained from the same sediment core and used to infer past population size changes. par values represent the number of pollen grains accumulated at the sediment surface  in a year and they can be directly related to the population size of the studied taxon in the effective pollen source area of the examined lake  <cit> . the importance of this relationship has been long recognized by palaeoecologists  <cit>  and used to reconstruct past population growth rates  <cit> . recently, the collection of forestry data allowed direct comparison of surface sediment par values with actual biomass and population sizes in modern forests and thus the projection of par-based population size estimates back in time  <cit> .

RESULTS
we analyzed eight different cpdna regions in extant and fossil material from norway spruce and six of them showed polymorphism . the alignment of the extant sequences revealed  <dig> point mutations and five length polymorphisms that yielded nine haplotypes . two haplotypes were the most common  found in  <dig> and  <dig> out of  <dig> individuals, respectively. out of  <dig> fossil pollen grains analyzed we obtained totally  <dig> positive amplifications . the higher amplification success  obtained with pollen compared to parducci et al.  <cit>  was likely due to the choice of using more  pollen grains instead of one during amplification trials, or it may simply indicates favorable condition for dna survival in the lake sediment at the retezat. after sequencing, four of the  <dig> amplicons  showed to be of pinus origin, while seven amplicons obtained with primers lf were of abies origin. pollen grains of these two taxa were present in the examined sediment layer  <cit>  and they were likely selected by mistake during the analyses. the rest of the amplicons were assigned to p. abies. another possible explanation for the findings of pinus and abies sequences is dna contamination from molecules of the surrounding sediment that may permeate or adhere to macrofossils in the sediments  <cit> . nevertheless, these sequences still provide authentic early holocene dna information from pinus and abies individuals.

 successful amplification of the fragment with no variation in the sequence; length of concatenated sequences is shown on the right; rows below the name of the fragments indicate the nucleotide position in the single fragments and in the concatenated sequence, respectively; base substitutions in bold were found only in the fossil material; ht: haplotype; s: seed; p: pollen

out of the investigated six norway spruce seeds, dna was successfully amplified from five seeds. altogether, we obtained  <dig> positive amplifications  . when sequences were concatenated, the total length of the haplotypes varied between  <dig> and  <dig> bp in the five seeds, and between  <dig> and  <dig> bp in pollen. concatenation of the four regions amplified from the  <dig> cone scales gave a haplotype with a total length of  <dig> bp. because cpdna is paternally inherited in norway spruce, sequence difference between cone and seed haplotypes  were not unexpected. we found three transversion substitutions at position  <dig> in fragment d , position  <dig> in fragment tl  and position  <dig> in fragment li . finally, replication of the analyses done at uppsala university using four new seeds retrieved at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> cm depths in the same sediment, gave two positive amplifications  using primers b. both sequences were of norway spruce origin and showed the 12a + 5g block, the most common variant present in the extant population.

comparison of ancient and extant sequences
after manually editing for base call errors, we performed an alignment between homologous regions obtained in extant and ancient individuals. the alignment revealed mismatches at several positions. transition substitutions  were interpreted as incorrect nucleotide pcr incorporations due to post-mortem lesions in the ancient dna molecules, a common problem when amplifications are performed from degraded dna molecules  <cit> . we therefore neglected two g > a substitutions detected in sample p <dig> . the rest of the substitutions were considered authentic, i.e. due to true polymorphism. two variants were unique to the ancient population: a 10a + 7g repetition found in sample s <dig> , and a ga dinucleotide substitution present in sample p <dig> . as expected, variants that were common to the extant population were also found in the ancient material . however, also rare variants found in extant individuals were detected among the ancient samples. for example, the 10a + 6g repetition in fragment b, and the c > a substitution at position  <dig> in fragment li, both with a frequency  <dig>  in the extant population, were found in sample p <dig> and s <dig>  respectively. similarly, a c > a substitution at position  <dig> in fragment tl was detected in samples p <dig> and s <dig> 

population genetic analyses
estimates of nucleotide diversity, haplotype diversity and average number of nucleotide differences calculated at the six polymorphic cpdna loci are presented in table  <dig>  observed values for fragment d, tl and li suggest that the ancient spruce population harbored higher levels of genetic variation compared to the extant population. fst values at these loci were also statistically significant, an unusual result considering the low level of differentiation usually observed among populations of conifer species. nucleotide-based genetic differentiation  was also statistically significant at these three loci. on the whole, our results suggest differentiation between extant and ancient spruce populations that inhabited the areas surrounding tăul dintre brazi at  <dig> - <dig>  cal yr bp.

** significant at p <  <dig> ; * significant at p <  <dig> ; ns - not significant

phylogenetic relationships of ancient and extant specimens
results of the phylogenetic analyses conducted on separate loci based on all sequences available  for fragments d, tl, li and lf are presented in figure  <dig>  a small group of sequences is formed by nine extant and four ancient sequences in the case of fragment d, while the other two ancient sequences are grouped with the rest of the extant material. in the case of lf fragment, the ancient sequences obtained from the cone and seed s <dig> are clustering together with the majority of the extant samples, while a smaller group of extant sequences that included samples collected on the northern slopes of the retezat, form a well-supported cluster. the phylogenetic analysis conducted on fragment li grouped together the majority of extant samples with one ancient sequence obtained from seed s <dig>  while the other two ancient sequences form a well-defined clade with one extant sequence collected on the shores of tăul dintre brazi. for fragment tl we obtained the largest number of sequences from the ancient material and the majority of them grouped together with the extant specimens. only three ancient and one herbarium specimen form a well-separated group.

finally, the a median-joining network created using microsatellite b sequences  grouped the two previously identified 100-year-old spruce pollen from sweden  <cit>  together with the common haplotype detected in this study in extant and herbarium specimens. our ancient sequences were also similar to this common extant haplotype with a single mutation step away from it, thus suggesting genetic continuity between norway spruce populations.

par-based population size estimates
discussion
patterns of plant genetic diversity in europe show that levels of diversity usually decrease during postglacial colonization from the refugia  <cit> . there can be however large differences between colonization routes followed by different plant species due to climatic and environmental factors, altitudinal range expansion and contraction, proximity to the ice sheets, and topography. results from our study suggest that these factors were crucial in determining the distribution and demography that shaped the genetic structure of the populations of the south carpathians in the retezat. in central europe, high levels of diversity are usually found in the oldest spruce regions , in the south-eastern alps, southern bohemian massif, west carpathians and northern dinaric alps  <cit> . the only exception is the south carpathian refugium, where scientists have found unique haplotypes and relatively low diversity levels in extant populations  <cit> . indeed, in our study we found a decreased genetic variation in the extant populations in the retezat compared to the ancient population, and such lower diversity could be easily associated with the several population bottlenecks identified by the par data. nevertheless, we cannot exclude that the limited number of fossil sequences affected the interpretation of the adna data.

it is reasonable to assume that the fluctuations observed in population size after an early holocene rapid expansion at tăul dintre brazi had a substantial impact on the genetic structure of the spruce population. the pollen record shows that a small population was already established in the lateglacial period around  <dig>  cal yr bp at high altitudes formerly covered by glacier ice  supporting the presence of a refugium in this area. such a refugium has been also detected by genetic analysis conducted on living populations by bucci & vendramin  <cit>  and tollefsrud et al.  <cit> . assuming therefore that spruce was present and probably abundant throughout the last glacial cycle at lower elevations in the retezat, it is likely that our sampled ancient population is similar in genetic composition to this refugial population. the pollen and the stomata record  show that the lateglacial expansion came to a halt during the younger dryas climatic reversal , and the spruce population was greatly reduced and/or eradicated from the lakeshore  <cit> . the species expanded again during the early holocene and our ancient material was sampled at the beginning of this second population expansion that started around  <dig>  cal yr bp. such increase in population size started from a population that was very small, according to the par record about 1/ <dig> or 1/ <dig> of the extant one, and that successively increased between ca.  <dig>  and  <dig>  cal yr bp. a significant increase in population size, however, only began around  <dig>  cal yr bp, when the largest overall holocene distribution was reached. fossil pollen data from this site  indicates that between  <dig>  and  <dig> cal yr bp norway spruce replaced european larch  on the lakeshore and probably also in other areas at the same altitudinal belt  <cit> . by this time, the population increased to a number that likely exceeded the extant population size.

according to the par record, the maximum extension of norway spruce in the retezat was followed by three distinct population bottlenecks. the first reduction occurred at  <dig> cal yr bp and was likely caused by a local population decline due to the expanding lake surface area  <cit> . a second reduction in size occurred at  <dig> cal yr bp and it was attributable to the climate-induced spread of european hornbeam  that partially replaced former mixed norway spruce - hazel forests at mid elevations  <cit> . the third bottleneck started  <dig> years ago and was of anthropogenic origin as suggested by the accompanying decrease in many other arboreal elements and the spread of human-indicator herbs  <cit> .

typically, population bottlenecks are characterized by loss in allelic richness and a more limited decrease of genetic diversity at neutral loci  <cit> . this theory however is not strictly applicable to the events that seem to have occurred during postglacial recolonization in the retezat. in our case, a combination of factors may have acted to limit the initial loss in allelic richness , and later to increase it . several pollen studies and historical documents show indeed that forest management was intense from  <dig> cal years bp and destroyed the large continuous distribution of norway spruce in this region  <cit> .

results from the genetic and par analyses seem therefore to support the hypothesis that the higher ancient genetic variability and the absence of some ancient haplotypes in the extant spruce populations was due to repeated bottlenecks experienced during the holocene in the retezat. in addition, as suggested by tollefsrud et al.  <cit> , the dry plains of central and south-eastern europe, may also have acted as an ecological barrier to the expansion of the early holocene populations from this site, whereas humid mountain ranges elsewhere in central europe facilitated the northward spread of new spruce lineages in the successive periods. as a result, despite the proximity to the south carpathian refugium, the genetic diversity of this site declined during the holocene.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates how past population size changes inferred from par records can be efficiently used in combination with adna data. the joint application of palaeoecological and population genetic analyses proved to be a powerful tool to understand the influence of past population demographic changes on the haplotype diversity and genetic composition of an important forest tree species. we used a pollen and plant macrofossil-based adna approach and traced population size changes of norway spruce in a refugial area in the south carpathian mountains. results clearly show that the paternal lineage observed at the beginning of the holocene in the retezat mts persisted at the site until today. problems associated with low sample size in our adna data could be overcome by the information obtained from the par data that clearly showed significant population size fluctuations in the retezat mts during the holocene. this combined information support the hypothesis that the spruce population of the retezat mts underwent significant demographic changes, most probably due to climatic shifts and anthropogenic influences, and that likely these changes significantly altered the haplotype frequencies and the level of genetic diversity.

this study thus laid down the first basis for further adna analyses. by examining additional levels of this sediment profile we can provide further insight to support the hypotheses presented in this study.

we have shown also that longer sequences, and more robust phylogenetic inferences can be obtained from plant macrofossils like seeds and cone scales when aliquots of the dna extracts are used in multiple pcr reactions providing sequences from different cpdna regions. similar attempts performed with fossil pollen grains were not as successful limiting at the moment population genetic inferences to single loci. on the other hand, multiple pcr products  and thus longer sequences might be obtained from pollen using the new generation sequencing platforms, like the  <dig> gs flx  <cit>  or multiple-loci pcr analyses. with this type of analyses, the use of dna extracted from plant macrofossils allows the study of longer dna sequences or, in the case of the  <dig> platform, even complete genomes from ancient plant specimens providing good resolution data sets for population genetic analyses, as recently done with an extinct cave bear species  <cit> . the main obstacle to the use of plant macrofossils for detecting population level changes is the limited number of individuals that can be obtained from a sediment sample. in cases, however, where macrofossils are well preserved and retrieved in large quantities from multiple time horizons  <cit> , they can easily provide multiple genotypes suitable for population genetic studies similarly to our recovery of an intact  <dig> -year-old norway spruce cone from tăul dintre brazi. in such cases, the opportunity offered by new data analytical methods in population genetics that work with multi-locus data, enables an efficient use of a relatively small number of individuals in the reconstruction of past population demographic changes  <cit> . indeed, there are several fossil sites in europe where upper weichselian  plant macrofossils from single or multiple chronological horizons have been recovered in large numbers  <cit> . in the carpathians, for example, numerous picea sp., pinus cembra and larix sp. cones have been reported from several last glacial  and holocene peat sediments  <cit> . such material seems ideal for adna analysis, as both organellar and nuclear dna in the seeds of these cones hold many alleles. its study have the potential of revealing ancient genetic diversity in cryptic northern refugia and adding valuable information on the role of this area in the postglacial recolonization of northern and western europe  <cit> .

our analyses in particular proved that the use of adna in combination with par data obtained from the same site can be very efficient in discovering demographic changes that occurred in the past in norway spruce, and will hopefully be used in other wind-pollinated tree species. finally, par-inferred demographic scenarios offer the opportunity of being incorporated in coalescence-based bayesian mutation rate estimations, and this way more accurate substitution rates can be obtained  <cit> .

