BACKGROUND
the large number of complete bacterial genomes in the public domain  has opened the way for genome-scale studies of pathogenesis, diversity, evolution and gene function. there has been particular interest in comparative analyses of bacterial pathogens, and especially studying molecular mechanisms underlying bacterial adaptation, as such analyses are expected to contribute to disease prevention and treatment . a typical approach is to discriminate between exclusive subsets of genes; e.g., genes shared among pathogens and their non-pathogenic relatives  and those genes showing presence-absence polymorphisms   <cit> . most studies of pathogenicity have restricted themselves to pathogen-specific subsets of accessory genes . only recently has the potential role of core genes in the evolution of pathogenicity been considered . however, the outcome of dividing genes into exclusive subsets is sensitive to the particular sample of the genomes  <cit> , and this could bias an investigation of the origin and maintenance of bacterial virulence.

this paper focuses on the evolution of genes and gene families of streptococci. the genus streptococcus is comprised of a wide variety  of both pathogenic and commensal gram-positive bacteria, which are found to inhabit a wide range of hosts, including humans, horses, pigs and cows  <cit> . within the host, streptococci often colonise the mucosal surfaces of the mouth, nares and pharynx, but also inhabit the skin, heart or muscle tissue. niche or tissue-specific adaptations of streptococci remain poorly understood  <cit> . this study includes the three most important streptococcal human pathogens: s. pyogenes causes pharyngitis, wound and skin infections, scarlet and rheumatic fever, pneumonia, necrotising fasciitis, acute glomerulonephritis, cellulitis, and toxic shock syndrome  <cit> ; s. agalactiae is known mainly for severe infections in newborns, such as sepsis, meningitis, and pneumonia, but also causes pneumonia and infections of bloodstream, skin, and urinary tract in adults  <cit> ; and s. pneumoniae is a major source for pneumonia, meningitis, septicaemia, otitis media and sometimes occult bacteremia  <cit> . most other streptococci are part of normal human flora  <cit> , and three such lineages  are included in this study. even within a nominal species, the genomes of individual strains vary in size and gene content . undoubtedly, some gene content variation among the lineages sampled in this study corresponds to important pathogenic differences between individual strains. rather than attempting to a priori delineate subsets of streptococci genes into sets more or less relevant to pathogenicity, we adopted an approach focused on clusters of homologous genes. although such clusters will not necessarily contain genes involved in presence-absence polymorphisms among pathogenic and non-pathogenic species, they will allow for a broader investigation of functional divergence among pathogenic and non-pathogenic lineages of streptococci.

we estimated rates of evolution for gene clusters comprised of known and putative coding regions, categorised them according to their evolutionary patterns, and identified genes and gene families evolving under positive selection. we found that both core and accessory genes are subject to evolution by positive selection, most likely in the form of diversifying selection resulting from the antagonistic interaction between host and parasite. a large fraction of the genes identified as subject to positive selection have functions that can be connected to virulence. furthermore, 19% of the positively selected streptococci gene clusters encode proteins that are known to have body-site specific expression pattern during invasive disease; a result which we argue is likely a substantial underestimate. taken together, the results of this study and others support the notion that the products of both core and auxiliary genes participate in complex networks that comprise the molecular basis of virulence, and that evolution of the participants of such networks contribute significantly to the dynamics of this phenotype over time.

RESULTS
characteristics of streptococci gene clusters
we partitioned the twelve complete genomes from five streptococcus species  into  <dig> clusters of homologous gene sequences based on the requirement that a cluster must be comprised of more than three distinct sequences and meet a sequence similarity threshold of 50%. when the threshold was lowered to 30%,  <dig> homologous gene groups were identified, with  <dig> of them obtained by a successive clustering procedure . both sets of clusters were subjected to identical data analysis procedures. despite the clustering differences, the results for both sets were consistent: the same conclusions were drawn from the estimates of evolutionary parameters, and the sets of genes detected to be under positive selection were very similar. this indicates a level of robustness of our results to the details of the clustering procedure. we therefore show results using the set of homologous gene clusters based on the 50% similarity threshold . in this case, the size of clusters varied from  <dig> to  <dig> sequences, and almost a third of clusters  contained at least  <dig> sequences. sequence length ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> nucleotides, the average being  <dig> nucleotides.

as expected, the sampled streptococci genomes were at-rich, with nucleotide content varying among different codon positions, and among genes and genomes. the average at content of the sampled genomes ranged from  <dig> to 64%, and the average for the gene clusters ranged from 49–74%. at content at 2nd and 3rd codon positions  was more biased as compared to 1st codon positions . for certain genes at content was extremely high at 3rd codon positions while overall at content was comparatively low: the majority of these cases were 30s and 50s ribosomal proteins  as well as uridine phosphorylase , protein grab , cell division protein , alcohol dehydrogenase i , cysteine synthase, o-acetylserine sulfhydrylase , triose phosphate isomerase , cell-wall surface anchor family protein and a homologous cluster containing glucan binding protein , secreted antigen , and general stress protein gsp- <dig> 

transition/transversion  ratios varied widely among the gene clusters: 95% of gene clusters had κ between  <dig> and  <dig>  with the average ratio being  <dig>  at the tails of the distribution we also found  <dig> % of gene clusters with no transversions  and 2% of gene clusters with κ <  <dig>  the latter cases included b-cell receptor associated protein, minor capsid protein, peptidoglycan hydrolase , abc transporter membrane-spanning permease , bacterocin transport accessory , oxidoreductase , acetylglutamate kinase , and pyrroline carboxylate reductase .

we used the cluster-specific gene trees, as estimated by phyml  <cit> , as the basis to estimate the mean number of changes per codon per branch under model m <dig>  as implemented in paml  <cit> . in 95% of the clusters the mean amount of codon evolution was between  <dig>  and  <dig> substitutions per codon site. however, in a small fraction of clusters  we observed either a very low amount of codon evolution , or a very high amount of codon evolution .

extreme outliers for at content, transition/transversion ratio, and high amount of codon evolution are strong candidates for genes having a history of lateral gene transfer between members of the genus streptococcus and more distantly related outgroup lineages . we note however, that a large amount of codon evolution might also arise as a consequence of strong positive darwinian selection.

phylogenomic analysis of evolutionary relationships among lineages
a subset of the gene clusters were concatenated for the purpose of obtaining a genome-scale estimate of the streptococcus phylogeny. we restricted our phylogenetic analysis to the  <dig> clusters that were comprised of exactly one gene from each of the  <dig> genomes, as identified under the 30% threshold. gene sequences from those  <dig> clusters were concatenated , and a phylogenetic analysis of this dataset resulted in the phylogenetic tree shown in figure  <dig>  this genome-scale estimate of relationships among species agrees with some prior estimates based on smaller molecular datasets  <cit> . the position of the root can be deduced by using the outgroup species lactococcus lactis. examination of the phylogenies estimated from each of the  <dig> single-gene clusters revealed that only 26% matched the species level relationship estimated from the concatenated data. given such a high level of among gene variability, and the possibility that some portion could reflect inter-species recombination events , all subsequent analyses were based on cluster-specific estimates of the gene tree.

the length of the tree estimated from the concatenated data was  <dig>  nucleotide substitutions per site. tree length taken as an average over all the single-copy gene clusters was biased by the presence of trees with long lengths, where estimation problems were likely. after excluding 5% of trees having the largest estimated length, the average tree length was  <dig>  nucleotide substitutions per site, with 95% between  <dig>  and  <dig> . according to simulations  <cit>  high accuracy of ml estimation, and the lrts, is expected under such levels of sequence divergence. the shortest trees  were obtained from 30s, 50s ribosomal proteins  and translation elongation factors . the longest trees  were obtained from membrane-spanning proteins, cell division proteins , atp-nad kinase , pantothenate kinase , diacylglycerol kinase , exfoliative toxin a, exotoxin b , 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase , enoyl coa hydratase ii , and isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase . for genes of such high divergences the lrt has almost no power to detect positive selection, although the bayesian prediction of sites under positive selection is expected to be highly unreliable in such cases  <cit> .

a two-step "genome scan" indicates robust identification of positive selection
gene clusters identified as subject to positive selection pressure are listed in additional file  <dig>  we considered the signal of positive selection to be strong when both lrts  were significant at 5%;  <dig> gene clusters met this criterion . an additional  <dig> gene clusters were identified by the lrt of models m <dig> and m <dig> at the 5% significance level . for the latter cases, it is possible that model m2a was too conservative to detect positive selection. indeed, simulation studies indicate that the lrt of m1a versus m2a is less powerful than the lrt of m <dig> versus m <dig> in such cases  <cit> .

any genome-scale study that surveys for positive selection is susceptible to false positives arising from uncertainty in parameter estimation  <cit> , a history of recombination  <cit>  or from procedural artefacts such as alignment errors. however, such surveys provide a powerful means to generate novel biological hypotheses for further experimental and statistical analysis . to assess the potential impact of such errors on our investigation, we performed a substantially expanded analysis on a sample of genes we detected to be evolving under positive selection. to minimise the effect of uncertainty in parameter estimation, we compiled a larger set of gene sequences. to avoid potential for procedural artefacts, we analysed the data "by hand" rather than using our tools to automate the process; this included careful visual inspection and editing of the sequence alignments. lastly, we employed the methods of wilson and mcvean  <cit>  to evaluate the possibility of positive selection while simultaneously allowing for a history of recombination.

clusters of genes initially identified as subject to positive selection were pre-screened for those comprised of a small number of sequences. eight genes were then randomly chosen from this subset, conditional on the availability of additional homologous sequences in genbank. we chose the ninth gene, rpls, because positive selection was unexpected, and the tenth gene, is <dig> transposase, because it is found only in s. thermophilus. all ten datasets were expanded by sampling homologous sequences from additional lineages of streptococci. we note that the distribution of strains among the streptococcal species was comparable. genes subjected to expanded data analyses are listed in table  <dig>  reanalysis under the standard set of models revealed that all ten datasets retained a signal of positive selection, six of which were significant at 1%, and two were significant at 5%, under both of the lrts . the remaining two datasets, rpls and a hypothetical protein-coding gene homologous to sib <dig>  were significant only under the lrt comparing m <dig> and m <dig>  we next employed the approach of wilson and mcvean  <cit>  to evaluate the possibility that both selection and recombination might have impacted the evolution of these data. in each case the results of this approach, which does not suffer from high false positive rates stemming from a history of recombination, confirmed positive darwinian selection .

notes: n <dig> indicates the number of gene sequences in the original gene cluster. n <dig> indicates the number of sequences in the expanded dataset. lnt is the length of the gene sequence in nucleotides. p <dig> indicates the proportion of codon sites estimate to be subject to positive selection under model m <dig> 

ω is the parameter in the codon model m <dig> for the nonsyonymous to synonymous rate ratio .

additional remarks:

a best non-gas blastp hit: gb|aak <dig> |ae007695_ <dig>  ftsk-like dna segregation atpase, ydcq b. subtilis orthologue ;

b fibronectin-binding protein ;

c best non-gas blastp hit: gb|aab <dig> |  atp-binding cassette lipoprotein ;

d may play a role in the structure and function of the aminoacyl-trna binding site;

e novel immunoglobulin binding protein; best blastp hit: sp|p11215|itam_human cell surface glycoprotein mac- <dig> α subunit precursor     .

the two cases where the lrt comparing models m1a and m2a failed to detect a signal of positive selection appears to reflect the greater restrictions on the parameter space of m1a and m2a as compared with m <dig> and m <dig>  m1a and m2a explicitly model a class of purely neutral sites  although it might not exist in a given data set; in which case sites having ω =  <dig> could reflect an artefact of averaging over sites subject to moderate positive selection and other sites subject to purifying selection. indeed, when we examined the parameter estimates under m <dig> for these two genes we observed  a very large fraction of sites  were subject to very strong purifying selection  or moderate purifying selection  and  the absence of a purely neutral site class. these empirical results are consistent with the results of a simulation study  <cit>  which showed that the lrt of m <dig> and m <dig> are often less powerful than the lrt of m <dig> and m <dig> in similar cases.

in general, by expanding these  <dig> datasets we increased the numbers of lineages and levels of sequence divergence  to values where the lrts are expected to have low type i error rates  <cit> . this result, taken together with robust detection of positive selection , suggests that positive section was reliably identified from our ten samples of streptococci gene sequences. we note that large scale surveys for recombination using traditional detection software  are possible, but such programs likely suffer from an inverse effect, i.e. recombination may be falsely detected due to the presence of positive selection. unfortunately, it is computationally prohibitive to carry out the approach of wilson and mcvean  <cit>  for all genes in a genome. for the time being, we suggest the two-step process carried out in this study will provide a valuable means to gauge the robustness of selected cases obtained from such "genomic scans".

a large fraction of genes subject to positive selection are connected to virulence
since both orthologous and paralogous genes can be included in the same gene cluster, positive selection detected in a cluster can be a result of various processes: adaptation of a species to optimise the process of infection, escape host immune response, adaptation to a different environmental niches , and functional diversification of members of multi-gene families. indeed, the  <dig> clusters identified as having evolved under positive selection were connected to a wide variety of functions , with only 10% having no ascribable function. interestingly, 7% of the clusters were comprised of genes known to be essential to s. pneumoniae , i.e. those where experimental disruption was shown to be lethal  <cit> , indicating that even essential genes can be subject to rapid evolution by natural selection. a substantial fraction of the clusters,  had either a known, or hypothesised, connection to virulence in streptococci . we considered a gene to have a connection to virulence if it was related to survival, spread, or persistence within its human host  <cit> . in the remainder of this section we focus on a select subset of the virulence genes subject to positive selection.

three genes, grab, endos, and ides, are well known to play a critical role in the ability of pathogenic streptococci to evade detection by the host immune system. the grab gene encodes the g-related α <dig> macroglobulin-binding protein  which functions to inhibit host-mediated proteolysis, a defence process that is often activated by the host during invasive infection  <cit> .

grab mediates the binding of human α-2m  to the surface of s. pyogenes thereby conferring protection against proteolytic degradation of important virulence determinants  <cit> . endos is an extracellular protein, encoded by the endos gene, which hydrolyzes n-linked oligosaccharides on the heavy chains of immunoglobulin g , thereby impacting igg function and preventing opsinising antibodies from triggering a protective immune response to s pyogenes  <cit> . the highly specific activity of this endoglycosidase increases pathogen survival in human blood containing opsonising antibodies  <cit> . finally ides  is a secreted cysteine proteinase that cleaves the heavy chain of igg and thereby also inhibits the susceptibility of s. pyogenes to phagocytosis  <cit> . the ides protein is specific to igg antibodies and has been found to be expressed in clinically important serotypes. in each case above, the function of the protein is to modulate a critical host defence molecule. this creates a situation where an evolutionary arms-race between pathogen and host is likely, with the host subject to intense selection pressures to avoid such modulation of its defence systems by the pathogen. our finding that each of these genes has evolved under positive selection pressure is consistent with such an antagonistic interaction between host and pathogen at the molecular level, and indicates that such evolutionary interactions are characteristic of several different systems used by pathogenic streptococci to escape recognition by the host. in each of the above systems the positive fitness consequences to the pathogen to winning such an arms race appears to be increased survival in human blood  <cit> .

escape from immune recognition is just one aspect of the ability of a pathogen to successfully invade and colonise its host. by conducting a genome-scale analysis of positive selection we identified sets of genes, when taken together with data derived from alternative methods of investigating virulence factors, provided insights into other potentially important molecular systems connected to streptococci virulence. for example, heat shock genes have been connected to bacterial virulence  <cit> . the products of heat shock genes are typically thought of as contributing to a protective cellular response to cope with the stress-induced damage of proteins. as such, many heat shock proteins are molecular chaperones or atp-dependent proteases that play important roles in protein folding, repair, and degradation  <cit> . however, charpentier and coworkers  <cit>  also reported that clpc proteases plays a major role in processes related to streptococci virulence, including adherence to human cells and production of known virulence factors such as pneumolysin, autolysin a, cbpa, and other choline binding proteins. recently, ibrahim et al.  <cit>  suggested clpc may play a major role in the virulence of s. pneumoniae. consistent with a potentially important role in virulence, we found atp-dependent proteases encoded by the clpl, clpc genes have evolved under positive selection pressure. we note that a signature-tagged mutagenesis screen of s. pneumoniae also identified clpc as a virulence factor  <cit> , and that clpc has been shown to contribute to the ability of s. pneumoniae to grow in the lungs and blood  <cit> . interestingly, we identified several other genes known to have a role in responding to stress conditions  as having evolved under positive selection.

efficient genome replication is essential for growth and survival of an organism, and polymerase complexes often fail to complete this task  <cit> . for some pathogenic bacteria this is especially important, as successful replication is thought to contribute to proliferation and efficiency of the colonisation of hostile environments . interestingly, we detected positive selection in several single-copy protein-coding genes connected to replication, recombination and repair proteins , and in two ribosomal proteins  and two dna-dependent rna polymerases . replication forks often stall and may collapse to generate new dna ends that provoke recombination and induce genomic rearrangements  <cit> . complete replication of the genome depends therefore on repair activities to remove or bypass lesions in the dna, modulation of rna polymerase to reduce conflicts with transcription, and recombination systems to rescue forks that have stalled or collapsed. in these cases the nature of selection pressure is far from clear. selection pressure on these genes could reflect constraints on efficient genome replication during colonisation and proliferation in the hostile environment of the host , or perhaps the ability to recombine during mixed colonisation by unrelated strains . neither is it known if these genes might be involved in an antagonistic interaction between host and pathogen at the molecular level.

generally speaking, our genome-scale analysis of streptococci protein-coding genes uncovered a wide array of clusters that can be connected to virulence and which are subject to positive selection pressure. in some cases the nature of the selection pressure seems clear, e.g., grab, endos, and ides described above. we documented other cases where we identified genes previously hypothesised to play an important role in virulence but where current data were not conclusive. yet another example of this is the two-component signal transduction systems mediated by histidine kinase; they are integral parts of bacterial cellular regulatory processes, and are used to regulate the expression of genes involved in virulence  <cit> . we identified five clusters comprised of genes from two-component response regulation systems, with two cases  having been previously hypothesised to play an important role in virulence  <cit> . we believe that large-scale analyses such as ours play an important role in highlighting particular molecular systems that warrant further study. finally, there were some cases where the nature of selection pressure was unclear, e.g., replication, recombination and repair proteins recg, recn, recr, recm described above. identification of such genes helps to generate new hypotheses concerning the role of different molecular systems in virulence.

both the accessory genome and the core genome are subject to positive darwinian selection
a typical approach to studying the evolution of pathogenicity is to focus on the subset of genes found exclusively in the genomes of pathogens . hereafter we refer to these genes as pathogen-specific accessory genes. clearly the acquisition of such accessory genes by lateral gene transfer  plays an important role in the acquisition of characteristics necessary for a pathogenic lifestyle . since pathogens are typically involved in a co-evolutionary arms race with their hosts  <cit> , one might expect pathogen-specific accessory genes are more likely to be subject to diversifying selection. indeed, a recent study suggested that among recently transferred genes in s. pyogenes there is a higher relative frequency of positive selection  <cit> . to test if this notion is broadly applicable to all pathogen-specific genes we compared clusters of pathogen-specific accessory genes to clusters of core genes . indeed, there were more pathogen-specific clusters  than core-gene clusters ; however, the ratio of significant to non-significant cases for positive selection did not differ significantly between the pathogen-specific  and core gene clusters , as indicated by a fisher's exact test . we also tested pathogen-specific accessory genes against non-pathogen specific accessory genes, and found no evidence for a significant difference . we note that a fraction of these gene clusters are likely have been impacted by gene duplication and deletion events, as well as by lgt.

marri et al.  <cit>  found that the relative frequency of positive selection was  <dig> fold higher in recently transferred genes in s. pyogenes as compared to core genes. as s. pyogenes causes a wider variety of human diseases than any other bacterial species, and possesses the largest number lineage-specific genes , we wanted to investigate the possibility that s. pyogenes also has a greater frequency of positive selection among its unique accessory genes. a chi-square test indicated that the odds of positive selection did not differ significantly among clusters of accessory genes unique to a given species of streptococcus . to minimise the impact of gene duplication and deletion, and to make a more direct comparison to the study of lgt by marri et al.  <cit> , we identified the clusters comprised of exactly one of each of the five sampled lineages of s. pyogenes and absent for all the other genomes under study. the relative frequency of positive selection was similar in both the single-copy s. pyogenes accessory genes  and in the streptococci core gene clusters , being about 8%. we note that marri et al.  <cit>  employed the same lrt  to identify positively selected genes. it appears that the finding of higher odds of positive selection among recently transferred genes  <cit>  could be sensitive to the method of assembly and classification of gene clusters.

as functional category has been shown to be related to selection pressure  <cit> , we investigated the possibility that functional category could have been a confounding factor in our tests for heterogeneity between pathogen-specific gene clusters and core gene clusters. we subdivided clusters among  <dig> functional categories based on cog assignments and computed the odds of positive selection for pathogen-specific accessory gene clusters and core gene clusters . although the highest odds of positive selection among the pathogen-specific clusters was associated with cellular processes and signalling, the odds ratio for this functional category was  <dig> , indicating that a high frequency of positive selection also occurred among the core gene clusters in this category. the highest odds ratio in favour of pathogen-specific accessory genes  did not differ significantly from one . indeed, the only category in which the odds of positive selection differed significantly between pathogen-specific accessory genes and core genes was for metabolism; and, in this case the odds of positive selection were higher for core gene clusters .

notes: the odds of positive selection were computed as the relative frequently of genes under positive selection divided by the relative frequency of genes not under positive selection. the odds ratio is simply the ratio of the odds of positive selection in two different categories of genes. the categories were based on functional assignments found in the cog database. the hypothesis that an odds ratio differed from one was tested by using the fisher's exact test.

our findings clearly indicate that the genes involved in presence-absence polymorphism among lineages of streptococci do not provide a complete picture of the nature of pathogen evolution within this genus, as core gene clusters have a similar propensity for positive selection pressure as pathogen-specific gene clusters. the properties of the analytical models used in this study provide some insight into this finding. lrts based on the site-models we used are best suited to the discovery of genes having rapid amino acid change over long periods of time . among streptococci, this is most likely to arise in response to the antagonistic evolutionary arms-race between pathogen and host. as such an evolutionary interaction leads to diversifying selection pressure, where fitness advantages are conferred by possessing an allele that is merely different from others in the population; the  <dig> genes identified as subject to positive selection pressure are the best candidates for such a mode of evolution. hence, our results reflect that streptococcus pathogen evolution may be thought of having at least two components:  the acquisition by lgt of accessory genes that confer characteristics necessary for a pathogenic lifestyle, and  the long term evolutionary arms race between host and pathogen that impacts the evolution of certain core and accessory genes. we note that other modes of adaptive evolution are plausible, such as a burst of adaptive evolution in an accessory gene following an lgt event or long term divergent selection pressure between pathogenic and non-pathogenic lineages of streptococci, but they are not detectible by using the codon models employed in this study.

a large fraction of positively selected genes have tissue specific patterns of expression
in vivo gene expression studies of invasive disease have provided insights into the response of bacteria to the host during the course of infection by revealing that known virulence factors, along with other types of genes, display body-site specific expression patterns  <cit> . such knowledge has lead to prediction that several streptococci genes of unknown function contribute to virulence, with these predictions being confirmed by experimentation  <cit> . however, extensive body-site specific contributions to pathogenesis make it difficult to determine if there is a core set of virulence-related genes required by all streptococci, or how extensive such a set of genes might be. given such variability, we were interested to determine  what fraction of positively selected genes, if any, exhibited body-site specific patterns of gene expression during invasive disease, and  if the intensity of selection might depend on their putative cellular role, as defined by level of gene expression.

we obtained expression data from the large-scale analysis of s. pneumoniae by orihuela et al.  <cit>  which provides data for expression levels within infected blood , cerebrospinal fluid  and epithelial cell contact . taken over all tissue types,  <dig>  of the positively selected gene clusters encode proteins that are known to have body-site specific expression. however, the expression data is derived only from s. pneumoniae, and patterns of gene expression are thought to vary among pathogens. interestingly, when we excluded the  <dig> gene clusters that did not contain at least one representative of s. pneumoniae, we found that the relative frequency of genes with body-site specific expression increased to 29%. the results are presented according to tissue-type in figure  <dig>  these data suggest a disparity among tissue types on the intensity of diversifying selection pressure, in so far as there were more positively selected genes having altered expression in csf and ecc tissue types than in the other categories . note that all the genes contributing to figure  <dig> have > <dig> fold difference in tissue specific expression levels during invasive disease  <cit> .

current expression data is far from comprehensive, as it does not cover all body sites, variability among lineages of pathogens, nor even cover all the genes of s. pneumoniae. for this reason, we expect that we have underestimated the numbers of positively selected genes that have body-site specific expression during invasive disease. large scale studies of expression level, signature tagged mutagenesis, and differential fluorescence induction are beginning to reveal that virulence is a function of a network of genes , many participants being core genes that are not well characterised. indeed, our finding that core genes, and even essential genes, can be subject to an antagonistic evolutionary arms-race between pathogen and host also highlights the need to gain a better understanding of the role core gene products have in virulence. we look forward to the time when gene networks are better understood, particularly with respect to lineage-specific alterations in the pattern of transcription during invasive disease. an understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of virulence factors in such a context offers the potential to identify previously unappreciated targets for vaccines or pharmaceuticals  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on our genome-wide analysis of selection pressure, we argue that the evolution of pathogen specific genes, although a popular focus of research, does not provide a complete picture of the evolutionary dynamics of virulence. there is no doubt that the acquisition of novel genes by lgt is critical to the colonisation and exploitation of novel niches, including the pathogenic lifestyle. however, those genes acquired by lgt impinge upon a complex network of interactions among gene products embedded in cellular metabolism. the effect of an lgt could be wide-spread in that the acquired gene or genes could have direct interactions with core gene products or result in an altered cellular environment  such that selective pressures acting on core gene products are impacted. as we gain a better understating of how niche specialisation, and pathogenicity in particular, is a function of networks of genes, we can begin to understand the evolutionary dynamics of individual core and auxiliary genes as a function of the networks in which they participate. the findings of this study, and others , suggest that the origin and evolution of the molecular mechanisms that result in enhanced virulence are more complex than previously thought.

