BACKGROUND
gene regulation via micrornas , small ~ <dig> nucleotide long rna molecules, is a strongly conserved mechanism found in nearly all multicellular organisms including animals and plants  <cit> .

incorporated into a protein complex mainly built of argonaute proteins, mirnas bind preferably to complementary regions within the 3' utrs of mrnas, their target sites. about 37% of the known mammalian mirnas are located within the introns of protein coding genes, so-called host genes  <cit> . this has to be appreciated as a vague estimate since the number of annotated mirnas varies strongly from  <dig> for bos taurus to  <dig> for homo sapiens, and expectations of the functionally active fraction of the genome presume amounts of mirnas far above these numbers  <cit> . for instance, the proportions for mouse  and human , two of the best studied mammals, are strikingly larger. furthermore, intronic mirnas appear to be conserved across several species  <cit> . although it is shown that about 26% of the mammalian intronic mirnas may be transcribed from their own promoters  <cit> , the majority is transcriptionally linked to their host gene expression and processed from the same primary transcript  <cit> . in human, it could also be shown that most of the intronic mirnas show correlated expression with their host genes  <cit> . besides drosha-processed mirnas, a second type of intronic mirnas, termed mirtrons, is known, that bypass drosha cleavage by splicing  <cit>  but exhibit t he same co-expression patterns with their host genes. the wide occurrence of intronic mirna raises the question whether the analysis of large-scale gene expression data principally based on protein-coding gene annotations can cope with the regulatory impact of gene expression.

gene regulation mediated by mirnas can be categorized into 'switch', 'tuning' and 'neutral' effects  <cit> . switch regulation denotes a knock-down of the mirna target. the gene product is downregulated under a specific functional threshold caused by effective translational inhibition or cleavage of the target mrna  <cit> . in contrast, tuning does not inhibit target activity but tunes expression in a way such that mirna targets are adjusted to a specific expression level required under specific cellular conditions  <cit> . a recent study in drosophila shows that antropin is tuned by mir- <dig> to prevent neurodegeneration  <cit> . by neutral targets one denotes mirna-mrna interactions, that are functional but without any advantageous nor adverse consequences to the cell. since the neutral regulation does not have any effect on the phenotype, it will not be discussed in this work.

it is a common paradigm in biology that conservation on dna sequence level also implies a conservation of function. therefore we hypothesize that the widespread appearance of the transcriptional junction of a protein coding gene and the regulatory mirna implies a common function. specifically, the co-regulation of a mirna with its host gene may include two different main functions:  an antagonistic effect is achieved by mirna-mediated knock-down of genes with perturbing effects on a pathway or biological process activated by the host gene. the combined expression of an effector gene and a mirna, which blocks translation of such antagonistic gene products, is a simple but elegant way to promote and support host gene functionality .  a synergistic effect can be achieved by adjusting the protein expression levels of intronic mirna targets towards intended optimal concentrations. a specific ratio between host and target gene products then allows for effective and optimized cooperative actions of co-regulated genes . in this work we assume that the proposed antagonistic effect is mainly mediated by switch regulation, whereas tuning of targets mainly mediates synergistic effects.

genes sharing a common function, such as being involved in the same biological pathway, tend to share similar regulatory mechanisms and therefore appear as co-expressed genes in their expression profiles  <cit> . thus, genes with correlated time-dependent expression patterns are likely to be involved in functionally related cellular processes. at least it is very unlikely that co-expressed genes act in an antagonistic manner. in contrast, anti-correlated expression patterns would promote the assumption that the participating genes take part in either unrelated or antagonistic processes. furthermore, there is increasing evidence that many mirnas cause degradation of their targets  <cit> , which referring to mrna expression will appear as anti-correlated expression patterns. in human, a functional relation between the host gene grid <dig> and the intronic mir- <dig> has been shown recently  <cit>  and the hereby proposed antagonistic effect has been proven for the intronic mir- <dig> and its host gene aatk  <cit> . furthermore, a recent study has shown that the intronic mir-208a, expressed with its murine heart-specific host gene myh <dig>  negatively regulates two proposed targets, namely thyroid hormone-associated protein  <dig> and myostatin, both negative regulators of muscle growth and hypertrophy  <cit> . however, these findings prove the proposed effects only for single mirnas. to ensure that these findings were not individual cases, but also generally detectable we applied several statistical methods on large scale data.

in this work, we investigated the functional relation between mirna host genes and putative targets of corresponding intronic mirnas with a data-driven approach based on large-scale gene expression data and a knowledge-based approach using gene annotations. we analyzed large scale gene expression profiles which are widely available and provide a basis to reveal gene expression phenotypic models. furthermore, functional gene annotations as provided by the gene ontology   <cit>  give information about a common or strongly related function of two genes, for instance host and target. we hypothesize that functional relations between mirna host genes and related target genes appear in significantly correlated expression patterns. furthermore, we expect that host and target gene sets are closer related in the go as randomly sampled sets, for both antagonistic and synergistic motifs as introduced in figure  <dig> 

RESULTS
targets of similarly expressed host genes show correlated expression patterns
we studied the relationship between host and target genes in three different mouse developmental microarray datasets : embryonic stem cell development   <cit> , somitogenesis   <cit>  and neurite outgrowth   <cit> . we chose developmental datasets since regulatory effects of mirnas are known to be strongly present in developmental processes  <cit> . during cell differentiation, groups of genes driving specific developmental processes are often commonly regulated, resulting in similar expression patterns in time course-data. a synergistic relationship between host and the mirna target genes of differentiating cells is then indicated by positively correlated gene expression patterns. in reverse, antagonistic processes are expected to show anti-correlated or uncorrelated expression patterns between host and related target genes.

since we argue that correlated expression indicates potentially common host gene functions, we initially tested for correlations between the expression patterns of known host genes. in order to generate statistically robust results  we did not analyze single gene expression patterns but argue on groups of correlated genes. therefore, for each dataset we identified all mirna host genes and clustered their time-courses according to correlations above  <dig>  .

within all analyzed cell differentiation datasets, host genes tend to be co-expressed in clusters. as a result of our clustering we obtained seven host gene clusters with more than  <dig> host genes from all three datasets .

 for each cluster we calculated the similarity score between host and all predicted target genes. additionally, target genes were split up into positively and negatively correlated targets and similarity scores related to the host genes were calculated. the p-values determined by a comparison of functional go similarities between host and predicted targets to randomly chosen sets of target genes of identical size were all significant after bonferroni correction . independent from the sign of correlation, we determined a significantly higher similarity than expected for all analyzed clusters.

intriguingly, some host genes appear to be clustered preferentially across the experiments. the genes h <dig>  igf <dig>  lpp, plod <dig>  and rnf <dig> were clustered in the two clusters scd i and no i, and the genes chm, copz <dig>  dnm <dig>  nupl <dig>  and sf3a <dig> in the clusters sg i and no ii.

for each host gene cluster we identified the intronic mirnas and all their expressed targets. most prediction tools for mirna target site prediction vary qualitatively and quantitatively. in order to get more confident predictions, we used a consensus model  of several mirna target prediction tools   <cit> . detailed lists of all analyzed mirnas/clusters in this work including host genes and loci, are available as additional files  <dig> and  <dig> 

we performed a hierarchical cluster analysis for the seven clusters based on the expression data of the target genes . all resulting trees mainly split up in two subclusters: one subcluster of genes with positively correlated expression patterns and one with anti-correlated expressions compared to the host genes. furthermore, within each dataset, the resulting trees of at least two target gene groups appeared to show completely flipped expression patterns of the main subclusters .

these results fit well to the observation that mirnas dampen the output of preexisting mrnas or optimize required protein output as it is proposed for metazoans  <cit> . additionally, it was shown that genes preferentially expressed at the same time and place as a mirna tend to avoid sites matching the mirna  <cit> . in contrast, co-expression of transcripts with evolutionary conserved mirna binding sites would then arise from a functional requirement.

the clear discrimination between the two expression patterns suggests a gradual order of differentiating cells, whereas mirnas function as enhancers of robustness in gene regulation  <cit> . a plausible explanation would be that shortly after initiation of the differentiation process, genes that arrange the differentiating cell towards its new function are up-regulated. in this stage mirnas are activated to inhibit processes required for self-renewal of stem cells but act perturbing during differentiation. after this reorganization the cell adopts its new functions. in this phase genes are up-regulated which now fulfill the cell's new responsibilities and simultaneously block activity that was only required for differentiation.

mirna host gene clusters and related target genes show significant correlations of their expression patterns and functional similarities
in order to confirm the above observed we statistically compared gene expression patterns of host genes with the expression patterns of predicted target genes and sets of randomly sampled genes. for each cluster, we determined the correlations between all hosts and predicted targets and all hosts and  <dig> sets of randomly sampled genes. using wilcoxon's rank sum test we tested the observed correlations to result from distributions with equal median .

to avoid bias in our cm, we further used three independent mirna target prediction tools, namely pictar   <cit> , targetscan   <cit>  and rna <dig>   <cit> . for each host gene cluster and each single host gene, expression patterns were compared to the expression of predicted targets. only clusters with predicted and expressed targets in the respective dataset were used in the following analysis.

concordant for all used methods and all analyzed datasets, we determined that  <dig> to 44% of the identified host gene clusters were significantly positively correlated or anti-correlated to their target gene expressions . thereby, the observed correlations between hosts and targets were independent from the analyzed dataset. the identification of significantly correlated target gene expressions based on the four used target prediction methods appears to be relatively similar between the datasets. the average amount of host gene clusters with significantly correlated target expression for the three datasets varies between 26% and 30%.

comparing the four tools, pt performs strikingly weaker  than ts, r and the cm with regard to the mean fraction of host gene clusters with significantly correlated predicted target expressions . since the number of targets predicted with pt for each host gene is on average considerably smaller compared to the two other methods, false positive predictions have a larger effect on the determined p-values.

although, the cm graph is less dense than the other graphs as well as notably smaller than the ts and r graph, it performs best in this analysis with an equal fraction of significantly regulated clusters. however, our results are consistent over all datasets and all different mirna target site prediction tools.

to further validate our results we used mirna-mrna interactions identified by argonaute hits-clip in the mouse brain  <cit> . from the  <dig> mirnas tested in this study two  were identified as intronic. after mapping these to our expression data we found the mir- <dig> host gene odz <dig> expressed in the no and sg datasets. from the  <dig> targets,  <dig> targets were expressed in the no dataset. after clustering these target genes, the resulting tree again splits up into two main subclusters, one with positively correlated and one with anti-correlated gene expression profiles .

the histogram over the correlation coefficients also confirms an equal distribution of positive and negative correlation coefficients . the considerable fraction of only weakly correlated target genes may result from  false positive experimental mirna-mrna associations,  neutral regulatory effects, or  experimental noise.

functional relation between host and target genes includes synergistic as well as antagonistic effects
the results so far indicate a non-directed functional relation between host genes and intronic mirnas, but do not provide any information on positive or negative correlations. to get robust results, we only used the two tools with the highest number of overall identified host-target gene clusters, which were ts and the cm for the following analysis.

to test whether one or both of the two proposed functional effects - synergistic or antagonistic - may be identified in our data, we calculated the distance between the medians, derived from the correlation distributions between host and predicted target genes and hosts and randomly sampled targets . the resulting distances Δm combined from all three datasets can be seen in figure 4b and 4c. both distance distributions show a bimodal distribution with a local minimum at Δm =  <dig>  but no significant shift towards a negative or positive correlation. hence, based on the assumption that highly positive or negative correlation of gene expression patterns indicates similar or opposite functions, we infer that the proposed synergistic and antagonistic effects appear to be equally represented in our data.

since our investigation is only based on mrna expression data and further information on protein levels is missing, the real impact on translation stays obscure in this analysis. however, it could be shown that most of mirna-mrna interactions function as fine-tuning adjustments to the proteome  <cit> . considering the fact that our experimental analysis was based on mrna expression data, only knock-down effects mediated by target cleavage are directly visible. however, in agreement with previous work  <cit> , the massive appearance of positively correlated mirna and target expressions strongly indicates tuning effects of varying translational repression. furthermore, as our findings so far were derived from developmental data, we have to state that the observed effects could be related to these datasets only.

host and target gene sets display enriched functional similarity
the significantly correlated expression patterns between host genes and mirna target genes support the notion that intronic mirna regulation improves host-associated biological functions by either tuning or dampening the expression of target genes. we assume that this relation is also apparent via shared functional annotations. to test this hypothesis, we determined the commonly used functional similarity of gene products based on gene ontology   <cit>  between a single or multiple host genes and their set of target genes. we then calculated the significance of the mean functional similarity by comparing the target set with randomly sampled sets of mirna target genes .

we analyzed the previously defined clusters scd i - no ii and calculated mean functional similarities between the host and all ts predicted target genes. according to the proposed synergistic and antagonistic effects, we divided the target genes upon their expression pattern correlations with the host genes into two groups of positive and negative correlated targets and calculated similarity scores. results are shown in table  <dig>  all host gene clusters display a significantly higher functional similarity to their predicted target genes as compared to the null model of randomly chosen target genes . comparing the similarity scores derived from the positively and negatively correlated target genes showed no significant differences between the two distributions. independent from the sign of correlation, we determined a significantly higher similarity score than expected for all analyzed clusters.

to check whether a high functional similarity can be found for all host-target relations independent of expression patterns, we additionally calculated the functional similarity score for all single host genes and their predicted target gene sets. we expected the most robust results for the largest network of predicted mirna target gene associations, since the score is given by the mean of all host gene - target gene pairs. in figure 5a, we plotted the frequency distribution of similarity scores for ts. we found that the scores are well distributed within the range of  <dig> and  <dig>  we compared each similarity score with a null model, where the same number of target genes is randomly selected from all mirna target genes as provided by ts. for the host gene copz <dig>  for example, we found a significantly larger functional similarity to its targets as compared to  <dig> randomly selected sets of mirna targets .

for all annotated host genes with available annotations for the respective targets, we calculated p-values and z-scores as measures of deviation from the null model. we found that surprisingly many host-target relations deviated from the null model, with high z-scores as can be seen in figure 5c. as many as  <dig> of all  <dig> host genes annotated in the ontology 'biological process' exhibited a greater similarity to their targets  than expected by chance,  <dig> of them with a p-value <  <dig> . for those pairs of host and target genes, a strong correlation in terms of their annotated 'biological process' existed. for the other prediction tools used on in this study, a similar trend to high z-scores could be observed . however, these predictions comprise less annotated host genes  and also about  <dig> times less links, rendering significant deviations less possible .

with the use of go annotations we could show that intronic mirnas tend to target genes that are functionally more similar to the host genes than randomly chosen genes. the strong bias towards positive z-scores and the absence of significant dissimilarities between host and target genes, independent from the sign of correlation, agrees with both former proposed regulatory principles . notably, go terms are not classified with respect to antagonistic or synergistic effects but on biological relations. for instance, two pathways with conicting regulation on a cellular process like 'cell growth' are both children of the parental term and therefore close within the go tree. furthermore, two genes can have opposing regulatory effects on one pathway and would be still grouped together in the same term.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this work show that the genomic linkage between intronic mirnas and their host genes coincides with a functional relation. using a data-driven as well as a knowledge-based approach, mirna host genes and related target genes were analyzed towards functional relations. expression patterns were obtained from three developmental datasets. correlated expressions of host and mirna target genes deviated significantly from a random model. both, positive and negative correlation patterns have been observed in approximately equal amounts. a further go analysis of the predicted mirna-mrna interaction network confirmed that host and predicted target genes tend to be annotated with similar or related terms, compared to a random model. taken together, our results indicate either synergistic or antagonistic regulatory effects mediated by either downregulation of genes with an opposed function or fine-tuning of mirna targets, co-operative to the host gene. this finding extends the common perception of gene expression analysis with a new regulatory functionality.

