BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions  are of central importance for most biological processes, and thus the protein interaction network  provides a global picture of cellular mechanisms. with the accumulation of interactome and transcriptome data, the integration of gene expression profiles has revealed the dynamics of protein interaction networks. for example, han et al.  <cit>  analyzed the protein interaction network of yeast and uncovered two types of hub proteins: "party" hubs and "date" hubs, which displayed condition- or location-specific features in the interactome network. xue et al.  <cit>  developed a new analytic method to discover the dynamic modular structure of the human protein interaction network in their aging study. recently, taylor et al.  <cit>  also proposed another two types of hub proteins: intermodular hubs and intramodular hubs, and identified whether the interactions between proteins were context specific or constitutive in the human protein interaction network. similar techniques were also applied to reveal disease related genes or modules. chuang et al.  <cit>  improved the prognostic predictive performance of gene expression signatures by incorporating interactome data in breast cancer. taylor et al.  <cit>  used a method analogous to a previous study  <cit>  and revealed that dynamic modularity of the human protein interaction network may be a good indicator of breast cancer prognosis. in the context of heart failure, camargo and azuaje  <cit>  integrated gene expression profiles with the protein interaction network in human dilated cardiomyopathy and efficiently identified potential novel dcm signature genes and drug targets. these studies suggest that the integration of interactome data with transcriptome information may facilitate the identification or discovery of disease biomarkers.

heart failure is one of the main causes of death in the world and is the consequence of many complex factors including genetics, diet, environment and lifestyle. heart failure is a physiological state in which the heart cannot provide sufficient output of blood to meet the body's needs. dilated cardiomyopathy , the major cause of heart failure, impairs the blood pumping ability of the heart and leads to insufficient blood flow to vital organs due to the enlargement and weakening of the heart  <cit> . previous studies  <cit>  on gene expression profiles have provided distinct perspectives on the etiology of dcm. barth et al.  <cit>  pointed out the significant immune response processes involved in end-stage dcm and presented a robust gene expression signature of this disease. wittchen et al.  <cit>  suggested novel therapeutic targets by gene expression profile analysis of human inflammatory cardiomyopathy. kabb et al.  <cit>  analyzed microarray dataset of human myocardial tissue to obtain region- and dcm-specific transcription profiles and determined the gene expression fingerprint of dcm. even though various causes of dcm have been revealed, the underlying molecular mechanism of this disease remains unclear.

here, we developed a network-based analysis approach to discover dcm or non-dcm related functional subnetworks by integrating dcm related gene expression profiles with the human protein interaction network and gene ontology  annotations. a comparative analysis was utilized to extract dcm exclusive subnetworks as heart failure related modules. these modules could be used to classify normal and disease samples. we further investigated the co-expressed protein interaction network structures of each module for dcm and non-dcm and observed dynamic variations of the identified modules between the two states. our results suggest that the modular changes between dcm and non-dcm could imply plausible molecular mechanisms involved in heart failure progression.

RESULTS
condition-specific co-expressed protein interaction networks
we integrated gene expression profiles with the protein interaction network to construct condition-specific co-expressed protein interaction networks of dcm and non-dcm, respectively. two interacting proteins are called co-expressed protein-protein interaction  under a specified condition, if their encoding genes are expressed correlatively with each other under particular biological conditions, such as dcm or non-dcm in this study. the network that consists of all the ceppis under the dcm condition is abbreviated as dcm cepin and the network under the non-dcm condition as non-dcm cepin. table  <dig> summarizes the structural information of dcm and non-dcm networks. given that the gene expression profiles were derived from the same tissue  <cit> , dcm and non-dcm cepins shared almost 70% of proteins and nearly 80% of physical protein interactions in common. however, the shared ceppis were only approximately 30%, indicating a large amount of interaction rewiring between dcm and non-dcm. hence, ceppis may reveal the condition-specific dynamic information hidden among otherwise common static interactions. previous studies  <cit>  have shown that by integrating co-expression information into physical protein interaction networks, dynamic features among various networks can be extracted. this preliminary observation of the network structure indicates the limitation of a static protein interaction network, and demonstrates the necessity of applying a condition-specific co-expressed protein interaction network model to discover the dynamic features which are attributed to the changes in gene expression profiles inside the static biological networks.

hub proteins in cepins tend to be differentially expressed
to further investigate the features of condition-specific cepins, we examined their topological properties, including degree, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality and clustering coefficient for significantly differentially expressed genes . all four topological properties of sdegs were significantly higher than those of non-sdegs in dcm cepin, as well as non-sdegs in non-dcm cepin . the results showed that the proteins encoded by differentially expressed genes under a specific biological condition tended to play topologically important roles in the corresponding cepins. figure 1a shows that proteins with higher ceppi degrees have larger proportions of sdegs. however, due to the fact that hub proteins in static pin had higher ceppi degrees in condition-specific cepins, we examined high- and low-degree proteins in three types of networks respectively, and compared their proportions of sdegs . although the proportion of sdegs  for high-degree proteins in static pin was similar to those with a low-degree , sdegs were especially enriched for high-degree proteins in both dcm cepin and non-dcm cepin  in comparison with low-degree proteins . the results implied that hub proteins in cepins are more likely to be differentially expressed, suggesting modular rewiring of co-expressed interactions between different biological states. altogether, the condition-specific cepins could carry more biologically significant network structure that reflects the underlying gene expression dynamics.

the average of each topological property for sdegs and non-sdegs in either dcm or non-dcm cepin is given in the table together with the corresponding p-value. the p-values were calculated using non-parametric wilcoxon rank-sum tests.

hub proteins of dcm cepin were also studied in the context of gene ontology to identify major biological roles in each protein category. table  <dig> shows the top  <dig> significantly over-represented functional annotations of dcm hub proteins in go biological process category  by bingo  <cit>  . previously, camargo and colleagues  <cit>  analyzed the differentially expressed genes of dcm in the context of go and identified phosphorylation to be significantly over-represented, which is also the most significant functional annotation of hub proteins in dcm cepin from our study. kang and colleagues  <cit>  suggested that dcm is highly associated with dysfunction of apoptosis pathways. consistent with their study, apoptosis-related functions, including regulation of apoptosis, apoptosis, and positive regulation of programmed cell death, came up in our go identification. these findings were consistent with what has been observed in previous studies and imply that hub proteins in cepins are similar to sdegs with respect of their biological roles.

identification of two dcm-related functional modules
based on the condition-specific cepins, we propose a new analysis approach to identify condition-specific functional modules. first, for any specific biological condition under study, we selected significantly enriched functions among proteins in condition-specific cepin. for each enriched function, hypergeometric tests were performed to examine whether the co-expressed interactions between two common-function proteins are also significantly enriched. by applying the proposed analysis to dcm and non-dcm cepins, two functional modules; muscle contraction and organ morphogenesis, were specifically revealed for dcm, as shown in figure  <dig>  table  <dig> shows the information of the network structure, hypergeometric test results, and classification accuracy of these two modules, respectively. both modules can be used to discriminate dcm from normal tissue samples with a classification accuracy of  <dig>   and  <dig>  . we further assessed their classification performance using receiver operator characteristic  curves and tested these with the expression profiles  from another cohort of dcm patients. the expression levels of the genes in each module were averaged to compute a module activity score. this revealed typical area under curve  values of  <dig>  ~  <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  these results indicate that the identified two modules might serve as potential therapeutic targets of dcm.

the list includes numbers of nodes and edges, hypergeometric test results  and classification performance .

to reveal connections between member genes in both modules, their gene co-expression networks were studied and visualized in figure  <dig>  both networks were organized with dense structure. the expression profiles of member genes in each module correlated more significantly with each other than those in random subnetworks of equal size . these results suggest that strong connections within each module exist at the transcriptional level.

subsequently we compared conditional gene expression levels and correlations of gene co-expression between dcm and non-dcm samples to illustrate the dynamic features of identified functional modules. we found that the average expression levels of member genes in each module changed between two conditions by an amount larger than expected from random subnetworks of equal size . moreover, the average change of member ppi gene expression correlation between conditions were also significantly higher .

we further studied the largest connected components of these two modules with respect to the co-expressed protein interaction difference between dcm and non-dcm to determine their dynamic features. in the muscle contraction module, dtna, snta <dig>  sntb <dig>  and dmd were shown to be highly correlated with each other in non-dcm cepin, but not in dcm cepin . proteins encoded by dtna, snta <dig>  and sntb <dig> are components of the cytoplasmic part of dystrophin-associated protein complex   <cit> . in addition, pivot proteins in both non-dcm and dcm, which have relatively more co-expressed interacting partners, were observed to change from dtna and dmd to utrn.

similar dynamic features were also observed in the organ morphogenesis module. we roughly defined this module into two major regions: the upper diamond, formed by insr, crkl, igf1r and rasa <dig>  and the bottom triangle, by flt <dig>  nrp <dig> and nrp <dig> . from the results, it is evident that the communication between the diamond and the triangle in dcm cepin was bridged by kdr and ctnnb <dig>  but disconnected in non-dcm cepin. moreover, the diamond structure in non-dcm cepin was observed to have collapsed. these changes in the muscle contraction and organ morphogenesis modules may hold some clues to the progression of dcm.

discussion
protein-protein interaction networks cover all possible interactions regardless of when or where the interaction takes place. in this sense, they are static. by integrating gene expression profiles of dcm with human protein-protein interaction networks, we successfully extracted two co-expressed protein interaction networks , i.e. dcm and non-dcm. here, we showed that dcm and non-dcm cepins exhibit substantial differences in co-expressed protein-protein interactions, even though their network structures are similar. the differences may be attributed to gene expression variations and interaction rewiring between dcm and non-dcm conditions. we suggest that cepins are able to reveal condition-specific interactions and the dynamic features hidden in static protein-protein interaction networks.

next, we showed that hub proteins in cepins tended to be sdegs compared to non-hub proteins. in cepins, proteins with higher degrees imply that they have more direct interacting partners co-expressed in gene expression levels; therefore any significant modification in their expression levels might influence more interacting partners. this observation suggests that once gene expression of hub proteins is changed, it is expected to cause greater expression variations to its neighboring interaction network in dcm.

since our analysis relies on pcc calculated from gene expression data to define ceppis and construct condition-dependent networks, we have carried out some further examinations about its robustness. first, we performed the same analysis with tightened pcc threshold, p <  <dig> , and obtained consistent results . second, li et al.  <cit>  recently revealed that correlations of gene expression levels to disease states could vary a lot with randomly selected subsets of the samples from one single microarray data set. under this light, we have performed re-sampling of our gene expression data and found that both the recovery rate of ceppis and the identification rates of the two dcm-related modules decreased as we lowered the sample size . however, the identification rates of the two dcm-related modules were much higher than any other modules, indicating that these two identified modules were robustly related to dcm.

since the human ppi data are still incomplete and noisy, there are different curated collections of human ppi data available. to examine whether our analysis was robust against the pin we used, we performed the same analysis with an expanded pin integrating the ppi data from hprd  <cit>  and biogrid  <cit>  databases and obtained consistent results .

one of the major symptoms of heart failure is the inability of the heart to sufficiently supply blood flow to the rest of the body. this is strongly related to heart muscle contraction efficiency. the failing heart undergoes morphological changes and becomes weakened and enlarged in dcm, the most common form of cardiomyopathy. our findings in dcm-related modules of muscle contraction and organ morphogenesis were consistent with the known symptoms of cadiomyopathy. consequently, we further investigated these two modules in relation to the underlying molecular mechanisms of dilated cardiomyopahty.

in the muscle contraction module, three sdegs, dmd, dtna and utrn, form a closed loop, implying topological significance. dystrophin, encoded by dmd, is a recessive, fatal x-linked disorder. it appears to stabilize the sarcolemma and protects muscle fibers from long-term contraction-induced damage and necrosis  <cit> , though its precise roles at the cellular level are still to be elucidated. dystrobrevin-alpha, encoded by dtna, belongs to the dystrobrevin subfamily of the dystrophin family and is a component of the dystrophin-associated protein complex   <cit> . disruption of dap is associated with various forms of muscular dystrophy. dystrophin binds to the intracellular cytoskeleton by associating with actin filaments at its n-terminus, whereas at its c-terminus dystrophin interacts with members of the dap, such as β-dystroglycan, which is encoded by dag <dig>  dystrophin therefore links the intracellular microfilament network of actin to a complex series of linking proteins in the cell membrane, and hence to the extracellular matrix  <cit> . in the muscle contraction module, both dmd and dtna were significantly down-regulated. the absence of dystrophin was suggested to cause the collapse of the entire dap and plasma membrane, leading to muscle damage  <cit> . on the other hand, mutations of dtna are associated with left ventricular non-compaction with congenital heart defects  <cit> . these defects might lead to cardiac muscle damage and possibly dcm.

utrophin encoded by utrn shares both structural and functional similarities with the dystrophin gene. mouse studies suggested that utrophin may serve as a functional substitute for the dystrophin gene and can be viewed as a rescue protein in muscular dystrophy caused by abnormal dystrophin expression  <cit> . in our results, utrn was significantly up-regulated, which might illustrate the rescue action of utrophin in the absence of dystrophin. however, no protein-protein interactions exist or are found between utrn and actc <dig>  which encodes the actin in cardiac cells, suggesting that progressive heart failure could be due to the failure of utrn rescue. based on these results, we proposed a hypothesis to explain how the muscle contraction module affects dcm progression . recently, bostick and colleagues  <cit>  reported that utrophin up-regulation alone  leads to dcm in mice, which provides strong evidence in support of our hypothesis.

on the other hand, in the organ morphogenesis module, we noticed that the largest connected component contains two major clusters. the two major clusters consisted of insulin pathway-related genes, including igf1r  and insr  and vascular endothelial growth factor  pathway-related genes, including flt <dig> , nrp <dig>  nrp <dig> and kdr . these two pathways have both been reported to be important in cardiac remodeling  <cit> . proper igf1r and insr signaling plays an essential role in cardiac function, and the disruption of this signaling induces the onset of dcm in knockout mice  <cit> ; while the vegf pathway is crucial in vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, which was reported to be altered in dcm  <cit> . the significant up-regulation of these two clusters of genes can therefore signify autosomal repair for damage caused by hypoxia induced by early dcm symptoms. malfunction of these activated pathways are possible reasons for the disease progression.

with focus on these pathways, we compared the subnetworks in dcm and non-dcm patients and found several notable points. first, these two clusters were not independent from each other, but were linked by a string of genes: rasa <dig>  kdr, ctnnb <dig>  and flt <dig>  rasa <dig>  encoding p120-rasgap which activates ras gtpase, is best known for its negative regulation of the ras/mapk pathway downstream of several growth factor pathways responsible for cell proliferation, including the igf- <dig>  insulin and vegf pathway. proper activation of the ras-dependent pathway is important for the functions of these pathways. the up-regulation and the linkage between rasa <dig> and insr may infer a possible negative regulation of the ras-dependent pathway. we also found crkl, a protein that mediates ras-dependent activation, to be significantly down-regulated in dcm patients. these observations imply the negative regulation of growth factor signaling involving insulin and insulin-like growth factor. second, the down-regulation of ctnnb, which encodes beta-catenin in ve-cadherin essential for contact inhibition of vegf-induced proliferation  <cit> , infers a malfunction in the control of vegf-induced vasculogenesis. the failure of beta-catenin regulation and defective vascularization have been observed in idiopathic dcm  <cit> .

our findings regarding the organ morphogenesis module successfully revealed possible integration of two important pathways in dcm and the crucial role that rasa <dig> up-regulation and ctnnb <dig> down-regulation might play in the etiology of dcm.

CONCLUSIONS
altogether we have developed a network-based comparative analysis approach that integrates protein-protein interactions with gene expression profiles and biological function annotations to reveal dynamic functional modules under different biological states. application to dcm reveals two functional modules with dynamic features accounting for the underlying disease mechanisms. the revealed molecular modules might be used as potential drug targets and provide new directions for heart failure therapy.

