BACKGROUND
the atlantic cod  is an economically and ecologically important species. due to unpredictable and variable harvests of wild cod, several countries including canada, norway, iceland, the uk, ireland, and the faroe islands  invested in the development of atlantic cod aquaculture to meet consumer demand for this species . larval diet/nutrition, growth, and survival are key issues for both wild and cultured atlantic cod populations .

the main food for wild marine fish larvae is zooplankton , whereas intensively cultured marine fish larvae are often fed rotifers followed by artemia  <cit> . survival of wild cod larvae, and recruitment, are influenced by the quantity and quality of zooplankton among other factors, such as temperature  <cit> . in culture, larval atlantic cod exclusively fed wild zooplankton  for even a brief period  have been shown to grow faster and with fewer deformities than larval cod fed only enriched rotifers, and the growth benefits associated with feeding zooplankton to cod larvae extend into the juvenile stage . it is thought that differences in the nutritional composition of zooplankton and rotifers may underlie the enhanced growth performance of zooplankton-fed cod larvae  <cit> . for example, zooplankton often have higher levels of the ω <dig> long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids , eicosapentaenoic acid  and docosahexaenoic acid , as well as several trace elements , than rotifers  <cit> . furthermore, zooplankton-fed cod larvae are reported to have higher levels of epa, dha, iodine, manganese, and selenium than cod larvae fed rotifers  <cit> . while nutritional quality likely plays a key role, the precise mechanisms by which consumption of zooplankton accelerates larval cod growth are not completely understood.

we used a functional genomics approach to identify genes and molecular pathways in larval cod that respond to feeding with small amounts of wild zooplankton . the feeding regime providing samples for this microarray-based research, as well as the impact of dietary zooplankton on larval and juvenile cod growth, are reported in katan et al.  <cit> . at approximately 30 days post-hatch , the lengths and weights of cod larvae fed rotifers supplemented with wild zooplankton  from  <dig> dph began to separate from those fed either rotifers alone  or rotifers enriched with protein hydrolysate ; i.e. this was the first developmental stage where the ra-zoo larvae were significantly longer and heavier. thus, we selected ra-zoo, ra and ra-ph larval samples at 9–10 mm length , with the goal of identifying zooplankton-responsive genes associated with the onset of the accelerated growth phase in the ra-zoo group as compared with both other groups. the ra and ra-ph groups had virtually identical lengths and weights at this life-history stage  <cit> , and thus, these groups were used in the current study as “non-zooplankton” groups for the purpose of identifying a robust suite of zooplankton-responsive genes. information on the impact of incorporating zooplankton and ph into larval diets on cod growth and survival, as well as expression of well-known growth and appetite related genes  can be found in katan et al.  <cit> . these genes were not differentially expressed in ra-zoo larvae as compared to both other groups at 9 mm  <cit> , suggesting that other factors are involved in the initial acceleration in growth rate experienced by zooplankton-fed cod larvae.

we initially conducted whole-body transcript expression profiling with the  <dig>  probe  atlantic cod oligonucleotide microarray platform  <cit> , and then validated selected microarray-identified genes using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction . over  <dig>  of the 20k microarray’s 50-mer oligonucleotide probes were designed based on unique candidate sequences arising from the assembly of over  <dig>  ests from  <dig> cdna libraries  representing various tissues, treatments, and life stages   <cit> . the est assembly process , and the rationale for sequence selection and probe design for the 20k microarray platform, were previously described  <cit> . since it has been estimated that the atlantic cod genome contains over  <dig>  genes  <cit> , the 20k microarray is necessarily missing some cod genes; however, this microarray platform has been effectively used for a variety of global transcript expression profiling applications  and is a suitable resource for the current larval transcriptome study. while microarrays have been used to study larval transcriptomes for fish species including atlantic halibut  and common sole   <cit> , to our knowledge this is the first microarray- and qpcr-based study to identify and validate larval fish genes that respond to feeding with zooplankton.

recently, rna sequencing  was used to study the larval cod transcriptome response to a diet of copepods versus enriched rotifers  <cit> . that rnaseq-based study identified  <dig> redox-relevant genes as significantly copepod-responsive, potentially contributing to enhanced growth  <cit> . similarities and discrepancies between the results of our study and the rnaseq study  <cit>  will be discussed in light of the different rotifer enrichment methods that were employed .

RESULTS
larval dry mass
at the 9 mm stage sampling time , the ra-zoo larvae were significantly heavier than ra larvae, while ra-ph larval dry mass was not significantly different from either of the other two treatments . when the larvae were 34– <dig> dph , the ra-zoo larvae were significantly heavier than both ra and ra-ph larvae . however, when they were size-matched , there were no significant differences in dry mass between the treatment groups although the ra versus ra-zoo comparison approached significance . within each treatment , dry mass differed between sampling points, with one exception. this parameter was not significantly different between ra-ph larvae at  <dig> and 13 mm .fig.  <dig> larval dry mass data for larvae fed the different diets. dissimilar lower case letters indicate a significant difference  between treatments  within a size-matched  or age-matched  group. dissimilar upper case letters indicate a significant difference  between sizes  within a treatment  group. * indicates a difference at p =  <dig>  between treatment groups marked. values are means + 1 s.e



microarray analysis of global transcript expression in ~9 mm cod larvae
the larval transcriptome was compared between treatment groups at the 9 mm stage. between 9 mm ra and ra-zoo larvae,  <dig> differentially expressed  microarray features were identified , whereas  <dig> de features were identified between 9 mm ra-ph and ra-zoo larvae . in contrast, only  <dig> de features were identified between 9 mm ra and ra-ph larvae. since the aim of this study was to identify a robust set of ra-zoo responsive genes in ~9 mm larvae, we used a venn diagram approach to identify overlapping genes in the aforementioned  <dig> and  <dig> gene lists. this identified  <dig> microarray features that were ra-zoo responsive compared with both of the other 9 mm groups . of these,  <dig> features were significantly up-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with those in both the ra and ra-ph groups , and  <dig> features were significantly down-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with both ra and ra-ph larvae . blast identification, gene ontology  functional annotation based on blast2go , and microarray fold change values for all  <dig> overlapping ra-zoo responsive features are contained in additional file 1: table s <dig> and additional file 2: table s <dig> fig.  <dig> overview of microarray experimental design and results. a. reference design microarray experiment. arrows represent microarrays with the numbers of biological replicates shown next to the arrows. the base of the arrow shows the cy3-labeled sample , and the arrowhead shows the cy5-labeled sample . the numbers of differentially expressed  features between ra-zoo and the other  <dig> treatment groups  are shown. b. venn diagram identifying microarray features that were de between ra-zoo and both ra and ra-ph larvae at 9 mm stage. of the  <dig> overlapping genes,  <dig> were up-regulated in ra-zoo and  <dig> genes were down-regulated in ra-zoo compared to the ra and ra-ph groups . selected genes from the  <dig> gene list were included in the qpcr study 



go term enrichment analysis
go biological process  terms that were underrepresented in the set of  <dig> ra-zoo responsive genes compared with the 20k cod microarray included “anatomical structure morphogenesis”, “aromatic compound catabolic process”, “ribonucleotide metabolic process”, and “carbohydrate derivative catabolic process” . go bp terms overrepresented in the ra-zoo responsive gene set included several related to cell division  and oxidation-reduction  . in the molecular function  and cellular component  categories, all enriched go terms were overrepresented in the ra-zoo responsive gene set compared with the reference gene set; this included go mf terms “oxidoreductase activity”, “antioxidant activity”, “tubulin binding”, “peroxidase activity”, and “selenium binding” , and go cc terms primarily involved in cell division  . selected go terms are shown in fig.  <dig>  and all enriched go terms are provided in additional file 3: table s <dig> fig.  <dig> gene ontology  term enrichment analysis for the  <dig> overlapping ra-zoo-responsive gene set. a. enriched biological process go terms. b. enriched molecular function go terms. c. enriched cellular component go terms. selected enriched go terms are included in this figure, and a complete list of enriched go terms is available in additional file 3: table s3



hierarchical clustering analyses
hierarchical clustering was performed on the collection of  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed  between ra-zoo larvae and both ra larvae and ra-ph larvae to determine if treatment groups could be separated based on gene expression profiles. in this analysis, all ra-zoo larvae clustered in a separate branch from all other larvae . however, among the ra and ra-ph larvae, there were no separate subclusters for treatment . this indicates that there was no discernible impact of ra or ra-ph treatments on expression of the complete set of  <dig> ra-zoo responsive genes.fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering analysis of zooplankton-responsive genes. ra-zoo, ra, and ra-ph  samples were clustered based on a collection of  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed  between ra-zoo and both ra and ra-ph. genes were median-centered and clustered using pearson correlation and complete linkage hierarchical clustering. coloured blocks indicate treatment groups 



hierarchical clustering was performed for subsets of the  <dig> genes identified in the go term enrichment analysis. since large numbers of enriched go terms pertained to oxidation-reduction and cell division, genes with these functional annotations  were included in the hierarchical clustering analyses. further, since selenium binding was an overrepresented go term  suggesting that selenium homeostasis may be involved in the larval cod response to zooplankton, ra-zoo responsive genes with selenium-relevant functional annotations  were subjected to hierarchical clustering. in the hierarchical clustering analyses of genes involved in oxidation-reduction  and selenium homeostasis , all ra-zoo larvae clustered separately from all other larvae; among ra and ra-ph larvae, there were no separate subclusters for treatment. these results demonstrate that the zooplankton diet had a considerable and consistent impact on larval expression of genes involved in these processes, while the other treatments did not have a discernible impact. note that there were some genes in common between the oxidation-reduction and selenium homeostasis clustering studies  . in the hierarchical clustering analysis involving mitosis-relevant genes , three ra larvae grouped with the ra-zoo in a branch separate from the remaining ra and ra-ph larvae . thus, compared with oxidation-reduction and selenium homeostasis, the influence of the zooplankton diet on mitosis appears to be less consistent.fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering analysis for a subset of ra-zoo responsive genes involved in oxidation-reduction. ra-zoo, ra and ra-ph  samples were clustered based on features having the associated go terms “oxidation-reduction process” and/or “cell redox homeostasis”. gene names were taken from the most significant blastx hits with associated protein names 

fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering analysis for a subset of ra-zoo responsive genes potentially involved in selenium homeostasis. ra-zoo, ra and ra-ph  samples were clustered based on features having the associated go terms “response to selenium ion” and/or “selenium binding”, and five additional selenoprotein-encoded transcripts were also included in this analysis. gene names were taken from the most significant blastx hits with associated protein names 

fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering analysis for a subset of ra-zoo responsive genes involved in mitosis. ra-zoo, ra and ra-ph  samples were clustered based on features having the associated go terms “mitosis”, “cell division”, and/or any term including the word “mitotic”. gene names were taken from the most significant blastx hits with associated protein names 



of the  <dig> overlapping ra-zoo responsive genes, approximately half  were up-regulated by zooplankton and approximately half  were down-regulated by this dietary treatment . of the  <dig> genes included in the oxidation-reduction clustering analysis,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated in response to zooplankton . unlike the results for all ra-zoo responsive genes or oxidation-reduction relevant genes, nearly all of the genes included in the selenium homeostasis  and mitosis  clustering analyses were up-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with the other two treatment groups .

ra-zoo responsive genes involved in the thyroid hormone  biosynthesis pathway
the microarray experiment identified two genes involved in th production  that were significantly up-regulated in zooplankton-fed larvae as compared with both other groups . iodotyrosine dehalogenase i precursor, associated with go bp terms including thyroid hormone generation and oxidation-reduction process, was  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold higher expressed in ra-zoo versus ra and ra-ph larvae, respectively. putative iodothyronine deiodinase type i, with go bp terms including hormone metabolic process and cellular metabolic process, was  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold higher expressed in ra-zoo versus ra and ra-ph larvae, respectively .

qpcr analysis
fourteen microarray-identified genes, representing a variety of functional annotations , were selected for qpcr studies involving 9–13 mm larvae templates. blast identification, manually collected gene ontology  functional annotations associated with the best named blastx hits, and microarray and qpcr fold change values for this set of  <dig> genes are contained in table  <dig>  of these,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes were down-regulated in ra-zoo compared with both other treatment groups at the 9 mm stage . four of the five up-regulated genes selected for qpcr  were qpcr validated as significantly up-regulated in ra-zoo compared with both other treatment groups at ~9 mm . while the microarray and qpcr results for the transcript encoding nattectin precursor agreed in direction of change, this gene was not considered to be validated as qpcr showed its expression level in 9 mm ra-zoo, ra, and ra-ph larvae was not significantly different . as shown by qpcr, the most highly up-regulated gene in 9 mm ra-zoo compared with both other 9 mm groups was selenoprotein pa  . all nine of the genes identified by microarray as being suppressed in zooplankton-fed larvae were qpcr validated as significantly down-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with both ra and ra-ph larvae at the 9 mm stage . qpcr showed that the most highly down-regulated gene in 9 mm ra-zoo larvae compared with both other 9 mm groups was cytochrome p <dig> cyp2y <dig>  .table  <dig> identification and transcript expression results for  <dig> microarray-identified features selected for qpcr studya


microarray probe idb

na not applicable 


athese  <dig> genes were selected from the list of  <dig> microarray features that were ra-zoo responsive compared with both ra and ra-ph in 9 mm stage samples. the complete list of  <dig> microarray features is available in additional file 1: table s <dig>  and additional file 2: table s <dig> 


bprobe identifier  numbers are 5-digit unique identifiers for the 50mer probes on the atlantic cod 20k microarray  <cit> 


cthe blastx hits with the lowest e-values and protein names  are shown for the atlantic cod expressed sequence tag  contiguous sequences  or singletons used for probe design  <cit> 


dfunctional annotation associated with the best named blastx hit of the atlantic cod cdna sequence represented by the informative microarray probe. biological process  and molecular function  gene ontology  terms are listed in this table. if multiple, similar terms were available, a representative term was selected for inclusion in this table


eqpcr mean fold-change was calculated as mean ra-zoo relative quantity  divided by mean ra or ra-ph rq for genes up-regulated in ra-zoo, and as mean ra or ra-ph rq divided by mean ra-zoo rq for genes down-regulated in ra-zoo . all genes in this table except nattectin were qpcr validated as significantly  differentially expressed between ra-zoo and both ra and ra-ph larvae at the 9 mm stage


fsince there are over  <dig> go terms associated with this sequence, a selection of go terms are included in this table


gthe best named hit was cytochrome p <dig> precursor . the second-best hit is listed as it has a more descriptive name and a similar e-value

fig.  <dig> qpcr results for selected zooplankton-responsive genes-identified by microarray. dissimilar lower case letters indicate a significant difference  between treatments  within a size-matched  or age-matched  group. dissimilar upper case letters indicate a significant difference  between sizes  within a treatment group.  a) glutathione peroxidase 1b; b) selenoprotein pa; c) trypsinogen h1_3a1; d) aurora kinase b; e) nattectin precursor; f) dehydrogenase/reductase sdr family member 1; g) cytochrome p <dig> cyp2y3; h) microsomal glutathione s-transferase 3; i) peroxiredoxin-1; j) dna-damage-inducible transcript 4; k) solute carrier family  <dig>  member 6; l) thioredoxin-interacting protein; m) ferritin, middle subunit; n) coagulation factor v.



in age-matched older larvae ,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes subjected to qpcr showed no significant difference in expression between treatment groups; the exceptions to this were trypsinogen h1_3a <dig>  and peroxiredoxin- <dig>  .

in size-matched larvae ,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes subjected to qpcr showed no significant difference in expression between treatment groups . of the remaining genes subjected to qpcr, one gene  was significantly up-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with both other treatment groups , and two genes  were significantly down-regulated in the ra-zoo larvae compared with the ra-ph group alone despite there being no significant difference in transcript expression between ra and ra-ph larvae . five genes in size-matched 13 mm larvae appeared to respond to the ra-ph treatment . two of these genes  were up-regulated and  <dig> genes  were down-regulated in 13 mm ra-ph larvae compared with other size-matched groups .

discussion
the microarray component of this study revealed that suites of genes involved in biological processes including oxidation-reduction, selenium binding, mitosis, and thyroid hormone generation were responsive in 9–10 mm cod larvae  that were fed wild zooplankton. however, the qpcr study showed that most of the genes identified as differentially expressed in the 9 mm larvae were no longer zooplankton-responsive in age-matched  or size-matched  larvae with the exception of: 1) trypsinogen h1_3a <dig>  and peroxiredoxin- <dig>  in the age-matched groups; and 2)  <dig> genes in the size-matched 13 mm comparison which showed the same direction of expression change as was observed in 9 mm larvae . these findings suggest that, while genes identified and validated in this study are likely involved in the initiation of the enhanced growth phenotype in zooplankton-fed larvae , only a subset of these genes appear to be zooplankton-responsive  in older larvae. genes analyzed by qpcr that were ra-zoo-responsive only in 9 mm larvae and not differentially expressed between groups of older larvae include selenoprotein pa , and three genes that were down-regulated in 9 mm ra-zoo larvae , associated with go terms including “neurotransmitter transport”, “organic acid transport”, and “taurine:sodium symporter activity” . the zooplankton-responsiveness of some genes at 9 mm, but not at the 11–13 mm stage, may be due to the fact that 9 mm larvae were fed rotifers while 11–13 mm larvae were fed artemia , and artemia are more similar to zooplankton than are rotifers for several important nutrients such as selenium and taurine .

as previously mentioned, penglase et al.  <cit>  used rnaseq to investigate transcript expression in cod larvae that were fed zooplankton versus rotifers. unlike our study, which used ori-culture and ori-green  enrichment of rotifers with no selenium or other enrichment , the rnaseq-based study used new enrichment protocols that provide rotifers with ‘zooplankton levels’ of some nutrients  but not others   <cit> . similar to our study, the rnaseq-based study found that there was no significant difference in the growth of cod larvae fed zooplankton versus rotifers up to  <dig> dph, with zooplankton-fed larvae experiencing significantly accelerated growth between  <dig> and  <dig> dph  <cit> . the rnaseq-based study evaluated larval growth, nutrient levels, and gene expression at  <dig> larval stages, with stage  <dig>   <cit>  approximately corresponding to the 9 mm stage in our microarray and qpcr studies. some of the stage  <dig> gene expression results from penglase et al.  <cit>  are similar to our microarray results; for example, thioredoxin interacting protein a , catalase, and glutathione-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit were down-regulated  in zooplankton-fed ~ 9 mm larvae in both studies . also, both studies found that the larval redox system and growth rate were strongly influenced by feeding with copepods . however, other results from penglase et al.  <cit>  do not agree with our results. in our study, glutathione peroxidase 1b  and selenoprotein pa  were significantly up-regulated in 9 mm ra-zoo larvae , whereas penglase et al.  <cit>  found that gpx1a and sepp1a were down-regulated  in zooplankton-fed ~ 9 mm cod larvae. since glutathione peroxidases and selenoprotein p are selenium-dependent , differences in their transcript expression may have been influenced by differences in rotifer enrichment methods utilized in the rnaseq-based study versus our study. in the rnaseq study, rotifer enrichment included sel-plex , a selenium-supplemented yeast, whereas in our study, rotifer enrichment included only ori-culture and ori-green  without a selenium supplement. therefore, the 9 mm ra and ra-ph larvae in our study may have been deficient in selenium, while the comparably staged rotifer-fed larvae in the rnaseq study were selenium replete due to the rotifer enrichment methods  <cit> . even with adequate levels of selenium, however, the rotifer-fed cod larvae in the rnaseq study still grew more slowly than the zooplankton-fed larvae, leading karlsen and colleagues to hypothesize that protein and taurine  may be involved in copepod-associated enhanced growth  <cit> .

in our study, the expression results for slc6a <dig> support the notion that taurine plays a role in the enhanced growth of zooplankton-fed cod larvae at the 9 mm stage. this taurine transporter-encoding transcript was shown by microarray and qpcr to be significantly down-regulated in ra-zoo larvae compared with both other groups at 9 mm . in atlantic salmon , slc6a <dig> was shown by microarray to be significantly up-regulated in distal intestine during the early response  to a soybean meal containing diet, and therefore, potentially associated with the development of soybean meal induced enteritis  <cit> . therefore, the higher expression of slc6a <dig> in both non-zooplankton groups  suggests that the groups fed only rotifers may have had an inflammatory reaction. in japanese eel  testis during hcg-induced spermatogenesis, higher slc6a <dig> transcript and protein expression levels are associated with lower taurine levels  <cit> . this inverse relationship between slc6a <dig> expression and taurine agrees with our study. rotifers have lower levels of taurine than artemia or zooplankton , and slc6a <dig> expression was higher in cod larvae fed rotifers  but not in older cod larvae fed artemia  . interestingly, trypsin promotes the uptake of taurine into eel germ cells by transactivating slc6a <dig>  and trypsinogen h1-3a <dig> was shown in our study to be induced in zooplankton-fed cod larvae. the potential roles of taurine, taurine transporter , and trypsin in copepod-associated enhanced growth of cod larvae warrant further investigation.

since the zooplankton-associated enhanced growth phenotype is first apparent when cod larvae are approximately 9–10 mm long  <cit> , we propose that transcriptome changes in zooplankton-fed larvae as compared with other larvae at ~9 mm provide significant insight into the mechanisms involved in the initiation of accelerated growth. in addition to oxidation-reduction, selenium-binding, and mitosis, the microarray experiment identified other key growth-relevant genes  as zooplankton-responsive. the remainder of the discussion will focus on how these genes and pathways, and their potential interactions, may be involved in enhanced growth.

influence of zooplankton diet on oxidation-reduction processes and selenium homeostasis
wild zooplankton  are high in lc-pufa such as dha and epa  <cit> . likewise, cultured marine fish larvae fed wild zooplankton have higher levels of lc-pufa than larvae without zooplankton in the diet  <cit> , and wild cod larvae also have high levels of dha and epa  <cit> . high levels of lc-pufa in marine fish larvae, along with other factors , make this life stage particularly vulnerable to molecular and cellular damage caused by oxidative stress  <cit> . the antioxidant system, including enzymes such as catalase and glutathione peroxidase, is key to protecting larval fish from reactive oxygen species generated by cellular metabolism  <cit> . the current microarray experiment showed that genes encoding several important antioxidant enzymes and other proteins involved in redox homeostasis were responsive to the feeding of zooplankton at the 9 mm sampling time point. this agrees at the pathway level with the rnaseq results of penglase et al.  <cit> , who showed that  <dig> redox-relevant genes were differentially expressed in cod larvae that were fed zooplankton versus rotifers. qpcr confirmed our microarray results, and revealed that the influence of dietary zooplankton on the transcription of genes related to the antioxidant system in larval cod was less apparent in 11–13 mm larvae. all of the genes in the qpcr study that were annotated with the go term “oxidation-reduction process” and/or “cell redox homeostasis”  were differentially  expressed between zooplankton-fed larvae and both of the other two larval groups at 9 mm, while none of these genes were differentially expressed between ra-zoo larvae and both ra and ra-ph larvae in the size- or age-matched comparisons . as previously stated, this may be due to dietary differences between the 11–13 mm larvae  and the 9 mm larvae ; the rotifers used in our study were potentially deficient in some nutrients  that are known to be at higher levels in artemia and zooplankton compared with rotifers .

in asian seabass  selenium-dependent glutathione peroxidase activity and lipid peroxidation increase through larval development, with glutathione peroxidase likely serving to detoxify lipid peroxides  <cit> . sea bass larvae fed high-dha diets have elevated glutathione peroxidase transcript expression levels compared with larvae fed a lower dha diet  <cit> . our finding that gpx1b was significantly up-regulated  in the zooplankton-fed cod larvae compared with the non-zooplankton groups at 9 mm, but not responsive to dietary zooplankton in 11–13 mm larvae, suggests that the 9 mm cod larvae in this study may have been more sensitive than the 11–13 mm larvae to oxidative stress potentially caused by the high-lipid  zooplankton diet. our microarray results also showed that some redox-relevant genes  were up-regulated while others  were down-regulated in zooplankton-fed cod larvae. interestingly, similar results were seen in larval senegal sole  fed live artemia nauplii as compared with larvae on inert feeds, where those fed live prey experienced enhanced growth, higher total glutathione peroxidase activity and lipid peroxidation, and lower catalase activity  <cit> . the ontogeny of gpx <dig>  gpx <dig>  and catalase transcript expression was previously studied by qpcr with templates from cod larvae fed only rotifers and formulated diet   <cit> . during late larval stages , hamre et al.  <cit>  found that catalase transcript expression was stable whereas gpx <dig> and gpx <dig> transcripts showed increased expression in successive larval stages. these three transcripts encode enzymes that reduce metabolically generated h2o <dig>  and therefore play key roles in the control of this reactive oxygen species  <cit> . h2o <dig>  which serves as a second messenger in insulin signaling and in the signaling cascades mediated by several growth factors , also plays a significant role in diverse biological processes including proliferation, inflammation, and aging . collectively, our results suggest that the maintenance of homeostatic oxidative status in 9 mm cod larvae on a high-lipid zooplankton containing diet is complex, involving numerous redox-relevant genes. the rnaseq results of penglase et al.  <cit>  also show that redox homeostasis is zooplankton-responsive, with some gene expression differences between that study and ours likely due to aforementioned differences in rotifer enrichment methods. whether or not alterations in h2o <dig> signaling play a role in the enhanced growth phenotype of zooplankton-fed cod larvae is currently unknown.

in our microarray study, several genes encoding selenium-dependent antioxidant enzymes  and other selenoproteins  were up-regulated in zooplankton-fed cod larvae compared with the other larval groups at the 9 mm stage. this suggests that selenium homeostasis was altered in these zooplankton fed larvae. selenium is an essential micronutrient that is present in copepods at much higher levels than in rotifers   <cit> . cod larvae fed copepods, likewise, have higher selenium levels than those fed rotifers  <cit> . since selenium levels in rotifers are well below the required level for cold-water fish   <cit> , it has been suggested that selenium may be the trace mineral most likely to be deficient in this live feed  <cit> , and this has led to studies on the effect of selenium-enriched rotifers on larval cod performance. for example, although they only assessed larval performance metrics until 26– <dig> dph,  larval cod fed rotifers enriched with selenium and iodine  had improved survival  <cit> , and penglase et al.  <cit>  used qpcr to show that transcripts encoding glutathione peroxidases  <dig> and  <dig> were significantly up-regulated in selenium-supplemented cod larvae at  <dig> dph. in light of these results, the up-regulation of gpx1b and gpx <dig> transcripts in zooplankton-fed larvae in our study suggests that these cod genes may have responded to the high selenium levels known to be present in zooplankton. as mentioned previously, the lack of a difference in gpx1a and gpx <dig> expression in ~9 mm larval cod fed rotifers versus copepods in penglase et al.  <cit>  is likely due to their use of selenium supplemented rotifer enrichment.

research involving selenium supplementation of larval diets has been conducted with marine fish species in addition to atlantic cod. for example, red sea bream  larvae fed selenium-enriched rotifers had higher whole body selenium levels and accelerated growth and development compared with larvae fed a control diet  <cit> . as well, betancor et al.  <cit>  used high dha and vitamin e diets with and without selenium to show that selenium improved larval sea bass growth and prevented lipid oxidation. these data, and previous results from ribeiro et al.  <cit> , led this group to speculate that selenium supplementation may be more important in earlier life stage larval sole. both deficient and excess levels of selenium can be detrimental to fish, with selenium deficiency potentially causing reduced growth and glutathione peroxidase activity in plasma and liver  <cit> , and excess selenium causing toxicity  <cit> . therefore, an appropriate level of dietary selenium  is likely needed for optimal larval cod performance. benner et al.  <cit>  showed that selenium supplementation in diets for zebrafish  influenced behaviour and increased the brain transcript expression of several selenoprotein-encoding genes including sepp1a. in mammals, selenium supply influences the transcript expression of genes encoding some selenoproteins such as glutathione peroxidase  <dig> and selenoprotein w , although selenium status does not appear to influence selenoprotein p transcript expression in rat liver . still, the known regulation of some selenoprotein-encoding genes by selenium supply supports our hypothesis that dietary selenium was at least partially responsible for the observed up-regulation of selenoprotein-encoding genes in zooplankton-fed cod larvae. in the current study, selenoprotein pa  transcript was shown by microarray and qpcr to be over 3-fold up-regulated in zooplankton-fed cod larvae as compared with both other groups. in addition to functioning as an antioxidant and a selenium transporter  <cit> , mammalian selenoprotein p also plays roles in spermatogenesis, immunity, and neurological function  supplemented rotifers, reported that the transcript expression of sepp1a was higher in zooplankton-fed larvae at ~ 5 mm stage, but not in 7–25 mm larvae . our results and those of penglase et al.  <cit>  collectively suggest that, while sepp1a may be a useful biomarker of selenium deficiency, it does not appear to be necessary for zooplankton-associated accelerated growth of larval cod.

research in mammals suggests that the acute phase response , defined as “a complex systemic early-defense system activated by trauma, infection, stress, neoplasia, and inflammation”  <cit> , inhibits selenoprotein p production . interestingly, transcripts encoding positive acute phase proteins  and ccaat/enhancer-binding protein delta  were identified by microarray in the current study as being significantly up-regulated in both ra and ra-ph larvae compared with ra-zoo larvae at the 9 mm stage . therefore, the suppressed selenoprotein pa transcript expression observed in 9 mm ra and ra-ph larvae may be due to an apr that was potentially related to nutritional insufficiency. since selenium deficiency in humans leads to oxidative stress and inflammation  <cit> , it is possible that selenium deficiency in the ra and ra-ph diets and larvae may have contributed to oxidative stress  and inflammation/an apr . however, the results of penglase et al.  <cit> , i.e. differential expression of many redox-relevant genes in cod larvae fed zooplankton versus selenium-replete rotifers, reveal that factors other than selenium are involved in the redox pathway response to dietary zooplankton. the roles and interactions of nutritional status  and apr-associated transcripts and proteins in larval cod growth warrant further investigation.

in addition to the production of selenium-replete rotifers, mineral enrichment trials have been conducted to produce rotifers with copepod levels of selenium, manganese, copper, and zinc  <cit> . zooplankton contain higher levels of all of these minerals  compared with rotifers  <cit> . interestingly,  <dig> genes with copper-relevant functional annotations were identified in this microarray study:  <dig> down-regulated  and  <dig> up-regulated  in zooplankton-fed cod larvae compared with both other larval groups. these genes may have responded to copper deficiency in the rotifer-fed 9 mm larvae in our study. however, since karlsen et al.  <cit>  used rotifer enrichment methods that resulted in significantly higher levels of copper in rotifers and rotifer-fed larvae compared with zooplankton and zooplankton-fed larvae, respectively, and growth acceleration was still observed in the zooplankton-fed cod, copper in not likely to be a limiting nutrient for growth in larvae of this species.

studies by our group, using the same larval batches and treatments as those used in the current functional genomics study, showed that accelerated growth in zooplankton-fed cod larvae first appeared in 9–10 mm  larvae  <cit> . this is in agreement with karlsen et al.  <cit>  who reported that the onset of accelerated growth in copepod-fed cod larvae was between  <dig> and  <dig> dph. since karlsen et al.  <cit>  used selenium-supplemented rotifers to ensure that the rotifer-fed larvae in their study were not selenium deficient and still saw decreased growth in the absence of copepods, it was proposed that nutrients other than selenium  may be limiting for growth in cod larvae fed only rotifers. collectively, it appears that ~ 9–10 mm in length represents a developmental window in which larval cod growth becomes responsive to nutrients present in the zooplankton supplemented diet . our microarray results and the rnaseq results of karlsen et al.  <cit>  provide snapshots of the impact of dietary zooplankton on the larval transcriptome at this pivotal developmental stage. however, the results of these studies must be considered in light of the very different rotifer enrichment methods employed.

influence of the zooplankton diet on genes involved in thyroid hormone production
two genes involved in thyroid hormone  production  were up-regulated in zooplankton-fed larvae as compared with both other groups . thyroid hormones, which require iodine for their biosynthesis, play key roles in controlling metamorphosis in larval fish  <cit> , as well as development and metabolism in adult vertebrates  <cit> . iodothyronine deiodinases are selenoproteins  that catalyze the deiodination of the prohormone thyroxine  to the active hormone triiodothyronine   <cit> . iodotyrosine deiodinase, which is not a selenoprotein, acts in iodine salvage by catalyzing the deiodination of th synthesis byproducts  <cit> . selenium regulates the expression and activity of selenoproteins including iodothyronine deiodinases and glutathione peroxidases, and selenium treatment has been shown to increase iodothyronine deiodinase mrna levels in chicken and mammalian cells  <cit> . to our knowledge, it is not known if selenium status affects iodotyrosine deiodinase mrna levels.

zooplankton contain higher levels of iodine compared with rotifers  <cit> , and in cod larvae of similar age and size to those used in our microarray experiment, karlsen et al.  <cit>  showed that rotifer-fed larvae at  <dig> dph  had significantly lower levels of iodine compared with  <dig> dph  growth-accelerated zooplankton-fed larvae. however, atlantic cod larvae fed rotifers enriched with copepod levels of iodine can experience iodine toxicity  <cit> . since zooplankton-fed cod larvae have higher iodine levels than those associated with toxicity in the iodine-enriched rotifer study , others have speculated that nutrient interactions, possibly involving bromine anion , may prevent iodine toxicity in zooplankton-fed larvae  <cit> . it should be noted that the current study involved the feeding of relatively small amounts of zooplankton , which would limit the larval intake of iodine. still, the potential roles of nutrient interactions in larval cod response to being fed various amounts of zooplankton should be investigated.

influence of zooplankton diet on expression of mitosis-relevant genes
our microarray study identified numerous genes involved in mitosis/cell cycle that responded to dietary zooplankton, and most of these genes were up-regulated in ra-zoo compared with the other larval groups. diet-associated growth differences in larval cod have been studied at the histological level, with larvae fed high dha:epa ratio rotifers experiencing faster growth  than larvae fed low dha:epa ratio rotifers  <cit> . the diet-associated rapid growth of larval cod by hyperplasia  seen by galloway et al.  <cit> , and in katan et al.  <cit>  on the same larval population used in this study, agrees with our results showing dietary zooplankton-associated up-regulation of genes involved in various aspects of cell division including mitotic prometaphase , mitotic spindle organization , and regulation of chromosome segregation  . murray et al.  <cit>  used microarrays and qpcr to study the transcript expression responses of larval atlantic halibut to a microencapsulated diet and showed that larvae fed the microencapsulated diet along with artemia grew significantly slower than larvae fed artemia alone. in the slow-growing halibut larvae, genes involved in cell division  were down-regulated while glutathione s-transferase a <dig> was up-regulated compared with controls  <cit> . these results agree with our study, in which slower-growing ra and ra-ph cod larvae experienced lower expression  of many genes involved in cell division  and higher expression of glutathione s-transferase. three glutathione s-transferase-like transcripts were down-regulated in ra-zoo larvae as compared with those from both other groups , while no glutathione s-transferase-like transcripts were among the genes up-regulated in ra-zoo compared with both other groups .

CONCLUSIONS
numerous studies have previously shown that larval cod that are fed zooplankton experience accelerated growth compared with those that are only fed rotifers. in this study, microarrays and qpcr were used to investigate the larval cod transcriptome response to partial zooplankton supplementation in the diet. our study complements the recently published work of karlsen et al.  <cit>  and penglase et al.  <cit> , and collectively, these studies suggest that altered larval th synthesis/metabolism and redox homeostasis, as well as taurine and trace mineral  levels in wild zooplankton, are involved in the initiation of accelerated growth experienced by zooplankton-fed cod larvae. however, the precise mechanisms involved and other important details  remain to be elucidated.

