BACKGROUND
rnai is a conserved cellular mechanism that can mediate sequence-specific rna degradation in eukaryotes  <cit>  and has recently been harnessed for reverse genetics in mammalian cells and transgenic animals  <cit> . many shrna and mirna transgene constructs have been designed and successfully used. the earliest type was composed of a pol iii promoter and a dna sequence encoding a shrna  <cit> . this type of constructs was constitutively active and was relatively inefficient in targeting the endogenous genes when pronuclear injection method was used to insert the transgene into the genome  <cit> . to overcome this limitation, several groups transfected cultured mouse embryonic stem cells, screened for clones where the transgene was active and then used those clones to produce transgenic mice  <cit> . other groups used lentivirus to insert transgenes  <cit>  or pol ii-promoter-based mirna expression constructs, which drive the synthesis of a mirna  <cit> . these approaches have achieved silencing of endogenous genes and specific loss-of-function phenotypes in transgenic mice.

to further improve the in vivo reverse genetics approach using rnai, we need to overcome several shortcomings of the currently used transgene constructs. first, extremely high levels of shrna expression should be avoided because such high levels of shrna can induce non-specific toxicity  <cit> . the commonly used pol iii promoter u <dig> is a very strong and constitutively active promoter  <cit>  that can drive shrna expression to a very high level, which may lead to non-specific suppression of the endogenous mirna expression  <cit> . by comparison, pol ii promoters drive mirna expression at lower levels and may be advantageous  <cit> .

second, although the constitutively active constructs work in cells and transgenic mice, a conditional silencing is more desirable. for example, if a target gene is essential, use of constitutively active constructs often yields no useful transgenic founders. this is because once injected into the embryo, the transgene immediately expresses the shrna or mirna, resulting in the silencing of the target gene and the death of the embryo. this problem can be avoided by using conditional constructs, which will not express the shrna or mirna when first injected, thus allowing the transgenic founders to be generated. additionally, there is a need in biomedical research to understand hypomorphic phenotypes of a gene in a specific type of cells or at a specific time. a conditional construct will afford investigators this capability.

third, coexpression of a reporter gene and a mirna by one promoter can facilitate identification of mirna expression in cells and in transgenic animals. one strategy for coexpression is to use a mirna cassette inserted into the 3'utr of a reporter gene, which has been explored by previous studies  <cit> . a shortcoming in this design is that the processing of primary mirna  by drosha will cause the mrna to lose their 3' polyadenylation, which destabilizes the mrna and reduces levels of the reporter gene expression. one solution to this problem is to embed the pre-mirna in an intron as an intronic mirna, which is common in many genomes  <cit> . lin and colleagues  <cit>  applied this strategy using an artificial in-frame intron placed within the open reading frame  of a reporter gene. this strategy is ingenious but relatively difficult to apply widely because one has to find sequences required for splicing  in its proximity) within the orf, and this sequence requirement cannot always be met in an orf.

in this report, we designed a new pol ii-based construct that overcomes these shortcomings. this construct uses a pol ii promoter to drive expression of the egfp gene that is flanked by loxp sites. this feature will allow convenient screening for cells or transgenic mice where the transgene is active. downstream to the egfp gene is the gene encoding red fluorescent protein . in the 3' utr of the rfp gene, we inserted an artificial intron containing a dna sequence encoding a pre-mirna. we show that this construct expresses egfp under basal conditions. when induced by cre recombinase, it drives expression of rfp and the mirna that silences its target gene. we conclude that this construct may be used as a backbone for conditional gene silencing in transgenic mice.

RESULTS
finding efficient shrnas against e1k and e2k subunits of kgdhc
we selected the e1k and e2k subunits of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex  as the targets for testing our mirna-expressing constructs. kgdhc is a key enzyme in mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid  cycle and is essential for mitochondrial energy metabolism  <cit> . dysfunction of kgdhc has been observed in the brains of alzheimer's disease and could cause metabolic deficiency that is associated with the disease  <cit> . to build a mirna expression construct that targets the e1k or the e2k subunit, our first step was to find shrnas that can efficiently silence these two genes. we designed and constructed eight shrnas targeting each of these two subunits. we used u <dig> promoter to drive the expression of these shrnas  and tested these constructs by transfecting them into mouse nf- <dig> cells. forty eight hours after the transfection, we determined the mrna levels of these two subunits using northern blot. we used a serial dilution of rna extracted from the cells transfected with a construct expressing scrambled shrna as a standard . this scrambled shrna did not show any silencing activity towards these two genes . by comparing to the standard, we found many excellent shrnas that silenced the expression of e1k and e2k by more than 80% .

placing mirna in an intron does not affect the mirna expression and target silencing but increases the reporter gene expression
we selected one effective hairpin against each of these two subunits  and incorporated the stem sequences into the pre-mir-30a structure to make mir-e1- <dig> and mir-e2- <dig>  respectively . we placed the pre-mir-e1- <dig> or pre-mir-e2- <dig> coding sequence behind a potent pol ii promoter cag and in the 3'utr of the rfp gene . the cag promoter is a ubiquitously active and commonly used promoter for gene expression in cells and in mice  <cit> . to mark the cells that express the mirna, the cag promoter also expresses rfp . when transfected into cultured cells, these two constructs expressed rfp and knocked down their respective mrnas for e1k and e2k to a similar degree as their shrna counterparts .

many natural mirnas are in introns of protein-encoding genes  <cit> . to determine whether placing a mirna in an intron can improve the expression of the mirna and the marker gene, we constructed an artificial intron and placed the pre-mirna in this intron . we placed this intron  <dig> nt-down stream from the stop codon because introns within the  <dig> nt downstream from the stop codon are found in some eukaryotic mrnas and do not cause non-sense mediated decay   <cit> . to test whether this intron can be successfully spliced, we extracted rna from the cells transfected with pcag-rfp-mirint and carried out rt-pcr across the splicing junction. we found a single band with the size of  <dig> bps that was expected from the spliced mrna . we did not detect any band with the size of  <dig> bps that would have been derived from the unspliced mrna . we sequenced the 212-bp pcr product and confirmed that the intron splicing occurred exactly as expected . thus, the artificial intron functions as designed. to compare pcag-rfp-mirint with pcag-rfp-mir, we transfected both constructs into the nf <dig> cells and determined their knockdown of target genes. by northern blots, we detected no difference between these two constructs in their degree of knockdown of e1k and e2k mrnas , suggesting that intron placement of pre-mirna encoding sequence does not increase the mirna production. to confirm this, the pre-mir-e2- <dig> and mir-e2- <dig> levels were measured and the levels did not differ between the pcag-rfp-mir and pcag-rfp-mirint . these results suggest that placing a pre-mirna in an intron does not increase the mirna expression.

in order to determine whether the intron influences the expression of rfp, we compared the rfp expression after transfecting these constructs into the nf <dig> cells. the results revealed two roles of the intron. first, the intron enhanced the expression of rfp by more than twofold  despite an existing intron in the 5'utr of the rfp gene in this construct. second, a pre-mirna in the 3' utr of the rfp gene inhibited the rfp expression by 50% or more . placing the pre-mirna in an intron, however, eliminated this inhibitory effect of the pre-mirna .

in order to establish whether the enhancing effect of the intron on rfp expression is a result of elevated mrna levels, we examined rfp mrna using northern blot. addition of intron increased mrna levels by ~10% . on the other hand, placing the pre-mirna in the 3'-utr of the rfp gene reduced the rfp mrna by ~10–20%  and resulted in a lower band  that was consistent in size with the band expected from drosha cropping. by placing the pre-mirna in the intron, the decrease of mrna levels caused by the presence of pre-mirna in the 3'-utr was largely prevented, and there was no lower band . overall, the changes in the mrna levels caused by the addition of the intron did not fully account for the changes in rfp expression, suggesting that other post-transcriptional mechanisms also contribute to the increased levels of rfp expression.

to further determine the effect of primary mirna  processing on the expression of mirna, we silenced the expression of drosha by transfecting the cells with a construct that expresses drosha shrna   <cit> . silencing drosha led to the recovery of rfp expression in constructs with the pre-mirna placed directly in their 3'-utr  but lowered the rfp expression somewhat in constructs with the pre-mirna embedded in an intron, although this did not reach statistical significance . these results indicate that drosha processing causes inhibition of rfp expression and placing the pre-mirna in the intron makes the rfp expression independent from drosha processing.

an inducible construct with fluorescent indicators for expression of mirna
having determined that intron-embedded pre-mirna construct is superior, we incorporated this design in a conditional expression construct based on the cre-loxp system . the construct structure is based on the z/ap construct that has been previously used in transgenic mice to express protein-encoding genes  <cit> . in the z/ap construct, we replaced the reporter genes lacz and human placental alkaline phosphatase gene, with egfp and rfp, respectively. the resulting construct initially expresses egfp gene, which is flanked by loxp sites. after induction with cre, the egfp gene is excised, and its expression ceases, leaving the cag promoter to express rfp and the mirna . the egfp fluorescence allows convenient monitoring of transgene expression in transfected cells or in vivo and can facilitate the subsequent analysis. we tested this construct by transfecting it with or without a cre-expressing plasmid. without cre, only egfp was expressed; with cre, egfp expression diminished but rfp expression appeared . to further test whether the mirna expression was regulated according to our design, we determined the target knockdown. we detected no knockdown of the mrna targets without cre  and significant knockdown with cre . thus, this construct worked as designed.

finally, to determine whether this construct can knock down the target protein levels, we measured kgdhc activity in cells transfected with pcag-rfp-mirnaint . we observed a robust knockdown of the kgdhc activity by targeting either the e1k or the e2k subunit  .

discussion
we have designed a conditional expression construct for mirna expression, pcag-egfp/rfp-mirnaint . this construct initially expresses egfp. when exposed to cre recombinase, the loxp-flanked egfp gene is excised, allowing the cag promoter to drive the expression of the mirna and the marker rfp. this construct will be useful for generating conditional silencing in transgenic mice and will have several advantages compared with the currently available transgenic silencing constructs. for example, the constitutive pol iii or pol ii promoter-based constructs are inefficient in generating transgenic animals with high levels of knockdown  <cit> . although, by screening for transfected es cells with high levels of knockdown or using lentiviral delivery, transgenic mice with hypomorphic gene functions have been generated  <cit> , these technologies are more complex and more costly than pronuclear injection. furthermore, it will be difficult to obtain transgenic lines with a high degree of gene silencing if one targets an essential gene, because founders with high levels of shrna or mirna expression cannot survive. while this problem might be partially circumvented by expressing mirna using a tissue-specific promoter  <cit> , the conditional approach that we have designed here will be more versatile and a superior solution to this problem. by crossing with different cre-expression lines, one can induce specific gene silencing in many different tissues from a single line of mice made with this conditional construct. transgenic silencing mice can be made with conditional constructs using pronuclear injection method  <cit>  or using more complex methods such as es cell screening or lentiviral delivery. in addition, compared with the inducible transgenic rnai constructs that have been reported in the literature, our conditional construct has the following advantages: it expresses egfp before induction of the mirna, thus affording a convenient screen for transgenic lines with desirable expression pattern. when crossed with a cre driver transgenic line, the coexpression of rfp and mirna will provide a convenient and precise indication as to in which cell type gene silencing is occurring.

while developing this construct, we compared the effects of placing the pre-mirna in an intron with the effects of placing the pre-mirna directly in the 3' utr of the rfp gene. our results indicate that placing the pre-mirna in an intron does not increase the mirna expression  but enhances the marker protein rfp expression . this conclusion agrees with a previous report, where a pre-mirna was placed in a 5' intron in the egfp gene  <cit> . our analysis, however, further revealed that the intron enhances the rfp gene expression by two effects. first, intron can directly enhance the protein gene expression . second, the pre-mirna sequence placed in the 3'-utr exerts an inhibitory effect on the protein gene expression, and this effect can be removed with the elimination of the pre-mirna sequence by the intron splicing . these findings justify the inclusion of the intron in our conditional mirna expression construct.

how the pre-mirna placed in the 3'-utr inhibits the rfp gene expression and why intron placement of the pre-mirna eliminates this inhibition remain unknown. one model, as has been proposed  <cit> , suggests that cropping of the pre-mirna from the 3'-utr by drosha and dgcr <dig> complex led to a cleavage in the pri-mirna, resulting in a separation between the 5'-cap and 3'-poly a and the degradation of the residue mrna, thereby reducing the rfp expression. by placing the pre-mirna in an intron, the cropping of the pre-mirna might occur in the spliced intron lariat. alternatively, the cropping of pre-mirna might occur before splicing, but this might not affect splicing  <cit> . in either case, the integrity of the mrna will be protected, thus enhancing the rfp expression.

changes in the rfp expression are consistent with the above models. when the pre-mirna was present in the 3'-utr, the rfp expression was decreased  and this decrease was prevented by inhibition of drosha ; when the pre-mirna was placed in the intron, the rfp expression was enhanced  and inhibition of drosha did not affect the rfp expression . however, at the mrna level, the presence of pre-mirna in the 3'-utr caused only a slight decrease ; and placing the pre-mirna in an intron caused a relatively small increase . these changes are not sufficient to account for the changes in the rfp expression, thus suggesting that protection of mrna from drosha/dgcr <dig> processing is not the only mechanism whereby the intron placement of the pre-mirna increases the rfp expression. from our data, it is clear that most of the enhancing effect of rfp expression is derived from the intrinsic properties of the intron, rather than protecting the mrna from drosha/dgcr <dig> cropping.

our data also show that the presence of a mirna in an intron does not interfere with intron splicing because the level of mature mrna produced from the construct with intron alone was not higher than those from the constructs with intron containing pre-mirna . conversely, intron containing the pre-mirna does not affect the mirna processing because constructs with or without an intron produced similar levels of mirna . thus, intron splicing and mirna processing do not interfere with each other in a mirna-containing intron. this conclusion agrees with a previous study  <cit> . however, our data also revealed that some pre-mirna can dampen the intron-enhanced rfp expression , possibly by interfering with the translation-enhancing effect of the intron. this observation indicates that the levels of the reporter gene expression cannot be used to compare the expression levels of different mirna because the mirnas may affect the reporter gene expression differently. nevertheless, the reporter expression levels may be used as an indicator of the same mirna expression levels in different cell populations, provided that the mirna processing machinery is not saturated.

based on our analysis, several improvements in our construct design is worth noting. first, we use a single promoter to drive both the reporter and the mirna expression. this is advantageous compared with a commonly used design in pol iii-driven shrna constructs, which places a reporter expression cassette on the same linear sequence with the shrna expression cassette  <cit> . because the synthesis of the reporter and the shrna are driven by independent promoters, the reporter expression does not necessarily represent the shrna expression and the degree of silencing. this is especially worrisome in transgenic animals, where a genomic insertion locus may influence different promoters differently. our construct will not have this problem because the expression of the reporter and the mirna is driven by a single promoter. second, the intron-placement of pre-mirna enhances the reporter expression, which improves from constructs that place the mirna directly in the 3' utr of the reporter  <cit>  . third, our placement of the intron in the 3' utr makes our construct easily adaptable if one desires to use other reporters. the rfp in our construct can be easily replaced by any other commonly used reporter. this is advantageous compared with the construct using an in-frame intron within the open reading frame  <cit> , where the reporter cannot be easily replaced.

CONCLUSIONS
we have built a conditional mirna-expression construct that expresses egfp initially, and upon induction by cre recombinase, expresses rfp and a mirna, which mediates efficient silencing of the target gene. this construct can be used to increase the efficiency of making stable cell lines or transgenic animals that stably express mirna for silencing specific genes.

