BACKGROUND
survival at high altitudes is very challenging. nevertheless, many native peoples and animals can thrive under the cold and hypoxic conditions associated with high altitude environments  <cit> . the molecular responses to high-altitude stress have been studied for over a century, but most of the previous studies focused on a single or a few candidate genes in model systems, which has limited our understanding of the molecular basis of adaptation in non-model systems . the recent development of next-generation sequencing  technologies has significantly accelerated the speed of gene discovery and genomics studies, greatly facilitating evolutionary and ecological research on non-model organisms  <cit> . numerous studies on the adaptation of endothermic animals to high altitude have been published; species investigated at the genome scale include the yak   <cit> , tibetan wild boar  <cit> , ground tit  <cit> , snow leopard  <cit>  and tibetan mastiff  <cit> , while transcriptome-scale studies have examined the blind subterranean mole rat  <cit> , deer mice  <cit>  and rufous-collared sparrows  <cit> . these studies resulted in the identification of many genes associated with hypoxia tolerance that have undergone natural selection in high altitude-dwelling species or have different expression patterns in high altitude species between closely related low altitude dwellers. however, there have been few investigations into the mechanisms of high altitude adaptation in poikilothermic animals.

toad-headed sand lizards of the genus phrynocephalus are widespread in the qinghai-tibet plateau   <cit> . they comprise over  <dig> species and represent an important component of low and high-altitude desert ecosystems  <cit> . despite increasing awareness of their ecological importance, the ecological niches and roles of phrynocephalus species in lizard communities of extreme environments are poorly studied. phrynocephalus erythrurus, which typically lives at altitudes of  <dig>  m above sea level  or more, is considered to be the most high altitude-adapted lizard in the world  <cit> . it has a congener, p. putjatia, which is widely distributed across the gobi desert and the semi-desert areas of the qinghai lake basin, and commonly lives at lower altitudes of around  <dig>  m.a.s.l  <cit> . the adaptations of these two phrynocephalus species to their respective habitats are likely to have contributed significantly to species diversification within the genus, making phrynocephalus an ideal system for studying high altitude adaptation in poikilothermic animals. previous investigations have examined differences in the efficiency of atp production in the mitochondria of sand lizard species dwelling at different altitudes, as well as differences in their metabolic activity and physiology  <cit> . however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms that underpin adaptation to life at very high altitudes in this genus. such studies have been hindered by the absence of genomic and transcriptomic resources for these non-model organisms.

here we present a large scale, multi-tissue, multi-individual transcriptome for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia that was derived using rna-seq. this transcriptome was created for two main reasons. first, to develop a molecular resource to support studies on sand lizards and make it available to the scientific community. second, to identify adaptive evolutionary patterns in sand lizards, which will hopefully provide important insights into the genetic basis of high altitude adaptation and speciation. an additional goal of this study was to analyse transcriptomic data for ranid species dwelling at high and low altitudes  <cit> , and to determine whether the evolutionary adaptations to life at high altitude in these cold-blooded organisms were functionally convergent with those seen in the sand lizards.

RESULTS
sequencing and de novo assembly
a total of  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads were generated for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia, respectively. after trimming adapter sequences and removing low-quality sequences, we obtained  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> clean reads, respectively. all of the clean reads were assembled into transcripts using the trinity program and cd-hit was used to cluster transcripts to obtain the final assembly. for p. erythrurus,  <dig>  unigenes were obtained with an n <dig> size of  <dig>  base pairs  and a mean length of  <dig>  bp. for p. putjatia,  <dig>  unigenes were obtained with an n <dig> size of  <dig>  bp and a mean length of  <dig>  bp. partial and complete open reading frames  were predicted using the transdecoder script from the trinity package, with a minimum length of  <dig> amino acids. finally,  <dig>  proteins were translated from the p. erythrurus assembly and  <dig>  proteins from the p. putjatia assembly. these results are summarized in table  <dig>  and the length distribution of all transcripts is shown in fig. 1a.table  <dig> summary of transcriptome data for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia

p. erythrurus
p. putjatia

final assembly

predicted proteins
fig.  <dig> overview of p. erythrurus and p. putjatia assemblies and annotations.  length distribution of assembled transcripts in base pairs.  top-hit species distribution of blastx matches to unigenes.  gene ontology  distributions of unigenes.  cog function classification of unigenes



annotation
the complete set of unigenes from both species was queried against the nr, go, swiss-prot, cog and kegg databases. in total,  <dig>   sequences from p. erythrurus and  <dig>   from p. putjatia yielded at least one significant match to an existing gene model in blastx searches . most of the unigenes that generated hits in the blast searches had relatively low e-values and high levels of similarity:  <dig>  % of the p. erythrurus unigenes and  <dig>  % of those from p. putjatia had e-values below 1e-50; while  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of these two species’ unigenes, respectively, had similarity values of more than  <dig> % . the top hit species for both of the sand lizard datasets were similar. more than half of the top hits from each transcriptome dataset were for genes from anolis carolinensis, and many of the rest were from turtles and birds . this is consistent with a closed phylogenetic relationship among lizards, birds and turtles  <cit> .table  <dig> functional annotation of unigenes

p. erythrurus
p. putjatia
database

annotated

unannotated

total


the go category distributions of the unigenes for both species were highly similar . the three main functional categories in each case were ‘biological process’ , ‘cellular component’ , and ‘molecular function’ . large groups of unigenes from both species  were assigned to all three categories. the cog database was used to define the orthologous functions of the identified unigenes. the distributions of unigene function categories for the two sand lizards were also very similar .

phylogenetic analysis
lizard phylogenetic trees presented in previous publications were generally constructed on the basis of mitochondrial dna sequence data and/or a few nuclear genes . the development of transcriptome sequencing technologies in recent years has made it possible to determine phylogenies more efficiently than using traditional pcr- and est-based methods  <cit> . several publications have demonstrated the utility of transcriptome data for resolving the relationships of spalacidae  <cit> , passerida  <cit> , and the large tetrapod group consisting of turtles, birds and crocodiles  <cit> .

given the limitations of previously reported phylogenetic trees for major lizard families, we sought to construct a more reliable tree to support subsequent analyses. a phylogenomic approach was adopted based on a dataset consisting of our sequence information for the toad-headed lizards p. erythrurus and p. putjatia together with data for five other lizards, three amphibians, and the zebra fish as an outgroup. a phylogenetic tree was constructed on the basis of four-fold degenerate sites among  <dig> single copy genes shared across these  <dig> species . the bootstrap support for all nodes was  <dig> % and the identified phylogenetic relationships were consistent with those reported previously  <cit> . divergence times were estimated for each node, indicating that p. erythrurus and p. putjatia are closely related and diverged around ~ <dig>  mya . this estimated divergence time is similar to that reported previously   <cit>  and the divergence time of each node in the new tree was comparable to that reported at the timetree website  . this result represents the first attempt to characterize the phylogenetic relationships and divergence times of lizards on the basis of transcriptomic data generated by rna-seq. our results provide a reliable phylogenetic tree for lizards and demonstrate the power of rna-seq as a tool for studying phylogeny.fig.  <dig> divergence time and the ratio of ka/ks for the researched species.  divergence time estimates for the major lizard clades generated using mcmctree and the 4-fold degenerate sites. the red dots correspond to calibration points. divergence time estimates  are indicated above the appropriate nodes; blue nodal bars indicate  <dig> % confidence intervals.  the box plot shows the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutations  for p. erythrurus, p. putjatia, r. kukunoris and r. chensinensis branches



hypotheses concerning mechanisms of high altitude adaptation in p. erythrurus
adaptive divergence at the molecular level may be reflected by an increased rate of non-synonymous changes within genes involved in adaptation  <cit> . we used our phylogenetic tree in conjunction with a branch model constructed in the paml software package to determine the ka, ks, and ka/ks values for  <dig>  separate alignments of p. erythrurus and p. putjatia. the results showed that the mean value of ka/ks ratio in p. erythrurus was higher than that in p. putjatia . a total of  <dig> go categories showing accelerated evolutionary rate  were detected in p. erythrurus and  <dig> in p. putjatia . in p. erythrurus, the accelerated categories were mainly linked to three functional groups potentially associated with high altitude adaptation. the first functional group was related to hypoxia tolerance, consisting of the go categories “response to hypoxia” and “response to oxidative stress”. the second functional group was energy metabolism, which was associated with go categories including “mitochondrial transport”, “atp metabolic process”, “lipid transport”, “regulation of lipid metabolic process”, and “steroid metabolic process”. the third functional group was response to uv damage, and included the go categories “response to uv”, “dna damage checkpoint”, “dna integrity checkpoint”, and “double-strand break repair”.fig.  <dig> comparison of ka/ks ratios for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia with respect to different go functional categories. blue dots represent categories with an elevated evolutionary rate along the p. putjatia lineage. red dots represent categories with an elevated evolutionary rate along the p. erythrurus lineage. a full list of the categories is presented in additional file 4: table s2



by combining our results with those of earlier studies, we were able to tentatively infer the mechanisms that underpin adaptation to high altitude in p. erythrurus. the partial pressure of oxygen decreases with increasing altitude, so organisms living at high altitude must be tolerant of chronic hypoxia  <cit> . this tolerance is established in two ways, the first of which is based on increasing the capacity to take up and transport oxygen  <cit> . genes associated with the “response to hypoxia” promote oxygen binding and transport to facilitate the capture of oxygen from the air. in particular, the hif-1α pathway contributes to hypoxia tolerance by activating the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor to promote the formation of new blood and thereby maintain an adequate supply of oxygen  <cit> . the capillary density and blood hemoglobin concentration of the high-altitude lizards are both significantly greater than those of their low-altitude counterparts, further increasing their capacity for oxygen transport  <cit> . the second way of adapting to the low-oxygen conditions associated with high altitudes is to reduce oxygen consumption. this typically involves reducing the rates of metabolic processes and atp demand   <cit> . metabolic suppression entails reducing the mitochondrial rate while maintaining a core temperature high enough to permit survival and supplying enough atp to sustain core physiological functions. this necessitates an increase in mitochondrial efficiency such that more atp and heat are generated while consuming less oxygen. atp production in such cases is largely driven by aerobic respiration, and lipid oxidation accounts for a relatively high proportion of the organism’s energy supply  <cit> . the finding that genes associated with energy metabolism and lipid metabolic process show accelerated divergence in p. erythrurus may thus reflect adaptation to high altitude. in addition to needing an increased capacity for oxygen uptake and transport, and a reduced metabolic rate with increased mitochondrial efficiency, high altitude dwelling organisms must cope with higher levels of uv radiation than their lowland counterparts. uv exposure can damage dna molecules by generating highly reactive chemical intermediates such as oxygen radicals  <cit> . this presents a particularly acute challenge to reptiles, which often rely on basking for thermoregulation  <cit> . this increased level of dna damage appears to have caused accelerated divergence of genes associated with dna damage checking and dna repair in p. erythrurus. while these findings are intriguing, it should be noted that analyses based on go enrichment and computational approaches for detecting genes with accelerated evolutionary rates can yield high false-positive rates. consequently, additional functional and physiological experiments are needed to verify the contributions of the identified genes to high altitude adaptation  <cit> .

detecting candidate genes under positive selection in p. erythrurus
to identify genes that are likely to be important in the high altitude adaptation of p. erythrurus, we used rigorous criteria to identify candidate positively selected genes  in the lineage. previous studies that attempted to detect genes subject to positive selection in specific lineages often had worryingly high false positive rates due to the use of overly loose criteria , so rigorous criteria were employed in this work to obtain more robust results. we initially used the prank  to align the orthologs, which is considered to be more accurate than alternative methods and to provide a lower level of false positives  <cit> . rather than performing simple pairwise comparisons of ka/ks ratios for p. erythrurus and p. putjatia, we used the branch-site likelihood ratio test to generate a list of candidate psgs  <cit> . this approach was shown to have reasonable power and an acceptable false positive rate under a variety of selection schemes. we then manually removed all candidate psgs with potential errors in their alignments to minimize the false discovery rate. after applying these strict criteria,  <dig> candidate high altitude responsive genes remained on the list for p. erythrurus .

the functions of these candidate psgs were consistent with the three functional groups of go categories exhibiting accelerated evolution. two of the candidate psgs, agtrap and ube2d <dig>  are both involved in the response to hypoxia, corresponding to the first functional group of go categories. agtrap encodes proteins that interact with the angiotensin ii type i receptor to negatively regulate angiotensin ii signaling  <cit> , which may partially attenuate hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension  <cit> . ube2d <dig> enables the ubiquitination of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor hif-1α by interacting with the e <dig> ubiquitin-activating enzyme and the e <dig> ubiquitin-protein ligases  <cit> . another two candidate psgs, aopb and ndufb <dig>  can be linked to the second group of go categories, which relate to energy metabolism. ndufb <dig> encodes a component of the mitochondrial membrane respiratory chain  <cit>  while aopb plays a key role in lipid transport  <cit> . finally, ten of the candidate psgs are linked to the repair of dna damage and the third group of go categories. two of these candidate genes  encode components of the replication factor c complex that loads pcna onto dna during the s phase of the cell cycle, and are thus associated with mismatch repair  <cit> . the other  <dig> candidate psgs in this group have roles in the repair of dna double-strand breaks  . the protein products of lig  <dig> and xrcc <dig> combine to form the lig4-xrcc <dig> complex, which ligates the ends of the two dna strands during the final step of dsb repair by non-homologous end-joining  <cit> . the nbn and fam175a encode proteins that transduces the dna damage signal and functions as an effector, both of them could verify the presence of dsbs and recruiting dna repair proteins to the site of dna damage during the early stages of homologous recombination repair . the smc <dig> and mms22l genes encode proteins that promote the recruitment of xrcc <dig> and other rad <dig> paralogs to form the rad <dig> filament, which appears to be a key event driving strand invasion . yy <dig> encodes a protein that plays a key role in binding the intermediate structures  during dna synthesis  <cit> .fig.  <dig> the dna double-strand break repair pathway. candidate psgs along the p. erythrurus lineage are highlighted in blue



we also investigated the amino acid sequence mutations observed in these  <dig> candidate psgs from p. erythrurus lineages, their likely impact on the three-dimensional structures of the corresponding proteins, and the potential relationships between the structural changes and functional properties. unfortunately, there was only one candidate psg  for which can be aligned to a suitable template in the pdb data bank to build a homology model from the phyre <dig> server. the candidate positively selected amino acid mutation  in this modeled sequence is located within a conserved c-terminal domain  . we generated a pseudo-atomic homology model of the mms22l protein, which features seven α-helices connected by six short loops to form a compact functional domain . when we zoomed in the fourth connecting loop which connects the fourth and fifth α-helices, the residue g <dig> is located quite adjcent to the n-termial of the fifth α-helix. since the glycine mutated to a positively charged lysine, it indeed changed the regional electrostatic potential from slightly negative one to the almost entire positive evironment as the comparison of the respective electrostatic potential maps show to us . we speculate that the g1152k substitution altering its affinity for tonsl and the activity of the resulting complex in the recombination-dependent repair of collapsed replication forks  <cit> . in addition, there were  <dig> other candidate psgs whose functions could not be immediately linked to high altitude adaptation on the basis of literature data. further studies will be required to clarify the roles of these genes in high altitude tolerance.fig.  <dig> the structure of mms22l protein sequences. the mms22l protein domain. the green frame represents the large n-terminal domain of mms22l, while the brown frame shows its c-terminal portion. the candidate positively selected site is indicated by blue arrow.  ribbon representation of pseudo-atomic models of the mms22l c-terminal domain in the p. erythrurus and p. putjatia, respectively. from the n-terminus to the c-terminus, it was colored from blue to red in a rainbow way. the zoomed-in picture showed the ball and stick representation of the mutated residues, which located at the loop region.  electrostatic potential map of mms22l c-terminal domain in the p. erythrurus and p. putjatia, respectively. the range of electrostatic surface potential is shown from − <dig> kt/e  to + <dig> kt/e . the local electrostatic potential around the mutated residues was zoomed-in at the bottom panal.



convergent evolution in ectothermic animals adapted to life at high altitudes
convergence is the independent evolution of similar features in different species. its occurrence supports the hypothesis that specific environmental challenges can induce species to evolve in predictable and repeatable ways  <cit> . studies on convergence between native animals living at high altitudes was very important to understanding the mechanisms of adaptation to high altitude. genes associated with three distinct functions  were found to have been subject to adaptive selection in p. erythrurus during its adaptation to life at high altitude. we therefore sought to determine whether adaptation based on these functions is common in poikilothermic organisms living at high altitudes.

one notable early study on high altitude adaptation involved a pair of ranid frog species, the high altitude dwelling rana kukunoris and the low altitude dwelling r. chensinensis  <cit> . we reanalyzed the sequence data for these two species to identify go categories exhibiting accelerated divergence using the protocol developed for use with the toad-headed lizards. r. kukunoris was found to have a higher branch ka/ks ratios than r. chensinensis .  <dig> go categories showing putatively accelerated evolutionary rates  were detected in r. kukunoris, with functional annotations similar to those identified in p. erythrurus. thus, go categories associated with the functions response to hypoxia, energy metabolism, and response to uv damage were all found to exhibit accelerated divergence in the high altitude dwelling r. chensinensis. specifically, the go categories “response to hypoxia” and “response to oxidative stress” were associated with the function of response to hypoxia; the categories “respiratory electron transport chain”, “regulation of lipid metabolic process”, “glycerophospholipid metabolic process” and “lipid biosynthetic process” were associated with energy metabolism; and the categories “response to uv”, “dna integrity checkpoint”, “dna damage checkpoint”, and “single-stranded dna binding” were associated with the function of response to uv damage. we also detected  <dig> candidate psgs along the r. kukunoris lineage , two of which  overlap with candidate psgs for the p. erythrurus lineage. the overlap presumably reflects convergent evolution relating to the response to hypoxia and dna damage repair. this finding is consistent with previous studies that have demonstrated convergent evolution associated with hypoxia adaptation in different high-altitude andean hummingbirds  <cit>  and in tibetan mastiffs and tibetan people  <cit> .

studies on two separate pairs of high- and low-altitude poikilothermic species from the qtp revealed significantly higer ka/ks ratios for high altitude species than for their low altitude counterparts, which suggests that the high altitude species may have experienced adaptive evolution that allows them to cope with their extremely inhospitable environment. however, the elevated ka/ks ratios could also be due to a relaxation of selective pressure; further population genomic analyses will be required to test this alternative hypothesis. we identified three main function groups showing evidence of accelerated evolution, suggesting that genes from these categories may play key roles in adaptation to high altitude life among poikilotherms. while we were writing this article, another paper on high altitude adaptation in lizards was published in which the highland dwelling p. vlangalii was compared to its lowland relative p. przewalskii  <cit> . that work similarly indicated that genes associated with responses to hypoxia and uv damage had undergone adaptive evolution in the high altitude species, which is consistent with our findings and suggests that the mechanisms of adaptation identified for p. erythrurus may be common to many highland-dwelling cold-blooded organisms. to properly test this hypothesis, it will be necessary to perform additional functional and physiological experiments that should be integrated with genomic/transcriptomic analyses of a wider range of high altitude-dwelling poikilothermic species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully sequenced and annotated large-scale, multi-tissue, multi-individual transcriptomes for two ectothermic vertebrate species and enriched the expressed sequence data available for the genus phrynocephalus. the transcriptome data sets reported here represent a valuable resource that will support further expressional and functional studies that will help interested researchers to address ecological and evolutionary questions concerning sand lizards and other lizard species. high altitude adaptation is a complex process that involves numerous genes. we identified several functional groups and genes that may have undergone accelerated evolution and positive selection in the highland-dwelling p. erythrurus and r. kukunoris lineages. similar go categories with accelerated evolutionary rates and candidate positively selected genes were identified in both species. in addition, three main gene functions that might contribute to high altitude adaptation were identified: responses to hypoxia, energy metabolism, and responses to uv damage. we hypothesise that these three functions are generally important in adaptation to high altitude life among poikilotherms. the findings presented herein increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which cold blooded animals adapt to highland life and will support further studies on high altitude adaptation among lizards, other reptiles, and poikilothermic species in general.

