BACKGROUND
many bacteria have evolved the ability to survive long-term environmentally unfavourable conditions by differentiation into dormant resting stages, most commonly referred to as spores or cysts. production of resting stages involves major rearrangements of many fundamental growth and cell-cycle processes and thus represents an important tool for understanding core physiological mechanisms themselves. resting stage differentiation in prokaryotes is phylogenetically diverse and, not surprisingly, there is a large variety in the mechanisms employed  <cit> .

the mechanism of sporulation has been most intensively investigated in gram positive species such as bacillus subtilis which forms endospores in response to unfavourable environmental conditions. these spores arise from an asymmetric cell division event which produces a prespore that becomes engulfed by, matured within, and then released from, the mother cell  <cit> . the complex, multi-layered spore surface which is important for much of the endospore's extraordinary resistance properties is assembled onto the pre-spore surface within the protective compartment of the mother cell  <cit> .

most of the myxobacteria, a group of gram negative soil inhabiting delta proteobacteria, are known to produce spores in response to starvation. the spores of myxococcus xanthus, the best characterized of the myxobacterial species, are produced by remodelling the rod-shaped cell into a sphere in the absence of a cell division event. the resulting spores are resistant to up to 60°c heat, desiccation, uv-irradiation, sonication, detergents and enzymatic digestion  <cit> . thus, the m. xanthus sporulation mechanism is significantly different from that of endospore formation and serves as an important model for alternate prokaryotic differentiation processes.

because m. xanthus is a predatory bacterium whose growth is facilitated by high population density, the cells have evolved to sporulate in mounds to aid in dispersal of groups of cells  <cit> . differentiation into spores is thus coupled to an approximately  <dig> hour starvation-induced multicellular developmental program  <cit>  in which cells are first directed to aggregate into mounds of approximately  <dig> cells, and spore differentiation is induced at the completion of aggregation and only within these mature mounds . the developmental program also includes cells that follow different cell fates including lysis , and formation of peripheral rods which remain outside of the fruiting bodies and do not sporulate  <cit> . thus, sporulation occurs in a minor proportion of the starving cells and is indirectly dependent upon multiple factors necessary to produce fruiting bodies, such as a threshold population density, motility, and a complex cascade of inter- and intra-cellular signals . it is, therefore, difficult to identify processes that are specific for only the core sporulation mechanism. these factors impede analysis of the core sporulation process via global gene or protein expression analyses.

it is also possible, however, to artificially induce spore-like entities in exponentially growing nutrient-rich broth cultures by addition of certain chemical compounds, such as  <dig>  m glycerol  <cit> ,  <dig>  m dimethyl sulfoxide  <cit> , beta-lactam antibiotics, and d-amino-acids  <cit> . in particular, addition of  <dig>  m glycerol induces differentiation of virtually all of the cells in the culture into spores within  <dig> hours  <cit> . glycerol-induced spores are not identical to starvation induced spores; mainly, they have a considerably thinner spore protective layer  <cit> , and they lack certain proteins that have been previously identified in starvation induced spores   <cit> , and the internal poly-phosphate storage protein w  <cit> ). furthermore, in contrast to starvation induced spores in which the genome is duplicated, glycerol-induced spores have a variable genome copies likely due to the replication state of the vegetative cells at the time of glycerol addition  <cit> . importantly, however, glycerol-induced spores share several key features with starvation-induced spores including morphogenesis into spherical entities that are phase bright under light microscopy, resistance to heat and ultrasound treatment, and the ability to germinate into rod-shaped vegetative cells  <cit> . thus, although artificial induction of sporulation seems to have fallen out of favour as a tool  <cit> , it clearly remains a good model system for investigation of the core mechanisms related to differentiation of vegetative rods into resistant, quiescent entities. in particular, because the glycerol-induced sporulation process is synchronized and bypasses the complex signalling pathways required for fruiting body formation, it is an excellent system in which to employ global gene profiling analyses to identify genes essential for the core differentiation process.

in this study, we performed global transcription analysis on a time course of a chemically -induced sporulation process with three goals: 1) to determine whether microarray analysis of the chemically-induced sporulation process can be employed as a useful tool to understand the starvation-induced sporulation process, 2) to obtain an overview of the cellular processes that are regulated during sporulation, and 3) to identify specific genes necessary for the core sporulation process. we report that 22% of the genes represented on the microarray chip were significantly regulated relative to vegetative cells. most of the known sporulation marker genes were significantly upregulated in our data set. analysis of the functional categories of the regulated genes suggested large proportions of the genes involved in energy metabolism, protein synthesis and fate, and in two-component signal transduction are regulated. using the microarray data, we identified a locus of eight genes that are necessary for production of viable spores under both glycerol- and starvation-induced development, which we termed nfsa-g. our data suggest these genes are transcribed together in an operon, and a pnfsa::mcherry fusion demonstrated nfs is expressed within fruiting bodies during starvation induced-development, but not in peripheral rods. consistently, nfs expression is altered in mutants of several key developmental regulators necessary for appropriate expression of sporulation genes.

RESULTS
microarray analysis of glycerol-induced spore formation in myxococcus xanthus
to identify genes that function specifically during m. xanthus sporulation, we performed microarray analysis on a time course of the glycerol induced sporulation process using microarray chips generated by the institute for genomic research  in which of  <dig>  <dig> of the  <dig>  <dig> m. xanthus protein coding genes assigned by jcvi  are represented in triplicate analyzable spots of 70-mer single stranded dna oligomers. microarray analysis was performed using cy™3/5-labelled cdna generated from cells harvested  <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hours after addition of glycerol and was referenced to cdna prepared from vegetatively growing cells just prior to addition of glycerol. genes called significantly regulated were selected by a delta value from sam analysis where the false discovery rate was 5% in combination with a two-fold cut-off criteria in at least one time point.

analysis of the resulting microarray data revealed a total of  <dig>  <dig> significantly regulated genes, corresponding to 22% of the analyzable orfs included on the chip. of these regulated genes,  <dig>  were upregulated and  <dig>  downregulated. to validate the microarray data, the expression patterns of certain up- , down-  and un-regulated  genes were confirmed by real-time pcr . the  <dig> significantly upregulated genes were next grouped into self organizing maps in which genes were clustered based on similar transcriptional expression patterns. our analysis revealed two patterns of expression: genes whose expression peaked either at  <dig>  -  <dig> hour  or at 2- <dig> hours  after induction with glycerol. these results are summarized in heat maps  and in additional file  <dig> 

regulation patterns of known sporulation markers
to determine whether microarray analysis of the glycerol-induced sporulation process could be a useful tool to understand the core sporulation process, we first examined whether genes encoding proteins or activities previously described to be involved in glycerol-induced sporulation displayed the predicted regulation patterns in our microarray data. genes were designated as markers if when mutated they failed to produce glycerol-induced spores, if the respective proteins were shown to be upregulated, or if the respective enzyme activities had been demonstrated as increased during glycerol induced sporulation . five previously described genes yield a significant glycerol-induced sporulation defect when mutated: four different genes coding for proteins that, as members of the enhancer binding protein family, are involved in transcriptional regulation   <cit> , and one gene  encoding for a homolog of a polysaccharide export protein  <cit> . of these genes, only nla <dig> is significantly upregulated in our data . exo  was considered an unreliable spot on the microarray chip, but subsequent real-time pcr analysis confirmed that the gene was indeed upregulated , as has been previously demonstrated using a lacz fusion reporter  <cit> . the remaining three markers which were not significantly regulated  also displayed mutant vegetative growth or motility phenotypes  <cit> , suggesting these genes could be constitutively expressed.

glycerol-induced sporulation markers displaying a mutant sporulation phenotype , encoding proteins identified in glycerol induced spores , or associated with upregulated activities . mxan; gene id; s: starvation induced spores; g: glycerol induced spores; max. reg.: maximum regulation in microarray analysis; nt: not tested; y: yes; n: no; class: i  or ii ; ?: gene unknown. * gene not analyzable on chip but subsequent rt-pcr analysis indicated peak 724-fold regulation at  <dig>  hours after induction . underlined markers displayed a transcriptional regulation pattern consistent with the prediction from the literature.

it has also been previously reported that the spore coat proteins protein s <dig>   <cit>  and protein u   <cit>  can be detected in glycerol induced spores, while protein s <dig> , and a putative phosphate storage protein, protein w   <cit>  are not . consistently, ops and pru, but not prw, were significantly upregulated. in contrast to previous data, however, we observed that tps was also upregulated  <dig> -fold, suggesting proteins <dig> may be post-transcriptionally regulated. protein c has been identified in the spore coat of starvation induced spores, and is absent from glycerol-induced spores; however, the corresponding gene has not yet been identified . finally, of the enzyme activities that have been specifically shown to be upregulated during glycerol induced sporulation, acea and aceb, likely encoding isocitrate lyase  and malate synthase , were highly upregulated . consistent with accumulation of trehalose in glycerol induced spores  <cit> , genes involved in trehalose synthesis,  were all detected in the significantly upregulated genes . finally, a four-fold increase in nadp-coupled isocitrate dehydrogenase  activity was reported increased during glycerol-induced sporulation  <cit> , which is in contrast to the observed down regulation of the corresponding gene . this inconsistency may be caused by post-translational regulation of isocitrate dehydrogenase activity, likely via phosphorylation/dephosphorylation  <cit> . thus, all of the examined glycerol-induced sporulation markers either displayed the predicted regulation patterns  or deviated from the prediction with plausible explanations , suggesting that our global transcriptional profiling analysis yielded data that correlate with empirically derived data. importantly, these correlations suggest that transcriptional regulation patterns can be used to predict functional importance during glycerol sporulation. an important caveat, however, is that in addition to genes whose protein products are subject to post-translational regulation, genes that function under both vegetative and sporulation phases of the life cycle , may be overlooked.

regulation patterns of starvation-induced sporulation markers
an ultimate goal of this study was to generate a tool to understand the core m. xanthus sporulation process. therefore, we next determined whether our global transcriptional profiling of glycerol-induced sporulation could also be correlated to the starvation-induced sporulation program. genes previously demonstrated to be "core" starvation-induced sporulation genes were examined to see if they were significantly upregulated in our data. in the starvation-induced developmental program, induction of sporulation is normally coupled to completion of aggregation. therefore, mutants in many genes that are not specifically involved in the sporulation mechanism  nevertheless produce a sporulation defect  <cit> . we specifically avoided non-core sporulation genes by choosing genes that, when mutated, significantly reduce the production of viable spores but do not appreciably prevent the formation of fruiting bodies ; genes described in table  <dig> were not included here. proteins mspa, mspb, and mspc were previously identified via comparative proteome analysis of spores and vegetative cells  <cit> . in our microarray data, mspa and mspc were upregulated, while mspb was not significantly regulated . genes cbga and fdga encoding a homolog of a bacillus sp. sporulation protein, and a polysaccharide export protein, respectively, are both necessary to form fully resistant spores  <cit>  and are both upregulated in the microarray data. genes acta and actb, both predicted to encode response regulators of the two-component signal transduction family whose function thus far is proposed to be regulation of the level of csga   <cit> , were upregulated in our microarray data. interestingly, both mutants fail to produce glycerol-induced spores . mrpa, encoding a histidine kinase proposed to function as a phosphatase to regulate sporulation through its cognate response regulator  <cit> , is also significantly upregulated. the dev genes, which are exclusively expressed within fruiting bodies and are required for sporulation  <cit> , and aglu which when mutated displays vegetative motility defects but is not necessary to build aggregation centres  <cit> , were both not significantly regulated in our analyses. therefore, the majority  of this list of core sporulation genes were significantly upregulated. these observations suggest that upregulation of genes during glycerol-induced sporulation can be used to predict function during starvation-induced sporulation.

starvation-induced sporulation markers which display a mutant sporulation phenotype without an associated defect in fruiting body formation. mxan: gene id; s: starvation induced spores; g: glycerol induced spores; max. reg.: maximum regulation in microarray analysis; nt: not tested; y: yes; n: no; class: i  or ii . underlined markers displayed a transcriptional regulation pattern consistent with the prediction from the literature;*: müller and higgs, unpublished

out of interest, we also examined the expression profiles of  <dig> genes known to be involved in regulation of the developmental program  but which are not sporulation specific , and  <dig> of these genes were not significantly upregulated under our analysis conditions . among the exceptions were mrpc and frua, encoding two key developmental transcriptional regulators which function early during the starvation-induced developmental program  <cit> . mutants in either mrpc or frua fail to aggregate or sporulate. it has been determined that mrpc induces frua expression  <cit> , acts as an antitoxin to control programmed cell death  <cit> , and together with frua regulates genes expressed late in the developmental program  <cit> . interestingly, we observed that Δmrpc mutants are unable to form glycerol induced spores , hinting that mrpc may also be necessary to induce core sporulation genes. taken together, these data suggest that genes upregulated during glycerol induced sporulation represent good candidates for the core sporulation mechanism and hint that genes involved only in regulation of the developmental program are largely not significantly upregulated.

glycerol-induced sporulation involves major rearrangements in transcription of metabolic and housekeeping genes
to gain insight into the processes that could be upregulated during glycerol-induced sporulation, we examined which categories of genes were significantly regulated. as a general overview, we started with the main role categories assigned during annotation by jcvi which were further amended so that unassigned genes  were assigned to a category, and genes with multiple designations were assigned to one category based on blast analysis  . a detailed analysis of the regulation patterns of gene categories is limited by the current annotation, and some ambiguity and inconsistencies in gene main role assignments, but these analyses nevertheless highlight certain core processes in which large changes in regulation are observed. these analyses suggested that 40%  of the genes assigned to the main role category "energy metabolism" were significantly regulated with a probability that this proportion was obtained from chance of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  . equal proportions  of these regulated genes were significantly over-represented in the up- and down-regulated genes . additionally, 37%  of the genes assigned to the "central intermediary metabolism" category were significantly regulated with equal proportions down- and up-regulated.

further examination of "energy metabolism" subrole categories revealed that 35%  and 30%  of the genes assigned to the tca cycle subcategory were down- and up-regulated, respectively. in addition, 39%  of the genes assigned to the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways were upregulated. interestingly, 41%  of the genes assigned to the "biosynthesis and degradation of polysaccharides" subrole category were upregulated. to integrate these observations, we examined which genes were significantly up- or down-regulated in the context of m. xanthus metabolic pathways. for these analyses, we started with the pathways assigned by the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways database  <cit>  and amended the pathways based on previous literature and data from our analyses . these observations strongly suggest that during glycerol-induced sporulation, m. xanthus cells downregulate large portions of the tca cycle, upregulate the glyoxylate shunt, and upregulate gluconeogenesis. most of the upregulated genes in this pathway fall into the class i category of upregulated genes  suggesting these metabolic arrangements occur early in the glycerol-induced sporulation program. these data are consistent with previous studies of specific enzyme activities  <cit> . the net effect of these metabolic actions would likely be production of precursors to carbohydrate synthesis which is important for two reasons: 1) m. xanthus cells do not grow on carbohydrates  <cit>  and obtain both carbon and energy from amino acids and fatty acids  <cit> , and 2) carbohydrate production increases by 200% during glycerol-induced sporulation in both soluble and insoluble fractions  <cit>  likely corresponding to protective or storage compounds  and spore coat polysaccharides  <cit> , respectively).

consistent with net production of phosphoglucose units, it has been previously demonstrated that the glycerol-induced spore coat consists of 75% carbohydrate containing two-thirds n-acetyl-galactosamine and one-third glucose  <cit>  and that enzyme activities involved in converting fructose biphosphate to udp-n-acetyl-galactosamine are upregulated during sporulation  <cit> . the gene likely to encode the final epimerization reaction  was also significantly upregulated in our data . it is not known how the spore coat is added to the surface of the cell, but good candidates include a highly upregulated cluster of nine genes  some of which share homology to polysaccharide export genes. interestingly, fdga and exo  are in this locus; fdga mutants aggregate but do not sporulate  <cit> , and exo has previously been characterized as a gene necessary for both glycerol and starvation-induced sporulation  <cit> .

we also observed that three different pathways leading to trehalose synthesis were upregulated represented by otsab , trey , and tres . it has previously been demonstrated that otsab can convert glucose 6-p directly into trehalose  <cit> , while trey and trez convert glycogen into trehalose  <cit> . consistent with accumulation of glycogen, a gene encoding a glucose- <dig> phosphate adenyltransferase  which is necessary to convert glucose-1-p to adp-glucose, a precursor to glycogen, is also upregulated. finally, tres could convert glycogen to trehalose and, furthermore, trehalose into maltose  <cit>  suggesting tres may also be necessary during spore germination.

in addition to large rearrangements of metabolic processes, analysis of over-represented functional groups in the significantly regulated genes revealed that the categories "protein synthesis- ribosomal proteins: synthesis and modification"  and "protein fate-protein and peptide secretion and trafficking"  were both over-represented in the downregulated genes . in contrast, the category "protein fate-degradation of proteins, peptides, and glycopeptides" category was significantly over represented  in the upregulated genes. several categories representing cellular processes necessary only in vegetative growth were significantly overrepresented in the downregulated genes including "motility and chemotaxis" , "siderophores" , and "biosynthesis of natural products"  . together, these transcriptional patterns are consistent with down-shift of new protein synthesis and turn over of proteins required in vegetative growth in preparation for spore differentiation and quiescence.

we also examined the proportions of significantly regulated genes involved in regulatory processes . it has been suggested that in contrast to sporulation program in b. subtilus which is regulated primarily by cascades of sigma factor expression, the m. xanthus starvation-induced developmental program is regulated by cascades of signal responsive non-sigma transcriptional regulators  <cit> . in our analyses of glycerol induced sporulation, the "transcription-transcription factors" category was not significantly represented  amongst the regulated genes, although the sigma  <dig> transcription factor , sigb , sigc , as well as two extracytoplasmic function  transcription factors  were significantly upregulated . rpon fell into the class i early upregulated genes, and correlates with the observation that several enhancer binding proteins  are required for glycerol induced sporulation  <cit> ; ebps help rpon form a transcription-competent open promoter complex  <cit> . sigb  fell into the class ii later upregulated genes, consistent with a role in spore maturation rather than spore formation  <cit> . signal responsive "one component" transcriptional regulators  <cit> , mainly lying in the "regulatory functions-dna interactions" category, were significantly under-represented in the regulated genes  . however, we cannot rule out that these genes are constitutively expressed or are not highly regulated at the transcriptional level. examination of the representation of genes involved in signal transduction demonstrated that the "signal transduction-two-component signal transduction " category was over-represented in the upregulated genes  and dispersed in both class i  and class ii  upregulated genes. it is tempting to speculate that tcst systems, which contain protein members that can act as ebps or other transcriptional regulators, play a dominant role in regulation of the core sporulation program. the relatively large family of eukaryotic-like serine/threonine kinase genes , were not significantly represented  in the regulated genes .

the most interesting aspect of spore formation in m. xanthus is the reorganization of the rod-shaped cell to form a spherical spore. control of shape transition is not understood, and none of the genes encoding proteins putatively necessary for the rod shape  are significantly regulated in our analysis, although we have observed that inhibition of the function of the cell cytoskeleton protein mreb prevents glycerol induced spore formation . intriguingly, it was recently demonstrated that peptidoglycan is degraded during glycerol-induced sporulation  <cit> . examination of the microarray data indicated that genes encoding peptidoglycan synthesis enzymes [such as pbp1a , pbp1c , dacb  were significantly upregulated , and we speculate that the cells likely first rearrange peptidoglycan during shape transition from rod to sphere and that peptidoglycan may be subsequently degraded after the spore coat is in place; these hypotheses are currently being investigated in our group.

identification of the nfs cluster necessary for efficient production of viable spores
a third goal of our studies was to identify novel genes which are specifically necessary for the core sporulation process. to this end, we searched the significantly upregulated genes for candidates using the following criteria: genes should be 1) highly upregulated , 2) encode proteins that are predicted to localize to the cell envelope, and 3) encode proteins whose function has not been characterized . these criteria were based on the rationalization that genes highly expressed are usually important structural components and that sporulation involves major rearrangements of the cell surface in a process that is largely uncharacterized in gram negative spore formers. approximately  <dig> genes fit our criteria, including several genes that lay in a single locus of eight consecutive genes  which were encoded in the same orientation . specifically, the microarray data suggested all eight genes shared the same transcriptional pattern and were at least 10-fold upregulated within  <dig>  hours of glycerol induction . the transcriptional pattern of three of these genes  were confirmed by real-time pcr analysis . all eight genes were annotated as hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins . finally, at least six of the eight genes were predicted to encode proteins that reside in the cell envelope .

bioinformatic analysis of the nfs locus. motifs were predicted by smart  <cit> . tm, transmembrane region; tpr, tetratrico peptide repeat domain involved in mediation of protein-protein interactions  <cit> ; fha, fork head-associated domain involved in binding to phospho-threonine containing proteins  <cit> . localization was predicted by cello  <cit> . om: outer membrane; c, cytoplasmic; p, periplasmic. * based on amended start codon positions .

to determine if these genes were indeed necessary for glycerol induced sporulation, we generated a complete in-frame deletion of mxans_3371- <dig> in the dk <dig> wild type background, generating strain ph <dig>  to assay for viable spore production in response to glycerol-induction, we induced both ph <dig> and dk <dig> cultures with glycerol for  <dig> hours, subjected them to heat and sonic disruption, and examined the remaining cells by phase contrast light microscopy. while the wild type culture produced phase bright spherical spores, no spores or cells could be detected in the mutant . consistently, when equivalent proportions of the treated cultures were incubated for  <dig> days on rich media plates, the mutant formed only  <dig> % of the wild type colonies arising from the germinating spores. we could show that this mutant phenotype arose from the deletion of the nfsa-h genes and was not due to a secondary effect because of the following reasons: 1) two additional independently generated mutants bearing the same in-frame deletion displayed identical phenotypes , 2) polar effects would not be observed since the adjacent downstream gene is orientated in the opposite direction  and is not expressed during glycerol induced sporulation as assayed by real-time pcr , and 3) in-frame deletions of each single gene in the locus generated the same mutant phenotype . thus, one or more of the genes in the locus are necessary for glycerol-induced sporulation.

to determine whether the deletion mutant is also perturbed in starvation induced sporulation, the mutant was induced to develop on nutrient-limited cf agar plates. the mutant began to aggregate exactly as wild type and formed similar looking aggregates from 0- <dig> hours . however, by  <dig> hours, the wild type fruiting bodies began to darken with the onset of sporulation, whereas the mutant fruiting bodies failed to darken even after continued incubation for  <dig> hours . after  <dig> hours, harvested cells were subject to heat and sonic disruption, and enumerated using a hemacytometer. while the wild type produced  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> heat and sonication resistant entities, the mutant produced  <dig>  ±  <dig> ×  <dig> entities  which, when examined by phase contrast light microscopy, were non-refractile, slightly misshapen spheres compared to the spherical refractile wild type spores . germination ability was assayed by plating both wild type and mutant on nutrient rich agar, the mutant produced  <dig> ± 34% of wild type germinating spores.

when assayed for development under strict starvation submerged culture conditions, the mutant behaved similarly as on nutrient limited cf plates: mutants cells aggregated with the same timing as wild type, but the fruiting bodies failed to darken . interestingly, under submerged culture conditions, the mutant formed  <dig> ± 12% of wild type heat and sonication resistant spores . however, the non-refractile misshapen mutant entities only germinated at  <dig> ± 16% of wild type levels  . together, these results indicate that one or more of the eight genes in this newly identified locus are specifically necessary for the core sporulation process. we therefore propose that the eight genes in this locus should be designated nfs  a-h.

nfsa-h consist of a single transcriptional unit
the observations that the eight nfs genes are oriented in the same direction and our finding that they share the same glycerol-induced expression pattern suggested that these genes could comprise a single transcriptional unit. careful examination of the gene sequences in this locus strongly suggested that currently annotated start codons for nfsd and nfsf were likely incorrect. in nfsd, the gtg start codon is not preceded by a sequence that could fit to a shine-dalgarno ribosome binding site, whereas an atg codon  <dig> bp downstream  is preceded by an appropriately positioned gccaggagc sequence. in nfsf, the start codon is predicted to be ttg, unlikely in the gc rich m. xanthus, whereas the third codon downstream is an atg .

based on differential gene transcription patterns between the upstream mxan_ <dig> gene and nfsa, a promoter likely exists upstream of nfsa. however, significant intergenic regions could be identified between nfsb and c , nfsc and d , nfse and f , nfsf and g , and nfsg and h . as per the current annotation, we could not identify convincing open reading frames in these intergenic regions. to determine if these genes are co-transcribed, we attempted to pcr amplify these intergenic regions using cdna generated from  <dig> min glycerol-induced cells. pcr products could be detected from all of these intergenic regions except between nfsc and nfsd . control reactions in which wild type genomic dna was used as a template produced the expected pcr product in all reactions; no pcr products could be detected using Δnfsa-g genomic dna or when mock cdna samples in which either the reverse transcriptase or template rna was omitted was used as template. these results suggest two putative promoters in the nfs locus: upstream of nfsa and upstream of nfsd.

to further examine whether these two putative promoters could drive gene expression, we generated pnfsa::mcherry and pnfsd::mcherry fusions in which the  <dig> bp upstream of the first codon of nfsa  and  <dig> bp upstream of nfsd , respectively, were fused to the second codon of the gene encoding the red fluorescent protein, mcherry. these constructs were inserted into the heterologous mx <dig> phage attachment  site in the wildtype dk <dig> genome, resulting in strains ph <dig> and ph <dig>  respectively. as positive and negative controls, we also constructed strains bearing the essentially constitutively active pila promoter  fused to mcherry   and the vector backbone  , respectively. all strains exhibited the wild type glycerol-induced sporulation and starvation-induced development, indicating the respective plasmid insertions did not generate a mutant phenotype . these strains were examined by fluorescence microscopy for mcherry production in vegetative growth conditions and at several time points after induction with glycerol. in the ppila::mcherry strain, fluorescence was detected in vegetative rods and throughout the differentiation process, while in the vector control strain only low level of background autofluorescence was detected . examination of the pnfsa::mcherry strain revealed that fluorescence was not detected in vegetative rods, but began to be detected between  <dig>  to  <dig> hours after induction with glycerol . in contrast, no significant expression could be detected at any of the examined time points in the pnfsd::mcherry strain .

similar results were observed when the cells were induced to develop in response to starvation: specific fluorescence could be detected in the sporulating pnfsa::mcherry strain , while only non-specific fluorescence could be detected in the pnfsd::mcherry strain . these results suggest that a second promoter does not lie in the intergenic region between nfsb and nfsd and that the reverse transcriptase-pcr did not amplify this region perhaps because of interfering secondary structure in the rna or cdna. thus, the nfsabcdefg genes are most likely a single transcriptional unit expressed from a promoter lying within the  <dig> bp upstream from nfsa.

nfs is expressed late during starvation-induced development specifically in sporulating cells
to examine the expression pattern of the nfs mutants during starvation induced development, we next measured the relative mcherry fluorescence of the pnfsa::mcherry, ppila::mcherry and vector control strains by developing the cells in submerged culture in dishes that could be inserted directly into a plate reader and thus measured fluorescence at various times during the developmental program. the ppila::mcherry fusion was detected from  <dig> hours and gradually increased  <dig> -fold at  <dig> hours of development . in contrast, the pnfsa::mcherry fusion began to be detected between 12- <dig> hours of development increasing to  <dig>  times at  <dig> hours. there was a gradual accumulation of autofluorescence in the vector control strain  which may correspond to build up of exopolysaccharides.

two cell types have been observed during the starvation-induced development program in m. xanthus, cells that aggregate into fruiting bodies and then differentiate into spores, and cells that do not aggregate and remain as undifferentiated peripheral rods. to examine whether both cell types expressed the nfs locus, the pnfsa::mcherry, ppila::mcherry and vector control strains were developed for  <dig> hours, fruiting bodies were separated from peripheral rods by low speed centrifugation, and the cells from both fractions were examined by fluorescence microscopy. both peripheral rods and spores fluoresced in the ppila::mcherry strain, while in the pnfsa::mcherry strain, mcherry specific fluorescence could only be detected in spores . together, these results demonstrate that during the starvation induced developmental program, nfs is expressed late in the developmental program and specifically within the sporulating cells.

during the starvation induced developmental program, the expression of many sporulation specific genes is dependent, directly or indirectly, on several key developmental regulators which are necessary for inducing fruiting body formation and coordinating onset of sporulation with completion of aggregation  <cit> . to determine if the nfs locus fits this class of sporulation specific genes, we next analyzed the pnfsa::mcherry expression pattern during starvation-induced development in strains bearing disruptions in key developmental regulators . both frua and csga mutants fail to form fruiting bodies and cannot sporulate  <cit> . pnfsa::mcherry was not expressed in the csga mutant, but surprisingly, was induced earlier in the frua mutant compared to the wild type background . frua is a transcriptional regulator, and these results suggest that frua might, directly or indirectly, initially repress nfs expression. dev mutants aggregate but fail to sporulate and the dev genes are expressed exclusively in fruiting bodies  <cit> . in the dev mutant background, pnfsa::mcherry expression was similar to that in the wild type background from 0- <dig> hours, but subsequently failed to accumulate to wild type levels . finally, like dev mutants, exo mutants aggregate but cannot sporulate, and exo is not expressed in dev mutants  <cit> . in the exo background, pnfsa::mcherry was expressed at slightly higher levels than in wild type but followed a similar induction pattern . these results are consistent with the class of genes that are expressed exclusively in fruiting bodies and dependent on the coordination of sporulation to aggregation.

in summary, our experimental data indicates that the nfs locus is necessary for the core sporulation process based on the following observations: 1) the Δ mutant is compromised in the ability to produce both glycerol- and starvation-induced viable spores, but does not affect formation of starvation-induced fruiting bodies, and has no obvious vegetative defect, 2) the locus is upregulated during both sporulation pathways, and is expressed specifically in the sporulating cell subpopulation during starvation-induced development, and 3) nfs expression during starvation-induced development shares a similar pattern of dependency on key starvation-induced developmental regulators as for other previously described sporulation markers  <cit> .

these genes encode proteins that contain no previously characterized catalytic domains, and it is thus unclear what exact role the proteins play in spore formation. although nfse  has been annotated as "putative adventurous motility protein t", presumably because it shares some sequence similarity with a gene previously shown to be defective in adventurous motility aglt  <cit> , it is not the closest paralog to aglt, and the Δnfsa-h deletion displays no defect in adventurous  motility . bioinformatic analyses suggest that nfsd and nfse contain multiple tetra-tricopeptide repeat  domains which play a role in mediating protein-protein interactions  <cit> , and nfsg contains a forkhead-associated  domain which also mediates protein interactions to phospho-threonine containing proteins  <cit> . nfsa, b, c, and h contain putative signal sequences consistent with export from the cytoplasm, nfse is predicted to be anchored in the outer membrane via a lipid attachment, and nfsd is predicted to encode an amino-terminal transmembrane segment suggesting it is anchored in the inner membrane. furthermore, secondary structure analysis of nfsa and nfsh predicts these proteins are beta-barrels consistent with localization in the outer membrane. blastp analysis indicates that nfsa-h contain orthologs in the myxobacteria species stigmatella aurantiaca  and the synteny of the locus is conserved. all together, these observations, coupled with our experimental data, suggest the nfs proteins are located in the cell envelope and likely form a functional complex which is necessary to produce viable spores. we are currently confirming the localization and further analyzing the function of the individual proteins during both glycerol- and starvation-induced sporulation.

CONCLUSIONS
global transcriptional analysis of artificially-induced spore differentiation in myxococcus xanthus, a gram negative bacterium, was shown to be an excellent model system for the core sporulation program which normally occurs at the culmination of a starvation-induced multicellular developmental program. examination of significantly regulated gene transcriptional patterns provided an overview of sporulation associated rearrangements of metabolic and physiologic processes. from the significantly upregulated gene pool, a locus of hypothetical genes was identified and demonstrated to be essential for the core sporulation process in both the artificial- and starvation-induced developmental program.

