BACKGROUND
computational discovery of motifs in biological sequences is an important challenge. it has in recent years attracted much research interest, resulting in more than a hundred different tools for motif discovery  <cit> . a motif discovery method has three important elements: a motif model that can capture the similarities of a diverse set of binding sites for the same transcription factor, an objective function defining the ranking of potential motifs and a search strategy for parameterisation of the motif model. the first two elements can be given an abstract representation, but should probably be designed to utilize and enhance biologically relevant information. the most commonly used motif models are position weight matrices   <cit> , mismatch strings   <cit>   and iupac strings   <cit>  .

due to the large number of available tools, robust assessment of motif discovery methods becomes important, not only for validation of existing tools, but also for pointing out the most promising directions for future research in the field. a major difficulty is our limited knowledge about the biological mechanisms of gene regulation at a detailed level. although collections of experimentally determined transcription factor binding sites  are available, these collections do have inaccuracies and biases. this has been shown e.g. by fogel et al. in their analysis of the transfac database  <cit> , and by bergman et al. in their study of drosophila gene regulation  <cit> .

a recent article by tompa et al.  <cit>  used experimental collections of tfbs to benchmark a large number of motif discovery tools. this was an important and timely contribution to the field, and it gave good guidance to biologists regarding the level of performance that can be expected with current tools. however, it gave less guidance to the motif discovery field itself. that is, although the study clearly showed a lack of correspondence between in silico predictions and in vivo experiments, the authors were not able to give much guidance with respect to how we can identify the most promising motif discovery approaches. furthermore, due to the inherent complexities of the data set, it was hard to distinguish between clever preprocessing and method parameterization done by the expert user on one hand, and the performance of the motif discovery algorithms themselves on the other hand. we note that one of the few clear differences that can be spotted from the generally low performance values – the relatively high score of weeder – is in the paper partly attributed to judicious choices regarding when to make predictions, while nothing is concluded regarding any superiority of the algorithm itself.

synthetic data sets may avoid many of these problems. by ensuring that high motif discovery performance is at least theoretically possible, the performance differences between tools may be clearer and more consistent, thus giving more guidance to developers. on the other hand, the coupling may be too loose between the synthetic data sets and the biological reality, introducing an artificial bias. this bias may favor specific classes of tools in a way that lacks biological relevance.

the performance of any motif discovery algorithm can be measured by how well it is able to identify true binding sites in a data set. however, the optimal performance that can be achieved will depend upon the complexity of the data set itself. here we use a machine learning perspective to analyse collections of tfbs with known binding site locations, in order to estimate an upper bound to the motif discovery performance that can be expected for a given data set. we formulate the problem as a binary classification problem where all sequence windows corresponding to binding sites are termed positive samples, and all other windows are negative samples. algorithms are given for finding mm, iupac and pwm models with optimal discrimination between positive and negative samples.

we use this approach to analyze the experimentally based benchmark data sets used in the recent assessment of motif discovery tools by tompa et al. we also analyze some synthetic benchmark data sets proposed by pevzner et al.  <cit>  and compare the results to those for the experimental collections. finally we show how the same approach can be used to construct benchmark data sets that combine advantageous properties of both experimentally based and synthetic benchmarks. data sets are ranked according to the best possible discrimination score as computed by our discrimination approach, and this ranking is used to select subsets with specific properties. we present one benchmark suite with data sets that allow good discrimination between positive and negative instances. this suite, the algorithm benchmark, is useful for evaluating algorithms for motif discovery that rely on the common motif models, as we know that it should be possible to achieve good discrimination with these models. we present another benchmark suite for evaluating motif models, the model benchmark. the data sets in this suite are selected so that none of the common motif models are able to discriminate between positive and negative instances in a reliable way. this suite is useful for evaluating novel and more expressive motif models, as we know that it is not possible to achieve good discrimination with the standard models.

RESULTS
we have used the discrimination algorithms described in methods to analyze motif occurrences in both experimentally based and synthetic benchmark data sets. we present an alternative way of constructing benchmark data sets that uses the discrimination algorithms as a key component.

discrimination algorithms
we view a collection of binding sites in a machine learning perspective, where the goal is to find motifs that achieve optimal discrimination of binding sites  from remaining sequence. binding sites are assumed to be of equal length, which may require some alignment and truncation of related sites. sequence windows corresponding to binding sites are considered positive samples, and all other sequence windows are considered negative samples. for each of the three common motif models, mm, iupac and pwm, algorithms have been developed that find the motif that best discriminates between the known positive and negative samples. discrimination is here defined as finding the single motif that best separates true from false sites, and the discrimination score is the nucleotide-level correlation coefficient  for this separation, using formula  <dig> according to tompa et al.  <cit> . details on the problem definition and the individual algorithms are given in methods and in supplementary material .

analysis of existing benchmark data
we used our discrimination approach to analyze the benchmark suite of tompa et al. for each data set we computed the best possible discrimination between binding sites and remaining sequence using the three motif models. as the binding sites are unaligned and of different length within each individual data set, we had to align and possibly truncate each set of binding sites as a pre-processing step using a gapless alignment  <cit> . the resulting set of consensus-aligned, equal-length binding site fragments is representative of what can be discovered by standard motif discovery methods.

the iupac model had the highest average score, followed by pwm and mm. the score differences between models were statistically significant using paired t-test with 95% confidence level. however, the difference between iupac and pwm was very small, and probably not of practical relevance. on the other hand, the score for mm was considerably lower than the others.

although pwms are more expressive than iupac models, iupac scored slightly higher in our tests. pwms were restricted to either contain log-likelihoods based on aligned binding sites, or to contain log-odds values taking negative data into consideration through a markov model. all established pwm-based methods use log-likelihood or log-odds matrices, we therefore see this restriction as a reasonable choice. we tried different pseudo-count values and backgrounds with different markov order, and chose the values that gave best overall score. on the other hand, the algorithms for the iupac and mismatch models take negative data directly into consideration, and this leads to slightly better classification performance under certain conditions.

although the discrimination algorithms return optimal discrimination results on the data they are given, the initial alignment of binding sites in our pre-processing step may be sub-optimal. multiple alignment algorithms are heuristic, and cannot guarantee optimal solutions. also, the criteria for optimality of an alignment may not ensure a motif representation that is optimal for classification. as the benchmarked motif discovery methods do not depend on this initial alignment, they may in some cases achieve a somewhat higher ncc-score than what we estimate in the discrimination case . however, from our experience this is a relatively rare situation, and heuristic ungapped alignment was in general found to perform well on the data sets analyzed here.

cross-validation performance
averaged prediction scores for the three motif models in a leave-one-out cross-validation experiment on the benchmark data sets of tompa et al. is given together with discrimination and motif discovery scores in figure  <dig>  we counted the sum of tp, tn, fp and fn for the test sets across all folds, and calculated the ncc from these accumulated numbers.

as expected, for all models the scores are much lower for cross-validation based prediction than for discrimination. with ncc-scores below  <dig> , it shows that even when most binding sites for a tf are known, it is still difficult to predict the location of unseen related binding sites . using some strategy to avoid overfitting, e.g. adding regularization terms, could improve the prediction performance somewhat. still, this means that even if better objective functions  <cit>  could bridge the gap between unsupervised and supervised motif discovery, it would only amount to a limited increase in prediction accuracy on the tompa benchmark suite. representation of the sequence similarity between related binding sites seems to be a strong limiting factor. we also see that the iupac scores are lower than pwm scores in the cross-validation, confirming that the high iupac scores for the discrimination case were partly due to overfitting. still, the difference in prediction performance between the motif models is very low. our results thus indicate that the choice of motif model should not be a major limiting factor on motif discovery performance on the benchmark suite of tompa et al. this fits well with the observation that weeder, which internally uses the simple mismatch model during motif discovery, is able to outperform the many pwm-based methods on this benchmark.

comparison of motif discovery methods
we also looked at how the total score of a typical motif discovery method would change if data sets were removed according to the discrimination score . we used meme as example, as it is a well-known method with reasonable performance in the assessment by tompa et al. if only the  <dig> data sets with lowest discrimination score had been included in the benchmark suite, the ncc-score for meme would have been just  <dig> , compared to a ncc-score of  <dig>  if only the  <dig> data sets with highest discrimination score were used. the ncc-score for meme on the full benchmark suite was  <dig> . we also wanted to explore the remark by tompa et al. that one reason for the good performance of weeder in the assessment was that the weeder group was conservative about making predictions. the possible level of discrimination is of course only one of several factors that could influence such a decision, but we wanted to see whether canceling predictions based on discrimination scores alone could have increased the score of meme on this benchmark suite. we found that the total score of meme could indeed have been increased slightly by not making any predictions on the data sets with low discrimination score. if no predictions were made on the  <dig> data sets with lowest discrimination scores, the ncc-score of meme on the full benchmark suite would have increased by 30%, from  <dig>  to  <dig> . actually, because of the generally low performance, meme would have gotten higher total scores in the assessment  even if they had submitted blank predictions on all but the  <dig> data sets with highest discrimination scores.

analysis of synthetic benchmark data
synthetic benchmark data sets avoid many of the problems associated with binding site collections, as the precise locations of synthetic binding sites are known and consistent with the location of sequence consensus. furthermore, the level of discrimination that is possible to achieve with a given motif model can be controlled.

the problem with synthetic benchmark data is that the generation of synthetic binding sites must necessarily presuppose a model of sequence variability between related sites, for example in the way instances of a base consensus sequence are "mutated" before being implanted in the benchmark sequences. as different motif discovery methods rely on different models of sequence conservation, this will incur a bias towards methods using models similar to the one used when generating data sets. synthetic benchmark data sets may therefore be suitable for comparing motif discovery methods using the same motif model, but will not give a fair comparison between methods using different motif models.

pevnzer and sze  <cit>  proposed the challenge problem for motif discovery. a data set is constructed by implanting one motif instance in each of  <dig> sequences,  <dig> bp long. in the -fm version , each motif instance is made by mutating  <dig> random positions of a  <dig> bp motif consensus. in the -vm version , each position of the motif consensus is mutated with a probability of 4/ <dig> when forming a motif instance. both versions assume that all positions are equally likely to be mutated, and that every nucleotide is equally likely to be the result of a mutation. these are the same assumptions as in the mismatch model. a slight variation to the challenge problem is proposed in styczynski et al.  <cit> , where experiments are done on data sets with motif instances in only  <dig> out of  <dig> sequences. figure  <dig> shows the discrimination scores of the three common motif models, averaged over  <dig> data sets of  <dig> sequences randomly constructed according to the three variants of the challenge problem. contrary to the results on annotated binding site collections, the mm model gets very competitive discrimination scores on the challenge problem data sets, only slightly lower than pwm scores. the iupac model, which had the highest average discrimination score on the data sets from tompa et al., gets the lowest score on the synthetic data sets. the iupac model is the model that most clearly relies on asymmetries in positional conservation and skewed positional nucleotide distributions, properties not present in these synthetic data sets, although they are assumed to be biologically relevant. both the high empirical scores of the mismatch model, and the low scores of the iupac model, support the intuition that synthetic data sets may introduce a bias towards a presupposed model.

generation of improved benchmark data
based on our analysis of existing benchmark data we propose a new strategy for the generation of benchmark suites. details are given in methods. basically binding site fragments corresponding to known binding sites were extracted from a suitable database  and represented either as real sequences  or markov sequences . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of binding sites. the best sequence-based discrimination between binding sites and remaining sequence was computed, as shown in figure  <dig>  based on the discrimination score two subsets were generated, an algorithm benchmark suite and a model benchmark suite.

the algorithm benchmark suite
for our algorithm benchmark suite we selected all data sets with discrimination score higher than  <dig>  for the real version and higher than  <dig>  for the markov version, giving  <dig> data sets of each version. figure  <dig> compares the distribution of discrimination scores for this suite to the suite by tompa et al., showing that the binding sites are standing out from background much more clearly in our algorithm benchmark suite.

this gives a benchmark suite where we know that it is possible to achieve good discrimination with standard motif models. this suite will therefore mainly evaluate the performance of the algorithms for motif discovery, as lack of performance has to be caused by failure to find optimal motifs, and not the motif model itself.

the model benchmark suite
the field would also gain from more powerful motif models that can better capture the variability between binding sites and discriminate these from background. this will be even more relevant as more examples of related binding sites become available.

for benchmarking of novel powerful motif models, we propose a model benchmark suite with binding sites that are hard to discriminate from background. the construction was similar to the preceding suite, except that for this suite data sets were selected that only allow a low level of discrimination with the common motif models. as powerful models typically require the estimation of more parameters, we also filtered out data sets with few binding sites. we selected  <dig> data sets with at least  <dig> binding sites in each data set, and with discrimination score below  <dig>  for the three common motif models. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the number of binding sites and the maximum discrimination score with common models for each data set in the model benchmark suite. table  <dig> shows the aggregated results in comparison to algorithm benchmark suites. as more experimentally determined binding sites become available in the future, the same methodology could give benchmark suites with a larger number of binding sites per data set, and even lower maximum discrimination scores when using the common models.

for several data sets, some of the substrings marked as binding site also had an exact unannotated duplicate in another sequence. this means that without working with longer motif length, or operating with a motif context based on flanking sequence, it is not possible to achieve perfect discrimination with any model. the distribution of maximum discrimination scores possible with any model without taking such measures, as well as the maximum discrimination possible with the currently common motif models, is given in figure  <dig> 

examples of benchmark runs
we ran meme and weeder on our proposed benchmark suite to indicate the level of motif discovery performance that can be expected. table  <dig> compares the scores of meme and weeder with the discrimination scores of the pwm model. as expected, the de novo motif discovery scores are much lower than the upper bound given by the discrimination score. note that all motif discovery results given on our benchmark suites have been achieved with default parameters. slightly higher scores might be achieved by tweaking of parameters and clever post-processing of results.

the average score of meme is higher on the real algorithm suite than on the remaining real data sets. for weeder this difference was less clear. while meme achieves slightly higher scores on markov version compared to real version of algorithm suite, weeder performs better on the real version. this might possibly be reflecting the different approaches to estimation of background distribution in meme and weeder.

although the performance of both meme and weeder is better than random even with default parameters on real sequences, the performance is still much lower than the bounds given by the discrimination scores, leaving much room for improvement in the development of objective functions and search heuristics for motif discovery.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed discrimination algorithms for the common motif models and used these algorithms both for analyzing an existing benchmark suite and for constructing new benchmark suites. the work has highlighted several important points:

• considering discrimination of known binding sites from background separates the limitations of motif models from the limitations of objective functions and search heuristics. discrimination algorithms for common motif models may be used to evaluate properties of data sets, for instance in a filtering step when constructing benchmark data sets.

• motif discovery is very difficult on the data sets used in the recent benchmark of tompa et al. algorithms reveal large difficulties even with the basic task of discriminating a set of known binding sites from remaining sequence.

• improved benchmark data sets with controlled properties can be constructed from motif databases, e.g. transfac matrix alignments, using discrimination algorithms for filtering. using this approach, we propose one benchmark suite for evaluating the motif discovery process itself with current models, and another benchmark suite with data sets that could profit from more expressive motif models.

our main focus has been on the level of discrimination that is possible for a given data set, and we have used the maximum score across the three models to avoid introducing a bias towards a specific model during the evaluation and filtering of benchmark data sets. still, we have observed some consistent differences between the discrimination power of the common models: the iupac model achieves the highest level of discrimination, slightly above the pwm model, with the mismatch model at a clearly lower level. on the other hand, synthetic benchmark data sets rely on a chosen computational method for generating variability among implanted binding sites. as expected, the motif models that are more compatible with the generation model achieved better discrimination scores on three versions of synthetic data sets that were considered.

a main line of future work would be to increase the size and quality of benchmark data sets by using our proposed methodology on additional binding site collections. also, as time goes, more data of higher quality will be available in the transfac database used in this work as well as in other similar databases. a different line of research would be to use a supervised learning approach as a first step in exploring novel and more expressive motif models. after the power of a new motif model has been determined by its discrimination scores on training sets, and its generalization ability has been determined by its prediction scores on independent test sets, the more complex task of developing efficent methods for de novo discovery could be commenced. supervised learning algorithms could be developed for entirely new models, or for exploring already proposed expressive models such as hmdm  <cit> , bayesian nets  <cit> , markov-model motifs  <cit> , dinucleotide matrices  <cit>  and spsp  <cit> .

