BACKGROUND
after the discovery of rna editing in the kinetoplastid of typanosomes nearly two decades ago  <cit> , similar processes have been observed for a large number of genes from different species. rna editing modifies the information encoded by the genomic dna post-transcriptionally at the rna level  <cit> . most examples of nuclear pre-mrna editing in higher eukaryotes employ adenosine to inosine  conversion which is generally discovered by an adenosine vs. guanosine discrepancy between genomic and cdna sequences because inosine and guanosine both pair with cytidine during cdna synthesis by reverse transcriptase. the conversion is catalyzed by adenosine deaminases acting on rna . the hydrolytic deamination by the enzyme requires a double-stranded rna structure formed by the editing site and an intronic region that contains an "editing site complementary sequence"  motif  <cit> .

in drosophila melanogaster deletions in the only gene  with homology to adars cause severe behavioural abnormalities and neurological symptoms including temperature-sensitive paralysis, uncoordinated movements, and tremors  <cit> . many known target genes of adar in drosophila are involved in fast electrical and chemical neurotransmission, indicating that rna editing by adar in this species may be of particular relevance for nervous system function  <cit> .

synapsins constitute a family of highly conserved proteins of the nerve terminal. in vertebrates they have been shown to bind to synaptic vesicles  and cytoskeletal elements in a phosphorylation-dependent manner  <cit> . the present hypothesis on synapsin function proposes that at rest synapsins attenuate neurotransmitter release by binding svs of the reserve pool to actin filaments of the cytoskeleton. synaptic activity leads to calcium influx and phosphorylation of synapsin by calcium dependent kinases, which reduces its affinity to svs and actin. this causes the release of the svs from the cytoskeleton such that they can move to the active zone for exocytosis. support for this hypothesis has been obtained by in vivo imaging of the redistribution of gfp-labelled synapsin during stimulation  <cit> . however, synapsins have also been proposed to be involved in various other neuronal activities, including neurite elongation, synaptogenesis, synaptic maturation, and synaptic plasticity  <cit> . similar to synapsin null mutant flies, triple knock-out mice, in which all three synapsin genes found in mammals have been inactivated, are viable and fertile but exhibit various behavioural defects. cultured neurons from these mice show differential synaptic alterations at excitatory and inhibitory synapses  <cit> . at the calyx of held synapse in the brainstem of mice it was recently demonstrated that synapsins  <dig> and  <dig> are only required for enhancing vesicle release probability during high frequency stimulation  <cit> . interestingly, a nonsense mutation in the human synapsin-i gene has been identified as the likely cause for a complex behavioural phenotype, displaying epilepsy, learning difficulties, and aggressive behaviour  <cit> .

invertebrate synapsins share with vertebrate synapsins three conserved regions, termed domains a, c, and e  <cit> . in drosophila a single synapsin gene  is found, which has been cloned and molecularly characterized  <cit> . targeted deletion of this gene does not impair basic synaptic structure or function but leads to a variety of defects in complex behaviour, in particular in tasks involving learning and memory  <cit> . when the genomic sequence of the synapsin gene became available  <cit> , we noted a single base substitution  in several independently cloned cdnas within the codons for the a-domain sequence rrfs that conforms to the rrxs phosphorylation motif conserved in all known synapsins  <cit> . we show that this a vs. g discrepancy between genomic and cdna sequences is found in all wild-type strains investigated and during all tested stages of development. the structural requirements for a to i editing by the adar enzyme are fulfilled. since the adar mutants described earlier  <cit>  were not available we created a new deficiency allele of the adar gene and demonstrate that the adar enzyme is required for the observed editing of the conserved kinase recognition motif in domain a of drosophila synapsin. in mammals and in aplysia this motif has been identified as a target site for camp-dependent protein kinase  and calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase i/iv. phosphorylation of aplysia synapsin at this site by pka has been suggested to play a role in regulation of neurotransmitter release  <cit>  and short-term plasticity  <cit> . in developing as well as in adult mammalian neurons phosphorylation by pka regulates the rate of synaptic vesicle recycling  <cit> . here we observe that an undeca-peptide containing the genome-encoded n-terminal sequence of drosophila synapsin is readily phosphorylated by bovine pka, whereas the cdna-encoded undeca-peptide is not efficiently phosphorylated by this enzyme.

RESULTS
examination of the boundaries of intron  <dig> in the drosophila synapsin gene
when the drosophila genome became available from the berkeley drosophila genome project   <cit>  a clear single base discrepancy between the genomic sequence and the previously published sequence of a cdna from a head cdna library  <cit>  was noted. we therefore wanted to test whether the affected region was polymorphic by amplifying and sequencing the corresponding genomic region in five different laboratory wild-type strains. in all cases the genome project sequence was verified  which predicts an open reading frame containing an rrfs motif compatible with the consensus pattern for phosphorylation by pka, -x- . thus it seemed that the pattern rrxs, which is found in the n-terminal a-domain of all known synapsin isoforms of both vertebrates and invertebrates, is also conserved in the drosophila synapsin. the published cdna sequence  <cit> , however, codes for rgfs at this site due to a single a to g transition between genome and cdna . the sequence rgfs is supported by n-terminal edman degradation  of immuno-affinity purified synapsin protein  from drosophila heads  <cit> . thus both, amino acid sequencing and cdna translation suggest that the pka consensus site is modified in all or the majority of synapsin protein from adult drosophila heads. to further investigate this discrepancy between the cloned cdna and genomic sequence, we examined additional cdnas from the five laboratory wild-type strains. the sequences were produced by reverse transcription pcr using poly-a+ mrna as a template . in all five wild-type strains the a to g base substitution that leads to the observed amino acid exchange at the second position in the kinase consensus sequence was detected. since in these experiments rna was isolated from flies of all ages and no unedited cdnas were observed we conclude that synapsin editing does not significantly vary with age of the flies. in two strains, wild-type oregonr and cantons, the a to g substitution was accompanied by two overlapping peaks  of similar height in the sequencing record  within the first triplet of the consensus, leading to an additional replacement of the first arginine of the consensus by glycine presumably in about half the proteins. we thus conclude that extensive editing occurs in this region of the synapsin mrna during rna maturation.

rna editing in newly established wild-type lines
to test whether the high efficiency of rna editing of synapsin pre-mrna might be an adaptation to the laboratory environment during the decade-long maintenance of the stocks under unnatural conditions, we collected wild flies in different regions of central germany. the newly established drosophila melanogaster lines were subjected to the same genomic dna and cdna sequence analysis as above. in all four strains we discovered the same genomic sequence as in our laboratory lines, in agreement with the sequence from the bdgp . sequencing of cdnas from these new lines again showed in all cases that the second arginine in the kinase consensus motif has been changed to a glycine by the same a to g substitution during mrna maturation. the first arginine codon of the kinase recognition site was not affected in these lines.

rna editing is observed in different tissues and at several developmental stages
synapsins are expressed in the entire nervous system of the fly. to find out if rna editing differs in thoracic and abdominal ganglia from that observed in the brain we separated head and thorax/abdomen and repeated the above experiments for each homogenate separately. in both tissues we found the edited cdna . in third instar larvae and in pupae we also found the a to g exchange. only in a fraction which combined cdnas from eggs and first instar larvae, evidence for a non edited form of the mrna could be detected. in this case two overlapping peaks for a and g in the second arginine codon of the kinase site were obtained.

no editing is observed at a second protein kinase a consensus motif of synapsin
within the drosophila synapsin protein there is another potential recognition site for pka/camk-i/iv. this site  lies adjacent to the e-domain of the protein  and is encoded by exon  <dig>  to investigate whether this site is also edited we examined genomic dna and the cdna sequences for this site in two different wild-type strains, the laboratory line wild-type berlin and the newly collected strain bad salzschlirf. here the aga codons for the first and the second arginine were not modified by rna editing .

jump-out mutagenesis of the adar gene using p-element line p{gt1}adar
white-eyed jump-out lines  which had lost the p-element were characterized by pcr and sequencing. line # <dig> suffered a deletion of  <dig> bp confined to intron  <dig>  is homozygous viable and displays no obvious phenotype. line # <dig> contains an insertion of  <dig> bp  in intron  <dig> and is considered a revertant. line # <dig> suffered a deletion of  <dig>  bp including the entire first exon and  <dig> bp of 5' regulatory sequences  and  <dig> bp of the first intron . this latter line is semi-lethal, and homozygous escapers display the temperature-sensitive paralytic phenotype described for adar null mutants  <cit> . we conclude that line # <dig>  represents a new hypomorphic or null allele for the adar gene.

the kinase target motif in the synapsin "a" domain is not edited in the adarsd <dig> mutant
in an additional set of experiments the synapsin cdna sequence of wild type , the homozygous mutant , and the jump-out revertant  was obtained by rt-pcr for the region coding for the kinase target motif . clearly, the discrepancy between genomic and cdna sequence  is abolished only in the mutant, demonstrating that the pre-mrna editing analyzed here depends on the presence of the intact adar gene. in addition, the partial editing of the first arginine codon in the strain canton-s is verified .

the edited form of synapsin is not phosphorylated efficiently by pka
in order to determine likely functional consequences of the editing described here, we performed in-vitro peptide phosphorylation experiments at two different substrate concentrations . the n-terminal synapsin undeca-peptide containing the rrfs pka recognition site encoded by genomic dna is readily phosphorylated by bovine pka, about  <dig> times faster than the positive control peptide , whereas no significant phosphorylation of the peptide containing the cdna-encoded rgfs sequence is observed at the substrate concentrations used. mutation to alanine of the two serines at position  <dig> and  <dig>  which represent possible phosphorylation target amino acids of the genome-encoded n-terminal peptide, abolishes phosphorylation.

discussions and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have investigated a discrepancy between the drosophila synapsin cdna sequence published earlier  <cit>  and the bdgp sequence at the junction of exons  <dig> and  <dig> of the synapsin gene. in all wild-type lines examined we verified the genomic sequence of the genome project  including the normal gt-ag splice consensus. thus it seems unlikely that this region is polymorphic. the genomic sequence encodes the canonical pka recognition motif rrxs in the a-domain of the drosophila synapsin. this motif is also found in all other known synapsins. in vertebrates phosphorylation at this site apparently is involved in the redistribution of the protein during synaptic activity  <cit> . however, in drosophila the genomic sequence reveals a single base pair difference to the published cdna which encodes rgfs at the kinase recognition motif. since the first canonical start codon  of the open reading frame of the drosophila synapsin gene is located downstream of the conserved a domain and the kinase recognition site, we had earlier identified the amino acid sequence of the n-terminus of the  <dig> kda synapsin isoform by edman degradation of the immuno-affinity purified protein  <cit> . this independent data identified an unconventional leucine encoded by ctg as the first amino acid and clearly supported the cdna encoded motif rgfs, strongly suggesting mrna editing at this site.

to verify the cdna sequence and to obtain a semi-quantitative measure of the efficiency of this editing we isolated mrna of embryos/1st instar larvae, 3rd instar larvae, pupae, and heads and bodies of adults of different wild-type lines and the eye colour mutant w <dig> which is frequently used to generate transgenic lines, and directly sequenced rt-pcr products in the region of interest. surprisingly, in all samples except embryos/1st instar larvae we found no trace of the genomic sequence, indicating that more than 90% of the pre-mrna was edited, as estimated from the signal to noise ratio of the sequencing trace. . thus, the only major pool of primary transcripts that escapes editing is found very early in development. in two wild-type laboratory strains  a certain fraction of the mrna apparently was edited in addition at the first arginine codon of the kinase target motif. the resulting sequence ggfs presumably cannot be recognized by kinases.

all a to g discrepancies between genomic and cdna in drosophila investigated so far are due to the activity of the adar enzyme which catalyzes an adenosine-to-inosine conversion  <cit> . expression of the drosophila adar appears to be prominent in the nervous system. interestingly, pre-mrnas of several other proteins of the synaptic release machinery were also identified as a-to-i editing targets, such as synaptotagmin, dunc- <dig>  stoned-b, complexin, and lap  <cit> . for hydrolytic deamination the enzyme needs a partial double-stranded rna to form at the editing region. normally this dsrna is formed between the editing site and a complementary sequence in a neighbouring intron. upon searching for a potential editing site complementary sequence  in the pre-mrna of the synapsin gene of drosophila we analysed  <dig> kb surrounding the kinase target site by a computer program which predicts secondary structures of an rna molecule . in this analysis we detected a potential ecs region lying only  <dig> bp downstream of the edited arginine codon . the ecs has a length of  <dig> bp similar to the size found e.g. in the ecs of the mammalian glutamate receptor glur-b mrna  <cit> . thus the pre-mrna of drosophila synapsin can form a secondary structure containing a double helical stem that could make it a target for adar in the nervous system of drosophila.

the new adar mutant allele isolated here suffered a deletion of the entire first exon and  <dig> bp upstream sequences which presumably contain essential regulatory sequences, but the coding region remains intact. the fact that flies homozygous for this allele show a very similar phenotype to null mutants and are unable to edit the synapsin pre-mrna suggests that this new allele is a severe hypomorph or a null allele.

with the methods used here we were unable to detect unedited mrna in 3rd instar larvae, pupae, and adults. such high rna editing efficiency in adult drosophila has also been observed at four different editing sites of the l-type voltage gated calcium channel ca-alpha 1d  <cit>  and in substrates of the adar <dig> enzyme of mammals  <cit> . possibly, unedited versions of these proteins are required earlier during development. this may also be true for drosophila synapsin as we find unedited mrna in embryos/first instar larvae. like differential splicing, rna editing is extensively used in drosophila to generate protein diversity far beyond what is expected from the number of protein coding genes. another evolutionary advantage of rna editing may be the possibility to adjust the ratio of the abundance of two isoforms to any value between  <dig> and  <dig>  rather than only to the  <dig>  1/ <dig> or  <dig> possible by allelic encoding. so at first sight 100% editing would not seem to make much sense. however, if editing was reduced or absent in only a relatively small subset of neurons, we would not be able to detect this in our experiments. on the other hand, editing of the first arginine codon of the rrfs motif occurred only in two out of nine strains investigated and here only with about 50% efficiency. to show that the modification of the rna sequence is restricted to the conserved n-terminal kinase target motif in the a-domain we also investigated the only other rrxs motif in drosophila synapsin. here no discrepancy between genomic dna and cdna sequences was observed. this result also represents an additional control against possible artefacts. editing at the n-terminus was found in all laboratory strains and also in newly collected flies from different parts of central germany. we conclude that the rna editing described here is not an adaptation of inbred stocks to a laboratory environment that leads to degeneration of many adaptations that develop or are maintained under natural selection pressure.

we finally investigated likely functional consequences of the editing of synapsin described here. we measured the in vitro phosphorylation by bovine pka of n-terminal undeca-peptides containing the edited, the unedited, and, as a negative control, a mutated amino acid sequence. these experiments clearly demonstrate that the peptide containing the genomic rrfs sequence represents an excellent substrate in this assay, while the edited version  is not efficiently phosphorylated. quantitative measurements of michaelis-menten constants should eventually be obtained for intact synapsin isoforms rather than on peptides, but such experiments are beyond the scope of this paper. however, the present in-vitro peptide phosphorylation data strongly suggest that editing also influences phosphorylation of synapsin by pka in vivo. since synapsin knock-out flies are impaired in learning and/or memory  <cit>  we speculate that phosphorylation of drosophila synapsin in the a domain is subject to cell-specific fine regulation by rna editing. this now needs to be tested by appropriate phosphorylation assays using wild-type and transgenic flies with targeted mutations that prevent or simulate synapsin phosphorylation in conjunction with studies on the behavioural impairments of these flies as described for synapsin knock-out animals  <cit> .

