BACKGROUND
sonic hedgehog  is critical for patterning, proliferation, and differentiation in a variety of tissues  <cit> . the effect of shh is transduced by the gli transcription factors  that have distinct and overlapping roles  <cit> .

previous studies on the roles of shh/gli signaling during early avian midbrain development showed that this pathway has a morphogen role in inducing ventral cell types as well as a role in stimulating cell proliferation and survival  <cit> . in this sense, shh appears to be involved in regulation of size and shape in the developing midbrain  <cit> . relatively few studies to date have analyzed the effect of the shh/gli pathway activation on the spatial organization of ne stem cells proliferative activity in the developing midbrain. it is known that the midbrain dv axis is established at a time when the vast majority of midbrain cells corresponds to necs  2–3); afterwards  a change in their adhesive properties lead to a reduction in cell mixing and to a clear structural regionalization into dorsal  and ventral  regions  <cit> . these processes are followed by an intensive proliferative activity in the alar plate  <cit>  leading to a massive expansion of the tectal hemispheres between ed4- <dig> 

the present study aims at analyzing  the effect of the shh/gli pathway activation on the nec proliferation during the neuronogenic period,  its possible influence on the spatial organization of the proliferative activity and  its potential morphogenetic role in the developing chick ot. to accomplish this objective, we first characterized the morphogenetic effect of gain and loss of hedgehog function experiments by means of in ovo local pharmacological treatment with the agonist purmorphamine  or the antagonist cyclopamine   <cit> . this approach was complemented with gain of shh/glia function experiments through electroporation of the dorsal midbrain to create ectopic sources of either shh or glia proteins. electroporation experiments were performed at embryonic days  <dig>  and necs proliferation was analyzed at ed <dig> -  <dig> , the time of maximal proliferating activity  <cit> .

preliminary statistical analyses on mitotic nec  spatial distribution in the developing ot showed that relative frequency histograms of inter-mitotic interval  length do not fit either a homogeneous or a gaussian probability distribution but display a slow exponential decay, i.e., high frequency of short i-mi and low frequency of long i-mi. besides, previous structural analyses on the spatial distribution of shh- and gli-expressing cells in electroporated dorsal midbrains  show that their spatial patterns are difficult to characterize due to their complex distribution, i.e., variability in size and shape of the shh+ and gli+ areas. for that reason, in this study the distribution of the mnecs was analyzed by non-linear methods that have the ability to characterize complex spatial distributions  <cit> .

in this study, several parameters were taken into account to evaluate the effect of shh and glia electroporations:  morpho- and histogenetic changes,  the global mnec density,  the variability of the mnec density along the d-v axis and  the scaling indexes of numerical sequences  representative of the mnecs spatial organization analyzed as a stochastic point process that occurs along the dv axis. the spatial organization was recorded by determining the spatial co-ordinates of every mnec found in d-v sections of the midbrain. three kind of numerical sequences:  binary signals ;  inter-mitotic intervals length signals and  mitotic density signals  area) were derived from the mnecs spatial co-ordinate records and analyzed by means of several standardized non-linear methods of signal analysis . all these methods have proven reliability to analyze the signal complexity and to characterize them as corresponding to different types of stochastic point processes  <cit> .

RESULTS
morphogenetic effect of shh signaling interference
to explore whether disturbance of shh signaling modifies the ot morphogenesis we first analyzed its phenotype after either hedgehog agonist pur or antagonist cyc treatments. figure  <dig> illustrates the effects of gain and loss of functions experiments by means of pharmacological treatments applied locally in ovo over two different temporal windows . figure 1a-c show that ed <dig>  old ot underwent significant changes in size after treatments with cyc or pur applied at ed <dig> . figure 1d-f illustrate the effect produced by treatments performed at ed <dig> and analyzed at ed <dig>  importantly, during both temporal windows shh antagonist produces significant reductions in the ot, dorsal prosencephalon  and optic vesicle  while the shh agonist produces the opposite effects, i.e. larger than usual ot, dorsal prosencephalon and optic vesicles.

in order to specifically analyze the effect of shh signalling on the developing ot, localized electroporation of exogenous shh and glia was performed at the dmb. figure  <dig> shows the result of the electroporation procedure; patches of gfp labeling can be seen distributed over the dmb . histological examination of these gfp+ areas is illustrated in next section. to further evaluate the effectiveness of electroporation and to ascertain whether shh related genes expressions are modified, the expression of ptc <dig>  and pax <dig> was analyzed . we also analyzed the expression of hnf3β, a typical marker of the basal midbrain.

shh electroporated dmbs at ed <dig>  displayed increased expression of ptc <dig>  and downregulation of pax <dig>  in comparison to the control ones confirming that, indeed, cells located at the dorsal midbrain actively respond to shh electroporation.

apart from their differences in size, by ed <dig>  the control ot typically exhibits the incipient dorsal-medial intertectal sulcus  and the roof plate at the bottom of the medial sulcus. the roof plate is identified as the thin neuroepithelial band at the dorsal midline . normally, the tectal roof plate later differentiates into the lamina commissurales . in glia electroporated ot the intertectal sulcus tends to disappear but the roof plate can still be recognized in 100% of the embryos as a thinner dorsal-medial neuroepithelial band . in shh electroporated specimens the intertectal sulcus disappears and the dorsal aspect of both the left and the right hemitectum form a single dorsal dome without any separation between them . in shh electroporated  dmbs the roof plate does not completely disappear; patches of poorly demarcated zones with a roof plate-like organization can be observed along the dorsal midline . in partially ventralized dmb the roof plate disappeared and the dorsal midline can only be identified by the position of the dorsal medial blood plexus . the ventralized region of the dmb changes its typical tectal structure to a histological organization characteristic of the basal region . it is composed of groups of neurons resembling the basal organization. the neurons of these motor-like nuclei originate axon fascicles that emerge through the ventral-lateral aspects of the mb forming one or more supernumerary motor-like nerves as judged by their position . the persistence of the sulcus limitans allows distinguishing the original basal region from the ventralized region of the dmb. an additional sulcus limitans appears between the tectal and the ventralized region of the dmb.

histogenetic and immunocitochemical characterization of the ot developmental stages in shh and glia electroporated dorsal midbrain
the ventralized region of the dmb displays an altered histogenetic organization that can not be characterized within the reference provided by table of developmental stages given in reference  <cit> . for that reason, only observations made in non-ventralized dmbs, i.e., dmbs that retain their tectal character, will be described in this section. figure 5a–f show that by ed4/ <dig> , the ot is at the end of the developmental stage  <dig> . at the beginning of ds <dig>  the ot structure corresponds to a single layered neuroepithelium. between ed2–ed4/ <dig>  the ot evolves through ds1:  the 1st neuronal cohort  appears along the dorsal midline between ed2-ed <dig> and  the 2nd cohort  appears over the entire ot neuroepithelium from ed <dig> -ed <dig> onwards. these latter neurons are born at the ventricular zone , near the inner limiting membrane , and then move to the outermost subpial zone forming an incipient premigratory zone .

2d representation of mnec records along the d-v axis
there were not significant differences amongst the vmb of control, glia and shh electroporation without ventralization . however, both the ventralized region of dmb and the vmb of these specimens  display percentages of ilm area occupied by mnecs significantly higher than the other specimens. it can be noted that the ventralized region of the dmb differs significantly from the tectal region of the same dmb but closely coincide with the values of the vmb.

statistical analyses of signals derived from mnec records
the global mean i-mi length was significantly shorter in glia and shh electroporated  dmb than in the control ot indicating closer positions between neighboring mnecs . there were no significant differences amongst the vmb of these three specimens. the effect of shh was more intense in specimens with partially ventralized dmb . in this case, the mean i-mi length in the tectal region was significantly lower than the value corresponding to the ot of the other three specimens. the value corresponding to the ventralized region of the dmb was higher than that of the tectal regions of the same specimens and approximate to that of the vmb of the same specimens. besides, the vmb of these specimens underwent a significant and remarkable decrease in i-mi length compared with the vmb of the other three specimens.

with regards to the mnec density in the alar plate, glia and shh electroporation results in significant increases of this parameter with respect to the control ot. however, no significant changes were detected amongst the vmbs of the three specimens. in shh electroporated partially ventralized dmb, the mnec density in the tectal region was significantly higher than those of the corresponding regions of the ot of the other three speciments. the ventralized region of the dmb underwent a decrease in mnec with respect to the tectal region of the same specimens and also with respect to the alar plate of shh electroporated specimens without ventralization. interestingly, the mnec density in the ventralized region of the dmb and in the vmb of the same specimens closely coincide. these mnec densities however, differs significantly from the values observed in the vmb of the other three specimens.

consistently with the increase in the global mnec density, the box counting method applied to binary signals revealed a significant increase in the fractal dimension  in glia and shh electroporated  dmb . in specimens with a partially ventralized dmb the value of the fractal dimension also significantly differed from the other three specimens.

all these analyses show that the pattern of values describing the proliferative behavior in the ventralized region of the dmb closely coincides with that of the vmb of the same specimens. these results indicate that the ventralization of the dmb does not only involve a change in its histological organization but also a change in the proliferative behavior of the nec population residing in the ventralized region.

analyses of local variations in mnecs density performed in gliaa electroporated and in shh electroporated without alar plate ventralization, estimated in successive  <dig> μm length windows along the d-v axis, indicate the existence of graded space-dependent differences in response to electroporation along this axis . in fact, the change in mnec density in response to the glia and shh electroporation is maximal near the dorsal midline and from this zone decreases gradually towards the ot-vmb boundary. these analyses also show that the response to shh electroporation is higher than the response to glia electroporation.

non-linear analyses of signals derived from mnec records
power spectral density 
fano factor 
hierarchical clustering analysis 
the values of the scaling indexes estimated in glia and shh electroporated alar plates were significantly higher that the one corresponding to the control ot. besides, coinciding with preceding analyses, the scaling index estimated in the tectal region of the partially ventralized dmb was higher than the value observed in glia and shh  eletroporated alar plates. this analysis confirms that glia and shh electroporations significantly modify the power law that governs the spatial organization of the mnec and that this effect is higher in shh electroporated alar plates, especially in the tectal region of the partially ventralized dmbs.

discussion
morphogenetic effect of shh and gli electroporation
it is known that the midbrain d-v polarity is determined, i.e., irreversibly established, during the early stages , onto a relatively small pool of progenitor ne cells. afterwards, by means of an intensive proliferative activity, these alar- or basal-committed necs give rise to populations of alar-derived or basal-derived neurons, respectively  <cit> . according to previous studies the d-v axis commitment takes place during hh stg <dig>  a brief period of only 5– <dig> hs. given that the biological activity of the shh protein peaks around 20– <dig> h after electroporation and considering that the effect persists for at least  <dig> h it is quite plausible that in our experiments, apart from their mitogenic influence, glia and shh proteins could be actively influencing the midbrain dv patterning. given the short time period along which the axis is determined, small differences in the developmental stage of the embryos  could lead to distinct results. this could explain the existence of two different kinds of results in response to shh electroporation. in our opinion, shh electroporations that did not result in dmb ventralization correspond to embryos whose midbrain d-v axis were already fixed at the time when the shh protein was overexpressed. given that the process of d-v axis determination progresses from the dorsal to the ventral regions, it is plausible that in some cases the overexpression of the shh protein occurs at a time when the axis was already fixed in the dorsal region but it was still plastic in the ventral region of the dmb. this could explain why the partially ventralization in all cases involved only the ventral zone of the alar plate and not the dorsal one.

this study shows that in ovo pharmacological injections of agonist and antagonist of the shh pathways have profound effect on the ot, dorsal forebrain and optic vesicle. while cyclopamine has been shown to inhibit shh signaling in the chick embryo, to our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an in vivo effect of the hedgehog agonist purmorphamine.

the present work shows that, in specimens that did not undergo dmb ventralization, shh and glia proteins display a mitogenic effect, specifically localized at the alar plate. in these specimens, nor glia neither shh modify the proliferative activity at the vmb. this study also shows that, in specimens who’s dmb underwent partial ventralization, the shh protein exerts both a mitogenic and a morphogen-like effect:  the morphogen-like effect is revealed by the change in the developmental fate of the ventral zone of the alar plate. the ventralization of the alar plate does not only involve a change in its evolution towards a basal-like histogenetic process but also a change in the pattern of necs proliferation. in fact, the ventralized zone of the dmb undergoes a decrease in proliferation, with respect to the tectal region of the same and other specimens, and acquired a pattern of proliferation that closely resembles the proliferative behavior of the necs located in the basal plate of the same specimens. this result is consistent with previous reports demonstrating that ectopic shh changed the fate of the mesencephalic alar plate to that of the basal plate, and decrease the massive cell proliferation that normally occurs in the developing tectum  <cit> ;  the mitogenic effect, in these specimens, is revealed by the fact that  the tectal region of the partially ventralized dmb displays a higher proliferation than the corresponding regions of the alar plate of the others specimens and  the ventralized region of the dmb and the vmb display a higher proliferation than the vmb of the other specimens.

shh and glia proteins significantly modify the proliferative behavior of the dmb mnec and this effect is accompanied by a morphogenetic anomaly at the ot dorsal midline. glia and shh electroporation alter the intertectal sulcus formation. it is considered that the medial-dorsal furrow, i.e., the longitudinal groove preceding the intertectal fissure  formation, involves a relative shortening of the dorsal midline -with respect to the lateral region of each hemitectum- due to a relative decrease in the nec proliferation along the dorsal-medial region  <cit> . the dorsal-medial groove formation is a relevant morphogenetic feature of the dmb since it is required for intectectal sulcus formation and subsequent segregation of the right and left tectal hemispheres. this process is normally followed by the differentiation of the lamina commissuralis and the inter-tectal commissure at the bottom of the sulcus. both glia and shh electroporation of the dmb, in different degrees, interfere with this morphogenetic event. in fact, glia electroporation reduces the furrow depth and shh electroporation completely impedes the medial fissure formation leading to a severe failure in the segregation of the right and left tectal hemispheres. in specimens with partially ventralized dmb shh electroporation lead to a complete absence of the roof plate.

it is interesting that the pharmacological treatment with the shh agonist purmorphamine also produces a lengthening of the ot dorsal midline resulting in an abnormally exaggerated dorsal convexity .

statistical analyses of the effect of shh/glia pathway on the ne cell proliferation. a graded responsiveness to glia and shh electroporation
the above-described structural anomaly is accompanied by alterations in several quantitative parameters of proliferation activity. in specimens with non-ventralized dmb, the increase in mnec density takes place specifically at the ot; the mnec density at the vmb remains unchanged.

it is interesting that the effect of glia and shh electroporations is not homogeneous over the entire alar plate. analyses of local variations in mnec density performed along the d-v axis showed that the effect of glia and shh elecroporations on this parameter is space-dependent. in both cases the increase in mnec density is maximal near the dorsal midline and, from this zone, the density decreases down to the ot-dmb boundary where the difference completely disappears. this boundary is easily recognizable by the persistence of the sulculs limitans and by their histological differences. this result suggests the existence of a d-v gradient in the sensitivity  of the nec to proliferate in response to the glia or shh proteins.

the multiple roles of shh signaling during the development of cns depend on the region, timing, and concentration of shh expression  <cit> . for instance, it has been shown that the shh expression level in the dorsal telencephalon is extremely low as compared with that in the ventral telencephalon. the ‘high level’ of endogenous shh expressed in the telencephalic medial ganglionic eminence is important for ventral patterning and differentiation of gabaergic interneurons. the ‘low level’ of endogenous shh in the dorsal telencephalon plays important roles in the proliferation, differentiation, and positioning of cortical neurons through fine-tuning of cell cycle kinetics  <cit> .

non-linear analyses
the signals derived from the mnec records are considered as realizations of stochastic point processes. they were mathematically analyzed to determine whether they correspond to non-correlated stochastic processes  or correspond to correlated stochastic processes with memory. these analyses consistently show that both shh and glia electroporations modify the scaling indexes of the signals indicating changes in the proliferation dynamics and/or the spatial organization of mnecs.

the values of the index of space filling property estimated by the box counting method significantly differ comparing normal versus electroporated dmbs. the change in the scaling index β estimated by the psd of the mnec density signal indicates that shh and glia electroporations change the spatial arrangement of mnecs. in fact, the significant increase in the value of β observed in glia and shh electroporated dmb indicates that these signals display a higher correlation than those obtained from the controls dmbs. the signals obtained from shh and glia treated specimens behave as stationary correlated stochastic processes with memory or space-dependency being the correlation higher in the shh treated specimens than in the glia treated ones. these results reveal changes in the spatial organization of the mnecs and suggest that the increase in concentration of exogenous shh and glia proteins have a synchronizing influence on the necs proliferation.

the change in the scaling index α estimated by the ff analyses of the binary signals also reveals differences between controls and shh treated specimens. in fact, the values of α ≈  <dig>  that characterize the signals recorded from control specimens correspond to homogeneous poisson-like processes. by contrast, the values of α >  <dig>  estimated from the binary signals obtained from shh treated midbrains reveal that they behave as correlated stochastic point process with self-similarity . the ff algorithm was not able to reveal significant differences between controls and glia treated midbrains. it is interesting that these analyses reveal an even higher correlating influence of shh on mnec density signals derived from specimens with partially ventralized dmb.

with regards to the hca, both the glia and the shh electroporations increase the slope of the log-log plot of the number of clusters as a function of the inter-cluster interval length; this increase is higher in shh treated specimens. it is interesting to spatially interpret the increase in the slope observed in this analysis. the increase in the scaling index takes place over a range of scales ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> μm. it must be noted that at ed <dig>  only 22% of the ilm area is occupied by mnecs and that glia and shh increase that percentage to only 26% and 29%, respectively. this implies that, normally, there is a large area of the ilm, i.e. around 80% of the total area, occupied by interphasic cells. given that small clusters of mnecs are mainly separated by short inter-cluster intervals and that large clusters are separated by long inter-cluster intervals, the addition of “new” mnecs produced by shh should mainly occur, by chance, at the longer intervals. surprisingly, the increase in the slope observed over the range of scales  <dig> to  <dig> μm reveals that the intercalation of additional mnecs does not takes place at random but, preferentially, at the short intervals, i.e. between or within the smaller clusters.

it must be mentioned that the smallest distance between two adjacent mnecs equals the mean cell diameter . thus, i-mi or inter-cluster intervals smaller that  <dig> μm corresponds to adjacent mnec that are partially overlapped within the  <dig> μm thick histological section. figure  <dig> shows how these mnec are partially overlapped with respect to the line  along which the i-mi intervals are measured. thus, most of the additional mnec produced by glia or shh electroporation appeared adjacent to another mnec. considering that the increase in the mnec density and the intercalation of additional mnecs occurs preferentially between or within the smaller clusters  <cit> , it is likely that the proliferative effect of the shh pathway preferentially takes places at zones where mnec are involved in symmetrical divisions and neuroepithelial tangential expansion.

the shh effect is quantitatively higher than the glia effect. values corresponding to glia treated midbrains were consistently intermediate between those corresponding to controls and shh treated midbrains. the fact that shh more efficiently stimulate nec proliferation and installs a higher coordination on the proliferative activity suggests that shh may have other effectors besides glia. of note, our previous studies suggested a non-canonical role of shh modulating egf mitogenic responsiveness when we showed that this factor regulates the expression of egfr in neural stem cells in the dorsal brain  <cit> . at this point we cannot rule out a crosstalk with other important mediators of ot growth such as bmps and canonical wnt signaling.

on the role of shh and gli during the tectal corticogenesis
shh acts as a morphogen in the ventral patterning of the cns  <cit> . a high-ventral to low-dorsal gradient of shh from the notochord and amplified by the floorplate controls the spatial organization of the different neuronal type determination in the spinal cord, hindbrain and midbrain basal plates  <cit> . shh, secreted by the prechordal mesoderm, also participates in the patterning of the ventral diencephalon, the medial region of the forebrain  <cit> . the gli transcription factors, downstream effectors of shh signaling, are also involved in this spatially organized process of shh signaling  <cit> .

apart from its role in the ventral regions of the cns, the shh pathway also has an important histogenetic function by regulating neuronogenesis in the associative areas derived from the alar plates of the brain  <cit> . early differentiated purkinje neurons release shh and stimulate granule neurons progenitors to proliferate  <cit> . in this way a macroneuron population regulates the number of associative microneurons and then the amount of afferent axons onto its own dendritic tree.

hedgehog signaling is known to accelerate progression through the cell cycle in many model systems. shh is involved in development of the dorsal neocortex, diencephalon and midbrain  <cit> . a shh-dependent signaling relay has been proposed to regulate proliferation of dorsal neuronal populations in the diencephalon and midbrain  <cit> . of interest, several hedgehog-binding factors  and hedgehog effectors  are expressed in the developing chicken dorsal midbrain  <cit> . these expression patterns thus provide a basis for understanding recent reports that implicate hedgehog signaling in the regulation of dmb structures  <cit> . these data, together with the context provided by a novel table of ot histogenetic developmental stages  <cit> , suggest that shh and gli may regulate neuronogenesis in the ot by a mechanisms similar to that found in the cerebellum between the purkinje neurons and the granule neurons; in this case between the efferent macroneurons corresponding to the 2nd neuronal cohort  and the associative microneurons derived from the 3rd cohort of neurons . in fact, by ed <dig>  at the beginning of the ds <dig>  the tectal wall is a single layered neuroepithelium and displays a mnec density of ≈  <dig>  mnec/ <dig> μm <dig>  between ed3- ed <dig>  the newborn neurons – the future large efferent neurons of the sgc– can be seen intermingled with the ne cells bodies. by the end of the ds <dig>  the earliest differentiating macroneurons form a pmz immediately overlying the nec layer; at this moment a two-fold increase in the mnec density can be detected at the vz. afterwards, between ed <dig>  - ed <dig> , the macroneurons leave the pmz and the mnec density decreases abruptly until the end of the proliferating phase.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that, apart from its critical developmental roles in the vmb patterning, shh also has a significant influence on cell proliferation and morpho- and histogenesis in the dorsal midbrain. in fact, glia and shh electroporations produce several significant changes in the developing ot. misexpressions of both proteins interfere with the formation of the intertectal fissure located along the dorsal midline and modify the density of mitotic ne cells measured along the dv axis. there is a gradient in the responsiveness of necs to the mitogenic effect of shh and glia. in fact, this effect is maximal near the dorsal regions and decrease towards the ot-vmb boundary.

in addition, shh and glia produce significant changes in the spatial organization of mnecs. the scaling indexes of the signals derived from the mnecs records significantly change from values corresponding to stochastic process with poor correlation to highly correlated stochastic process with long memory. the increases observed in the values of β and α reveal that both glia and shh install higher correlations or space-dependencies between the values composing the signals representing the mnec distribution.

furthermore, the changes in the slope of log-log plots of the number of clusters as a function of the inter-cluster intervals built from the dendrograms obtained by the hierarchical clustering analyses indicate the existence of a power law relationship between “number of clusters” and “inter-cluster interval length” that significantly increases under the glia and shh effect.

the extent to which shh regulates the size of a developing cns area seems to depend upon the developmental context -developmental stage and position within a spatial reference axis- and the level at which the hedgehog signaling cascade is perturbed. our study illustrates that between ed <dig>  – ed <dig> the ot is still growing and malleable and shh/glia signaling significantly modifies ne cell proliferation and also influences its spatial organization. these changes, in turn, have profound effects on the ot morphogenesis. our observations provide a first explanation for the apparent discrepancies found in the literature regarding the role of shh pathway in midbrain growth. these differences might be due to divergences in the time points chosen for the experiments or the level and extent of ectopic shh expression/pathway activation. in fact, our gain of function studies does not support a simple morphogen gradient action of shh. taken together the findings presented in this paper suggest that the size and shape of the developing midbrain are dependent on dual actions of shh, influencing both morphogenetic and mitogenic events. considering the multifunctional uses of the shh signaling pathway, further understanding of how the levels and duration of hedgehog signaling are modulated by recipient cells is required.

finally, these findings complement our previous studies in zebra fish and mice and suggest that the mitogenic activity of shh is likely conserved between teleosts, birds and mammals  <cit> .

