BACKGROUND
wallerian degeneration, the characteristic degeneration sequence of nerve fibres separated from their cell bodies, was described by waller in  <dig>  <cit> . following various forms of axon injury this rapid degeneration process begins with degradation of axoplasm and axolemma accompanied by development of axonal and myelin debris that is subsequently removed by schwann cells and invading macrophages. in recent years it became apparent that wallerian degeneration is initiated by an active process intrinsic to the axon that shares some principles with apoptosis  <cit> . these discoveries were firmly established by studies on the slow wallerian degeneration  mutant mouse, in which this active process seems to be turned off. accordingly, this mutant shows a tenfold delay in wallerian degeneration and synapse breakdown after experimental nerve injury  <cit> . the delay of wallerian degeneration is an intrinsic property of the axon suggesting that glial cell and macrophage changes are secondary events  <cit> . the underlying trait is carried by the autosomal dominant mutation wlds that arose by spontaneous mutation  <cit> . genetic analysis has shown that the wlds mutation on mouse chromosome  <dig> comprises a stable 85-kb tandem triplication  <cit>  encoding the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids of the multiubiquitination factor ube4b fused in frame to the nuclear nad producing enzyme nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase  <dig> . correspondingly, wlds mice express a novel chimeric protein  in neuronal nuclei that has full nmnat  <dig> activity but seemingly no ube4b function since the expressed n-terminus lacks ability for multi-ubiquitination within the ubiquitin-proteasome system   <cit> , the molecular machinery responsible for a major pathway of cellular protein catabolism. either only one or both parts of the nuclear wlds protein could be responsible for the phenotype through a nuclear process that has an indirect effect on the axon although recent results foster that the wlds mechanism is likely to involve a gain of function of nad synthesis  <cit> . however, inhibition of a specific step of the ubiquitin proteasome system or another modifying role of the n-terminal domain of the wlds protein remains a possibility  <cit> .

from a clinical point of view not only traumatic disorders such as nerve, spinal cord or head injury result in wallerian degeneration  <cit>  but it is now broadly accepted that wallerian degeneration is mechanistically related to axon loss in many neurodegenerative disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, charcot-marie-tooth disease, toxic neuropathy, multiple sclerosis, and possibly alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease  <cit> . protection from neurodegenerative disorders by wlds is currently under intense investigation. the neuroprotective mutation alleviates diverse pns axon disorders, including dysmyelination and dying back neuropathy in p0-/- mutants  <cit> , motor neuropathy in pmn mutants  <cit>  and axon degeneration in vincristine and taxol toxicity  <cit> . more recently wlds was reported to attenuate pathology in acute cns lesions caused by stroke  <cit> , parkinson's disease  <cit> , and in gracile axonal dystrophy  mice, a cns axonal spheroid pathology  <cit> . a better understanding of the biological mechanism of delayed axon degeneration in neurological diseases would help to develop therapeutic methods to target axon degeneration.

despite research extending over more than  <dig> years and its frequent use as tool to detect interneuronal connections in the cns since the time of cajal, fundamental issues of wallerian degeneration remain unresolved and controversial even on a purely morphological level. among these is the spatiotemporal pattern of wallerian degeneration along the separated nerve stump. understanding the exact pattern of spread should provide additional insights into the mechanisms of axon death and may indicate strategies to alter wallerian degeneration in neurological disease. shortly after the pioneering investigations of waller, and in the following decades, there has been much debate as to whether degeneration occurs in an anterograde direction, a retrograde direction or simultaneously along the separated nerve stump axons .

the controversy over the directionality of wallerian degeneration has arisen partly because appropriate methods to follow axons over considerable distances did not exist until recently but also because the course of wallerian degeneration varies with many experimental factors. thus, spatiotemporal evolution of wallerian degeneration depends on the laboratory animals used  <cit> , on the age of the animals  <cit> , on the neuroanatomical locus of study   <cit> , on the type of fibre analyzed   <cit> , on the type of lesion   <cit> , on the length of the remaining distal nerve stump  <cit> , on the criteria used for identification of fibre degeneration   <cit> , on environmental factors   <cit>  and many more. for example, in more modern experimentation from the last decades, lubinska  <cit>  demonstrated with the help of the teased fibre technique on myelinated fibres of the rat phrenic nerve that axonal breakdown into myelin ovoids spreads anterogradely along axons separated from their cell bodies at velocities correlated with fibre diameter and internodal length. george and griffin  <cit>  also found anterograde spread of axonal disintegration along dorsal columns of the rat following l4l5l <dig> radiculotomy. contrary to these views, lunn and colleagues  <cit>  showed by means of silver-stained wholemount preparations from the peripheral nerve stump that degeneration after crushing proceeds in a retrograde direction. they also proposed a retrograde progression after sectioning, freezing or ligaturing, although this was less clear because degeneration was more complete at the time-point sampled. electrophysiological approaches suggested that the spread of failure of conduction in degenerating mammalian nerves runs from proximal to distal after nerve transection  <cit> . in cell culture studies using dorsal root ganglions  explants membrane beading, blebbing, fragmentation and annexin v staining progressed along interrupted neurites in an anterograde direction with a rate comparable to that of slow axonal transport  <cit> . taking secondary changes after axon disintegration into consideration, bendszus and colleagues  <cit>  tracked an anterograde spatiotemporal course of macrophage infiltration after acute peripheral nerve injury in rats. while most of the above mentioned investigators concluded a progressive nature of wallerian degeneration from the appearance of degeneration gradients along injured nerves other authors did not observe any evidence for an anterograde or retrograde pattern of axonal degeneration  <cit> .

in view of the contradictions and anomalies in the previous literature, we have reassessed the directionality of wallerian degeneration using a recently introduced technique to visualize individual fluorescent axons over cm-long distances during degeneration  <cit> . this was made possible by using nerves from transgenic mice expressing yellow fluorescent protein  in representative subsets of axons, which presents a simplified image of peripheral nerve  <cit> . no method existed until recently to follow up individual axons undergoing wallerian degeneration over a considerable length. here we compared the progression of wallerian degeneration along single axons traced over lengths of approximately  <dig>  cm. specifically, we have tested a key prediction of all progressive models: that it should be possible to image axons degenerated at one end but not at the other. we detected such axons and showed that wallerian degeneration in wild-type peripheral nerve is a rapid, asynchronous, progressive and wave-like process that can change its orientation depending on the lesion type.

to our knowledge there have been no reports about the spatiotemporal pattern of the much-delayed axon degeneration in peripheral wlds nerves that could yield important clues for understanding classic wallerian degeneration. therefore, we also report a detailed characterisation of injury-induced axon degeneration in slow wallerian degeneration mutant mice in order to determine whether axons degenerate with a similar spatial evolution to that in wild-type mice, but in "slow motion", or whether the process is fundamentally distinct. we report a series of differences between axon degeneration in wild-type and wlds mice, suggesting that irreversible injury in axons where wallerian degeneration is blocked eventually leads to a different pathway of degeneration.

RESULTS
yfp labelled wild-type axons fragment abruptly and asynchronously after a latent phase of approximately 36– <dig> h
in preliminary experiments we used conventional light and electron microscopy to investigate whether wallerian degeneration is progressive in wild-type mouse peripheral nerves. we were never able to find any significant gradients of degeneration along injured nerves that were processed with these traditional methods . we then looked for signs of progression in localised observations of degenerating yfp-h nerves because fragmentation of yfp-labelled axons from these mice corresponds to granular disintegration of axoplasm as well as myelin ovoid formation and yfp positive axons represent the whole myelinated axon population  <cit> . axonal fragmentation was first detected at both the proximal and distal ends of the distal nerve stump  <dig> h after transection  and  <dig> h after crush injury .  <dig> h after transection  and  <dig> h following crush lesion  the majority of axons in both locations were fragmented by assessment with conventional fluorescence microscopy. by direct comparison of the separate images of proximal and distal sites in the distal nerve stumps excised at all further time points no apparent difference was visible in the proportion of fragmented axons .

wallerian degeneration in wild-type nerves progresses anterogradely after nerve transection and retrogradely after nerve crush
the failure to observe any gradient of degeneration in the above experiment does not mean that wallerian degeneration is not progressive. it could propagate so rapidly that it was not detectable by this method, or a gradient might not be detectable because of the considerable statistical noise of the highly asynchronous process. in order to investigate these possibilities we turned to confocal tracing of individual axons in long wholemount yfp-h nerve segments. at  <dig> h after transection we found  <dig>  % of fluorescent axons with extensive proximal fragmentation and intact distal regions indicating an anterograde gradient of wallerian degeneration in these axons . around  <dig> h the proportion of distal axon stumps degenerated at their proximal but not distal ends peaked at  <dig> %. an example is presented in fig.  <dig>  of the remaining axons,  <dig>  % were intact and  <dig>  % were entirely fragmented without an apparent gradient.  <dig> h after cut injury the proportion of partially fragmented axons decreased to  <dig>  % and after  <dig> h we only found axons that were fragmented over the whole length. in summary, at all investigated time points partially degenerated axons  always exhibited an anterograde spread of wallerian degeneration after nerve transection.

in contrast, all partially fragmented axons after crush injury at all investigated timepoints were fragmented in distal tibial nerve but not at the proximal end of the distal stump . once again, only a small minority  could be detected in this state at any one time. partially fragmented axons first appeared at  <dig> h  and the proportion peaked at  <dig> h . a representative example is shown in fig.  <dig>  the remaining  <dig>  % of yfp labelled axons at  <dig> h was entirely fragmented without an apparent gradient. at all earlier investigated time points axons with a retrograde gradient of fragmentation were also observed but in lower proportions and after  <dig> h we only found axons that were fragmented over the whole length.

summarising all these quantification results of cut and crush lesions at time points where partially fragmented fibres were observed, on average  <dig>  % of all axons were either completely intact or fragmented and  <dig>  % showed a gradient of wallerian degeneration, whose orientation depended on the lesion type.

a wave of axonal fragmentation propagates rapidly along individual wild-type axons and the axon population degenerates asynchronously
to study further the gradients of axonal fragmentation both after cut and crush injury  we quantified the number of axonal breaks along partially and totally fragmented axons. firstly, this was a way to distinguish between a locally restricted wave of fragmentation such that entirely intact lengths of axon suddenly change into entirely fragmented lengths, and a more gradual fragmentation process that would result in a few interruptions that become more frequent further along the axon. secondly, by this approach we tried to get insight on the question of whether axons assigned into the group "entirely fragmented" continue to break into smaller fragments leading to a gradient of fragment size along the nerve.

concerning the first question we found that wallerian degeneration progresses as a wave, with the wave front defining the point to which fragmentation had spread along the axon. in partially fragmented axons separated from the cell body by transection or proximally compressed by crush lesion, axon regions with no features of degeneration abruptly change into segment lengths with marked breakdown within a transition zone of less than one millimeter . a short region of intact axon immediately ahead of the wavefront becomes increasingly vacuolated as the wave front approaches, and a newly formed break appears as though a vacuole has filled the entire axon diameter, completely interrupting it . the degeneration wave sequentially affects adjacent regions of the fibre and different lesions cause this wave to progress in different directions.

in order to determine whether the anterograde and retrograde fragmentation wave runs at the same velocity along the axon we next estimated the rate of progression. as the average axon length measured was  <dig> mm and the majority of axons must have entirely fragmented between  <dig> h and  <dig> h after transection  , the minimal velocity for the degeneration wave is  <dig> mm/h. analogously, after crush lesion the calculated velocities of the retrograde degeneration wave is also at least  <dig> mm/h , as the majority of axons fragmented between  <dig> h and  <dig> h after the lesion . thus, the rates of wallerian degeneration progression are similar or possibly even equal in these opposite directions, but with a faster initiation of the fragmentation wave after transection.

we then tested whether our crush lesions interrupted axon continuity as in nerve transection, because a failure to do so could underlie the different direction of propagation in crushed nerves . in fluorescent wholemount preparations of crushed nerve segments we found continuous longitudinal yfp signals across the crush site, and in teased fibre bundles of osmificated nerve segments after crush injury, a majority of fibres remained continuous across the crush site . these data are consistent with the axonal membrane remaining intact after  <dig> sec nerve crush, unlike that of a transected nerve.

the observation that at early time points after cut and crush injury some axons had already fragmented or started to fragment while the majority is still intact  together with the variable localisation of the fragmentation wave front along different axons at one time point  indicates that wallerian degeneration is asynchronous among the population of axons in a peripheral nerve. this probably reflects both differences in the timing of onset of degeneration and varying velocities of propagation in axons of different thickness that cannot be distinguished by our imaging approaches. furthermore, the observation that the transition between intact and degenerated regions can be 19– <dig> mm distal to the crush within  <dig> h rules out regeneration as a possible source of error.

quantification of axonal breaks along entirely fragmented axons  revealed that fragmentation is homogenously dispersed through the whole fibre distance and no gradient is detectable. thus, once fragmentation begins it is rapidly completed. all these findings obtained in yfp-h mice are summarized schematically in fig.  <dig> 

in contrast to wild-type nerves injured wlds sciatic and tibial nerves degenerate anterogradely independent of the lesion type
we then extended these studies to wlds axons, already known to survive  <dig> days after transection lesion  <cit> , using light and electron microscopy after prolonged lesion times of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days. in contrast to the analogous experiment in wild-type mice, a significant difference in axon preservation rate was immediately apparent between the proximal sciatic nerve and distal tibial nerve.  <dig> days after high sciatic nerve transection,  <dig>  % of myelinated axons were structurally preserved a few millimetres distal to the lesion site in light and electron microscopy  but the most distal part of the tibial nerve showed ultrastructural preservation in  <dig>  % of axons . likewise, at all further time points beside  <dig> days  after transection lesion we found more intact axons in distal tibial nerve than in proximal sciatic nerve close to the point of injury . overall, these results clearly indicate anterograde progression of axon degeneration along transected wlds peripheral nerves.

remarkably, in view of data reported in wild-type mice, a crush injury of the proximal sciatic nerve also resulted in anterograde progression in wlds sciatic/tibial nerve that was evident with a more moderate gradient after 20– <dig> days. twenty days after sciatic nerve crush  <dig>  % of all myelinated axons were preserved a few millimetres distal to the lesion  while  <dig>  % of these fibres were preserved at the distal tibial nerve more than  <dig> millimetres away from the point of lesion . similarly,  <dig> and  <dig> days after crush lesion we observed an increase in preserved axon numbers from proximal to distal along the sciatic-tibial nerve distance . even  <dig> days after transection or crush lesion there were many protected distal axons in tibial nerve . by contrast, the degeneration of all distal fibres in wild-type mice was complete within two days . thus, while axon degeneration in more proximal regions is delayed approximately tenfold by wlds after a lesion, the delay in more distal regions is at least twenty fold. in summary, quantification of axon preservation assessed by light and electron microscopy is sufficient to indicate a marked anterograde direction of axon degeneration both after transection and crush injury of peripheral wlds nerves.

anterograde degeneration of individual yfp labelled wlds axons is slowly progressive
in order to exclude nerve branching as an explanation for the observations above, we carried out detailed longitudinal analysis of individual degenerating wlds axons labelled with the yfp-h transgene as described previously  <cit> . following transection or crush lesions to the sciatic nerve, long-range confocal yfp axon tracing was performed in 2– <dig> cm wholemount nerve segments.  <dig> days after transection almost all  yfp labelled wlds axons showed a homogeneous anterograde gradient of degenerative changes along the sciatic and tibial nerve . an example is presented in fig.  <dig>  in contrast to partially degenerated wild-type axons after transection lesion, where there were clear interruptions between markedly demarcated yfp-positive fragments, axon fragmentation in proximal wlds nerves after  <dig> days was mostly incomplete. instead of interruptions, there were many constrictions of short regions of the axon or thin axoplasmatic bridges between thicker regions . occasionally we observed small swellings  at the proximal ends . distal areas of the same wlds axon lacked these degenerative changes . the remaining  <dig>  % of wlds axons appeared to be completely intact without any discernible signs of degeneration .  <dig> days after transection, proximal regions of individual wlds distal axon stumps were more completely fragmented . however, some millimetres distal the fragments became gradually less frequent and again were often joined by yfp positive material indicating incomplete fragmentation . at this time point such incomplete fragmentation with axonal narrowing occasionally continued up to distal regions of the fluorescent wlds axons . altogether at  <dig> days post operation all axons showed anterograde gradients of complete or incomplete fragmentation . additionally, we analyzed individual axons that were separated for  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  days from their parent cell body and found that with increasing lesion time proportionally more axons displayed anterograde degeneration gradients. the gradients became structurally clearer through more marked demarcation of axonal fragments . thus, the initial morphological events in the degeneration of wlds axons are constrictions or atrophy, followed only considerably later by complete interruptions of the axon.

we then followed up the earlier em experiments using crushed nerves from wlds/yfp-h double mutant mice to study the directionality of axon degeneration in wlds nerves using this very different method. once again, the spatio-temporal pattern of axon degeneration after crush injury in wlds mice was very similar to that after transection injury, contrasting with wild-type mice where directionality depends on lesion type. correspondingly,  <dig> days after crush lesion we counted  <dig>  % of all yfp labelled wlds axons with an anterograde gradient of degenerative changes . an example of such an individual axon is shown in the additional data file add fig  <dig> pdf. however, crushed wlds axons more frequently showed end bulbs at the proximal end of the distal stump, which were often very large,  and subsequent multiple axonal swellings . this feature was far more prominent in crushed wlds axons than in the transection experiment where we observed end bulbs just occasionally. further distally these swellings disappear with remaining axonal constrictions and breaks  representing incomplete fragmentation. as in transected nerves, distal parts of the crushed wlds axon were free of degeneration signs . compared to transection lesion, more axons at  <dig> days remained entirely intact  . by  <dig> days after nerve crush of wlds axons, proximal fragmentation became more prominent with fully separated fragments  while more distal regions of the same axons were again incompletely fragmented  and further distal still lacked any degeneration signs . the proximal end bulbs and localised swellings were larger than at  <dig> days , possibly due to continued accumulation of retrogradely transported material.

in summary, quantification  <dig> days after crush lesion revealed that all axons showed anterograde gradients of complete or incomplete fragmentation . thus, the yfp-h studies confirmed our light and electron microscopy observations that delayed degeneration in individual wlds axons is directional with an exclusively anterograde pattern both after transection and crush injury. this pattern of degeneration is qualitatively different from that in wild-type mice, which shows asynchronous, bidirectional fragmentation and degeneration.

wlds axons show a continuous gradient of axon degeneration that moves with a velocity similar to that of slow axonal transport
in the above experiments we noted the gradual change from degenerated regions to intact regions in wlds axons. in contrast to our observations in wild-type mice, there was no clearly delineated boundary or wave front separating degenerated and fully intact regions. in order to quantify this, we counted the number of axonal constrictions and breaks along the length of yfp positive wlds axons following injury. at all post-lesion time-points randomly chosen axons showed gradually decreasing signs of degeneration  along their length . this markedly contrasts with the wave-like degeneration observed in wild-type mice where a sharp boundary divided preserved regions of the axon from completely fragmented regions. the closely superimposed curves shown in fig. 12a, c, e, g also indicate that anterograde axon degeneration is more synchronous among the axon population in wlds nerves at both  <dig> and  <dig> days following transection or crush injury. only rarely could we observe morphologically normal wlds axons adjacent to axons with anterograde gradients of degeneration . this quantification allowed us to estimate the rate at which anterograde degeneration progresses along single wlds axons. between  <dig> and  <dig> days the equivalent stage of degeneration has advanced up to  <dig> mm further along the nerve , giving a maximum velocity of wlds degeneration progression of  <dig> mm /  <dig> days =  <dig>  mm/day. this is similar to the reported velocity of slow axonal transport   <cit> . all findings concerning topology of axonal degeneration in wlds peripheral nerves are summarized schematically in fig.  <dig> 

discussion
we have shown that the fragmentation of axons undergoing wallerian degeneration in a mixed wild-type peripheral nerve is a rapid, asynchronous and progressive process. by using a recently developed method to visualise individual axons over cm-long distances, and by targeting a short critical period during which nearly all axons degenerate, we have made the first observations in vivo of partially fragmented individual axons and thus determined the directionality and the wave-like nature of wallerian degeneration, as well as estimating its velocity. furthermore, we have shown that nerves of wlds mutant mice undergo a fundamentally distinct process rather than simply following the same pathway in slow motion.

lesioned wild-type axons remain morphologically normal for a latency period of ca. 36– <dig> hours, which depends on lesion type and individual axonal properties  <cit> . each axon then undergoes a catastrophic process in which at least  <dig> mm of the distal stump fragments entirely within an hour. the propagation rate of at least  <dig> mm/h is considerably faster than reported in rat dorsal column   <cit> , rat phrenic nerve   <cit>  and in primary culture   <cit> , probably reflecting differences in neuronal subtype and context. for example, slower propagation of wallerian degeneration in the cns is suggested by the observation of an anterograde spread in the gracile tract following a dorsal root lesion, whereas the spread of degeneration within the root itself was too short-lived to be resolved by the methods used  <cit> . wallerian degeneration may also propagate more slowly in longer axons, which could account for differences between mice and rats  <cit> , and there may be many reasons why the propagation rate in vitro could differ from that in vivo. nevertheless, while the propagation rate may differ, the anterograde degeneration after axon transection is a consistent feature of each of these studies.

we have shown that wallerian degeneration in wild-type nerves is a wave-like process that can travel in either direction along the axon, depending on lesion type.  <dig> partially fragmented axons were observed, and all showed a sharp boundary between fragmented and non-fragmented zones, such that all axon regions up to the wavefront were degenerated and all regions beyond it remained intact. fragmentation had reached different points along the nerve in different individual axons , reflecting asynchronicity of the onset and rate of degeneration. the wave-like propagation of wallerian degeneration has been proposed before  <cit> , and especially lubinska  <cit>  has shown that wallerian degeneration of the distal stump progresses centrifugally by jumping from one internode to another, but this is the first time the wavefront has actually been observed. of the  <dig> partially fragmented axons,  <dig> transected axons were fragmented only at their proximal ends and  <dig> crushed axons were fragmented only at their distal ends . differences between cut and crushed nerves have been suggested before  <cit>  and axons cut at both ends also exhibit a retrograde degeneration component  <cit> , but this is the first demonstration that two different lesions at the same site in the same nerve cause different directions of degeneration. the mechanistic basis of this surprising observation remains unknown, but some models are outlined below.

we discuss here two models to explain the wave-like propagation of wallerian degeneration in wild-type nerves: one based on fast axonal transport and the other based on calcium influx . numerous reports have proposed that the clearance of a supportive or trophic factor by fast axonal transport processes underlies the anterograde direction of wallerian degeneration after transection  <cit>  based on the observation that anterograde fast axonal transport of proteins continues after axotomy in the peripheral nerve stump in a wavelike manner. such a factor could be an inhibitor of an axonal destruction programme, likely to be stabilised or upregulated by a downstream effector of the wlds protein. the fastest reported components of axonal transport move at around 14– <dig> mm/h, but it is reasonable to expect that some minor, thus far undetected, components may move faster  <cit> . this is just compatible with the spread of the fragmentation wave at a minimum of  <dig> mm/h that we observe. however, wallerian degeneration could progress even faster, too fast to be accounted for by fast axonal transport, and anterograde clearance of a factor inhibiting wallerian degeneration could not explain the retrograde degeneration that we found in crushed nerves.

thus, we consider also an alternative model in which short regions of the axon membrane become permeabilised to calcium ions and this feature moves rapidly as a wave along the axon. fibre degeneration requires accumulation of axoplasmic calcium  <cit> , which probably activates the cystein protease calpain  <cit> . once inside the axon, calcium ions could diffuse to the immediately neighbouring axoplasm and activate calpain, leading to degradation of axoplasmic and membrane proteins, and thus permeabilisation of the next segment. such a membrane associated ca2+ influx hypothesis was proposed by schlaepfer for the first time  <cit>  and developed further involving calcium channels in more modern studies  <cit> . lopachin and lehning  <cit>  reported calcium entry linked to membrane depolarisation through reverse na2+-ca2+-exchange, leading to a steady rise in intra-axonal calcium and calcium accumulation has been observed beneath schmidt lantermann clefts at distal sites  <dig> h after injury  <cit> . once the threshold for calpain activation is exceeded, a wave of degeneration could be initiated and then propagate rapidly in either direction as outlined above.

there are several possible reasons why degeneration may begin proximally in a transected nerve but distally in a crushed nerve. the proximal end of a transected distal stump is especially vulnerable because of the exposure of the axoplasm to the external ionic environment, and because all extra-axonal structures that normally support the axon have been totally disrupted, e.g., blood vessels, schwann cells, extracellular matrix, perineurium. one of these factors may cause a calcium entry wave to begin at this point. in contrast, intact endoneural blood vessels can be found close to a nerve crush  <cit> , the epi- and perineurium tubes are maintained at the site of crush  <cit> , and some nerve crush protocols do not break axon continuity  <cit> , so that wallerian or wallerian-like degeneration occurred only many days after compression or not at all. more specifically, even application of longer high pressure injuries with a minimum of shear forces may squeeze out axoplasm into adjacent parts of the axon rather than interrupting the axolemma preserving nerve conduction monitored electrophysiologically  <cit> . in our nerves we observed continuous longitudinal yfp signals across crush sites immediately after lesioning, indicating that at least some axons were not transected by the direct effect of crushing. we also observed many preserved fibres crossing the crush site when we fixed and then partially teased crushed nerves to generate small bundles where individual fibres were easily identifiable . thus, the proximal end of the distal stump may be less vulnerable than after transection, and fragmentation may begin instead at the distal end because this is the hardest part to supply with everything the axon needs to survive.

we observed a series of differences in the pattern of wallerian degeneration in wlds nerves that are incompatible with delayed axon degeneration following a similar mechanism to wallerian degeneration in wild-type nerves, only slower. the spread of degeneration along wlds nerves is around 100-fold slower, axon degeneration is more synchronous, at least relative to how long it takes to occur, it progresses in a proximal to distal direction in crushed nerves as well as transected nerves, there is a continuous gradient of degeneration along the length of the axon rather than an abrupt change at a boundary, and the first sign of axon degeneration is a constriction rather than a complete interruption. we therefore propose that the ultimate degeneration of axons in wlds mice be termed "slow anterograde axon decay" rather than wallerian degeneration as summarised schematically in fig.  <dig> 

based on these differences, we propose that injured wlds axons eventually undergo a passive process of atrophy, rather than an active process of self-destruction similar to apoptosis that appears to take place in wild-type axons  <cit> . it is likely that preserved axonal proteins will eventually be degraded by catabolic processes and may not be replaced by significant new synthesis, even if wallerian degeneration is completely prevented. a direct indication of this is our observation in primary neuronal cultures of significant atrophy of distal neurites when their degeneration is delayed by wlds . even the fact that some proteins are synthesised locally in axons  <cit>  may not be sufficient to prevent the eventual depletion of protein in severed wlds axons, as it remains unclear which proteins are made there and in what quantities.

we discuss two models to explain the slow anterograde progression of degeneration along wlds axons: one based on slow axonal transport and the other on a temperature gradient along the limb. the gradual nature of axonal atrophy in wlds makes it difficult to be precise about the rate at which it progresses along the axon, but it is certainly not incompatible with the velocity of slow axonal transport of  <dig> – <dig>  mm/day  <cit> . clearance of structural proteins by slow anterograde transport, added to their gradual depletion by protein turnover, could cause the protein content at the proximal end of the distal stump to drop below the threshold level needed to maintain axon integrity. bidirectional transport of cytoskeletal components continues in transected wlds nerves, leading to localised neurofilament-depleted constrictions and terminal and intermediate swellings containing disorganised neurofilaments  <cit> . we have made similar observations in yfp labelled wlds axons, and additionally report a gradient of such features along the nerve. a net anterograde movement of cytoskeletal proteins could therefore underlie the anterograde gradient of axonal atrophy in wlds axons injured for many days.

alternatively, a proximal-distal decreasing gradient of temperature along the limb could underlie the observed difference in degeneration rate at different points in the wlds nerve. a decrease in temperature has been shown to delay degeneration both in wild-type and wlds axons after injury  <cit> . in wild-type nerves, a temperature gradient explains neither the different directions of propagation after transection and crush injury, nor the sharp boundary between intact and degenerated regions. however, in wlds axons there is a proximal to distal gradient of degeneration regardless of lesion type and the change from intact to degenerated is a gradual one. thus, a temperature gradient could play a more important role here.

the extremely long survival of distal tibial nerve following injury in wlds is in marked contrast to the presynaptic nerve terminal at the neuromuscular junction, which is the first structure to degenerate in both wild-type and wlds nerves  <cit> . intramuscular nerve also degenerates early, at least in wlds heterozygotes . this supports the hypothesis of compartmentalised degeneration mechanisms of axons and synapses  <cit>  and suggests that a clear boundary exists between the two domains. the location and nature of this boundary could hold important clues for determining the mechanism of both wallerian degeneration and synapse degeneration.

finally, the methods we report here could now be applied to study spontaneous nerve degeneration in 'dying-back' disease. the 'dying-back' model also predicts the transitory existence of partially degenerated axons, but as in wallerian degeneration such axons have never been directly observed and there is no indication of the speed of 'dying-back' of individual axons  <cit> . there are interesting parallels between axon degeneration after nerve crush and 'dying-back', as both can be delayed by the wlds gene and the direction of degeneration is also shared  <cit> . thus, it is an intriguing possibility that the speed of propagation is equally rapid and asynchronous. if it is a similarly catastrophic event, what can stop it progressing back to the cell body leading to neuron death? in some cases neuronal death does appear to be the outcome  <cit> , whereas in others, proximal axons and their cell bodies somehow survive  <cit>  and it is important to find out why. future prospects include direct observation of the progression of a degeneration boundary along yfp labelled axons in vivo after nerve lesion or in disease, once methods for in vivo imaging of single axons become more refined and more readily available, e.g., cell vizio, mauna kea technologies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we report the first direct observation of partially degenerated single axons in lesioned nerves undergoing wallerian degeneration, indicating that wallerian degeneration propagates in wild-type nerves as a wave whose speed is at least as fast as the highest reported rate of fast axonal transport. it could be faster still in mouse sciatic and tibial nerve. the direction of degeneration is proximal to distal after a cut, but the reverse after a crush. for now the mechanism remains unknown, but these observations will ultimately need to be explained in any comprehensive model of the wallerian degeneration mechanism. injury-induced axon degeneration in wlds nerves is also progressive, but differences in the topographic pattern and morphology of degeneration indicate a fundamentally different process from that in wild-type nerves. we propose that wlds axons ultimately undergo atrophy, in a passive process similar to that which wallerian degeneration was once thought to be.

