BACKGROUND
several recent studies have eroded the traditional perspective that interspecific hybridization is a rare phenomenon among animals, providing evidence that closely related taxa in different groups of organisms often share a history of introgressive hybridization . however, patterns of introgression appear heterogeneous across the genome, since the exchange of genomic regions between species depends greatly on their fitness effects or the fitness effects of linked regions  <cit> . in fact, there is now a growing list of studies showing extensive gene flow at some loci, whereas other loci remain differentiated, probably because some genomic regions associated with species-specific adaptations and/or reproductive isolation are less prone to introgress  <cit> . furthermore, it is also possible that some alleles are more easily introgressed because they can either confer an advantage in an alternative environment or in a foreign genetic background  <cit> . the consequence of incomplete barriers to gene exchange is semipermeable or porous species boundaries  <cit> .

while the recent availability of partially or fully sequenced genomes have greatly facilitated the study of patterns of introgression in model organisms, investigation of gene introgression in animals lacking those genomic resources is still a challenging task  <cit> . in fact, until recently, mtdna has been the marker of choice for examining evolutionary relationships at the population level and among closely related species  <cit> . however, the study of a single gene is of particular concern because its genealogy may not truly reflect the history of populations or species, often leading to erroneous conclusions . hence, taking advantage of recent advances in molecular methodologies such as the development of exon-primed intron-crossing  primers , comparative studies of multiple gene genealogies, including nuclear and mtdna markers, have been considered an alternative tool to examine the evolutionary history of diverging taxa and, in particular, for the detection of patterns of introgressive hybridization among closely related species of non-model organisms .

both empirical and simulation studies have shown that interspecific hybridization can occur as the outcome of changing demographic conditions and/or species' distributional ranges  <cit> . in the northern hemisphere it is well-established that pleistocene glacial cycles greatly affected the evolutionary history of many organisms, inducing population contractions and expansions following ecological changes . such processes often promoted contact between divergent evolutionary units or closely related taxa after climatic amelioration, leading to the occurrence of extensive hybridization and introgression . in contrast, the consequences of pleistocene climatic instability in the neotropics since the early proposed "forest refugia" hypothesis  are still a matter of intense debate. whereas some recent studies support that hypothesis, suggesting that pleistocene climatic fluctuations promoted extensive contraction and expansion of the forests following dryer and colder periods  <cit> , others argue in favour of a permanent rain forest cover all over the amazon basin during the last glacial period, even if the combination of reduced temperatures, precipitation and atmospheric co <dig> concentrations have certainly produced changes in the composition and structure of forests  <cit> . despite these differences, both scenarios suggest an important role of pleistocene climatic oscillations as an engine of genetic structure modification for many amazon species and communities.

two closely related anuran species widely distributed in south america  provide a compelling case study to investigate interspecific hybridization. across south america, r. marina is restricted to rainforests of the amazonian region, whereas r. schneideri is typically found in dry forests  along northeast and south of brazil, including paraguay, bolivia, uruguay and argentina  <cit> . these species are morphologically similar  and have essentially a parapatric distribution, but may occur in sympatry along ecological transitions between humid and dry forests . previous phylogenetic analyses of the r. marina group based on mtdna  <cit>  suggested a division in two major clades: one including r. veredas, r. cerradensis, r. jimi, r. marina, r. schneideri, and r. poeppigii , and another including r. arenarum, r. rubescens, r. achavali, and r. icterica . interestingly, when only samples of r. marina located south of the amazon river are used this species together with r. schneideri, r. jimi and r. poeppigii formed an unresolved polytomy  <cit> . while vallinoto et al.  <cit>  did not exclude that retention of ancestral polymorphism may explain this observation, they suggested instead that it could reflect past or current hybridization events. considering the different habitat preferences of r. marina and r. schneideri, it is possible that strong environmental changes after the last glacial maximum  in south america  <cit>  may have impacted dramatically their demography and distribution ranges, with consequences on the evolutionary trajectories of both taxa. finally, we note that r. marina is a highly invasive species whose history, ecology and demography have been studied in detail in australia and in the hawaian archipelago, but not in its native range  <cit> .

in this study, we focused on r. marina populations from the eastern amazonian region as well as on populations of r. schneideri representative of its distributional range. we used one mitochondrial gene and three nuclear introns to examine patterns of polymorphism and divergence within and between the two species, and addressed three major questions: i) are r. marina and r. schneideri well-differentiated at the nuclear level and how does this differentiation compares to the mtdna level? ii) is there evidence of hybridization between the two species or do the results conform more with the retention of ancestral polymorphism? and iii) can we infer post-glacial expansion movements and is there evidence for the occurrence of a hybrid zone?

RESULTS
mitochondrial dna analysis
a fragment of  <dig> base pairs  of the cyt b gene was obtained from  <dig> individuals:  <dig> of r. marina, and  <dig> of r. schneideri . the ingroup alignment revealed  <dig> distinct haplotypes, from which only five are present in r. schneideri. the genealogical relationships between the haplotypes  showed two main haplotype groups, one corresponding to r. marina sequences from left amazon bank , and the other comprising sequences of r. marina from the right amazon bank  and from r. schneideri. within the rab group, individuals from the northwestern population  and from all northeastern populations  were included in two different sub-groups. individuals from central-south amazonian forest  were clustered in both sub-groups of rab . with the exception of paraguay localities , all sampled populations of r. schneideri exhibit haplotype h <dig>  which was fixed in po, rc and mn. this haplotype was also present in three r. marina individuals from canaã dos carajás  .

n, number of sequences; h, number of haplotypes; s, number of segregating sites; π, nucleotide diversity; θ, watterson population mutation parameter  <cit> ; rm, minimum number of recombination events  <cit> ; and, Φw statistic p-value  <cit> .

* p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> .  considering the two copies in the case of nuclear loci.

nuclear genealogical analysis
for the rpl <dig> nuclear fragment, we obtained  <dig> sequences from  <dig> individuals . the ingroup alignment  revealed  <dig> haplotypes , defined by  <dig> polymorphic sites and  <dig> parsimoniously informative sites. while a minimum of three recombination events  was found in rpl <dig> for r. marina and r. schneideri, no statistical evidence for the occurrence of recombination was detected  using the Φw test .

for the rpl <dig> nuclear fragment, we obtained  <dig> sequences from  <dig> individuals . the ingroup alignment  revealed  <dig> haplotypes  defined by  <dig> polymorphic sites, from which  <dig> were parsimoniously informative sites. a minimum number of two recombination events  was inferred for both species, but no statistical support was found when the Φw test  was used .

for the c-myc nuclear fragment, we obtained  <dig> sequences from  <dig> individuals . the ingroup alignment  revealed  <dig> haplotypes  defined by  <dig> polymorphic sites, from which  <dig> were parsimoniously informative sites. according to both rm and Φw tests, no evidence for recombination was observed in c-myc sequences .

for all nuclear loci, haplotypes clustered in two groups corresponding to r. marina and r. schneideri, separated by a minimum of two  and a maximum of twelve  fixed differences . the only exception to the species-specific group of haplotypes occurred in rpl <dig>  where three individuals of r. marina from canaã dos carajás  were heterozygous, and their haplotypes clustered both within r. schneideri  and the r. marina group  . within the two geographically-defined groups of r. marina, we observed shared polymorphism .

dxy, average pairwise number of nucleotide substitutions per site; da, average pairwise net nucleotide divergence; ψ, number of polymorphic sites exclusive of each group or species; ψ 1; refers to the first species/group listed in each pairwise comparison.

*removing the r. schneideri haplotypes  present in three r. marina heterozygous from population cc .

the reconstruction of the phylogenetic species tree based on the three nuclear genes is shown in figure 3d. while none of the three nuclear loci examined in this study was completely sorted with regard to lab and rab groups of r. marina, a bayesian species tree inference method produced a high posterior probability  for their sister-taxa relationship. the placement of r. schneideri with respect to r. marina /r. marina  and the weakly supported clade r. icterica/r. arenarum were unresolved.

patterns of nucleotide variation and divergence
patterns of nucleotide diversity within each species and for each main clade identified using the phylogenetic analysis are summarized in table  <dig>  levels of diversity were highly variable across loci and within species. across nuclear loci, c-myc exhibited lower levels of variability than rpl <dig> and rpl <dig>  at the species level, r. schneideri presented, in general, lower levels of diversity when compared to r. marina, except for c-myc. one of the most remarkable differences was detected at the mtdna cyt b gene, where π was considerably lower for r. schneideri  than was observed in both r. marina groups . tajima's d, fu's fs and r <dig> statistics were highly variable among loci, although essentially non-significant . the main exceptions occurred in r. schneideri for the cyt b gene and in r. marina rab group for the c-myc nuclear locus. in the former cyt b had a significantly negative skew for tajima's d and fu's fs tests, while in the latter all tests showed significant deviations from neutral expectations for c-myc, also exhibiting negative values for tajima's d and fu's fs tests, and a low value for r <dig> .

at the mtdna level, the divergence measured by da and dxy between samples of r. marina from rab and lab was approximately twofold higher than the divergence between r. marina from rab and r. schneideri. the average distance between the rab group and r. schneideri ranged between  <dig> % and  <dig> % for da and dxy, respectively. rab and lab groups showed values of divergence of  <dig> % and  <dig> % for da and dxy, respectively . at the nuclear level, the divergence between r. marina and r. schneideri ranged from a minimum of  <dig> % and  <dig> %  to a maximum of  <dig> % and  <dig> %  for da and dxy, respectively.

divergence times and coalescent simulations
the approximate posterior density curves of the model parameters which resulted from the analyses using the isolation-with-migration model implemented in the software ima <dig> are shown in additional file  <dig>  posterior distributions of parameter estimates were consistent across replicate runs with effective sample sizes  values> <dig>  and there was no evidence of trends in the ascii-based parameter trendline plots. however, the right tail of the posterior density curves was often relatively flat and failed to reach zero in the estimates of divergence time and ancestral effective population size. by consequence, in most of these cases the 95% hpd  estimates were not reliable, reflecting some degree of uncertainty, and so they should be interpreted with caution . based on nuclear data, our ima <dig> analysis showed that the split between r. marina and r. schneideri was estimated to be ≈  <dig>  myr, and the split between r. marina populations from rab and lab occurred at ≈  <dig>  myr. for the mtdna analysis the split between lab and rab occurred at ≈  <dig>  myr. we also estimated the posterior distributions of ima <dig> parameters considering the two clades uncovered by mtdna phylogeny . this analysis indicated that populations on the opposite banks of the amazon river diverged at ≈  <dig>  myr, which was very similar to the divergence time estimates inferred for r. marina and r. schneideri based on nuclear loci alone. likewise, when we used all four loci simultaneously, assuming that mtdna from the rab group belongs to r. schneideri, ima <dig> also resulted in estimates of time since divergence between r. marina and r. schneideri beginning in the early pleistocene . to test whether estimated levels of the effective number of migrant gene copies per generation  for each pairwise comparison were significantly different from zero we used the llr tests implemented in ima <dig>  our results indicated a significant level of gene flow only from r. marina lab to rab populations when information of nuclear genes is used .

a r. marina  and r. schneideri using nuclear loci.

b r. marina  × r. marina  using nuclear loci and mtdna. c r. marina  × r. marina  using mtdna.

d r. marina  ×  using mtdna.

e r. marina and r. schneideri combining all markers and assuming that mtdna from rab population belongs to r. schneideri. ? values corresponding to the cases where parameters could not be reliably estimated.

given that we found mtdna shared variation between species, we conducted coalescent simulations to investigate whether the conflicting signal found in the mtdna versus nuclear dna-based phylogenies could be explained by incomplete lineage sorting. we simulated mtdna sequence datasets under a model with no gene flow and using parameter estimates of divergence times and ne  inferred from the ima <dig> analysis using nuclear loci. the model included two historical events: i) an ancestral haploid population with ne≈ <dig>  that splits into lab  and rab  populations at  <dig>  generations in the past; and ii) an ancestral haploid population with approximately ne≈ <dig>  that splits into two descendant populations with ne≈ <dig>   and ne≈ <dig>   at  <dig> , <dig> generations ago. under this scenario, the monophyly of r. schneideri was recovered in  <dig> % of the simulated mtdna gene trees, therefore rejecting the hypothesis of incomplete lineage sorting.

discussion
our analysis of patterns of genetic variability and phylogenetic relationships in a comprehensive set of r. marina and r. schneideri populations from south america clearly suggests a compelling case of massive unidirectional mtdna introgressive hybridization between these taxa. more specifically, we found that i) both species are highly divergent at the nuclear level, a fact that is not observed at the mtdna level, ii) the previously described mtdna/nuclear discordance in populations of r. marina are more easily explained by interspecific hybridization and not by the retention of ancestral polymorphism, as revealed by coalescent simulations of mtdna phylogeny under the speciation history inferred from nuclear genes, and iii) the application of the isolation-with-migration model  to nuclear data suggests that r. marina and r. schneideri diverged at about  <dig>  myr ago, while estimates of divergence between r. marina lab and rab populations suggest a split time in the middle pleistocene . this time of divergence is not consistent with the split between the two main mtdna clades lab and rab + r. schneideri . below, we discuss all these issues in detail and suggest that the most likely explanation for the cytonuclear discordance resulted from the capture of r. schneideri mtdna by the invading r. marina.

introgressive hybridization vs retention of ancestral polymorphism
conflicting mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees among closely related species are often taken as an indication of mtdna introgression due to interspecific hybridization . however, the alternative scenario of incomplete lineage sorting may also result on the frequently observed pattern of mtdna paraphyly or polyphyly. while the lower effective population size of mtdna implicates that lineages sort out more easily among species than in the nuclear genome  <cit> , the fact is that in most cases the two alternative hypotheses are not explicitly tested.

our phylogenetic analysis of cyt b gene sequences showed that both taxa do not form monophyletic groups, revealing instead two major groups of haplotypes, one corresponding to r. marina samples from lab, and the other including both r. marina from rab and r. schneideri . this close relationship between r. marina and r. schneideri was already reported by vallinoto et al.  <cit>  based on a detailed phylogenetic analysis of the r. marina group using a larger mtdna fragment . these results are in stark contrast with the phylogenetic pattern observed for nuclear loci both inferred by network haplotype genealogical relationships and by the species tree coalescent method that takes into account differential lineage sorting across markers . networks of nuclear loci are basically concordant in revealing two highly divergent groups of haplotypes, corresponding to morphological-defined r. marina and r. schneideri species. the three nuclear loci exhibited a lack of shared haplotypes and a number of fixed differences between the two species that ranged from two to twelve, while a pattern of shared polymorphism was observed within the two geographically-defined groups of r. marina  . the only exception to these species-specific groups of haplotypes occurred at the rpl <dig> gene, where three r. marina individuals sampled in canaã dos carajás  shared haplotypes clustered within both r. schneideri and r. marina species. the bayesian species tree reconstruction corroborates the monophyly of r. marina, supporting a close relationship between lab and rab populations .

the close relationship between r. marina populations based on nuclear loci is supported by the use of a coalescent-based isolation-with-migration model . this analysis suggested that r. marina and r. schneideri likely diverged at ≈  <dig>  myr, while the inferred split time between r. marina lab and rab populations was at ≈  <dig>  myr ago. in contrast, the divergence time for the different pairwise comparisons across the amazon river bank populations based on mtdna  or combining all loci  is always similar to that obtained for r. marina and r. schneideri . coalescent simulations of mtdna phylogeny under the speciation history inferred from nuclear genes clearly show that this conflicting signal found in the mtdna-based phylogeny relative to the nuclear dna could not be explained by incomplete lineage sorting. in fact, the monophyly of r. schneideri was recovered in  <dig> % of the simulated mtdna gene trees, and stands in contrast with the observed pattern of shared mtdna sequences between this species and r. marina rab populations. accordingly, even after accounting for stochasticity and uncertainties in mutation rates , we can discard the hypothesis of incomplete lineage sorting as the explanation for the cytonuclear discordance reported here. instead, we interpret our data as supporting an unidirectional massive mtdna introgression between these species.

extensive unidirectional mtdna introgression
together with the current knowledge about the geographical distribution of both species, our results favour the hypothesis that the mitochondrial lineage detected in the right amazon bank likely belonged to r. schneideri and was subsequently captured by r. marina. notably, this hypothesis implicates that r. schneideri must have occupied a significant part of the amazon and its extinction from this region was presumably preceded by a process of replacement driven by r. marina populations expanding southwards. a scenario supporting this hypothesis - under which such massive interspecific unidirectional mtdna introgression could have taken place - has recently been proposed and modelled  <cit> . following this model, when the territory of a resident species is invaded by another more successful species, even rare hybridization events at the front of this expansion can lead to introgression from the resident species into the expanding one. drift at the front of the invasion and during the following expansion is responsible for repeated and transient secondary contacts among species, promoting situations of competitive replacement. in one of the most remarkable examples reported to date, alves et al.  <cit>  described how three iberian hare species  were extensively introgressed by the mtdna of l. timidus, a boreal species presently extinct in iberia. these authors indicated that l. timidus could have occurred in a significant part of iberia during the lgm, but subsequently became extinct after climatic amelioration and competitively replaced by the more adapted temperate iberian species that likely experienced a northwards range expansion  <cit> .

the impact of quaternary environmental changes in the neotropical region has been the subject of extensive and controversial debate. in fact, there is a growing body of evidence originating in palaeoclimatological, palynological and palaecological data, but also in molecular phylogeographic studies  <cit> , suggesting that significant changes in the amazonian rainforest and cerrado may have occurred during the late pleistocene and the holocene  <cit> . during previous drier glacial periods, the cerrado expanded and may have penetrated into the amazon forest, while most parts of the southern present-day cerrado might have contracted due to strong cold fronts and to the expansion of subtropical grasslands  <cit> . since the middle holocene, a change towards more humid climatic conditions has occurred, promoting the expansion of the amazon forest and also the southward re-establishment of cerrado  <cit> . these climatic-induced changes seem to have played an important role on the evolutionary history of a great diversity of organisms  <cit> . for example, ramos et al.  <cit>  suggested that during glacial times the tree hymenaea stigonocarpa became extinct in most parts of southern present-day cerrado, being restricted to the milder climatic conditions of the northernmost and easternmost regions of this biome. after postglacial climate amelioration, this species expanded its range southwards. accordingly, it is tempting to consider that recent climatic oscillations forced dramatic changes in species distributions, including the neotropical toads r. marina and r. schneideri. these transient environmental conditions could have created the opportunity for these two species to meet and hybridize, a situation that may have been likely favoured by similar breeding behaviour and coincidence of reproductive seasons  <cit> .

following this hypothesis, the current distribution of r. schneideri  seems to result from its recent retreat from the amazon and a subsequent southward expansion into the present-day cerrado biome, as evidenced by the low levels of mitochondrial diversity in all current distribution area. in fact, part of these populations is fixed for haplotype h <dig>  introgression from r. schneideri into r. marina could then correspond to phases of forest expansion, when the latter species would be favoured and eventually replaced the former  <cit> . the tendency toward negative values for tajima's d and fu's fs and low values for the r <dig> statistic observed in rab populations across all loci could be interpreted as a signal of population expansion. in addition, indirect evidences that likely highlight the importance of climatic/ecological changes on the evolutionary history of these toad species are provided by some unique genetic signals present in canaã do carajás . this population represents a small remnant island of the cerrado biome within the humid amazon forest  <cit>  and correspond to the single location where we detected three individuals of r. marina having r. schneideri rpl <dig> haplotypes and the most frequent and widespread mtdna haplotype of r. schneideri . taken together, this evidence may suggest that the population of canaã dos carajás could be located close to the putative hybrid zone between r. marina and r. schneideri. future studies should clarify this question and, in particular, investigate if that hybrid zone is defined by a clear boundary between the dry and rain forest or corresponds instead to a more complex and patchy region due to the occurrence of multiple cerrado islands within the amazonian forest.

implications of selective and neutral processes for asymmetric introgression
when introgression of mtdna from one species into another occurs, foreign mtdna can completely replace resident mtdna through selective or neutral processes  <cit> . the effects of directional selection on mtdna could produce changes in the patterns of genetic variability generating a star-like genealogy and a significantly skew towards low-frequency alleles  <cit> . both tajima's d and fu's fs tests of the frequency spectrum of mutations are significantly skewed towards rare alleles in the mitochondrial genealogy of r. schneideri . there are many evidences that various sorts of selection pressures could act on mtdna , driving in some cases extensive mtdna introgression  <cit> . however, this kind of deviation may be confounded by the influence of demographic history, which could have a similar impact on variability patterns under neutrality . for example, deviations from a neutral model of dna sequence variation closely linked to a site that has undergone a selective sweep may be similar to those in populations that experienced an expansion  <cit> . both empirical and simulation studies have suggested that some alleles occurring at the front of a range expansion could travel with the wave of advance  over long distances and eventually reach high frequencies  <cit> . likewise, a reduction in population size would also cause a depletion of genetic diversity by the action of genetic drift alone, which is more pronounced at mtdna markers due to its lower effective size compared to nuclear markers .

other often reported explanations for differential introgression of mtdna versus nuclear loci are male biased dispersal and dissortative mating, especially when prezygotic isolation models like female-preference or male-male competition are implicated  <cit> . however, such patterns could also be explained by postzygotic asymmetries , in which reciprocal crosses resulted in different degrees of hybrid viability or fitness, or a combination of both pre- and postzygotic effects  <cit> . in amphibians, many examples of unidirectional introgression due to asymmetric reproductive behaviour have been reported, as expected in polygynous mating systems such as those found in bufonids . while to date natural hybridization in the r. marina group has only been demonstrated between r. icterica and r. schneideri  <cit> , our data clearly suggest that this phenomenon is probably more widespread than reported so far. an extensive study involving more than  <dig> laboratory crosses between  <dig> species of bufonids showed that crosses between r. marina females and both r. poeppigii and r. arenarum males resulted in hybrid offspring constituted only by females, while crosses involving r. schneideri females and r. arenarum males produced hybrids of both sexes  <cit> . while we cannot discard the possibility that asymmetric reproductive isolation could have resulted in the observed asymmetrical mtdna introgression between r. marina and r. schneideri, further studies investigating the existence and the extent of pre- and/or postzygotic barriers between these species are required to examine this hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
our results clearly suggest that the closely related r. marina and r. schneideri shared a history of introgressive hybridization. nuclear analyses support the monophyly of both species, a fact that would have not been perceived if our inferences were based solely on the mtdna analysis. another important inference of this work is that past environmental changes have likely played a crucial role for the occurrence of hybridization in the neotropics. this is of special interest considering recent habitat changes due to extensive deforestation of the amazonian forest in last decades for industrial and agriculture purposes. in fact, it has been demonstrated that human-induced environmental changes could create the opportunity to increase the area of sympatry and the likelihood of hybridization between many closely related taxa . future research focusing on transition areas between the amazon rain forest and the dry forests of cerrado and caatinga will be crucial for a deeper understanding of the consequences of the complex past climate and present-day environmental changes on the evolutionary trajectory of organisms.

