BACKGROUND
preputial glands are accessory glands of the reproductive system of the male mouse and play a role in reproduction and dominance behavior  <cit> . inflammation and infection of these glands can lead to abscess formation. this health issue occurs more frequently in some mouse strains such as b6c3f <dig>  <cit>  however the incidence is usually quite low in c3h mice  <cit> . the usual presentation of preputial gland inflammation is a uni- or bilateral subcutaneous swelling on either side of the prepuce. this develops to form a palpably hard mass and the overlying skin can be inflamed. in the worst case the abscesses can ulcerate and purulent exudate can be visible on the coat . during a long-term  study in our facility, a high incidence of abscesses were noted, and the principal investigator was concerned at the impact of chronic infection and antibiotic treatment on both mouse welfare and the scientific goals of the study. to try to resolve the problem, a procedure to remove the glands surgically was developed, and this was used both to treat established abscesses, and as a preventive measure.fig.  <dig> anatomic region of the preputial glands. a general view. the abdominal skin layer has been reclined to expose the muscle layer and the preputial glands region. the black frame represents the area enlarged in the next picture. b enlarged view of the preputial glands region. 



RESULTS
no complications related to the anaesthesia protocol occurred. in a small number of animals minor bleeding from the fatty tissue around the gland occurred but this was easily managed by applying pressure on the tissue with a dry swab. given the location, perforation of the abdominal muscle layer or trauma to the penis could occur, but in our cases none of these complications occurred. the most common complication was re-opening of the surgical wound. eight mice  removed skin sutures within 24 h post surgery, and the wound was closed again under general anaesthesia. infection of the surgical wound, with obvious exudate occurred in six mice  within 24–48 h post surgery. antibiotics were administered until infection resolved . recurrence of an abscess at the surgical site was noted in six mice .

discussion
the incidence of preputial gland inflammation or abscess are influenced by several factors. mouse strain, age and microbiological flora are considered to be of importance  but also environmental condition such as group housing have been considered to increase the incidence of the condition  <cit> . in this case report, the high prevalence of this condition in c3h/henhsd mice was considered to be due to the high fat diet and the sugar water regimen used for the main study but no bacterial culture was performed to identify an infectious agent, as this would not have impacted our treatment approach. no histopathology exam was performed to confirm the diagnosis of abscess. this diagnosis was only based on the clinical signs observed and the similar progression of clinical signs in all animals. the treatment suggested in the literature is to lance the abscess and administer antibiotics to the animals  <cit> . however, in our experience the recurrence rate was high  when using this treatment regimen. this might be due to the multilobular structure of the gland preventing complete drainage of the abscess. the recurrence of these abscesses therefore represents a welfare cost for mice, as it may be associated with pain, fever and can lead to systemic amyloidosis  <cit> . both a surgical procedure and repeated antibiotic therapy can impact on the welfare of the mice  <cit> . the surgical procedure described has the advantages of preventing infection, and resolving established abscesses. it was associated with a low level of complication . however this procedure is more technically demanding and time consuming than the previously documented treatment regimen. like other surgical procedures, principles of good aseptic technique should be followed and a non-sterile assistant should be available to prepare the animal for surgery, monitor the anaesthesia and assist the surgeon. the time taken to perform each individual surgery was not recorded but in our experience each surgery required just under 10 min. isoflurane was considered to be the anaesthetic of choice for this procedure as it provides a fast and smooth induction and recovery and also reliably produces a surgical plane of anaesthesia  <cit> . the other issue with this procedure, which was not investigated, is the potential impact on reproductive function since these glands play a role during the mating  <cit> . as a consequence, we only advise surgical removal of the preputial glands if a high incidence of the condition appears associated with a specific study, and when other means of reducing the incidence of the condition have been considered.

CONCLUSIONS
in the study described here, early intervention was successful in preventing intercurrent infection compromising both animal welfare and the outcome of the study.

