BACKGROUND
the haploid and thermotolerant kluyveromyces marxianus is a non-conventional yeast species with several advantageous metabolic properties over saccharomyces cerevisiae, such as fermentation ability at high temperatures, ability to grow on various hexose and pentose sugars, production of less ethanol in the presence of excessive sugar, and weak glucose repression, which enables the fermentation of mixed sugars, such as hemicellulose hydrolysate and inulin, at higher temperatures  <cit> . these properties facilitate the development of efficient fermentation processes utilizing k. marxianus. as a result, this generally regarded as safe  species shows potential for use as a cell factory with high capability for improving biomass yields in industrially relevant biotechnological applications. for example, k. marxianus has been utilized for the reduction of lactose content in food products as well as for the production of ethanol, various enzymes, heterologous proteins, aromatic compounds, and bioingredients, and for bioremediation  <cit> .

in order to engineer this species to be more suitable for use in various applications, genetic resources, such as its genome and transcriptome, are required at the genomic scale. k. marxianus is a member of the saccharomycetales; however, the genetics and metabolism of this yeast are considered quite different from those of s. cerevisiae from an evolutionary point of view  <cit> . for instance, the mode of regulation of genes in the glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid  cycle pathways differs between the two yeast species, although they are largely conserved  <cit> . in particular, regulatory mechanisms in metabolic networks governing carbon assimilation have not yet been explored. it has been established that transcriptional regulatory networks, comprising of transcription factors and other auxiliary components, control metabolic flexibility and robustness in response to environmental conditions. therefore, a full understanding of the cellular response to growth conditions as well as the roles of cognate regulators, such as transcription factors, is necessary for the elucidation of changes in transcript levels of metabolic genes due to the effects of growth conditions.

interestingly, genome-wide transcriptome analyses have demonstrated that the eukaryotic genome is pervasively transcribed  <cit> , e.g., more than 85 % of the genome of s. cerevisiae is transcribed  <cit> . this is due to a plethora of previously unannotated non-coding rnas , which are pervasively transcribed from intergenic and antisense regions of annotated genes. as transcription requires a large amount of cellular energy, nonfunctional pervasive transcription may impose a metabolic and regulatory burden on cells. in accordance with this, diverse functions of ncrnas, such as in the modulation of gene expression related with metabolism and pathogenesis, have been revealed  <cit> . however, there have been few reports on the functional characterization of ncrnas in non-model yeast, despite accumulating evidence of the roles of regulatory ncrnas in model organisms . the evolutionary conservation of antisense rna  has been reported between s. cerevisiae and saccharomyces paradoxus, which are in the sensu stricto saccharomycetales  <cit> . additionally, the evolutionary conservation of long asrnas between five sensu stricto saccharomycetales members and kluyveromyces lactis has been reported  <cit> . thus, the evolutionary conservation of pervasive ncrna transcription in budding yeasts suggests that these ncrnas perform important functions in these organisms  <cit> .

in order to examine the functions and extent of transcription of ncrna, we analyzed the transcriptomic changes at three time points during the exponential growth phase in k. marxianus by conducting strand-specific rna-seq. the results indicated pervasive ncrna transcription in the exponential growth phase. additionally, we performed enrichment analysis of differentially expressed transcripts to demonstrate that long antisense ncrnas  show functional associations with carbohydrate and energy metabolism. the correlation between transcription levels in mrna and lancrna pairs suggests potential mechanisms by which these rnas perform their functions.

RESULTS
rna-seq at the exponential growth phase
we are particularly interested in transcriptional regulation at exponential growth phase where most biomass production is accomplished. in order to measure dynamic transcriptomic changes during exponential growth in the non-model yeast k. marxianus and achieve further understanding of the cellular response to the exponential growth conditions, we sequenced total rnas isolated at three time points corresponding to early-exponential , mid-exponential , and late-exponential  growth phase, with two biological replicates for each sample . we employed the dutp method for rna-seq  <cit>  and obtained  <dig> , <dig> mapped reads for el,  <dig> , <dig> mapped reads for ml, and  <dig> , <dig> mapped reads for ll   <cit> . these corresponded to  <dig>  % of the genome being transcribed from one strand of dna and  <dig>  % being transcribed from both strands of dna. considering only the gene region,  <dig>  % of the sense strand and  <dig>  % of the antisense strand were transcribed, and  <dig>  % of the gene regions were transcribed from both strands. most of the sequence reads were mapped to the sense strand of protein coding genes , intergenic regions , and antisense strand of protein coding genes  . a low number of sequence reads  were mapped to rrnas, indicating that rrna depletion was successfully carried out. during cell growth, the fraction of reads mapped to the sense strand of protein coding genes was increased , while that mapped to the intergenic region was decreased . the fraction of reads mapped to the antisense strand of protein coding genes was almost unchanged . this result suggested that not only mrna, but also a substantial amount of ncrnas, were changed to achieve rapid cell growth in the exponential phase. hierarchical clustering of biological replicates showed that, overall, experimental procedures were reproducibly conducted . in particular, the transcriptional landscape of rna-seq indicated high strand-specificity and distinct transcriptional expression patterns during cell growth .fig.  <dig> genome-wide measurement of transcriptome during exponential growth phase. a–e ee, me, and le indicate early-exponential , mid-exponential , and late-exponential  growth phase, respectively. a
k. marxianus growth curve in ynb-u medium. rna collection points at exponential growth phase  are indicated by arrows. b reads mapping fraction of the three experimental conditions against location relative to gene classes. c heatmap of hierarchical clustering among the rna-seq experiments of the two biological replicates of the three experimental conditions, which was carried out by deseq with variance-stabilizing transformation function. d rna-seq profile of example genomic region during cell growth. data for each condition were normalized to rpm  to make y-axes same scale



pervasive ncrna transcription across the genome
we annotated  <dig> protein coding genes from the k. marxianus genome using augustus   <cit> . gene units were defined without taking exon-intron structures into account, as the number of introns in the k. marxianus genome is less than 5 %  <cit> . cmsearch program in infernal version  <dig>   <cit>  yielded  <dig> rna genes using rfam data   <cit> . subsequently, we obtained transcription units across the genome by transfrag method and subsequent post-processing . transfrag is defined as contiguous genomic region actively transcribed  <cit> . briefly, we discarded transfrags of transcriptional level lower than  <dig>   to reduce false positives in the detected transcripts. in addition, transfrags overlapping with either the forward strand or reverse strand of rna genes were removed in order to focus on the ncrnas associated with protein-coding genes. we then classified the transfrags into five rna classes based on their length   <cit> , coding potential    <cit> , and location relative to gene annotation   <cit> :  mrna   long antisense ncrna ,  long intergenic ncrna ,  short antisense ncrna , and  short intergenic ncrna . we obtained  <dig>  transfrags, corresponding to  <dig> mrnas ,  <dig> lancrnas ,  <dig> lincrnas ,  <dig> sancrnas , and  <dig> sincrnas  . these data demonstrate pervasive ncrna transcription, which comprised ~60 % of transfrags with ~30 % of mapped reads .fig.  <dig> detection and classification of transcriptional unit . a schematic demonstration of analytical procedures for transfrag detection and classification. cpat program was used for predicting coding potential. b proportion of transfrag classes among the detected transfrags. c distribution of transcription level of transfrag classes. transcriptional level was obtained from deseq result. d length distribution of protein-coding genes  and mrna. e distribution of fraction of gene model covered by mrna, lancrna, and sancrna



most ncrna had a lower transcriptional level than mrnas, although both lancrna and lincrna had higher transcriptional level than both sancrna and sincrna   <cit> . the average length of mrna transfrags was ~802 bp, which is about half the length of protein-coding genes  . among the protein-coding genes with mrna transfrags ,  <dig>  % of genes had only one transfrag and  <dig>  % of genes had no more than two transfrags. in addition, the number of genes covered by transfrags indicated that the majority of mrna transfrags covered more than 90 % of the gene annotation . although lancrna and sancrna transfrags covered much fewer genes than mrna transfrags, a substantial proportion of the gene region was covered by lancrnas. approximately 40 % of lancrnas covered more than 50 % of the gene annotation while only ~ <dig>  % of sancrna covered the same proportion. taken together, no more than two transfrags were detected for most genes, and thus over-fragmentation of transcripts into multiple transfrags was negligible.

in principle, the 5′- and 3′-end position of each transfrag represents the transcription start site  and transcription termination site , respectively. these genomic features enabled us to determine whether the transfrags contained artifacts. in order to test this, we compared mapped read enrichment for each rna class of k. marxianus with those of s. cerevisiae, sampled at exponential phase  <cit> . the comparison showed that the mapped read enrichment of all rna classes was highly similar to that of s. cerevisiae, suggesting that the transfrags are highly accurate and ncrnas are pervasively transcribed in k. marxianus . unexpectedly, lincrnas and sincrnas also showed high levels of transcription at the opposite strand, with a much lower transcriptional level than those of lancrnas and sancrnas. the proportion of intergenic ncrna region covered by antisense transcription was ~ <dig>  %. in accordance with this, several cases of antisense transcription in ncrnas have been reported  <cit> .

regulatory roles of ncrna
in order to investigate whether pervasive ncrna transcription at the exponential growth phase plays a functions, we focused on mrna, lancrna, and sancrna, as the functions of genes within these rna classes may be simply inferred from gene annotation  <cit> . by using deseq for ee to me condition and ee to le condition , we obtained  <dig> differentially expressed transfrags, comprising of  <dig> sense,  <dig> antisense, and  <dig> intergenic transfrags   <cit> . from these transfrag pairs, significantly enriched kegg pathways were separately obtained for sense and antisense strands   <cit> . these results demonstrated enrichment of carbohydrate metabolism, including glycolysis and amino acid biosynthesis pathways as well as respiration pathways. these pathways are important for the synthesis of fundamental cellular components and energy production to fulfill energy requirements for rapid growth during the exponential phase  <cit> . however, we observed gradual inactivation of respiration-related pathways, such as the tca cycle and oxidative phosphorylation during cell growth. the gradual inactivation of the pathways indicates that aerobic condition had been changed to anaerobic condition due to a decrease in dissolved oxygen levels  <cit> . this pathway enrichment pattern at the exponential phase is consistent with the fact that k. marxianus, being a crabtree-negative species, uses aerobic-respiration, thereby producing energy from carbon sources  <cit> . interestingly, the enriched pathways could be categorized into three groups based on the differential expression of sense, antisense, or both strands. each group showed distinct functional associations; genes with differential expression of only the sense strand were mostly associated with amino acid metabolism and energy production related to mitochondrial respiration, whereas those with differential expression of antisense strands only, or both strands, were associated with mostly carbohydrate metabolism. the asrna-mediated regulation of carbohydrate metabolism was mostly conducted by lancrna .fig.  <dig> enrichment of kegg pathways. a overlap of genes with mrna, lancrna, and sancrna and their enriched kegg pathways. blue colored letters indicate amino acid metabolism pathways and red colored letters indicate carbohydrate metabolism or energy metabolism pathways. b heatmap of significantly enriched kegg pathways by differentially expressed sense and/or antisense transfrags. amino acid metabolism pathways are indicated in blue lettering and carbohydrate metabolism or energy metabolism pathways are indicated in red. three consecutive rectangular demonstrate transcriptional level of ee, me, and le conditions of sense and antisense transcription, respectively. c genes with differentially expressed lancrnas at core carbohydrate metabolic pathway. d rna-seq profile near acs. e rna-seq profile near adh. f rna-seq profile near mdh



in particular, several differentially expressed lancrnas were located in core carbohydrate metabolic genes, many of which were found to be important for the regulation of their constituent pathways . there were three genes in the glycolysis pathway, pfk, gapdh, and eno, for which antisense transcription was significantly induced. antisense transcription of the pfk gene was significantly induced under me and le conditions; however, transcription from the opposite sense strand was not induced under these conditions. considering pfk gene encodes a rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis in yeast and human cancer cells, it is highly regulated at the transcriptional level by ncrna  <cit> . we detected two gapdh homologs that showed significant induction of antisense transcription at me and le conditions; however, no transcription induction was observed in their sense strands. the gapdh gene encodes a key glycolytic enzyme and functions as a metabolic switch to reroute carbohydrate flux to protect against oxidative stress  <cit> . the eno gene encodes one of the most highly expressed glycolytic enzymes in many organisms  <cit>  whose activity is known to be regulated by gene expression to a very low extent. we found that the transcription from the sense strand of the eno gene was slightly reduced, while that from the antisense strand was significantly induced. the antisense strands of two genes, idh and mdh, which encode enzymes of the tca cycle, were significantly induced. the idh gene encodes a rate-limiting enzyme of the tca cycle. antisense transcription of the idh gene was significantly induced while sense transcription was slightly increased. mdh catalyzes the final step of the tca cycle   <cit> . antisense strands were significantly induced in two mdh homologs; however, antisense transcription was increased in one homolog but decreased in the other. this suggests that each homolog is under distinct antisense-mediated transcriptional regulation.

we observed that three fermentation genes, pdc, adh, and acs, showed significant induction of antisense strands. induction of the fermentation genes is consistent with the inactivation of the tca cycle and oxidative phosphorylation genes in crabtree-negative species  <cit> . pdc encodes a key enzyme of alcoholic fermentation, which cleaves pyruvate into carbon dioxide and acetaldehyde, and is auto-regulated  <cit> . antisense transcription of the pdc gene was significantly induced and sense transcription was concordantly increased with antisense transcription. the antisense strands of three adh homologs, which are responsible for conversion alcohol into aldehyde in s. cerevisiae, were significantly induced. two of the sense strands were significantly induced and one was significantly repressed. the acs enzyme is responsible for the transformation of acetate into acetyl-coa. we detected differentially expressed transfrags from two acs homologs. in one homolog, both strands were significantly induced whereas in the other, only the sense strand was significantly induced. the rpe enzyme, a constituent of the pentose phosphate pathway, is responsible for the conversion of ribulose 5-phosphate into xylulose 5-phosphate. both the sense and antisense strands of the rpe gene were differentially expressed.

among the genes described above, we selected three genes, acs, adh, and mdh, for the investigation of their antisense transcription pattern. rna-seq profiles of the genes demonstrated an increase in transcription from both sense and antisense strands under me and le conditions, which indicated concordant increase of transcriptional level of mrna/lancrna pairs . furthermore, they showed obvious strand specificity, except in genes with lancrna. these demonstrate that their antisense transcription is transcribed and their transcriptional level is simultaneously increased indeed.

mode of regulation of mrna/lancrna pairs
a given lancrna can exert both positive and negative regulation of its cognate mrna  <cit> . accordingly, we had observed both cases. in order to investigate mode of regulation, we compared the transcriptional levels of mrna/lancrna pairs, where either one or both of the pairs were differentially expressed under ee, me, and le conditions. lancrnas regulate their target by base-pairing  <cit>  and this suggests that interaction between mrna and lancrna may be associated with the mode of regulation. therefore, we hypothesized that the following two factors are associated with mode of regulation,  three differential expression types of mrna/lancrna pairs, as follows: differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs, differentially expressed mrna/non-differentially expressed lancrna pairs, and non-differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs, and  length fraction of mrna covered by lancrna.

in order to test the former hypothesis, we compared transcriptional levels of sense and antisense strands for each differential expression type separately, and found that they showed distinct correlation patterns. taking all the mrna/lancrna pairs into account, our results showed weak positive correlation between lancrna and mrna which was consistent with findings in s. cerevisiae   <cit> . differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs demonstrated strong positive correlation whereas differentially expressed mrna/non-differentially expressed lancrna demonstrated weak positive correlation . the strong positive correlation indicates that transcriptional expression level of mrna is co-regulated with lancrna for each mrna/lancrna pairs. interestingly, non-differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs showed unexpected results . although a weak positive correlation was observed when all the pairs were taken into account, they showed obvious negative correlation at low mrna transcription level while positive correlation at high mrna transcription level. this shows that a certain threshold of transcriptional level of cognate mrna is important to determine the mode of enhancing or repressing by lancrnas. thus, we concludes that this was the result of switch-like behavior of lancrna, as negative regulation at low mrna transcription levels could be interpreted as ensuring the “off” state of mrna transcription, and vice versa  <cit> . thus, our results suggest that the transcriptional mode of regulation of lancrna was influenced by differential expression types of the pairs and mrna transcriptional levels.fig.  <dig> correlation between transcriptional level of mrna and lancrna pairs. a all mrna/lancrna pairs where either one or both member of each pair was differentially expressed during ee, me, and le. b differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs. c differentially expressed mrna/non-differentially expressed lancrna pairs. d non-differentially expressed mrna/differentially expressed lancrna pairs. e pairs with more than 50 % of mrna covered by a lancrna. red points represent genes with high transcription level while blue points represent genes with low transcription level. black, red, and blue lines indicate least squares fitting of mrna and lancrna pairs



in order to test the latter hypothesis, we compared the transcriptional level of mrna/lancrna pairs in which more than 50 % of an mrna was covered by a lancrna . the result showed a positive correlation stronger than that observed when the covering length fraction was not considered . furthermore, genes for which more than 50 % of the mrna was covered by a lancrna exhibited more obvious enrichment of carbohydrate or energy metabolic pathways . these data suggest that the covering length fraction is also an important factor in determining the transcriptional mode of regulation of lancrna.fig.  <dig> significantly enriched kegg pathways of genes with lancrnas. a significantly enriched kegg pathways of genes with all lancrnas. b significantly enriched kegg pathways of genes with lancrna which covers more than half of coding region. red words indicate carbohydrate metabolism or energy metabolism pathways



discussion
pervasive ncrna transcription, which has been demonstrated in the model organism s. cerevisiae, is evolutionarily conserved in the sensu stricto saccharomycetales  <cit> . consistent with this, our results indicate that pervasive ncrna transcription, from antisense and intergenic regions, also occurs in k. marxianus . it was found that ncrnas accounted for ~60 % of all identified transfrags. additionally,  <dig>  % of protein-coding transfrags were found to possess either long or short ncrnas at the opposite strand. similar length fractions of genes  had ncrnas at the opposite strand when only expressed genes were considered. in s. cerevisiae, there are large numbers of unannotated cryptic unstable transcripts  and xrn1-sensitive unstable transcripts , which are destabilized after synthesis  <cit> . furthermore, cuts are reported to be transcribed from both intergenic and antisense regions  <cit> . these data suggest that a large length fraction of ncrnas in k. marxianus may be associated with cuts and xuts.

our results show that lancrna-mediated regulation is enriched for carbohydrate metabolism pathways . enrichment analysis for lancrnas covering more than half of the protein-coding genes in s. cerevisiae revealed a similar enrichment pattern of carbohydrate and energy metabolic pathways    <cit> . the evolutionary conservation of pathway enrichment suggested that pervasive ncrna transcription plays evolutionarily conserved functions in k. marxianus  <cit> . the importance of these pathways for rapid growth via the synthesis of fundamental cellular components and energy production  <cit>  suggests that lancrnas may play major role in rapid growth during the exponential phase through currently unknown mechanisms.

elucidation of the mode of regulation of lancrna may provide insights into these unknown mechanisms. it is generally accepted that lancrnas positively or negatively regulate their cognate mrnas  <cit> . a recent report proposed that lancrnas function as on/off switches, thereby increasing the variability of gene expression  <cit> . several cases of lancrnas with on/off switch-like behavior have been reported . our results showed that mrna/lancrna pairs demonstrate inverse mode of regulation according to the transcriptional level of mrna, especially in differentially expressed lancrna/non-differentially expressed mrna pairs , although the same trend was also observed in other types of mrna/lancrna pairs . therefore, the relationship between transcriptional levels of mrna and lancrna involves switching mrna transcriptional level between on and off states. in other words, lancrnas enhance the transcriptional level of their cognate mrnas if the mrna transcriptional level is higher than certain threshold, but repress this if it is lower. therefore, our results not only support the view of lancrna functioning as an on/off switch, but also suggest that this represents a widely used mode of regulation, particularly in carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways. in addition, our results showed that strong positive correlation exists between transcriptional levels of mrna/lancrna pairs, if both pairs are differentially expressed or if the length fraction of mrna covered by lancrna is more than 50 % . these data suggest that the two factors are important for enhancing mrna transcriptional levels by a currently unknown mechanism. consistent with this finding, a recent study showed that lancrnas indeed play a role in enhancing mrna transcriptional levels in several cases  <cit> . taken together, our results suggest that a single lancrna may play either a switch-like roles or an enhancing role depending on conditions such as the mrna transcriptional level and differential expression of mrna. however, the molecular mechanisms underlying this mode of regulation should be investigated in a specific candidate gene, as our findings are based on observations of the mrna/lancrna population. besides, evolutionarily conserved enrichment of lancrna differential expression, and several cases of lancrna functioning as a switch for regulating mrna in carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways suggest that the switch-like function of lancrna may be prevalent across a wide range of species.

among genes with differentially expressed lancrna, pfk encodes an enzyme that catalyzes fructose 6-phosphate  into fructose- <dig> -bisphosphate  with the release of energy via atp hydrolysis. pfk is one of the primary targets of glycolytic flux regulation according to atp demand, and this regulation is conserved from bacteria to humans  <cit> . reporter metabolites, such as atp for pfk, play an important role in monitoring the environment or nutrient status by modulating the transcriptional level of associated genes . most genes with differentially expressed lancrna are associated with cofactors used as reporter metabolites. the acs enzyme also uses atp whereas gapdh, mdh, and pdc use nad, and idh uses nadp as cofactor. recent studies show that long ncrnas promote transcriptional poising of the immediate-early response of inducible genes  <cit> . therefore, the transcriptional status of these genes may serve as a good target for the regulation of glycolytic flux. additionally, lancrnas may enable rapid and efficient post-transcriptional switch in response to environmental changes, in contrast to metabolic regulation or gene regulation alone  <cit> . consistent with this, metabolic fluxes mediated by glycolytic enzymes are regulated at the post-transcriptional level  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, k. marxianus transcribes ncrnas pervasively during exponential growth. among the ncrna classes, lancrnas are enriched for genes comprising carbohydrate or energy metabolism pathways. further analysis of the correlation between mrna and lancrna suggests that lancrnas enable switch-like behavior of their cognate mrnas via transcriptional induction. thus, lancrna-mediated regulation of mrna represents a mechanism for efficient regulation of carbohydrate and energy metabolism pathways.

