BACKGROUND
withania somnifera  dunal  commonly known as ashwgandha or winter cherry is one of the top medicinal herbs used in ayurveda – the holistic system of indian medicine. most of its therapeutic properties are comparable to those of ginseng, and hence w. somnifera is also known as indian ginseng. w. somnifera extract in various forms has been used as an adaptogen, aphrodisiac, liver tonic, anti-inflammatory agent, hepatoprotectant, astringent, immune booster  <cit> , immunomodulator  <cit>  and more recently to treat alzheimer’s disease  <cit> , neurodegenerative disorders and stress  <cit>  and also as an adjunct to chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy  <cit> . wide variations in the type and content of secondary metabolites have been reported within chemotypes and parts of the w. somnifera plant  <cit> . the principle bioactive components, a group of secondary metabolites collectively called withanolides, are c- <dig> steroidal lactones  <cit> . withanolides are biosynthesised through the isoprenoid pathway, probably via both the mevalonate and non-mevalonate pathways  <cit>  wherein 24-methylene cholesterol is the first branching point towards the biosynthesis of different withanolides through a series of desaturation, hydroxylation, epoxidation, cyclization, chain elongation, and glycosylation steps  <cit> .

w. somnifera has been identified by the national medicinal plant board of india as one of the thirty-two priority medicinal plants that are in great demand in the domestic and international markets  <cit> . according to one estimate, the demand for withanolide production from dried plant material is  <dig>  tonnes  <cit> , whereas the annual production is  <dig>  tonnes  <cit> . to meet the growing demand of the herbal industry, in vitro cultures could be an alternative to field-grown plants for consistent production of secondary metabolites within a short period  <cit> . several reports indicate the potential of manipulating in vitro tissues to produce bioactive terpenoids, phenolics, saponins and anthocyanins  <cit> , but any attempt to engineer efficient production of secondary metabolites requires understanding of their biosynthetic pathway, and our present knowledge of withanolide biosynthesis is limited to only a few genes involved in the pathway  <cit> .

next-generation sequencing  technology for transcriptomes  provides a new approach for both obtaining gene sequences and quantifying transcriptomes of any organism. in recent years, rna-seq has been a powerful method for identifying genes involved in important secondary metabolite pathways such as biosynthesis of ginsenosides in panax ginseng  <cit> , carotenoids in momordica cochinchinensis  <cit> , flavonoids, theanine and caffeine in tea   <cit> , flavonoids in safflower   <cit> , capsaicinoid in chili pepper   <cit>  and flavor components in radish   <cit> . initial efforts have been made to generate expressed sequence tags  from in vitro tissues of w. somnifera  <cit> . in addition, leaf and root transcriptomes of field-grown tissues have been analysed to identify genes involved in withanolide biosynthesis  <cit> , and very recently, analysis of the expression of pathogenesis-related genes has been carried out in leaf transcriptomes of w. somnifera  <cit> . however, no large-scale transcriptome information validated by expression profiling is available for in vitro tissues of w. somnifera.

here, we used rna-seq for large-scale transcriptome profiling and generated a comprehensive transcriptome for w. somnifera by assembling the transcriptomes of in vitro adventitious root and leaf tissues from the millions of short sequence reads generated by illumina. annotations including functional annotation, gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways - are also reported. in addition, we showed that in vitro tissue extracts have antioxidant activity and cytotoxicity against human adenocarcinoma gastric cancer  cell lines. furthermore, we have developed a web database in which to access the w. somnifera transcriptome. overall, this work represents the first large-scale transcriptome profiling of in vitro tissues for w. somnifera and provides comparative expression profiling of pathway genes involved in withanolide biosynthesis and their potential biological activity.

RESULTS
induction and maintenance of in vitro cultures
direct adventitious roots were induced successfully from leaf explants of w. somnifera. further induced roots were maintained in ms liquid medium in a bubble column bioreactor . at 45 days, adventitious roots showed maximal growth with increased branching. the roots were healthy and creamy white in colour. by 60 days, the roots turned brown and brittle. leaf tissues from multiple shoots maintained in vitro were used for isolation of total rna.figure  <dig> 
adventitious root induction and proliferation in bioreactor. a -induction of adventitious roots from the leaf explants of w. somnifera, b propagation stage after 30 days of culture, c mass production of root after 45 days in bioreactor.



illumina sequencing and de novo assembly
to establish a comprehensive overview of the w. somnifera transcriptome, we prepared rna-seq libraries from total rna isolated from 60-day-old in vitro cultures of adventitious root and leaf tissues and subjected them to paired-end  sequencing with the illumina platform. we obtained  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> cleaned high-quality reads from the in vitro adventitious root and leaf tissues, respectively . we combined both sets of reads and assembled them using trinity  <cit>  to generate a unique transcript library. after read depth analysis, we obtained a total of  <dig>  transcripts  with an average length of  <dig>  bp  that we used for subsequent analyses and also prepared a set of  <dig>  non-redundant  transcripts by selecting only the longest sequence among isoforms.table  <dig> 
summary of
w. somnifera
transcriptome sequencing, assembly and annotation



tissues
no. of raw reads
no. of trimmed reads
no. of assembled transcripts
nr set 
average transcript length 
longest transcript length 




differentially expressed transcripts between in vitro-grown roots and leaves
high-quality reads from in vitro adventitious root and leaf samples were separately mapped to the assembled transcripts and the number of reads mapped was normalized by the fpkm method using rsem  <cit> . we classified gene expression into four categories , based on the fpkm values for each transcript in the respective tissue samples . the largest fraction of transcripts showed low expression  in both tissue samples. a small fraction  was expressed moderately in both tissues and very few  had high expression . in addition, we identified transcripts expressed specifically in each tissue sample using tissue-by-tissue comparison between root and leaf. for this, we normalized the number of reads mapped to each transcript per million  mapped for root and leaf tissues and considered transcripts to be expressed specifically in a single tissue  if they showed at least  <dig> tpm in the tissue of interest and zero in the other. among the total  <dig>  transcripts analysed in this study, a large number  were present in both tissues and a total of  <dig>  were preferentially expressed in root. by contrast, we did not find any transcripts expressed exclusively in leaf. to identify differentially-expressed transcripts, the edger bioconductor package was used with a threshold of greater than 2-fold change and a significant false discovery rate  value of ≤  <dig>   <cit> . we found a total of  <dig>  transcripts with different expression between root and leaf . among them,  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated and  <dig>  transcripts were down-regulated.figure  <dig> 
expression profiling of
w. somnifera
. root and leaf transcripts were classified as having low, moderate, high, or very high expression based on fpkm values.



functional annotation of the assembled transcripts
for validation and annotation of assembled transcripts, sequence similarity searches were conducted against protein databases. blast searches indicated that  <dig>   and  <dig>   out of  <dig>  transcripts showed significant similarity to known proteins in ncbi nr and tair databases. as expected, the number of annotations we could assign increased when we annotated based on the closely related solanaceae species of tomato and potato. of all the transcripts,  <dig>   had blast hits in tomato protein database, and  <dig>   transcripts significantly matched proteins in the potato database.

further, gene ontology  annotation  <cit>  was carried out blast2go  <cit>  and a total of  <dig>  transcripts  were assigned at least one go term. among the go classifications, assignments to the cellular component class ranked highest , followed by biological process  and molecular function . within the molecular function category, transcripts assigned to protein binding  and atp binding  processes were the most common . within the biological process category, the majority of the go terms were assigned to response to salt stress  and response to cadmium ion . for cellular components, the assignments were mostly nucleus  and plasma membrane .figure  <dig> 
gene ontology  classification of assembled
in vitro
tissue transcripts. go assignments are summarized in three main categories: molecular function, biological process, and cellular component. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were assigned go terms based on blast matches to known proteins.



to identify the biological functions and interactions of genes, we used kegg pathway  <cit>  annotation. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were assigned to  <dig> kegg pathways. as shown in figure  <dig>  the kegg metabolic pathways assigned most transcripts were involved in purine, starch and sucrose metabolism. of the transcripts assigned to secondary metabolite biosynthetic pathways, a large pool with  <dig> members was mapped to phenylpropanoid biosynthesis , with monoterpenoid biosynthesis  and terpenoid backbone biosynthesis  also including many transcripts. the overall annotation of the w. somnifera transcriptome provides a valuable resource for investigating specific processes, functional descriptions and pathways.figure  <dig> 
kegg pathway annotation of assembled
in vitro
tissue transcripts. pathway assignment was summarized for two main categories: metabolism and secondary metabolite categories. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were assigned to primary and secondary metabolic pathways.
differential expression of transcripts involved in major secondary metabolite biosynthetic pathways



pathway
pathway id in kegg db
no. of transcripts assigned to pathway
differentially expressed transcripts 
no. of unique transcripts

adventitious roots
leaves


we next identified differentially expressed transcripts involved in the biosynthesis of major secondary metabolites . differentially expressed transcripts were observed for most of the pathways analysed, which was perhaps not surprising given the large number of transcripts that were unique to in vitro root tissues. we mapped the  <dig>  in vitro root-specific transcripts to kegg pathways and observed that only 3% of the transcripts were assigned to established pathways whereas the others were of unknown function. interestingly,  <dig> transcripts for beta-amyrin synthase appear to be specific to in vitro–grown roots as they were not found among field-grown root transcripts  <cit> .

expression of major withanolide biosynthesis genes in adventitious root and leaf tissues at different culture periods
to establish a complete expression profile for genes in the withanolide biosynthesis pathway, we extracted transcripts encoding enzymes involved in withanolide biosynthesis, including fpps, se, cas, dxps, gt, and hmgr  from our assembly. we found expression of most transcripts in both types of in vitro tissues, along with some in vitro root-unique transcripts . there were many transcripts for methyltransferase enzymes and very few for enzymes such as ceci, mecdps, hmbpr, hmbps and mvd . overall, our data clearly showed that genes encoding putative enzymes involved in withanolide biosynthesis were expressed in both in vitro root and leaf tissues. for experimental confirmation, we chose major candidate genes hmgr, fpps, se, cas and gt and performed qrt-pcr analysis . fpps, se and cas genes exhibited higher expression at 45 days of growth in both leaf and root tissue. hmgr expression was high in 30-day-old in vitro adventitious root cultures, but declined sharply by the 45th day to levels observed in leaf tissues. in leaf tissue, the expression of hmgr was much lower, with maximal expression at 45 days of culture. cas and gt shared similar expression levels in leaf tissues. in root tissue, gt levels were high until 60 days of culture, whereas in leaf tissue, gt exhibited similar expression during  <dig> and 45 days of growth but declined at 60 days. the expression of se and gt seemed to follow a similar pattern with relatively higher expression in roots compared to leaves at all three time periods analysed, whereas fpps and cas shared a similar expression profile, with comparatively higher expression in leaves. the correlation matrix revealed significant linear correlation between the expression patterns of fpps and se, and the accumulation of major withanolides. fpps and se exhibited significant correlation  and  respectively with the accumulation of withanolide a in 45-day-old root culture. in 45-day-old leaf culture, significant linear correlation  and a strong positive correlation  were displayed by fpps and se, respectively, towards the accumulation of withaferin a. among 60 day old root culture, significant correlation was exhibited by se  and fpps  towards the accumulation of withanolide a whereas, among 60 day old leaf culture, fpps exhibited strong positive correlation  followed by se  towards the accumulation of withaferin a. this shows that, though the roots turn brown by 60 days of culture, there is active metabolism taking place. overall, the expression of the  <dig> tested genes in all time periods were comparable to the digital expression patterns observed in 60-day-old in vitro root and leaf tissue sequencing data based on fpkm values .table  <dig> 
number of transcripts found in
in vitro
roots and leaves putatively encoding enzymes involved in withanolide biosynthesis



enzymes
abbreviation
enzyme commission number
no. of transcripts

total
expressed in both adventitious roots and leaves
uniquely expressed in adventitious rootsexpression analysis of selected genes related to withanolide biosynthesis. adventitious roots and leaves of  <dig>   <dig>  and 60 days old were collected and their total rnas were used for qrt-pcr analysis of genes for hmgr, fpps, se, cas, and gt. relative expression levels were calculated by the 2-ΔΔct method with gapdh as an internal control.



quantification of major withanolides in in vitro leaf and root tissues
the major secondary metabolites of w. somnifera, namely withanolide a and withaferin a, were quantified by high performance thin layer chromatography  <cit>  . the contents of both components were significantly different in the two tissues tested . leaf tissues preferentially accumulated withaferin a whereas in vitro adventitious root tissues accumulated prodigious quantities of withanolide a. significant differences were also observed in the accumulation patterns over time. in vitro adventitious roots contained high amounts of withanolide a  at 45 days, but less at 60 days of culture. similarly, withaferin a accumulation  in leaf tissue was highest at 45 days and reduced on extended culturing period.figure  <dig> 
accumulation of major withanolides in
in vitro
grown samples. withanolide contents in in vitro adventitious root and shoot cultures  quantified using hptlc. the data are the mean ± se of three replicates obtained from two independent experiments.



antioxidant activity of extracts of in vitro leaf and root tissues
complex antioxidant systems are essential for protecting cellular membranes and organelles from the damaging effects of reactive oxygen species , and plants have developed a series of enzymatic and non-enzymatic detoxification systems to counteract ros  <cit> . the enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant activities of the cultured w. somnifera tissues is represented in table  <dig>  though both tissues were grown under controlled conditions, the antioxidant potentials differed between extracts of in vitro adventitious root  and leaf . the antioxidant capacity, as estimated from total antioxidants, of root extracts was much higher than that of leaf extracts .table  <dig> 
antioxidant activity in methanolic extracts of adventitious root and leaves



activity of antioxidants
tissue

in vitro
adventitious root
in vitro
leaf

enzymatic antioxidants 

non-enzymatic antioxidants 
the values of mean ± sd of triplicates.

sod : amount of sod that causes 50% reduction in the extent of nbt oxidation.

peroxidase : change in absorbance/min at 430 nm.

gst : moles of cdnb conjucated/min/mg of sample.

polyphenol oxidase: : change in absorbance/minute at 495 nm.



inhibitory effect of methanolic extract of in vitro w. somnifera leaf tissue on cell proliferation
an initial cytotoxicity study based on the survival of adenocarcinoma gastric cancer  cell lines was performed using an mtt - <dig>  5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. cells were exposed to various concentrations  of methanolic extract of in vitro-grown leaf tissues  and the cell viability was determined. cytotoxicity was quantified as the percentage of viable treated cells relative to the viable cells in an untreated control. the half maximal inhibitory concentration  for leaf extract was  <dig>  μg/ml . to determine the amount of sub g0/g <dig> cells present, the ags cell lines were treated with leaf extract at the maximal ic <dig> concentration . the cells were stained with propidium iodide  and analyzed using flow cytometry. statistically significant accumulation of cells with sub-g <dig> dna content and other remarkably detectable cell cycle changes were noted after 24 h incubation. consistent with an increased sub-g <dig> ags cell population, there was a notable decrease of cells in g <dig>  s and g2/m phases. the control cells that were treated with phosphate buffer saline  alone showed no changes in cell cycle regulation . annexin v/pi staining followed by flow cytometry was used to confirm the effect of apoptosis on ags cells. treatment of cells with methanolic extract of in vitro-grown leaf tissue resulted in more apoptotic cells, and the percentage of cells in late apoptosis was much higher than that in early apoptosis . these data suggest that leaf extract from in vitro-grown w. somnifera inhibits ags cell proliferation by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.figure  <dig> 
influence of i
n vitro
leaf extract on ags cell growth inhibition. a- inhibitory effect of in vitro methanolic leaf extract on ags cell proliferation was measured by mtt assay. ic- <dig> value of the extract on the cell viability was identified as  <dig>  μg/ml. b – dna cell cycle analysis of control and treated ags cells. cells were stained with pi to determine cell cycle phase distribution based on fluorescence of dna. c - apoptosis level was examined by flow cytometry for control and treated ags cells. cells were treated with methanolic extract of in vitro grown leaf tissue  for 24 h. data are representative of three similar experiments.



comparative analysis of in vitro- and field-grown leaf and root transcripts
to investigate tissue or culture method-unique gene expression, we compared our 60-day-old in vitro leaf and root transcripts with one-year old field-grown root and leaf sequences that were downloaded from the ncbi sra database   <cit> . we selected high-quality reads from in vitro root and leaf samples and assembled them separately using trinity. this assembly yielded a total of  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of  <dig>  bp for root and  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of  <dig>  for leaf. then, we mapped field-grown root sequences onto our in vitro root transcripts with a minimum alignment length of 200 bp. only  <dig> % of the transcripts were not found in field-grown roots, and we consider these transcripts as in vitro root-specific transcripts. similarly, field-grown leaf sequences were aligned onto our in vitro leaf data set, revealing about  <dig> % of in vitro leaf-specific transcripts.

furthermore, we assembled field-grown leaves and root tissues separately using clc assembler to identify field-grown specific transcripts. we did not find a significant number of field grown tissue-specific transcripts. this implies that our assembly from cultured tissue contains a large enough number of contigs to avoid much loss of information.

identification of cdna-derived est-ssr markers
transcript-based ssr markers are important resources for genetic diversity analysis, marker-assisted selection, and genetic mapping. for identification of ssrs, w. somnifera nr set transcripts were searched with perl script misa . the following criteria for ssr identification were used in the misa script: mono-nucleotides repeated more than ten times, di-nucleotides repeated more than six times, and tri-, tetra-, penta- or hexa-nucleotides repeated more than five times. a total of  <dig>  potential est-ssrs were identified in  <dig>  transcripts, of which  <dig>  sequences contained more than  <dig> est-ssr and  <dig> est-ssrs were present in compound form. the di-nucleotide ssrs represented the most abundant type  of ssrs identified followed by tri-nucleotide  ssrs. we also identified tetra - and penta -nucleotide ssr motifs. although only a small fraction of tetra- and penta-ssrs were identified in w. somnifera, the number is quite significant and will provide a cost-effective method for development of functional genetic markers in w. somnifera.

withanomics database
we developed a public data resource, withanomics, which provides a searchable interface for the w. somnifera transcriptome data. withanomics is freely available at http://im-crop.snu.ac.kr/withania/index.php. the current version of this database provides the total transcriptome sequences  and leaf  sequences and root  sequences separately reported in this study, as well as est sequences produced from our previous study  <cit> . expression data for transcripts can be accessed using unique transcript ids which report the expression of the transcripts in root and leaf tissues. functional searches for all transcripts can be carried out using functional keywords with the annotation database. additionally, we included an in vitro root-specific function option to extract function of in vitro root-specific transcripts. the database uses the ncbi blast algorithm  for sequence-based searches. from blast searches, users can match nucleotide or protein sequence against the w. somnifera whole transcriptome data, separate tissue transcriptome data, and ests from root and shoot data at user-defined parameters. furthermore, we developed a sequence extract tool to extract or download single or bulk sequences from our database. we anticipate that the database will be useful for accelerating genomic research in withania and we will be updating this database annually or as new sequence data sets are available for withania.

discussion
establishment of in vitro cultures and transcriptome sequences of w. somnifera
w. somnifera is a medicinal plant of high therapeutic value, and withanolides are the major secondary metabolites responsible for most of the pharmacological activity of this plant. the accumulation of secondary metabolites in field-grown plants can be influenced by various environmental factors as well as the age of the plant at harvest  <cit> . the growing demand in the pharmaceutical industry and the lack of homogeneity in field-grown material led us to search for an alternative approach for mass production of w. somnifera roots. adventitious w. somnifera roots grown in vitro have been reported to produce the pharmaceutically important withanolides, especially withanolide a  <cit> . root tips are auxin-accumulating regions where active cell multiplication takes place, and hence were chosen for establishment of suspension cultures. leaves from shoots devoid of roots were chosen from in vitro multiplied plants. this was done to ensure that the transcriptome library we constructed would represent transcripts exclusively specific to root or leaf tissues. in vitro cultures have been successfully exploited for the production of paclitaxel, an anticancer agent from taxus species, at industrial scale, and attempts are being made to increase production using elicitors  <cit> . however, only when bottlenecks in the biosynthetic pathways have been identified will it be possible to overexpress the genes that control the rate-limiting steps and thus boost the production of valuable secondary metabolites in in vitro cultures.

in our current study, we generated a total of  <dig> million high-quality reads from in vitro-grown leaf and root tissues, more than the previously reported ests and transcriptome data  <cit> . we obtained a total transcriptome size of  <dig> mbps with average transcript length of  <dig>  bp  which is comparatively better than a previous withania  <dig> transcriptome study  <cit> . significant differences in the number of transcripts annotated previously  <cit>  and in the present study were documented. functional genomics studies require highly reliable reference sequences and our assembly data can be utilized as such for w. somnifera due to the high sequencing depth. go annotation showed that many transcripts were assigned to regulation-related process such as response to stress and wounding and defence responses in the biological process category. transcripts related to go term nucleus were most abundant in the cellular component category, which is similar to the previously reported go annotation of field-grown root and leaf tissues  <cit> . further, pathway assignment for all transcripts was performed based on the kegg database. previously, gupta et al.  <cit>  identified a total of  <dig> pathways among one-year-old field-grown leaf and root tissue transcripts, while  <dig> pathways were identified in the present study. in both studies, the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was found to harbour the largest cluster of transcripts. in a recent study, dasgupta et al.  <cit>  reported  <dig> pathways from their in vitro leaf transcriptome library. the additional pathways may be due to pathogenesis-related genes expressed in response to salicylic acid signalling in the source tissue of their study.

identification and expression of genes related to withanolide biosynthesis
with respect to the genes involved in withanolide biosynthesis, we observed all genes to be expressed in both roots and leaves, similar to the results of gupta et al.  <cit> . as a part of our ongoing endeavour, we validated important withanolide pathway genes including hmgr, fpps, se, cas and gt at different time periods of culture . hmgr catalyses the reduction of hmg-coa to mevalonate, reported to be the first committed step in the isoprenoid pathway  <cit> . fpps catalyses the biosynthesis of fpp, which serves as a substrate for the first committed reaction of several branched pathways  <cit> . se and cas genes comprise vital genetic components of biosynthetic pathways leading to production of phytosterols and a large cluster of triterpenoids  <cit> . gt performs the glycosylation of a wide variety of natural compounds, which is an important mechanism in detoxification of exogenous compounds  <cit> .

among these genes, the expression of hmgr was notable in that it showed very high expression during the 30th day of culture in in vitro roots. differences in expression of hmgr could be essential to accommodate the changing demand for a cellular array of isoprenoids during normal growth and development of the plant, as is evidenced by the tissue-specific expression of members of this multi-gene family in several plant species  <cit> . hmgr has been reported to be present in two copies in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  and three to four copies in solanum species  <cit> . expression of hmgr varies in a time-dependent manner in in vitro cultures of dioscorea zingiberensis  <cit> , which is similar to our observation. fpps is another of key enzyme in the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway, wherein it initiates triterpenoid precursor biosynthesis to support withanolide production  <cit> . any change in the levels of fpps would alter the flux of isoprenoids towards various branches of this pathway, playing a crucial role in isoprenoid metabolism. cas plays essential roles in plant cell viability and in the regulation of triterpenoid biosynthesis. upregulation of cas results in enhanced accumulation of diosgenin in in vitro cultures of d. zingiberensis  <cit> . in general, the expression of fpps and cas were found to be higher in leaves at all time points in in vitro shoots compared to roots, which is in accordance with previous observations  <cit> .

se is a noncytochrome-p <dig> type monooxygenase that catalyses the formation of a hydroxyl group that is characteristic of sterols and triterpenols and represents a rate-limiting step in sterol biosynthesis  <cit> . a higher level of se expression was observed in in vitro roots than in leaf tissues, consistent with a previous report of higher expression of se in one-year-old field-grown roots than in shoot tissues of w. somnifera  <cit> . glucosylation of sterols is catalyzed by sterol glucosyltransferases , which are family  <dig> glycosyltransferases. the expression of se and gt was found to be higher in in vitro roots at all time periods compared to leaves. among the time periods analysed, all genes investigated except hmgr showed the highest expression at the 45th day of culture.

in the present study, the high expression of se observed in root tissue was in corroboration with the data of sabir et al.  <cit> , who reported a correlation between high expression of the genes for squalene epoxidase and squalene synthase and relatively higher accumulation of withanolide in field-grown root tissues. se was reported to be the rate-limiting enzyme in sterol biosynthesis  <cit> , and this could explain the high withanolide accumulation in 45-day-old in vitro root culture. though expression of fpps was higher in in vitro root tissue at 45 days, wsfpps may not modulate withanolide content  <cit>  as fpp is also reported to be involved in biosynthesis of triterpenoids, carotenoids, plastoquinones and many other molecules. next to fpps, expression of cas was highest in root tissues. after the formation of epoxy squalene, cas catalyzes the next step, which involves the formation of 24-methylene cholesterol, a precursor molecule for withanolide synthesis. hence, expression of cas also plays a significant role in the biosynthesis of withanolides.

we can surmise that the key pathway genes are expressed to different levels in different parts of the plant thus showing tissue-specific expression. this variation may be because of the presence of specific trans-acting factors required for their functional activation. expression analysis of other genes involved in the biosynthetic pathway along with inhibitor studies will aid in enhancing the specific accumulation of desirable secondary metabolites.

pattern of withanolide accumulation
it has been hypothesised that withanolides are produced in different parts of the plant through expression of the metabolic pathway rather than being imported from leaves  <cit> . our current results support this hypothesis in that the expression of important genes involved in withanogenesis showed a differential pattern along with the accumulation of important withanolides, namely withanolide a and withaferin a. the accumulation of both withanolide a and withaferin a was found to be high during 45 days of culture, but interestingly, accumulation of withanolide a in leaves was nearly absent as was that of withaferin a in roots.

this observation is contradictory to the previous reports of sabir et al.  <cit> , but is in accordance with the observation of dasgupta et al.  <cit>  who reported a low concentration of withanolide a in control leaf samples, which are comparable to the 45-day-old leaves in the present study. the accumulation of withanolide a in roots followed a similar pattern to the previous report  <cit> , where withaferin a was absent in in vitro root cultures. thus, withaferin a was found to be tightly linked to leaf tissue indicating that there was no coordination of the accumulation profile between root and leaf tissue. the results of the present study are particularly important as they indicate that the in vitro-cultured roots and shoots possess de novo withanogenic competence and that in vitro cultures can be manipulated for efficient production of specific withanolides.

antioxidant efficacy of in vitro tissues
we found that the in vitro-cultured roots of w. somnifera are good source of both non-enzymatic and enzymatic antioxidant components. in vitro-cultured root tissue showed high sod and gst activity in addition to polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase activity. present in all subcellular organelles, sod serves as the first line of defence against free radicals. gsts are most often thought of as detoxification enzymes and can metabolize a wide range of toxic exogenous compounds via gsh conjugation  <cit> . polyphenol oxidase is localized in the chloroplast and is a copper-associated enzyme with two binding sites for phenolic substrates. previous research reported that polyphenol oxidase is activated only when the plant undergoes physical damage  <cit> . this might explain the relatively low level of polyphenol oxidase activity in in vitro root and leaf tissue. increased peroxidase activity is associated with environmental stress on plants  <cit> . the low peroxidase activity in in vitro cultures could result from a related lack of expression of the enzyme. among the non-enzymatic antioxidants, vitamin e was found to be the most abundant in in vitro root cultures. vitamin e is a lipid-soluble vitamin found in cell membranes and circulating lipoproteins that offers protection against oxidative damage by acting directly with a variety of oxygen radicals. its antioxidant function is strongly supported by regeneration promoted by vitamin c  <cit> . hence, these results support the view that in vitro-cultured roots are promising source of potential antioxidants and function similar to field-grown tissues.

combining the promising evidence that the in vitro leaf tissues express higher quantities of withaferin a than the in vitro root tissues, we proceeded to analyse the cytotoxicity of w. somnifera leaf extract on ags cell lines. we found that the samples had the ability to linearly produce 50% cell death with the maximally effective concentration being 100–120 μg/ml. the effect of w. somnifera leaf extract on ags cancer cells establishes that tissues grown in vitro are capable of inducing apoptosis and regulating the cell cycle of dna biosynthesis. it has been previously reported that withaferin a, a promising anticancer constituent of w. somnifera, inhibits growth of human breast cancer cells in culture and in vivo in association with apoptosis induction  <cit> . overall, the apoptosis and cell cycle analysis in cancer cells demonstrates that the in vitro w. somnifera leaves have anticancer effects, especially on human gastric adenocarcinoma cell lines.

CONCLUSIONS
here, transcriptome profiles for in vitro-cultured leaf and root tissues of w. somnifera provided substantial information with respect to expression of genes involved in withanolide biosynthesis and accumulation of major withanolides. we have also shown that accumulation of different metabolites is linked to tissue type and that the extracts of in vitro root and leaf tissues have antioxidant potential and anti-proliferative capacity against an ags cancer cell line, respectively. further, we developed a user-friendly public database to accelerate research. altogether, our research provides valuable information on the w. somnifera in vitro transcriptome and withanolide biosynthetic pathway gene expression to promote effective engineering of the pathway genes for improved biosynthesis of withanolides.

