BACKGROUND
rna editing is the process whereby an rna sequence is modified from the sequence corresponding to the dna template. a particular form of rna editing in plant mitochondria, by which some cytidines are converted to uridines before translation, occurs in many land plant lineages. although cytidine to uridine conversion is most common, the reverse conversion is sometimes observed  <cit> . in plants, the phenomenon is best studied, albeit still poorly understood, in the mitochondria and plastids of angiosperms  <cit> .

the majority of plant mitochondrial rna editing occurs in coding sequences, and editing frequently changes codons, resulting in changes of amino acids, or, in some cases, creation of entirely new open reading frames  <cit> . these changes often result in an increase in similarity with respect to homologous protein sequences among different organisms , and gray has postulated that the rna editing process functions as a repair mechanism to correct otherwise-deleterious genomic mutations  <cit> . rna editing has also been detected in introns, where it is conjectured to improve splicing efficiency  <cit> .

the precise biochemical basis for c-to-u editing in plant mitochondria is unknown, although experimental evidence suggests a deamination reaction  <cit> . despite substantial study, the molecular biological mechanism by which c-to-u rna editing proceeds remains relatively obscure, although several experimental studies have implicated a role for cis-recognition  <cit> . the mechanism by which edited sites are recognized is also still poorly understood, but the importance of surrounding nucleotides has been noted  <cit> . a highly non-random distribution of nucleotides in the immediate vicinity of edited sites  is observed, but no precise consensus motif has been identified  <cit> . additionally, previous studies suggest that inferred secondary structure is not important in site recognition for c-to-u conversion  <cit> .

identifying edited sites thus remains an open problem, one to which we have applied tree-based statistical models and an extension of such models. when applied to a similar problem  class i molecules  <cit> ), tree-based statistical methods generated very accurate models, identifying specific important residues when no precise sequence motif had previously been identified. therefore, we were motivated to apply tree-based statistical models and an extension, random forests, to the problem of c-to-u rna editing in angiosperm mitochondria using complete mitochondrial genome data for three species: arabidopsis thaliana, brassica napus and oryza sativa. the objective for the current research was to identify sequence features that may provide insights into c-to-u editing of plant mitochondrial rna. we address the following specific questions. is there evidence that sufficient information exists within sequence regions flanking edited sites to accurately predict editing? is there an association between estimated free energy of folding for short sequence regions containing edited sites and c-to-u editing? we report tree-based statistical analysis of three complete mitochondrial genomes and show that relatively simple models provide moderately accurate prediction of c-to-u edited sites.

RESULTS
tree-based statistical models
analysis of each of the three species-specific mitochondrial genome data sets yielded substantially similar results . using flanking nucleotides and estimates of folding energy as predictor variables, the optimistic re-substitution-based estimates for cross-validated pruned models had a mean correct classification rate of  <dig>   across the three species.

as an additional classification tree analysis, we examined a dataset generated by combining the data from the three species. these results were generally similar to those described above for the mean of the individual genome datasets. the classification tree model is shown in figure 1; the partition is defined based on the nucleotide immediately 5'  of the edited/non-edited site. of the  <dig> observations with pyrimidine at the - <dig> position,  <dig>  are edited and  <dig>  are non-edited sites. of the  <dig> observations with purine at the - <dig> position,  <dig>  are edited and  <dig>  are non-edited sites.

random forests
results from random forests  were very similar to those obtained with classification trees and were somewhat more accurate. in single-species analyses, the mean accuracy rate was  <dig>  . analysis of the larger, combined data set yielded a model better than any of the single genome models with an accuracy of  <dig>  . analysis of variable importance showed that the - <dig> position is overwhelmingly the most important factor in determining editing status. other variables of lesser predictive value include estimated free energy of folding, and the - <dig> and + <dig> positions relative to the edited/non-edited site .

discussion
despite their simplicity, the tree-based statistical models derived here performed moderately well, with mean accuracies across species generally ~ <dig> . single trees were improved upon by constructing models based on ensembles of tree-based models  each of which was built using random subsamples of the data. this sub-sampling has the effect of reducing the variance through averaging and also reducing the correlation among models.

one of the advantages that random forests have over single classification trees is that they provide quantitative measures of variable importance, whereas with a simple classification tree, one is primarily limited to inferring variable importance from the frequency and location of the occurrence of variables in the model. one measure of variable importance is the decrease in the gini index  induced by splitting on the variable, averaged over all trees  <cit> .

in order to infer the relative importance of the predictor variables, we considered the measure of variable importance produced during the random forest run on the combined dataset, which is the most broadly representative dataset considered here. a plot of the variable importance measure for this dataset is shown in figure 2; more important variables are shown as higher bars. the measure strongly indicates that the residue immediately 5' of the edited site  is very important. these variable importance results are in agreement with previous work on c-to-u editing in mitochondria of arabidopsis thaliana, which noted the - <dig>  and - <dig> positions had highly non-random nucleotide distributions  <cit> . however, the results here differ from the past study of arabidopsis in that we find no indication that the - <dig> position has much importance in edited site recognition. also previously noted was that for  <dig> % of the time  <cit> , the - <dig> position contained a pyrimidine, which is the data partition found by the classification trees.

the free energy results contrast with previous studies indicating that secondary structure was not important in edited site recognition  <cit> . our results show free energy is a relatively important variable in the random forest analyses. these results therefore indicate that secondary structure, as measured by free energy of folding for the  <dig> nt region centered on an edited/non-edited site, does help in distinguishing edited from non-edited sites. previous studies determined putative secondary structures for mrna regions containing edited sites and looked for conserved structural motifs. in contrast, we used estimates of free energy of folding, which are much easier to compare quantitatively. it may be that secondary or tertiary structure is even more important in determining edited sites than shown here; however, secondary structure may not be effectively represented by the calculated estimates of free energy of folding analyzed.

CONCLUSIONS
simple models based on nucleotides surrounding edited/non-edited sites and on estimated folding energies of those regions provide moderately accurate prediction of c-to-u rna edited sites. more nuanced representation of secondary or higher-order structure in combination with variables based on the nucleotide positions found important here might improve models. overall, the results strongly suggest that the c-to-u editing mechanism in plant mitochondria does not depend exclusively on the primary sequence immediately in the vicinity of the edited site.

