BACKGROUND
although the exact phylogenetic position of phoronida is still a matter of ongoing debate , all recent molecular analyses agree in their inclusion within the protostome superclade lophotrochozoa  <cit> . mainly based on a proposed homologous feeding organ, the lophophore, phoronida has been traditionally aligned with ectoprocta and brachiopoda to form the monophyletic lophophorata  <cit> . this view is supported by a shared radial type of cleavage  <cit>  , but otherwise there is little morphological support for such an assemblage, mainly due to the high disparity of the adult bodyplans of these phyla. the same is true for the proposed lophophorate-spiralian alignment, where autapomorphies are hard to come by, one of them may be the occurrence of a larval apical organ with serotonin-like immunoreactive flask-shape cells  <cit> . on the other hand, lophophorates share some embryological features with the seemingly distantly related deuterostomes, such as the above-mentioned radial cleavage  <cit> , the  three coelomic compartments  <cit> , and an upstream ciliary filter feeding system  <cit> .

the nervous system is often considered highly conserved between major animal taxa and is therefore often used for morphology-based phylogenetic inferences  <cit> . while an impressive amount of data on the development of the nervous system has recently become available for numerous lophotrochozoan subtaxa, phoronid neurogenesis is still comparatively little known, with most studies dealing with the description of the neuroanatomy of more or less mature larvae rather than with the development of the nervous system as such  <cit> . there are exceptions to the rule, however, but the few studies on phoronid neural development are restricted to one species belonging to the genus phoronis and are not detailed enough to allow for answers concerning crucial issues such as the exact cellular composition and arrangement of the apical organ, thus rendering comparisons with other lophophorates, or even spiralians, difficult. accordingly, a reconstruction of the neural anatomy of the larva of the last common lophophorate  ancestor remains highly speculative. the unexpected recent finding of a paired ventral neurite bundle in the actinotroch larva of phoronopsis harmeri <cit>  similar to most spiralians may provide evidence for such a neural system in the phoronid as well as lophotrochozoan groundplan. such a scenario would imply, however, secondary loss of this paired ventral nervous system in adult phoronids , since they do not exhibit a comparable neural structure. in order to broaden the database on phoronid neurogenesis and larval neuroanatomy and to contribute to the discussion concerning the groundpattern of the phoronid and lophotrochozoan neural bauplan, we investigated the development of the serotonin-like and fmframide-like immunoreactive nervous system during larval development of phoronopsis harmeri.

RESULTS
description of major developmental stages
the development of phoronopsis harmeri was previously described in detail  <cit> . we briefly describe here the gross morphological characters of the crucial stages of larval development. the apical plate, which later includes the apical organ with an apical ciliary tuft, appears in the early gastrula ), which has a flattened vegetal pole and a round blastopore . the first immunoreactive cells differentiate only in the mid-gastrula stages .

mid-gastrula : this stage is 140 μm long and 100 μm wide. the archenteron is rounded . the blastopore is flask-shaped with swollen anterior and narrow posterior portions . at this stage, the anterior mesodermal precursor resembles a large mass of cells in front of and on both sides of the archenteron .

late gastrula i : this stage has an elongated archenteron with a cone-shaped posterior portion . it represents the anlage of the future midgut. the blastopore closes and becomes tear-shaped with a narrow posterior portion . the volume of the blastocoel decreases in the posterior part of the embryo. cells of the anterior coelomic precursor often form processes that pass to the apical plate, and the preoral coelom forms in the anterior part of the embryo .

late gastrula ii : the body shape of this stage differs from that of the previous stage in that the mouth becomes deeper and the precursor of the preoral lobe forms . the latter is an epidermal fold that is formed by two epidermal layers above the mouth. on the lateral and ventral sides of the posterior portion of the body, the postoral ciliated band, which is a belt of thick epithelium, appears. at this stage, the midgut contacts the surface of the epidermis of the posterior body part.

preactinotrocha : at this stage, the proctodaeum appears but the larva is still lecithotrophic . the larva has a well-developed esophageal muscle, the preoral coelom, and the postoral ciliated band, which does not yet contain motionless latero-frontal cilia.

young actinotrocha : this stage has a well-developed preoral lobe . the preoral lobe is the large anterior portion of the larva and has a large blastocoel, which is crossed by processes of mesodermal cells. the latero-frontal cilia on the tentacular ridge appear and the larva starts to feed. on both sides of the anus, small epidermal invaginations arise, which form the protonephridial tubes.

5- to 6-day-old actinotrocha: the larva has large blastocoels in the hyposphere, a short trunk under the tentacular ridge, and well-developed two protonephridia with several terminal cells .

13-day-old actinotrocha: specimens feed, increase in size, and retain nutrients in the cells of the stomach and hindgut . there are three pairs of protrusions along the tentacular ridge, the primordial tentacles.

actinotrocha with three pairs of tentacles : the larva has a well-developed trunk with a terminal telotroch around the anus . the ventral pair of tentacles is the longest, and the dorso-lateral pair is the shortest. the trunk is occupied by a large trunk coelom. on the ventral body side under the tentacles, an area of thick epidermis appears which forms the primordium of the metasomal sac.

neurogenesis
although the apical tuft and the apical plate form in the early gastrula, perikarya do not differentiate and connect to the sensory cells of the apical plate until the mesodermal muscle cells appear, which is in the mid-gastrula stage.

serotonin-like immunoreactive nervous system
during the mid-gastrula stage, the first perikarya differentiate in the epithelium of the apical plate . four serotonin-like immunoreactive flask-shaped perikarya usually differentiate simultaneously . they are located at the anterior edge of the apical plate and have a thickened basal part and a narrow apical part . the apical part contacts the surface and bears the cilium. the basal part of each cell forms short processes that project towards the central part of the apical plate . most somatic cells of the embryo have a tear-shaped nucleus with a wide basal part and a thin apical part . this form of nucleus is also typical for serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya .

in the late gastrula i , the basal processes of serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya form a neuropil in the center of the apical plate . nerve fibers occupy the basal portion of the apical plate and are in close contact with the mesodermal cells . at this stage, the shape of perikarya does not change but the number increases with age and is seven or nine in the late gastrula ii . the arrangement of the perikarya forms a horseshoe-like pattern along the anterior edge of the apical plate. the apical portion of the cell becomes longer . the neuropil becomes rounded and larger . at this stage, and usually within the apical organ, there are two perikarya which are situated very closely adjacent to each other and form a cluster with two apical parts, two nuclei, and one process .

the number of perikarya in the apical organ increases and the preactinotrocha has  <dig> perikarya . the apical organ also increases in size and the perikarya are arranged in a wide horseshoe-like pattern with a large neuropil in the center .

in young actinotrochs , the apical organ retains its previous organization and consists of 13– <dig> monopolar, monociliated flask-shaped cells . at the same time, the shape of some perikarya starts to change . the apical organ contains one or two perikarya, which have a thin area between the nucleus and the apical part of the cell . this area becomes progressively thinner, whereas the basal part of the cell  becomes wider . simultaneously, the basal part of the cell migrates to the basal portion of the apical plate, and the nucleus of the perikaryon is then located under the common row of nuclei . perikarya with thin median portions are best identified in three-dimensional reconstructions . the bipolar or multipolar perikarya result from these processes. later, these bipolar perikarya can be found within the perikarya of the apical organ . the young actinotroch usually has two or three bipolar perikarya within the apical organ. they are located in front of the neuropil and on the dorso-lateral side of the neuropil. the first serotonin-like immunoreactive neurites appear in the young actinotroch . the pair of dorso-lateral neurites originates from the neuropil and passes along the dorso-lateral sides of the preoral lobe to the dorsal ends of the postoral ciliated band . here, each nerve tract bifurcates into short branches with swollen ends .

in the 5-day-old actinotroch , additional serotonin-like immunoreactive neurites appear along the edge of the preoral lobe. they form two rows, which constitute the anterior and posterior marginal neurite bundles . each anterior marginal nerve passes along the marginal muscle of the preoral lobe and contains 4– <dig> bipolar serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya. the posterior marginal neurite bundle is stained more intensely than the anterior marginal neurite bundle and connects with 12– <dig> large serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya . the anterior and posterior margin neurite bundles merge at the dorsal ends of the preoral lobe. dorso-lateral neurite bundles emerging from the neuropil increase in diameter, pass along the tentacular ring, and form contact on the ventral side, forming the tentacular nerve ring . the number of monopolar perikarya within the apical organ does not increase, but the shape of the perikarya does . in the 5-day-old actinotroch, monopolar perikarya have a long basal process, which can reach 6 μm in length. the basal part of the perikaryon is wide and rounded  and the nucleus is located here. the apical part of the cell resembles a collar and stains intensely. a serotonin-like immunoreactive cell with one basal process, two rounded nuclei , a small apical part, and a cilium  can be found among other perikarya. within the apical organ, there are bipolar or multipolar perikarya, which are located among the fibers of the neuropil ; these perikarya have a large and irregularly shaped nucleus and they always occupy the anterior and lateral edge of the neuropil . two bipolar cells can usually be found near the apical organ . these cells are associated with the dorso-lateral branches of the tentacular neurite bundle and are located on both sides of the apical organ. a round nucleus is located in the center of the perikaryon.

in the 6-day-old actinotroch larva , the serotonin-like immunoreactive nervous system becomes more complex . all previous elements are retained and new elements appear . at this stage, typically, the apical organ contains 12– <dig> monopolar serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya, but up to  <dig> monopolar perikarya were found within the apical organ in some larvae . the neuropil of the apical organ becomes more elaborate and can be recognized even in live larvae, where it resembles a transparent bubble under the apical plate epithelium . the basal processes of the monopolar perikarya branch before they form contact with the neuropil and form a neural meshwork . bipolar or multipolar perikarya occur in the neuropil. the posterior and anterior marginal neurite bundles of the preoral lobe retain several bipolar perikarya. these neurites can not be recognized in subsequent stages . approximately  <dig> perikarya are distributed along the anterior marginal neurite bundles and five of them are concentrated in its median portion . the dorso-lateral neurite bundle of the tentacular ring divides into two near the neuropil . the branches of one neurite bundle fuse on the dorsal side. three-dimensional reconstruction reveals that the tentacular neurite bundle runs along the lower edge of the tentacular ridge. as in the previous stage, two bipolar perikarya are associated with the two dorso-lateral neurite bundles. these perikarya are located on both sides of the neuropil . in the 6-day-old larva, an oral nerve ring appears . it is composed of thin circular neurites, which also extend along the esophagus. the oral nerve ring does not contact the apical organ. in some larvae, serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya occur under the oral ring and on its left and right sides . larvae of this stage also have serotonin-like immunoreactive processes around the proctodeum and the pyloric sphincter . interestingly, immunofluorescence can be observed in the apical portion of the epithelium of the proctodaeum . a paired serotonin-like immunoreactive neurite bundle appears in the epithelium of the oral field, between the oral nerve ring and the tentacular neurite bundle . it consists of two longitudinal neurite bundles and commissures, which interconnect the perikarya of the two neurite bundles. each longitudinal neurite bundle includes thin neurites and six perikarya and contacts the oral nerve ring via paired perikarya, which are situated in close proximity to the oral nerve ring . this serotonin-like immunoreactive paired ventral neurite bundle was previously described  <cit> , and here we provide micrographs of a different larval specimen . 3d reconstruction of another larva reveals the presence of repetitive perikarya and thin commissures between them .

in 13-day-old actinotrochs, the general organization of the nervous system changes . the anterior and posterior marginal neurite bundles become very weak, and serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya along them are not evident . the paired ventral neurite bundle can not be recognized. the tentacular neurite bundle becomes more complex. its dorso-lateral parts bifurcate and each branch forms two additional branches, which fuse on the dorsal side . the ventral portion of the tentacular neurite bundle also changes such that many thin small loops extend along its edge . the apical organ contains numerous bipolar or multipolar perikarya . the number of monopolar perikarya does not increase substantially. the basal processes of the monopolar perikarya bear several varicosities . when the tentacles become more pronounced, branches of the tentacular neurite bundle extend into each tentacle . a neurite bundle runs along the abfrontal side of each tentacle . the apical plate has a complex structure and contains sensory cells and perikarya . sensory cells can be recognized by the presence of long microvilli on the apical surface; these microvilli are strongly stained by phalloidin . sensory cells form an external row on the periphery of the apical plate and form two rows in the center. double staining with phalloidin and against serotonin reveals the position of serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya and sensory cells . the former are situated on the periphery of the apical plate between the sensory cells. thus, serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya are distant from the center of the apical plate where the neuropil is situated. for this reason, each monopolar perikaryon forms a long  basal process . large varicosities occur along the process. bipolar or multipolar perikarya form a layer under the neuropil, along its anterior edge . this layer is composed of 8– <dig> perikarya. the most dorsal multipolar perikarya give rise to the dorso-lateral branches of the tentacular neurite bundle .

in 24-day-old actinotrochs the general organization of the serotonin-like immunoreactive nervous system changes . at this stage, the apical organ and the tentacular neurite bundle are the main elements of the nervous system . the apical organ is composed of 20– <dig> monopolar perikarya and 12– <dig> bipolar or multipolar perikarya . each monopolar perikaryon has a flask-like shape with a wide basal part and a narrow apical part . the basal part of the cell forms a single process, which usually arises from the terminal basal part of the perikaryon. in some perikarya, however, it projects from the central part of the perikaryon . the processes of all monopolar perikarya extend to the center of the apical organ and contribute to the apical neuropil . under this neuropil, bipolar or multipolar perikarya and their processes are situated . they are arranged in two groups, left and right, and each group consists of 4– <dig> spherical perikarya that are 5–6 μm in diameter . interestingly, in some larvae the left dorso-lateral group of multipolar perikarya form a large mass, which rises above the neuropil . the multipolar perikarya are located near the anterior and lateral edge of the neuropil, whereas their processes occupy the dorsal portion. the serotonin-like immunoreactive part of the neuropil is ovoid and 16–17 μm long and 8–9 μm wide.

the 24-day-old actinotroch has a weak marginal neurite bundle with several perikarya  and a prominent median neurite bundle, which extends from the apical organ to the edge of the preoral lobe along its median line . the median neurite bundle arises from the left group of multipolar perikarya . in some larvae, a group of weakly stained perikarya is found in the center of the median neurite bundle . this group consists of three small perikarya that contribute to the frontal organ. in some larvae, there is only one perikaryon instead of three . two dorso-lateral branches of the tentacular neurite bundle arise from the dorso-lateral parts of the neuropil where the multipolar perikarya are situated . near the apical organ, each dorso-lateral neurite bundle branches into several neurite bundles, which fuse on the dorsal side . here, the dorso-lateral neurite bundles are connected to each other via a dorsal commissure . along the whole length, the tentacular neurite bundle is formed by 7– <dig> neurites . the tentacular neurite bundle runs under the tentacular ridge and forms a loop along the abfrontal side of each tentacle. the oral nerve ring is composed of thin circular neurites and several perikarya, which usually stain weakly . these perikarya are located in the oral field epithelium, under the mouth. the oral nerve ring does not contact the tentacular neurite bundle or the apical organ, as stated previously  <cit> . thin neurites form a cylinder, which matches the shape of the esophagus . in the 24-day-old larva, the trunk and the telotroch have formed . the telotroch is innervated by two serotonin-like immunoreactive neurite bundles: the inner and the external one. they form two circles in the posterior end of the body . thin nervous fibers pass along the lateral and dorsal sides of the larval trunk .

fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nervous system
the earliest signal of the neuropeptide fmrfamide is found in the late gastrula and is located in the apical plate . cell processes are labeled at this stage, but no cell bodies were found . labeled cell processes form a neuropil in the center of the basal portion of the apical plate . mesodermal cells forming the protocoel lining contact the neurites of the fmrfamide-immunoreactive neuropil . three-dimensional reconstruction reveals that the neuropil is shaped like a horseshoe with two dorso-lateral branches .

in the preactinotroch, the thin and interrupted fmrfamide-immunoreactive neurites appear along the edge of the preoral lobe . interestingly, the first fmrfamide reactive neurite runs along the edge of the preoral lobe, whereas the serotonin-like immunoreactive neurite extends from the apical organ to the tentacular ridge.

the first perikarya with fmrfamide-like immunoreactivity occur in the young actinotroch. perikarya are situated on the dorso-lateral side of the preoral lobe behind the neuropil . usually, two or three perikarya appear simultaneously. these are large bipolar cells, which connect to the neuropil via thin neurites . in young actinotrochs, several thin neurites originate around the mouth and along the medio-ventral line of the oral field . these neurites are very weak .

after several hours, new fmrfamide-immunoreactive elements appear in young actinotrochs . these are the perikarya of the oral field epidermis, perikarya in the midgut, and radial neurites in the preoral lobe . in young actinotroch larvae, the apical organ consists of bipolar and monopolar perikarya. the latter is column-shaped with wide apical and basal parts . the basal part contains the nucleus; the apical part is always brightly stained. the basal part of the perikaryon forms a process that passes into the neuropil. bipolar perikarya are located distant from the neuropil and connect to it via long anterior processes . the posterior process runs along the dorso-lateral side of the body and forms the primary tentacular neurite bundle. at this stage, the paired ventral neurite bundle contains six bipolar perikarya, which contact each other via thin longitudinal neurites. these bipolar perikarya form the longitudinal neurite bundles which pass from the oral ring to the tentacular ridge . second, two groups of latero-ventral perikarya, each consisting of two or three perikarya , are located near the tentacular ridge . third, two large perikarya arise on the ventro-lateral side near the site of contact between the preoral lobe and the hyposphere  . these perikarya connect to the marginal neurite bundle via the thin precursors of the ventro-lateral neurites  . perikarya in the midgut are located near the pyloric sphincter; they are bipolar and triangular with a wide basal part that forms two processes that extend around the midgut . radial neurites of the preoral lobe are concentrated along its midline and run along the radial muscles . at this stage, two to five radial neurites with median perikarya can be detected in the preoral lobe.

five-day-old larvae contain all the neural elements observed in younger larvae . the ventral neurite bundles, two large upper ventro-lateral perikarya, and two groups of lower ventro-lateral perikarya innervate the epidermis of the oral field . the apical organ becomes more complex. the number of monopolar perikarya increases, but their shape does not change . the number of bipolar perikarya also increases . in addition to the two main  perikarya, two lateral groups of bipolar perikarya develop. these perikarya stain weakly; they form two lateral groups which connect to the neuropil via a prominent neurite bundle . the main perikarya stain brightly and give rise to the tentacular neurite bundle. the entire tentacular neurite bundle appears in the 5-day-old actinotroch . in some larvae, the tentacular neurite bundle bifurcates into two branches, one below and one above the tentacular ridge .

in 6-day-old larvae, new perikarya appear adjacent to the paired ventral neurite bundle and in the epidermis of the preoral lobe . in the latter case, most of the perikarya form two main neurites: one passes into the neuropil and the other connects to the marginal neurite bundle . in some cases, the perikarya of the preoral lobe form more than two neurites, which spread into the preoral lobe epithelium . the perikarya of the ventral neurite bundles form two longitudinal rows, which contact each other via thin commissures . there are at least two commissures between the paired perikarya of the two longitudinal rows . a new and large perikaryon appears near the mouth, in the epidermis of the oral field . at this stage, the upper ventro-lateral perikarya form thin longitudinal ventro-lateral neurites, which contact the lower ventro-lateral perikarya .

in 13-day-old larvae, the number of upper ventro-lateral perikarya increases to three or four . accordingly, the number of thin longitudinal neurites and the number of lower ventro-lateral perikarya also increases. at this stage, the connection is evident between the marginal neurite bundles of the preoral lobe, the upper ventro-lateral perikarya, the ventro-lateral longitudinal neurites, and the lower ventro-lateral perikarya . 13-day-old larvae have a well-developed nerve net around the mouth that is connected to the paired ventral neurite bundles on its lateral side . the ventral neurite bundles comprise seven or eight paired perikarya. the paired perikarya lie very close to each other, and the commissures cannot be recognized . larvae at this stage have primordial tentacles, and the tentacular neurite bundle forms loops into each primordium. a 13-day-old larva has a short trunk and the telotroch appears around the anus. monopolar and bipolar or multipolar perikarya of the apical organ form two lateral clusters . monopolar perikarya occupy the ventro-lateral epidermis of the apical plate, on the both sides of the neuropil. bipolar or multipolar perikarya are located in the dorso-lateral epidermis of the preoral lobe. these perikarya form a compact group with three or five perikarya, which produce dorsal neurites — the tentacular neurite bundle .

in 24-day-old larvae, the fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nervous system is highly complex and contains numerous thin neurites . the most prominent nervous element is the apical organ. it contains monopolar and bipolar or multipolar perikarya . monopolar perikarya are triangular with a narrow apical part and a wide basal part; the latter produces one basal process that extends into the neuropil. as before, the bipolar or multipolar perikarya form two dorso-lateral groups that contain between three and seven perikarya . the dorso-lateral parts of the tentacular neurite bundle arise from the dorsal groups of the bipolar or multipolar perikarya of the apical organ. the tentacular neurite bundle passes along the tentacular ridge . on the dorsal side, the tentacular neurite bundle contains upper and lower branches . on the median line of the preoral lobe, the median neurite bundle appears . it contains several neurites and perikarya. the latter are concentrated in the central part of the median neurite bundle . radial and circular neurites and two marginal neurite bundles innervate the preoral lobe. both marginal neurite bundles split into numerous thin neurites where the preoral lobe merges with the hyposphere. the anterior marginal neurite bundle continues into ventro-lateral neurites of the oral field, whereas the posterior marginal neurite bundle passes into the lateral neurites of the oral field . thus, there are two pairs of groups of neurites that pass from the preoral lobe to the tentacular neurite bundle and that innervate the lateral and ventro-lateral sides of the oral field. the ventral side of the oral field is innervated by the paired ventral neurite bundle, which contains 15– <dig> bipolar perikarya . some of these perikarya are paired, but commissures are not present. the ventral neurite bundles connect to the oral ring. the latter is very complex and contains numerous neurites and perikarya. the neurites spread along the esophagus and form the cylindrical nerve net with a long dorsal side and a short ventral side . there are six large perikarya on the dorsal side of the esophagus, whereby three are situated on the dorsal wall of the cardiac sphincter . at this stage, there are two large perikarya, which are located in the epidermis of the oral field near the mouth . these fmrfamide-reactive perikarya form two or three processes, some of which are in contact with the oral nerve ring . the number of perikarya in the midgut increases to as many as 8– <dig> . they form a circle around the midgut near the pyloric sphincter. the telotroch is innervated by the nerve ring, which passes along its external perimeter . the trunk and dorsal body region are innervated by thin neurites .

discussion
the structure of the larval apical organ in lophotrochozoans and deuterostomes
the phoronid larval nervous system was first described on the basis of immunocytochemistry by hay-schmidt  <cit> , who analyzed individual stages of early embryos and young larvae of phoronis vancouverensis. according to these and our data, the first perikarya appear in the apical plate. the differentiation of the first perikarya in the apical organ is a common feature for numerous – but not all – lophotrochozoans . as is the case in other lophotrochozoans, the initial serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya in the apical organ are flask-shaped in phoronid embryos. they possess a thin basal process and are retained during the entire larval development. the organization of the apical organ becomes more complex with age, as is indicated by the dramatic increase in the number of cells that constitute the apical organ.

in phoronopsis harmeri larvae, four types of perikarya form the apical organ: monopolar and bipolar  serotonin-like immunoreactive as well as monopolar and bipolar  fmrfamide-like immunoreactive. within the apical organ, only the monopolar serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya are flask-shaped. in young larva, there are 20– <dig> monopolar serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya, which form a horseshoe-shaped  field with two dorsal branches. these cells are monociliated, flask-shaped, and their basal processes pass to the centre of the apical organ and form the neuropil. bipolar  serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya and some of their processes form the posterior-most layer of the apical organ. their perikarya form two  groups with 5– <dig> perikarya, which are located directly under the monopolar perikarya. in 24-day-old larva, the neuropil, which is composed of the neurites of the bipolar  serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya, is subdivided into two portions . the monopolar fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya form one group each on the left and right side of the apical organ, respectively. bipolar or multipolar fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya are strongly stained and form two dorso-lateral groups, which occupy the most dorsal area of the apical organ. groups of bipolar or multipolar fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya connect to the tentacular fmrfamide-like immunoreactive neurite bundle and appear earlier than monopolar fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya.

hay-schmidt  <cit>  found three types of perikarya in the apical organ of phoronis muelleri. these are monopolar and bipolar or multipolar serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya as well as monopolar fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya. in early larvae of p. vancouverensis, the apical organ consists of two types of perikarya: monopolar and bipolar or multipolar serotonin-like immunoreactive cells  <cit> . interestingly, the apical organ neither contains monopolar nor bipolar  fmrfamide-like immunoreactive cells. in phoronis pallida, two types of serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya were found in the apical organ: bipolar ciliate and nonciliate  <cit> .

taken together, the data available show that the apical organs of phoronid larvae have a much more complex architecture than that of other lophotrochozoans. it consists of at least four cell types and contains approximately 30– <dig> serotonin-like immunoreactive and 16– <dig> fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya. the majority of the serotonin-like immunoreactive cells consist of monopolar or  bipolar flask-shaped perikarya, which form a u-shaped mass.

in most lophophotrochozoan larvae, the apical organ consists of only a few serotonin-like immunoreactive flask-shaped cells . such a simple apical organ can therefore be regarded as a basal feature of spiralian protostomes  <cit> . however, there are deviations from this general pattern. the high degree of complexity of the apical organ of entoproct and polyplacophoran larvae has been considered one of several apomorphies of monophyletic entoprocta-mollusca . on the other hand, some polychaete annelids or ectoprocts seem to lack flask-shaped cells in the apical organ altogether  <cit> .

the organization of the apical organ of lecithotrophic brachiopod larvae differs from that of the swimming planktotrophic juveniles of glottiid brachiopods. while the latter have numerous, probably non-flask-shaped cells, the former have four or more  serotonin-like immunoreactive flask-shaped cells  <cit> , again suggesting that these cells belong to the groundpattern of lophotrochozoa.

in the deuterostome larvae investigated so far , the apical organ consists of more than ten or fifteen serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya, the shape of which probably being typically flask-shaped  <cit> .

accordingly, two scenarios concerning the evolution of complexity in invertebrate apical organs appear principally possible. either, the last common ancestor of protostomes and deuterostomes had a simple apical organ and its complexity evolved three times independently: once in the entoproct-molluscan  lineage, once in phoronids, and once in the deuterostomes, or a complex apical organ was present in the last common ancestor and has been retained in the three above-mentioned clades, while it was subsequently reduced multiple times independently in the remaining spiralians.

comparison of the overall neural architecture of phoronid larvae with other lophotrochozoan and deuterostomian larvae
in young p. harmeri larvae, the serotonin-like immunoreactive nervous system consists of four perikarya-containing subsets: the apical organ, a group of six to eight perikarya distributed along the edge of the preoral lobe, frontal organ, and a group containing the oral nerve ring with ventro-lateral perikarya, which connect to the ventral neurite bundles. perikarya of the preoral lobe interconnect with the serotonin-like immunoreactive marginal neurite bundles of the preoral lobe and can not be recognized in late stages. however, in p. muelleri larvae, these perikarya are retained in late stages and are concentrated along the midline of the edge of the preoral lobe .

in older p. harmeri larva, a fourth serotonin-like immunoreactive perikaryon appears in the frontal organ. it contains several perikarya which connect to the serotonin-like immunoreactive median neurite bundle of the preoral lobe. the frontal organ has been described for other phoronid larvae as well  <cit>  and contains serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya  <cit> . the median neurite bundle of the preoral lobe is found in all phoronid larvae studied so far, except for young stages of p. vancouverensis <cit> . in the larva of p. harmeri, this neurite bundle emerges from the left group of serotonin-like immunoreactive bipolar  perikarya.

p. harmeri is the only phoronid larva to date for which a paired ventral neurite bundle has been described . it consists of two longitudinal neurite bundles, each being associated with several bipolar , paired perikarya. the ventral neurite bundles are interconnected by serially repeated commissures. such a ventral nervous system is common for many larval  adult spiralians, and although the number of the ventral neurite bundles may vary between and even within various phyla, a paired ventral neurite bundle with serially arranged commissures is usually considered basal for lophotrochozoans  <cit> . accordingly, the larva of p. harmeri appears to have retained this neural structure, while it was lost in the adults as well as in adults and larvae of the other phoronid species investigated so far. at the same time, the paired ventral neural bundle of p. harmeri larvae differs from the one of typical spiralian larvae .

in all phoronid larvae studied to date, the serotonin-like immunoreactive tentacular neurite bundle is a prominent structure. in p. harmeri larvae, two dorso-lateral branches of the tentacular neurite bundle are connected each other via a dorsal commissure, which seems to be lacking in other phoronid species. according to some data  <cit> , there are two tentacular neurite bundles: one minor  and one main bundle .while in phoronid larvae the tentacular neurite bundle forms contact with the apical organ, the apical organ never directly connects to the neurite bundles that innervate the ciliated bands in spiralian trochophores  <cit> . in ambulacrarian larvae , however, the apical organ is also connected to the neurite bundles of ciliated bands, as is the case in the phoronids  <cit> . moreover, according to some data  <cit> , the apical organ of echinoderms arises as a bilaterally symmetrical nerve plexus, which is generated by neurite bundles of ciliated bands. in ambulacraria, the apical organ arises after or simultaneously with the neurite bundles and perikarya associated with the ciliary bands  <cit> , while in actinotroch larvae, serotonin-like immunoreactive neurites innervating the ciliated bands are formed after the establishment of the apical organ. accordingly, the left and right branches of the apical organ give rise to the two lateral tentacular neurite bundles of the phoronid larva. the telotroch in phoronid larvae is innervated by two  or one  serotonin-like immunoreactive circular neurite bundles.

thus, in all actinotrochs studied, all ciliated bands are innervated by prominent serotonin-like immunoreactive neurite bundles, some of them  containing serotonin-like immunoreactive perikarya. scattered perikarya associated with neurites that innervate ciliated bands are known from larvae of enteropneust and echinoderm deuterostomes  <cit> .

the larval fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nervous system is very complex in p. harmeri. in this species, the fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nervous system appears to be associated with the major muscle systems. the first neurites appear in the epidermis of the apical plate and then along the edge of the preoral lobe  in young actinotrochs and is retained in late stages. in older actinotrochs, there are two fmrfamide-like immunoreactive marginal neurite bundles  <cit> , herein. these bundles extend into the oral field and furcate into individual neurites, which ventrolaterally connect to two groups of perikarya. in most previous reports  <cit> , the fmrfamide-like immunoreactive system of actinotrochs does not seem to contain any perikarya even in the apical organ. however, in p. harmeri, there are five main groups of perikarya, which are located in the oral field , the preoral lobe, and the midgut. perikarya in the oral field were found in p. muelleri larvae. they are multiplied and form the layer along the upper border of the tentacular ring  <cit> . in larvae of p. harmeri and p. muelleri, there are perikarya along the medio-ventral side of the oral field. in young larvae of p. harmeri, these perikarya are part of the paired ventral neurite bundle. in older larvae, the commissures interconnecting the ventral neurite bundles were not found  <cit> . another group of perikarya is formed by perikarya which are scattered in the epidermis of the preoral lobe  <cit> , herein. neurites of these perikarya are associated with the radial muscles of the preoral lobe. perikarya in the midgut were described for the first time in p. harmeri <cit> . the fmrfamide-like immunoreactive tentacular neurite bundle was found in all actinotrochs studied to date  <cit> . it runs under the tentacles and has two pairs of dorsal branches in p. harmeri. the fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nerve ring around the telotroch is described for the first time herein.

the digestive tract of the actinotroch larva is associated with serotonin-like immunoreactive and fmrfamide-like immunoreactive perikarya and neurites . the most prominent nervous elements were found in the esophagus , midgut , and the proctodaeum of actinotroch larvae. some bilaterian planktotrophic larvae have a nerve ring around the mouth , but the innervation of other parts of the digestive tract is still unclear. in trochozoan planktotrophic larvae, there is an oral nerve ring, which connects to apical organ via esophageal connectives  <cit> . some deuterostome larvae have serotonin-like immunoreactive, fmrfamide-like immunoreactive, and salfamidergic perikarya and neurites in the esophagus, stomach, and pylorus  <cit> . these prominent neural features are directly correlated with the long planktotrophic life in the water column of these organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
p. harmeri has the most complex larval serotin- and fmrfamide-like immunoreactive nervous systems of all phoronids studied to date. the gross anatomy of the nervous system of the actinotroch larva combines characteristics of both lophotrochozoan and deuterostome larvae. on the one hand, the phoronid apical organ consists of flask-shaped serotonin-like immunoreactive monopolar perykaria, which most likely constitute a lophotrochozoan apomorphy  <cit> . on the other hand, the complexity of the phoronid apical organ, which contains more than  <dig> serotonin-like immunoreactive perikaria, resembles that of some deuterostome larvae. the distant relationship of phoronids and deuterostomes suggests independent origin of these complex apical organs, although a complex apical organ at the base of the protostome-deuterostome split with subsequent independent simplification in most spiralians cannot be ruled out. the finding of a paired ventral neurite bundle with serially arranged commissures suggests that such a neural feature was part of the ancestral phoronid – and most likely also the ancestral lophotrochozoan – bodyplan, which was secondarily lost in adult phoronids, probably in connection with the acquired sedentary lifestyle.

