BACKGROUND
eschericia coli remains a useful resource to the genomic community as it provides important knowledge which can be applied to the analysis of most microbial genomes. its central role devolves from two facts; first, the accumulated results of seven decades of laboratory experimentation have identified the function of over half of its gene products; second being a metabolic generalist, e. coli's metabolic functions are widely shared among other organisms.

common practices of annotation rely, more than one might realize, on the accuracy of the annotation of e. coli's genes. while searches for sequence matches to unknown genes usually yield a large number of matches, chances are high that firm functional information comes only from experimental studies on e. coli. because annotations of genes do not always indicate that the assignments are derived, and because derived annotations are used serially for further annotation without experimental confirmation, many genes carry original e. coli annotations. it is therefore important to the entire genome-analyzing community that the data on e. coli gene products be as accurate as possible. since the original genbank deposit of e. coli k- <dig> , new and updated annotations are available at ncbi  and at more specialized databases including, asap  <cit> , colibase  <cit> , cybercell  <cit> , echobase  <cit> , ecocyc  <cit> , genprotec  <cit> , and regulondb  <cit> . an effort is under way to coordinate the current e. coli annotations  <cit> .

over recent years, our work on the e. coli genome has led us to an appreciation of the pernicious role that gene fusions often play as troublemakers in function assignments and in relating groups of sequence similar proteins  <cit> . the fusion of two independently functioning genes results in the formation of a composite  protein encoding for two independent functions located at separate parts of the protein. this type of fusion is not equivalent to the joining of protein domains, i.e. domains encoding binding sites for a cofactor or a substrate, which is seen in multidomain proteins. an example being the enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase which according to the domain databases pfam  <cit>  and superfamiliy  <cit>  contains two domains, an nad binding site and a dehydrogenase catalytic site. in our studies the entire protein including both domains represents one independent functional unit with one activity. multidomain proteins are more prevalent and most often encode one overall function for the gene product  <cit> .

annotation involving transfer of function from composite proteins to sequence similar matches requires that the alignment regions be evaluated in order to determine whether all activities or only one of them should be assigned to the matching sequence. currently fused proteins are themselves not always annotated to reflect that they encode more than one function, and rarely is the location of the separate functions indicated. different combinations of fused genes are seen in the sequenced genomes, adding potential sources for annotation errors. errors in functional assignments including those caused by fused genes have been noted years ago  <cit>  and that such proteins may contribute to propagation of annotation errors in databases  <cit> . the fused proteins also interfere with the generation of sequence related protein groups as they link proteins based on their coexistence in a fused protein and not purely based on sequence similarity. components of fused genes are often not sequence related, so generating protein groups without taking gene fusions into account may result in "mixed" groups of proteins with different sequence relatedness, functions and evolutionary histories.

previous work has been published where we identified fused e. coli proteins from partial alignments between proteins encoded in the e. coli genome  <cit> . this work resulted in the identification of  <dig> multimodular proteins. as our analysis continued and more genome sequences were incorporated in our studies we realized that most of these identified multimodular proteins actually contained multiple domains and had one overall function. we have therefore revised our method of detecting fused proteins. we are making use of sequence information from  <dig> genomes including e. coli to detect proteins which are fused in the e. coli genome and are present as individual components in one of the other genomes. we have also made use of published experimental data on e. coli gene fusions. as a result the number of fused proteins in e. coli has been reduced to  <dig>  the number of groups of sequence related proteins was also reduced from  <dig> to  <dig> since some of the previously identified groups are made up of protein domains catalyzing only part of an overall reaction. this work represents a revision of the state of fused proteins in the e. coli genome their affect on genome analysis both within e. coli and across genomes.

RESULTS
multimodular vs. multifunctional proteins
to prevent confusion, we define multimodular proteins as those seeming to result from gene fusion in which two independent proteins are connected. multimodular proteins encode separate functions in different parts of the molecule. these functions might be the same if two like elements have fused, or as we see more often in e. coli, they differ in sequence and activity. distinctly different, multifunctional proteins are defined as those that carry out more than one reaction or activity in the same part of the protein. examples of such multifunctional proteins are encoded by the genes cobu, bira, ubig, fold, cysg, tesa, and ndk .

a protein that illustrates both properties is the fadb protein of e. coli  <cit> . fadb is a multimodular protein with n-terminal and c-terminal modules. its n-terminal module is multifunctional with three activities that are catalyzed at the same active site and cannot be spatially separated along the length of the protein. the three activities are 3-hydroxybutyryl-coa epimerase, delta-cis-delta-trans-enoyl-coa isomerase, and enoyl-coa hydratase. the c-terminal module of fadb encodes a single function, 3-hydroxyacyl-coa dehydrogenase. adding the n-terminal and c-terminal modules, there are  <dig> activities for the fadb protein.

identifying multimodular proteins in e. coli
in earlier work, before the genomic sequence of e. coli was completed, we saw that sequence similarity among its proteins was widespread  <cit> . after the entire sequence was available, we identified  <dig> e. coli proteins as being multimodular and encoded by fused genes  <cit> . the modularity of the proteins was inferred from the alignments among e. coli proteins. however, we have since found that many of these so-called multimodular proteins were proteins containing more than one domain and not more than one protein. such multidomain proteins may appear to encode two functions but in reality encode two or more conserved motifs . by including sequence information from other genomes besides e. coli we were able to better distinguish fusions of complete proteins versus the more common fusions of protein domains. of the  <dig> proteins previously identified as multimodulars only  <dig> remained as fused proteins in this study with the remaining representing domain fusions.

in the present work, some of the fused proteins were identified by searching the literature for experimental data. examples of e. coli proteins long known to contain multiple functions encoded at separate parts of the proteins include glne  <cit> , metl  <cit> , thra  <cit> , and tyra  <cit> . we have collected such experimentally verified information over time  <cit> , labeled as multimodular proteins with literature citations in our database genprotec  <cit> . other multimodular proteins were identified by selected types of alignments between e. coli proteins and proteins encoded in  <dig> sequenced genomes. the component proteins of a multimodular protein may be unimodular and unfused in another genome. we looked for alignments between the larger potentially multimodular proteins in e. coli and smaller orthologous proteins that are homologous to only one of the modules . not all gene fusions of e. coli will be detected by this method. for instance elements of a fused gene may have diverged to the point where the component modules no longer have detectable similarity to their homologous counterparts, or the independently existing modules may have been lost from the gene pool of the  <dig> genomes analyzed, or the  <dig> organisms may contain only the multimodular form.

in total we identified  <dig> e. coli proteins to be multimodular, with  <dig> containing two modules and  <dig> containing three modules. the largest number of multimodular proteins joined modules of dissimilar sequence . an abbreviated list of the modules and their functions is shown in table  <dig>  a complete list of the multimodular e. coli proteins is made available: ' '. the remaining proteins,  <dig>  % of the total, were considered to be unimodular. the average length of the multimodular proteins was  <dig> residues compared to  <dig> for the remaining proteins in the chromosome . individual modules from the multimodular proteins were on average  <dig> residues long, similar to the length of the unimodular proteins. however, the size alone of a protein does not reflect multimodularity as we found many large proteins to be unimodular.

1gene product type: e, enzyme; pe, putative enzyme; r, regulatory protein; pr, putative regulatory protein; t, transport protein; pt, putative transport protein; pc, putative carrier protein; o, unknown function.

characteristics of multimodular proteins of e. coli
 <dig> includes putative assignments

1gene type includes known and putative functions.

2protein names derived from gene names.

3genes encoding three modules.

• many of the multimodular enzymes function in the biosynthesis or degradation of compounds .

• the majority of the multimodular transport proteins encode fusions of components of the abc superfamily transporters . also, fusions of the pts proteins were detected in different combinations. thirteen proteins contained two or more pts components, including hpr, enzymes i, iia, iib, or iic.

• among the multimodular regulatory proteins, two-thirds were part of two-component regulatory systems and contained histidine kinases fused to response regulators. seldom were known domain subdivisions within these modules detected by the rules we applied.

while the fraction of enzymes  is similar to the fraction of enzymes encoded in the genome as a whole , the proportion of multimodular transport proteins  and regulatory proteins  were higher than their proportion genome wide . the over-representation in transporters and regulators is a reflection of the level of gene duplication seen for these proteins. large paralogous groups are detected for some of the abc transporter protein subunits and for components of the two-component regulators.

pairwise similarity of e. coli single modules
all unimodular proteins, including the modules obtained from multimodular proteins, were tested pairwise for sequence similarity. matching all single module e. coli proteins to each other using the allalldb algorithm of the darwin package, we collected all aligned pairs with a similarity score of less than or equal to  <dig> pam units, with an alignment of at least  <dig> residues. altogether  <dig>  unique pairs met these criteria .

paralogous groups of e. coli protein modules
we used the data on pairwise similarity to assemble groups of proteins of similar sequence that were unlike other proteins in the cell. besides the pam less than  <dig> and alignment length of at least  <dig> residues, two additional requirements were imposed; that more than 45% of each protein in each pair be aligned, and that a module could not belong to more than one group. a transitive clustering process was used to form the sequence-similar groups  <cit> . this grouping method requires only that each member of the group have sequence similarity to at least one other member of the group and does not require a detectable similarity among all the members of a group. both closely related groups and groups with more divergent proteins were found.

we identified  <dig> sequence-similar or paralogous groups in e. coli ' '. altogether  <dig> unimodular proteins belonged to one of the groups. modules from  <dig> of the multimodular proteins were present in  <dig> of the groups. table  <dig> shows the power law type of distribution of the number of members in the groups, smaller groups being more abundant than large ones. there were  <dig> groups of two proteins, and only  <dig> % of the groups had  <dig> or more members. as shown in table  <dig>  the smaller groups tended to be tight groups in which the majority of sequences were related by our criteria to all or most others in the group. larger groups were more divergent with a minority of members related to all others. at group size  <dig> and above, no members have the property of relating to all others.

the largest groups of paralogous enzymes, transport proteins and regulatory proteins are shown in table  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. while enzymes represent the largest gene product type in e. coli with known or predicted function, they tend to be present in smaller paralogous groups as compared to the transporters and regulators. among the larger groups the oxidoreductases and the subunits of oxidoreductases are most common, making up  <dig> of the top  <dig> enzyme groups .

1contains groes-like structural domain .

atp-binding components of the abc superfamily of transport proteins are highly conserved and make up the overall largest paralogous group in e. coli . the other two components of the abc superfamily transporters are less conserved with membrane components in groups of  <dig> or less and periplasmic binding components in groups of  <dig> or less. components of the pts system; enzyme iia, iib, iic and i also formed sequence similar groups. one of the groups classified as a group of transporter proteins actually contains both transport proteins  and regulatory proteins . these two functional types are sequence related, and all of the proteins contain a common structural domain  for the binding of small molecules  <cit> . the difference lies in the presence or absence of a dna-binding domain.

response regulators of two-component regulatory systems make up the largest group of regulatory proteins in e. coli . sensory histidine kinases of two-component regulatory systems and the sigma <dig> activating proteins also constitute paralogous groups. a group almost equal in size to the response regulators is the lysr-family of transcriptional regulators. other large groups of transcriptional regulators are also present.

cross genome comparisons of paralogous groups
in addition to using paralogous groups for intra-genomic analyses, the groups were also used in cross genome comparisons . the sizes of selected sequence related groups are shown for three bacteria, the closely related enterics e. coli and salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium and the more distantly related organism bacillus subtilis. the sizes of the groups in the closely related bacteria are similar, whereas there are differences in relation to b. subtilis, a gram positive soil organism. for instance, the largest e. coli enzyme group containing fe-s-binding oxidoreductases was represented by only one homolog in the b. subtilis genome. however, b. subtilis encodes for  <dig> oxidoreductases homologous to the group of  <dig> nad-binding oxidoreductases of e. coli. the number of homologous sugar kinases, respiratory reductase subunits, and nucleoside diphosphate  hydrolases appeared overall to be lower in b. subtilis.

1no. proteins in escherichia coli paralogous group

2no. sequence matches for e. coli paralogous group in salmonella typhimurium lt2

3no. sequence matches for e. coli paralogous group in bacillus subtilis

4contains groes-like structural domain .

discussion
protein modules vs. protein domains
we have attempted to enumerate fused genes in e. coli in earlier work. although we recognized the difference between independent proteins with complete function, called modules  <cit> , as opposed to parts of proteins such as motifs and domains, we were not successful in our most recent effort in collecting only complete proteins to the exclusion of domains  <cit> . in earlier work we depended on size as a criterion to eliminate domains, but we know now some domains are large and overlap the lower range of sizes of independent proteins  <cit> . we also limited our previous studies to alignments between e. coli proteins. in this report we make use of information from  <dig> genomes to detect complete and independent protein homologs for the components of the fused e. coli proteins. the need to make use of additional genome sequences is supported by the fact that only 57% of the modules in fused e. coli proteins had unfused homologs within the e. coli genome while 90% had homologs among the  <dig> genomes. this result suggests that additional fused e. coli proteins might be detected in the future with more available genome sequences.

the overall effect of changing the methodology has been to reduce the numbers of multimodular proteins identified in e. coli k- <dig>  as a result of reducing the number of fused proteins, the number of paralogous protein groups was also reduced. the grouping process is based on similarity between the sequences hence many parts of the same proteins remained together in the new groups.

the effects of multimodular proteins on annotation of genes
for many years we have known that the e. coli contained fused genes and groups of sequence-similar proteins  <cit> . today with the sequence of the entire genome and that of many other microbial genomes, we can quantify the gene fusions in e. coli and apply this information to generate paralogous groups. even though we find that multimodular proteins are a minor fraction,  <dig> %, of the proteins in e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig>  they significantly affect the annotation of related genes and the ability to define paralogous genes within a genome.

examples of the types of errors arising in the annotation of fused proteins are shown in figure 3a. the multimodular protein thra  encodes an aspartokinase in the n-terminal module  and a homoserine dehydrogenase in the c-terminal module . a sequence similar protein from lactococcus lactis, gi <dig>  aligning only to the n-terminal module is erroneously annotated as having both aspartokinase and homoserine dehydrogenase activities. the correct annotation should be aspartokinase. in a second example, a protein from bacillus halodurans, gi <dig>  aligns to the aspartokinase module of thra but is described as homoserine dehydrogenase. the correct assignment should be aspartokinase.

as shown in figure 3b, different genes are sometimes fused to the same gene in different organisms. in e. coli an aspartokinase is fused to a homoserine dehydrogenase , while in xylella fastidiosa, an aspartokinase is fused to a diaminopimelate decarboxylase . one needs to be alert to partial alignments. in this case, the annotation is correct for both activities of the xylella protein, although the description does not follow the convention of stating the n-terminal activity first, raising the potential for misidentification of the activity of a partial homolog.

generality of gene fusions and remedies
the details of gene duplication and divergence and of gene fusions have followed different courses in separate lines of descent of bacteria. the fusions of different gene partners to aspartokinase in e. coli and x. fastidiosa connected proteins acting in the same pathway. however, the pathways are different for the two organisms, threonine biosynthesis for e. coli and lysine biosynthesis in x. fastidiosa. fusions of genes in a pathway have long been known and also the fusions of different genes in different organisms. in the tryptophan biosynthesis pathway of e. coli both the trpc gene ) and the trpd gene ) encode two enzymes as indicated in their former names. in contrast rhizobium meliloti has a fusion between the trpe and trpg genes, trpe  <cit> . such differences not taken into account in annotation have generated errors in assignment of activities in some of the tryptophan synthesis proteins in a number of organisms. the variability in gene fusions among bacteria means that definition of multimodular proteins cannot be transferred from one organism to another, but must be worked out by analyzing the partial homology patterns with smaller independent proteins found in other organisms.

to promote awareness of fused proteins, databases should list such proteins with their separate component activities and the approximate locations of these; either by start and end residues, or by module location . such a format has been implemented in genprotec  <cit> . when analyzing protein sequence alignments, one should make use of information on the alignment lengths and on the percent of each sequence that is involved in the alignment. such information may hold clues to detecting fused proteins.

properties of paralogous groups of e. coli
groups of unimodular e. coli proteins similar in sequence vary in size from two  up to  <dig> members . from pairs to groups of  <dig>  the number of paralogous groups follows a power law. above size  <dig>  most sizes are represented by just one or two groups. for the smallest groups, two to four members, the degree of sequence similarity  tend to range widely . as the groups are larger, a clear distribution around pam  <dig> emerges. perhaps the larger groups are ones whose success is reflected in many duplication events over time with a retained function if the sequence drift is held to the range  <dig> to  <dig> pam units. it appears that choosing  <dig> pam as the upper ceiling has not eliminated an important number of groups with highly diverged members. also, the broad range of degree of relatedness among members of paralogous groups  suggests that some types of proteins diverge further than others. the cluser around pam  <dig> is populated by large successful paralogous groups, some of which are closely related in catalytic function while others have diverged to more distantly related activities.

the largest paralogous groups are transporters and regulators . paralogous groups of enzymes tend to be smaller . the largest enzyme classes tend to be oxidoreductases or subunits of oxidoreductases, and the relationships among members of these groups point in the direction of shared binding capacities accounting for the sequence relatedness, e.g. fe-s clusters. in earlier work we found that some sequence related enzymes are alike in their ligand-binding characteristics, others are alike in mechanism of the catalytic action  <cit> . both types of shared properties are seen in table  <dig> 

the abc transporters have been a successful formula in bacterial evolution. the atp-binding subunits maintain detectable sequence similarity. more divergent are the membrane subunits, and least similar are the periplasmic ligand-binding subunits, perhaps understandably divergent as their binding specificities for each transported compound will differ with the properties of the compounds  <cit> . one of the groups of periplasmic binding components also contains sequence related transcriptional regulators of the galr/laci family, agreeing with previous reports  <cit> . the major difference between these two functions is the presence or absence of a dna-binding domain. according to fukami-kobayashi et al.  <cit> , the regulators in this group are believed to have arisen by the fusion of a dna binding domain to an ancestral periplasmic binding protein. the substrate specificity is thought to have evolved subsequently. only a few of the transporters and regulators in this group bind the same substrates; galactose , ribose  and xylose .

among the regulator groups , the class of two-component regulators is large. the two major activities of sensory histidine kinase and response regulators separate by the rules for grouping modules, but their known internal structures do not emerge. many other groups are different kinds of transcriptional regulators. another example of different functions related by sequence has been reported for a class of repressors and kinases, the rok family  <cit> . in this case the two different functions are sequence related via their sugar-binding domains and differ in their dna-binding or kinase activity.

cross genome comparisons
examining comparable paralogous groups among organisms may provide insight into functional and physiological differences among organisms. illustration of the possibilities is shown in table  <dig> where the sizes of comparable paralogous groups are shown for the closely related enteric bacteria e. coli and s. enterica serovar typhimurium and the distant gram positive soil organism b. subtilis. major difference is seen for one category of oxidoreductases. the largest enzyme group in e. coli contains  <dig> fes-binding proteins whereas the b. subtilis genome has only one protein of this type. members of the e. coli group include subunits of formate dehydrogenases, hydrogenases  <dig> and  <dig>  dmso reductase, and a nadh dehydrogenase. the presence of elements of the formate hydrogen lyase system and of the dmso reductase in e. coli but not b. subtilis illustrates information on metabolic differences that emerges from such cross-genome comparisons. b. subtilis does not have the diverse anaerobic respiratory capability of e. coli and s. enterica. duplication and divergence of this common ancestral gene seems to have taken a different course in the two bacterial lineages.

in another example, b. subtilis has made use of one enzyme type to a greater extent than the two enteric organisms. the number of one of the types of nad-binding oxidoreductases is much larger in b. subtilis  than in the enterics . the b. subtilis enzymes in this group are fatty acid biosynthesis enzymes, agreeing with the known fact that this organism synthesizes a greater variety of fatty acids and has dedicated more of its proteome towards diversifying its fatty acid biosynthetic capabilities  <cit> . thus sequence similar groups may be used in comparative analysis between genomes, highlighting areas where genetic resources have been expanded, pointing up metabolic differences between organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
• proteins encoded by fused genes, multimodular proteins, require special attention in genome analysis. such multimodular proteins contain two or more functional components that are located at separate parts of the protein and that may exist as independent proteins in other genomes. annotation of the multimodular proteins should include the separate functions and their corresponding locations in the gene product. this will improve transfer of function between the fused proteins and sequences matching their entire length or only the length of one of their module components. current annotation errors involving fused genes can be remedied by introducing this approach.

• the identification of multimodular proteins in e. coli was improved by making use of sequence information from  <dig> genomes to detect alignments between the fused proteins and smaller, un-fused homologs corresponding to the component modules. the more common multidomain proteins, proteins containing fused sequence domains or motifs that together make up one overall function, were not detected as multimodular proteins by this approach. as a result the current number of fused e. coli proteins was reduced to  <dig> proteins with  <dig> containing three modules and  <dig> containing two modules. the multimodular e. coli proteins consist mainly of enzymes, regulators and transport proteins. their component modules are often not related by sequence but many are related in that they function in a common pathway or cell role. components of fused genes appear to vary from genome to genome hence complicating their detection and function assignment.

• multimodular proteins are different from multifunctional proteins in that the latter catalyze more than one reaction in the same region of the protein.

• the generation of paralogous or sequence related groups is improved when the modules of multimodular proteins are separated and treated as independent proteins for the grouping process.  <dig> groups of sequence related e. coli proteins ranging in size from  <dig> to  <dig> were generated from the new module data. the smaller groups range widely in degree of relatedness while the larger groups have diverged from one another to about the same extent. transport proteins and regulatory proteins were found in the larger groups while enzyme groups tended to have fewer members.

• over half of the e. coli proteins belong to paralogous groups, reflecting the prominent role of duplication and divergence in the evolution of the genome. the number and sizes of paralogous groups reflect the distinctiveness of the organisms and they can be used in cross genome comparisons.

