BACKGROUND
during the last few decades numerous studies have highlighted the important role of anthropogenic disturbances on the occurrence and speed of contemporary evolution in wild populations . furthermore, evolution experiments have shown that fitness of populations subjected to heavy metals or pesticides can rebound within less than ten generations . these results indicate that – at least in these conditions – populations can show quick evolutionary responses to anthropogenically-induced selection pressures. however, when new environmental conditions appear, they can affect life history traits and thus may have major consequences for the demography of the populations. these demographic changes may in turn reduce the evolutionary potential of populations through increased genetic drift and reduced genetic variance for the traits under selection  <cit> . it is therefore important to evaluate the demographic consequences of a novel environment as they provide information on the potential for evolutionary rescue  <cit> .

several factors can reduce the evolutionary potential of a population facing novel environmental conditions. an organism can be viewed as an integrated system with functional, developmental and genetic associations among its different traits  <cit> . it is therefore important to consider the multivariate feature of traits in an organism to provide more robust predictions of the evolutionary trajectory of populations as a result of novel selection pressures  <cit> . the evolutionary potential of traits is constrained by the magnitude and sign of the genetic associations among the traits  <cit> . these associations are represented by the matrix g of additive genetic variance and covariance  <cit> . consequently changes of g-matrix structure could modify the evolutionary trajectory of a population  <cit> . g-matrices are assumed to be highly stable over time  <cit> . several studies, however, have shown that they can be easily altered , including by quick changes in environmental conditions  <cit> .

when submitted to a new stressor, a population can change its evolutionary trajectory, which may lead to improved adaptive responses to the stressor. for instance, selection induced by pollution can favor genotypes allocating more resources to detoxification mechanisms  <cit> . to date, however, we are limited in our ability to predict which mechanisms and traits will be involved in response to the type of pollutant and its concentration, and if these responses can be generalized to all species. to improve our ability to predict the evolutionary patterns involved in response to different pollutants we need to compare the evolutionary responses of replicates of the same population of origin, subjected to different sources of pollution.

in addition, selection induced by pollutants is assumed to be directional, continuous and strong  <cit> . however, in a heterogeneous environment, antagonistic selection pressures induced by ecological factors other than the pollutant can both prevent the rapid evolution of a population in response to the pollutant  <cit>  and maintain its genetic variation and therefore its evolutionary potential in response to potential new stressors . furthermore, temporally fluctuating environments seem to favor a generalist rather than a specialist way of life  <cit> . populations that evolved in the presence of alternating stressors may thus cope less well with each stressor, and their evolutionary response may be slower than for populations that evolved in response to a single stressor.

in this study we used experimental populations of caenorhabditis elegans to evaluate the evolution of life history traits in response to two different pollutants, salt  and depleted uranium  – the radiological effects of exposure to depleted u are assumed to be neglected compared to the chemical effects  <cit> . we analyzed multivariate evolutionary responses to each of these pollutants and to an alternation of these pollutants. our approach allowed us to test whether  the degree of evolutionary response to selection and the evolutionary patterns of life history traits differed according to the pollutant,  the stability of environmental conditions or the alternating presence of the two pollutants affected the evolution of the traits differently,  the regime of selection caused by each treatment affected the demography differently, and  the temporal changes in the phenotypic/genetic variance structure of life history trait differed according to the polluted environments.

RESULTS
evolutionary responses to different polluted environments
for hermaphrodites and males, trait changes across generations  differed according to the treatment. for traits measured in hermaphrodites, the model with the lowest deviance information criterion  included an interaction between treatment and generation, and covariance between traits . we found similar results when we limited the analysis to each pair of traits, except between growth and late fertility . for males the selected model included the interaction between treatment and generation, but including trait covariance did not significantly improve the fit of the model . in both cases the replicate effects explained < 4% of the variance among traits.table  <dig> 
comparison of multivariate mixed models including different effects



effects included within the model
dic
− <dig> 
− <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
effect of generation and environment  on hermaphrodite  and on male  traits, measured between generations  <dig> and  <dig> of the multigenerational experiment. we used multivariate mixed models with all the traits included as dependent variables, and compared different models using deviance information criterion . left-hand side: characteristics of the fixed effects included in each model . right-hand side: dic of the model followed by the change  in dic value between this model and the previous model that did not include the fixed effect. except for the models shown at the last line for each sex, covariance between traits was allowed in the priors. in bold: selected models for which Δdic >  <dig>  i.e. the model including interaction had a smaller dic. replicate effects in these models represent  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total variance for traits measured in hermaphrodites and males, respectively.



at generation  <dig>  intercepts of traits were lower in polluted environments than in controls, and lower in the salt than uranium populations . as shown by the 95% highest posterior density interval  , traits did not change across generations in the control treatment, except for a slight reduction in late fertility . evolutionary responses between generations  <dig> and  <dig> were generally higher to salt  than uranium treatment , and the strongest evolutionary response of fertility was to the selection imposed by the alternating treatment . the evolutionary responses of early fertility to uranium treatment, of late fertility to salt treatment and of both traits to the alternating treatment were significant . traits related to reproduction showed stronger evolutionary responses  than traits related to growth . male body bend increased between generations  <dig> and  <dig> for salt and alternating treatments, but not for uranium or controls .figure  <dig> 
evolutionary responses of traits between generations  <dig> and  <dig>  measures of hermaphrodite total fertility , growth , early  and late  fertility, and male growth  and body bend . each symbol corresponds to the mean value of the trait and its standard error . trait values were rescaled prior to analysis by subtracting each value by the mean of the sample  and dividing it by twice the standard deviation. control , uranium , salt  and alternating uranium-salt  environments. regression lines correspond to posterior mode of the distribution for intercept and slope . small dashed line: control; black line: uranium; large dashed line: salt; gray line: alternating uranium-salt environments.



demographic consequences of evolution in different environments
for all treatments we started each replicate population with  <dig> individuals. after 3 days, estimated population size in the control environment reached  <dig>  <dig> individuals on average, and fluctuated around this value over the  <dig> subsequent generations . in the uranium treatment, estimated population size reached  <dig> and  <dig> individuals for generations  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. it then increased to reach a plateau at around  <dig>  <dig> individuals during generations 7– <dig>  in the salt treatment the estimated population size first decreased to <  <dig> individuals during the first generation; it stayed low and varied around  <dig> individuals during the whole experiment. in the alternating treatment, estimated population size started at around  <dig> individuals during generation  <dig>  and then fluctuated within 5000– <dig> individuals, without any notable temporal trend.figure  <dig> 
changes in average population size in the different treatments between generations  <dig> and  <dig>  symbols show the mean value and standard error over six replicated populations in control , uranium , salt  and alternating uranium-salt  treatments.



comparison of variance matrices
we did not find any covariance between growth and body bend in males. furthermore, tests for traits in males revealed angles between the first eigenvector of each combination of two matrices of 0° in all environments . we thus only present matrix comparisons for hermaphrodites.

we found a strong divergence of g <dig> matrices  between control, uranium and salt treatments . for g <dig> matrices divergence was moderate between salt and both control and uranium treatments . divergence in g <dig> matrices was non-significant between uranium and control treatments .figure  <dig> 
angle between different environments. histogram and density curve of the distribution of the angle  between different environments. θ obtained by a resampling procedure, between the first principal component  of both matrices of variance for traits measured in hermaphrodites  between populations from two environments: control vs. salt, control vs. uranium, and salt vs. uranium. we used this procedure for the periods g
 <dig>  and g
 <dig> . error bars denote 95% confidence intervals for θ obtained using a resampling procedure.



g <dig> and g <dig> matrices did not differ in the control environment . we found a strong divergence between these matrices in the uranium treatment , and a weak divergence in the salt treatment . divergence between g <dig> and g <dig> was negligible in the three environments , indicating that all matrices were more stable during that period.figure  <dig> 
angle between different periods. histogram and density curve of the distribution of the angle  between different periods. θ obtained by a resampling procedure, between the first principal component  of both matrices of variance for traits measured in hermaphrodites  between two periods g
 <dig>  vs. g
 <dig> ; and g
 <dig> vs. g
 <dig> . we used this procedure for the populations from control, uranium and salt environments. error bars denote 95% confidence intervals for θ obtained using a resampling procedure.



eccentricity and size of the g <dig> matrices did not differ significantly between the environments . eccentricity decreased significantly across the subsequent matrices in the uranium populations, indicating a decrease in stability of the correlation between traits in this polluted environment . there was a significant decline in matrix size for control and uranium compared to the salt environments at g <dig> , indicating a decrease in the overall variance of traits in these two environments. however, matrix size appeared stable over time for the control  unlike the uranium environment . the two pollutants affected eccentricity and size differently: uranium decreased both eccentricity and size, whereas salt resulted in both parameters remaining stable over time .figure  <dig> 
matrix eccentricity and matrix size. measures of matrix eccentricity  and size  of variance matrices for traits measured in hermaphrodites in the control , the uranium  and the salt  environments. error bars represent 95% highest and lowest of confidence intervals. we used g
 <dig> , g
 <dig> , g
 <dig>  and g
 <dig>  matrices.



discussion
this laboratory study demonstrated that c. elegans populations can evolve towards a higher resistance to pollutants in only a few generations. overall, we found a stronger evolutionary response of populations to salt than uranium treatment . however, the results suggest that pollutants drove the evolution of populations towards different life histories: salt populations slowed down their life histories by producing more eggs during late fertility , whereas uranium populations showed faster life histories by producing more eggs during early fertility . changes in life history features in the presence of different pollutants were also revealed by demographic changes; at the end of the experiment the rates of increase were similar for uranium and controls, but were much lower for salt and alternating treatments. furthermore, evolution in the alternating pollutant regime was intermediate between the two individual treatments. towards the end of the experiments we detected changes in the variance structure of traits in uranium and salt compared to control populations, and compared to different periods for the same treatment. these results suggest that trait variance matrices were not always stable in a changing environment, and changed according to the novel conditions. overall, salt seemed to maintain the features of the matrix  through time, whereas uranium populations showed a decrease in trait variance  and covariance .

microevolutionary trajectories in response to different pollutants
in the presence of uranium or salt the c. elegans populations clearly showed evidence of stress, as their life history traits and darwinian fitness  were all strongly affected. our results from generation  <dig> onward suggest that most phenotypic changes during the experiment were caused by cross-generation genetic changes in response to novel selection pressures  <cit> . the large number of individuals  used to seed new petri plates at each generation and the low variance between replicate populations within a treatment , showed an absence of random divergence between replicates – this rules out the possibility that genetic drift could be responsible for the observed long-term changes across generations. similarly the absence of trends in control populations suggests that uncontrolled environmental conditions had negligible effects on changes in traits measured during the experiment. however, during the first four generations the effects of selection may have been obscured by potential effects such as intragenerational or transgenerational  phenotypic plasticity . intragenerational and transgenerational effects, however, were unlikely to be responsible for cross-generation changes observed from generation  <dig> onward, i.e. once the animals experienced a stable environment the parental effects did not generate any new variation among individuals caused by the novel environment  <cit> . therefore, after generation  <dig>  changes at the phenotypic level probably reflect microevolutionary  response to selection. these microevolutionary changes occurring in the different polluted environments confirm the previous findings of lopes et al.  <cit>  on the capacity of a genetically diverse population of c. elegans to respond to selection by a pollutant pesticide. epigenetic effects could also be responsible for some evolutionary changes throughout the experiment  <cit> . epigenetic effects might have played a role in evolutionary changes in this experiment if they generated epigenetic inheritance responsible for some phenotypic variation similar to genetic inheritance  <cit> . whatever source of variation is the origin of these changes, c. elegans populations have the potential to rapidly change their traits in the presence of novel pollutants, resulting in rapid improvement of fitness across generations.

environment-dependent evolutionary divergence
despite a strong and immediate impact, in a few generations, populations quickly responded to both pollutants. pollutants had dramatic effects on life history traits, and these effects differed with the type of pollutant.

within the first three generations, in the presence of a pollutant, populations reacted with a strong decrease in early fertility and growth, and to a lesser extent in late fertility . furthermore, populations subjected to salt and to alternating pollutants showed a strong decrease in early survival; however, for uranium the survival remained similar to control populations . these differences between environments reflect different selection pressures imposed by pollutants on traits, indicating that several mechanisms may be involded in these short-term responses. further experiments with different stress and control treatments in a large dataset of individual traits, in the first three generations of exposure, are required to address the mechanisms involved in these responses. a comparison between generations or treatments would allow discrimination and quantification of the role of each mechanism.

after generation  <dig>  populations reacted by increasing their total fertility. however, salt and uranium treatments affected fertility at different life stages. for salt, fertility increased later but not early in life ; furthermore, salt favored hermaphrodite growth and stronger body bend frequency. in contrast, for uranium, fertility increased early in life but did not change later; also, uranium did not affect hermaphrodite growth and male locomotion. at this stage it is too speculative to infer why the different pollutants led to the evolution of different life histories, but our results highlight the need for more studies on the divergent effects of pollutants on life history.

growth for hermaphrodites and males in all polluted environments improved over time compared to controls, except for hermaphrodites in uranium. in some cases, we were unable to clearly conclude that the evolutionary response was significant. however, given the observed trends, the evolutionary response could have become significant if the experiment was performed for a few more generations. another explanation could be that fitness is more strongly related to fertility than to growth  <cit>  and thus that growth may be subject to weaker selection pressures and not evolve as quickly as fertility.

locomotion was not affected by uranium after generation  <dig>  in contrast there was an evolutionary response to salt and alternating treatments after a reduction in initial generations. pollutants commonly decrease the frequency of body bends in the short term . since locomotion behavior promotes encounter rate between males and hermaphrodites  <cit> , outcrossing could be affected in polluted environments. it should be noted that compared to self-fertilization outcrossing permits hermaphrodites to double or quadruple their fertility  <cit> . however, the ratio of males, also an index of conservation of outcrossing rate  <cit> , was only slightly affected in the uranium and the alternating environments, and was not affected in the salt environment . the effects of salt on locomotion, associated with a reduction in survival, could partly explain the lower intrinsic population growth in this environment.

evolution in the alternating uranium-salt treatment was intermediate between the two individual treatments – similar to evolution for salt at the beginning of the experiment and became more similar to that for uranium at the end. temporal fluctuating regimes can lead to antagonistic selection pressures and thus to slower evolutionary responses . the intermediate response in the salt-uranium alternating treatment may support this hypothesis. an intermediate evolutionary trajectory may also reflect a cost of lost alleles due to selection caused by the recurrent change of phenotypic optima . in such a case, it appears that the change in phenotypic optima was not completely symmetrical and that, compared to salt, selection in uranium had a greater effect on the evolutionary responses of these populations. previous studies have found cases of adaptation to heterogeneous environmental conditions through evolution towards a more generalist way of life  <cit> . in these cases, the process involved in the evolution of generalism seems to be mutation accumulation  <cit> . the present study involved only  <dig> generations, and mutation rate was likely insufficient to be the cause of the evolutionary changes observed  <cit> .

demographic consequences
none of the populations subjected to pollutants reached the rate of increase of the control populations during the study period. therefore, despite rapid evolutionary changes, populations were unable to revert to their original fitness level unless these changes modified their fitness optimum. at the end of the experiment, the population rate of increase for uranium treatment reached about 75% of the control rate – in contrast it stabilized at around 35% for the alternating treatments and < 15% in the salt treatments.

although the duration of our experiment was not long enough to estimate the potential for evolutionary rescue, it should be noted that all the populations could maintain a positive rate of increase  <cit> . furthermore, the impact of the different pollutants on life histories and their demographic consequences suggest that different selection pressures leading to different adaptive processes may also generate different probabilities for evolutionary rescue. evolutionary rescue depends on factors such as initial genetic diversity, population size, the intensity of selection imposed by the environment and the evolutionary history of the population  <cit> . our results suggest that another factor affecting the potential for evolutionary rescue is the type of life history evolution consequent to new selection pressures imposed by the stress: uranium quickly allowed the populations to grow to a level similar to the control populations. in contrast, by slowing the pace of life of populations, salt may lower the potential for evolutionary rescue.

changes in p- and g-matrices and environmental conditions
the first eigenvector of a g-matrix represents the line of least genetic resistance of a population, and thus g can be used to predict the evolutionary potential and trajectory of a population  <cit> . therefore changes in the direction of that eigenvector across generations, or differences between environmental conditions, provide information on the evolvability of a population in these conditions, and on the effect of the novel environment on evolutionary trajectory. furthermore, the stability of the g-matrix is an important assumption for predicting the evolutionary constraints imposed by the genetic structure of a population in a novel environment  <cit> .

quantitative genetic studies historically assumed that the g-matrix was stable through time and conditions, as this assumption enabled researchers to predict evolutionary changes from the action of selection on the matrix  <cit> . however, recent studies have shown that this was not the case  <cit> . in support of these previous findings, our study showed very rapid changes in the p- and g-matrix structure in c. elegans populations subjected to novel environmental conditions. studies have revealed divergence between g-matrices, after hundreds or thousands of generations of evolution in natural populations, as a result of combined selection, drift and mutational effects . g-matrices can also change within a few generations as a result of rapid changes in the adaptive landscape  <cit> . sgrò and blows  <cit>  showed some alteration of the genetic structure in drosophila populations that evolved for  <dig> generations in different heat stress environments. finally, as our results show, g can change within a few generations, before mutations or potential selection could have affected it. g-matrix instability has already been shown on a very short term . furthermore, short-term changes in estimates of genetic variance and covariance have been found as a result of environmental changes  <cit> .

we also observed divergence in the p- and g-matrices for populations that experienced different environmental conditions. for uranium the most important changes occurred within the first four generations . furthermore, matrix eccentricity and size decreased in the uranium populations, revealing a decrease in trait variance and covariance in this environment. changes in the orientation of the matrix, and in matrix eccentricity and size, within the first four generations followed by stability after generation  <dig> for uranium suggest that in this novel environment epigenetic or acclimation effects may have caused changes in the p-matrix. in contrast, divergence in matrix orientation between salt and the other populations was moderate from the first four generations but more persistent over time. moreover, matrix size and eccentricity stayed constant over time in the salt environment. changes in the p-matrix for salt may thus reveal changes at the underlying genetic level, or may indicate that a decrease in epigenetic effects on the matrix structure after generation  <dig> was combined with an increase in changes in the g-matrix. although our results did not allow us to rule out these two hypotheses, they may partly explain why we found faster evolutionary rates for salt compared to uranium from generations  <dig> to  <dig>  a stable matrix implies stronger genetic association between the traits. these results confirm those of a previous study using isogenic lines of the same c. elegans population, in which we found a stronger and positive genetic correlation between fertility and growth in salt than in uranium . stronger genetic association may constrain the independent evolution of traits  <cit> , but it can also facilitate the evolution of both traits if they are positively correlated and both positively selected.

our results confirm the hypothesis of matrix instability and provide new evidence that epigenetic effects, selection and genotype by environment interaction can have instantaneous and strong effects on the divergence in the orientation, eccentricity and size of the matrix in a polluted environment.

rates of evolution
pollutants in our study affected the rate of evolution of populations, with a stronger evolutionary response to salt than uranium treatment. there was a  <dig> % increase per generation for total fertility in the former, mostly caused by a strong  <dig> % increase for late fertility. in addition, generation time has been found to be longer in the salt than in the uranium or control treatments . consequently, salt populations were studied for less than  <dig> generations, and evolutionary responses were probably underestimated.

why would the evolutionary response be faster to salt than uranium treatment? we chose concentrations that reduced fertility by almost 60% at the first generation for both pollutants. however, despite that precaution, selection pressures could be stronger in salt as suggested by the stronger reduction in survival in this medium . indeed some genotypes may have been removed faster from the salt population. heritability of traits in uranium is lower than in the other treatments , and differences in genetic structures for uranium compared to salt  could also constrain the evolutionary potential of traits in that medium . populations also showed a stronger acclimation to uranium than to salt during the first generations of exposure . the quick acclimation may have also reduced the strength of selection on the traits and thus the evolutionary rate in the uranium populations  <cit> . a population’s response to a novel environment by acclimation or by adaptive processes can have completely different implications on the future of the population. although plasticity is a costly strategy  <cit> , it does not entail any long-term costs of adaptation such as a reduction of genetic diversity  <cit> . consequently, populations that respond to a novel environment by plasticity can cope with a larger range of conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that rapid adaptation to different polluted environments may involve different and complex patterns of evolutionary responses of the life history traits with consequences at the demographic level. part of this differential response is caused by the shape and the strength of selection pressures on the studied traits, the capacity of populations to acclimate to novel conditions through phenotypic plasticity, some epigenetic effects and the direct effects of the pollutants on the genetic variance structure of traits. studies on microevolutionary responses to pollutants should thus incorporate information on these different aspects of the response of populations that will help highlight the consequences of pollution on the evolutionary potential of wild populations.

