BACKGROUND
peptidases are widespread enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of peptide bonds. not only do peptidases hydrolyse proteins to amino acids and peptides for nutrition and recycling, but they also perform some of the most important post-translational processing events leading to the activation  of many other proteins, including other enzymes and peptide hormones. over 2% of the protein coding genes in a genome encode peptidases, and there are over  <dig> peptidase genes in the human genome. peptidases exist in at least six catalytic types, depending on the nature of the nucleophile in the catalytic reaction  or aspartate or glutamate residues). peptidases are grouped into over  <dig> different evolutionary families  <cit> .

the pepsin family  contains aspartic-type endopeptidases. activated water is bound by two aspartate residues each of which is located in a motif xaa-xaa-asp-xbb-gly-xbb where xaa is a hydrophobic amino acid and xbb is either ser or thr. a third important residue is a tyrosine which interacts with the substrate and is located on a beta-hairpin loop known as the "flap" which forms part of the roof to the active site. a second motif, part of a structure known as the psi-loop  <cit>  consists of two hydrophobic residues followed by a glycine. two of these motifs are conserved in all sequences known or predicted to be active within family a <dig>  the psi-loops are important in stabilizing the structure, especially the active centre. many members of family a <dig> have three conserved disulphide bridges. homologues are known from animals, plants, fungi and protozoa, but no homologues have been reported from prokaryotes. family a <dig> has recently been divided into two subfamilies, with the majority of characterized peptidases in subfamily a1a. peptidases within this subfamily include: pepsin a , gastricsin  and chymosin , which are digestive enzymes in the stomach; cathepsin d , which is a lysosomal enzyme that degrades phagocytozed peptides and proteins; renin , which is a peptidase that processes angiotensinogen; and memapsins  <dig>  and  <dig> , widely distributed peptidases of unknown function but which may be involved in alzheimer's disease . subfamily a1b contains predominantly peptidase homologues from plants including nucellin  <cit>  and nepenthesin . besides peptidases, family a <dig> also contains a number of proteins which cannot be peptidases because the active site aspartates are not conserved. these include pregnancy-associated glycoproteins  <cit>  and a xylanase inhibitor  <cit> .

the tertiary structures of several members of this family have been determined, and each shows a bilobed protein. each lobe contains one of the active site aspartates in a psi-loop and the two lobes are structurally similar. this similarity can only be observed in the tertiary structure because, apart from motifs contributing to each psi-loop, there is no observable similarity in the protein sequence. this led to the hypothesis that an ancestral gene duplication had taken place, followed by gene fusion  <cit> . this raises the question of how did the original gene product function, being only one half of a modern-day pepsin? the discovery of a peptidase, retropepsin , within the genome of the human immunodeficiency virus  that also represents a single lobe of an extremely divergent pepsin  and which has to dimerize to be active, provided evidence to answer this question  <cit> . proteins with a single pepsin lobe also exist in eukaryotes. the structure of the saccharomyces cerevisiae protein ddi <dig> , which is not a peptidase, has been resolved and shown to contain a domain with a retropepsin-like structure, and the protein also has to dimerize to be active  <cit> . this domain was probably derived from a retroelement and represents an even more ancient divergence than that of the a <dig> and a <dig> families, as has been shown in a recent phylogeny of clan aa peptidases  <cit> . it has been assumed that the hiv peptidase represents the ancestral state and that the ancestral half-pepsin also had to dimerize to be active. however, it is also possible that the hiv peptidase was derived from a normal, bilobed pepsin when a virus captured half of its host's gene. this "chicken and egg" situation might be resolvable if pepsin homologues could be found in prokaryotes, because this would represent an extremely distant sequence divergence. if a prokaryote pepsin homologue contained only one lobe, then it would support the hypothesis of the ancient gene duplication and fusion event. however, if the prokaryote pepsin homologue were bilobed, then either a) this hypothesis is incorrect; b) the gene duplication precedes the most recent common ancestor of prokaryotes and eukaryotes; or c) the bacterial homologue genes were derived by horizontal gene transfer.

we report the discovery of the first prokaryote pepsin homologues in the completed genome sequences of several proteobacteria.

RESULTS
over  <dig> completely sequenced prokaryote genomes were analysed , and  <dig> of these contained no detectable homologue of pepsin. this included all of the archaean genomes. however, pepsin homologues were detected in seven bacterial genomes, and these are shown in table  <dig>  characteristics of the predicted proteins of these homologues are shown in table  <dig>  all the bacteria containing pepsin homologues are members of the class gammaproteobacteria, and all except marinomonas are members of the order alteromonadales; marinomonas is a member of the order oceanospirillales. despite the genomes having been completely sequenced, no pepsin homologue was detected in the proteomes of the following shewanella species: s. baltica, s. frigidimarina, s. halifaxensis, s. oneidensis, s. pealeana, s. putrefaciens, s. sp. ana- <dig>  s. sp. mr- <dig>  s. sp. mr- <dig>  s. sp. w3-18- <dig> or s. woodyi, nor in sinorhizobium meliloti.

members of peptidase family a <dig> found in the proteomes derived from completely sequenced bacterial genomes. base pairs in parentheses preceded by the letter "c" are on the complimentary strand with respect to the database entry.

sinorhizobium medicae
predicted active site residues are numbered according to the translation of the respective coding sequence. the threshold scores for alien hunter analysis are given in parenthesis after the raw score; a different threshold exists for each genome analysis. the pepsin homologue in sinorhizobium medica is derived from a gene that is split between two 5000-residue windows in the alien hunter analysis, hence there are two scores.

blastp searches of the ncbi non-redundant database using the bacterial pepsin homologues as queries returned only one other bacterial sequence. this was the a5a_a <dig> gene product from vibrio cholerae strain mzo- <dig> . this sequence consists of  <dig> residues with the peptidase unit predicted to be residues 14- <dig>  and the active site residues to be asp <dig>  phe <dig> and asp <dig> . the genome of this particular strain is incomplete and no pepsin homologue is present in any of the other thirteen strains of vibrio cholerae for which the genome sequences are complete. because this sequence might be a contaminant, it has not been included in the analysis. a search of the uniprot sequence database using hmmer also failed to return any other sequences from bacteria. two psi-blast searches of the ncbi non-redundant protein sequence database were undertaken using the amino acid sequences of the pepsin homologues from shewanella amazonesis and marinomonas as the seed sequences for  <dig> and  <dig> iterations respectively ; these also failed to find any new bacterial homologues.

four homologues were found among the environmental samples nucleotide sequence database , and all were from marine environments. the predicted protein sequences of aacy <dig> and aacy <dig> were virtually identical. none of these fragments were identical to any known pepsin homologue, but each was most closely related to a homologue from shewanella and are likely to be derived from at least three other bacterial species. because these are fragments only, they are not considered further.

several of the bacteria with pepsin homologues are marine and psychrophilic, including colwellia psychrerythraea   <cit>  and shewanella detrificans  <cit> . shewanella loihica is also marine but associated with deep-sea, hydrothermal vents. shewanella amazonensis was isolated from marine sediments from the shallow waters of the amazon river delta, and shewanella sediminis from sediments in halifax harbour, canada  <cit> . marinomonas sp. mwyl <dig> is a salt marsh species initially isolated from the root surface of the grass spartina anglica  <cit> . exceptionally, sinorhizobium medicae is found associated with root nodules of medicago species  <cit> . there are completed genome for several other shewanella species that are also marine , but these do not contain pepsin homologues, so there is no apparent correlation between environment and presence of a pepsin homologue.

an alignment containing only bacterial homologues, human pepsin a and memapsins  <dig> and  <dig>  generated by extracting the sequences from the muscle alignment and removing all the gap-only columns, is shown in fig.  <dig>  as can be seen from this figure, both active site aspartates  are conserved, indicating that the bacterial homologues are bilobed. this means that each homologue has the same structure for the peptidase unit as pepsin, and each would be active in the monomeric form.

none of the proteins were predicted to possess a signal peptide. this means that unlike the majority of members of peptidase family a <dig>  these bacterial proteins are not secreted . many members of family a <dig> are active at acidic ph, being secreted in the stomach, or to the lysosome or plant and fungal vacuoles, but a cytoplasmic peptidase would presumably be active at neutral ph. amongst the mammalian pepsin homologues, renin is secreted into the blood and is also active at neutral ph. this change in ph optimum has been explained by the replacement of thr <dig> by ala, thereby preventing a hydrogen bond forming which affects the acidity of the active site residue asp <dig>  that this replacement is also found in the hiv retropepsin, which is also active at neutral ph, supports this hypothesis  <cit> . intriguingly, six of the seven bacterial homologues also have ala <dig> . in pepsin a, thr <dig> is hydrogen-bonded to asp <dig>  but in renin both residues are replaced by ala and site-directed mutagenesis of ala <dig> for asp lowered the ph optimum  <cit> . in the sequences from shewanella and colwellia, asp <dig> is replaced by leu, which is an isosteric replacement. in the sinorhizobium sequence asp <dig> is replaced by arg, and in the marinomonas sequence it is replaced by ser. there would be no problem accommodating the smaller ser in the available space, but the larger arg could be more problematic.

fig.  <dig> shows that of the cysteines forming the three disulphide bridges found in many of the eukaryotic homologues, only those forming the first are conserved in the sinorhizobium and marinomonas homologues. cys <dig> from the third disulphide bridge is retained in the sequences from colwellia, shewanella loihica and s. sediminis, which may mean that the proteins are thiol-dependent. disulphide bridges would not be expected in intracellular proteins. the sinorhizobium and marinomonas homologues also differ in having phe <dig> instead of tyr ; although this is a common replacement, none of the homologues with phe <dig> has ever been biochemically characterized or shown to be catalytically active. replacement of tyr <dig> for phe in rhizopuspepsin by site-directed mutagenesis led to some, weakened activity  <cit> . the hydrophobic-hydrophobic-gly motifs in the psi-loops are conserved in all the bacterial homologues except sinorhizobium and marinomonas . because these bacterial homologues have inserts here, the alignment is uncertain. although it is possible that the inserts might compensate for the loss of the hydrophobic-hydrophobic-gly motif, which would imply a different structure in this region, it is much more likely that the two proteins lacking these motifs are not active as peptidases.

from the solved tertiary structure the residues forming the s <dig> and s1' substrate-binding pockets for human pepsin a are known. pepsin a prefers large hydrophobic residues  in substrates for both p <dig> and p1', and the substrate-binding pockets are correspondingly lined with hydrophobic residues  <cit> . the bacterial homologues, with the exception of that from marinomonas, have most of the substrate-binding residues conserved except thr <dig>  which is replaced by another hydrophobic residue, and thr <dig>  which is replaced by ala .

the phylogenetic tree  shows that all bar two of the bacterial sequences are close to the origin of the division between subfamilies on the tree, implying that horizontal transfer of genes from a recent eukaryote species to a bacterium is unlikely . this is confirmed by the results from alien hunter  which finds horizontal transfer of genes unlikely in all species except marinomonas. considering that marinomonas is a commensal organism living on the root surface of a grass, the origin of a pepsin homologue via horizontal transfer of a gene from the host is not unexpected. the marinomonas homologue is most closely related to that from sinorhizobium. these sequences do not cluster with the other bacterial homologues on the tree. sinorhizobium is also a commensal organism, living in the root nodules of legumes, but the region containing the gene was not predicted to be the result of horizontal transfer. there are therefore two groups of bacterial pepsins, one containing sequences from shewanella and colwellia and one containing sequences from sinorhizobium and marinomonas.

to further investigate whether the pepsin homologues in shewanella species were derived from horizontal gene transfer, we attempted to estimate the rate of mutation. we hypothesized that if the bacterial pepsins are of ancient origin then their rate of mutation must be very low otherwise we would not be able to see the sequence similarity to eukaryotic proteins. we calculated the percentage identities between the pepsin sequences from shewanella species and compared these with the percentage identities from other peptidase families. the families of signal peptidase  <dig>  and the clpp subunit of endopeptidase clp  were chosen because these are well conserved in bacteria, and all the shewanella species have only one homologue per family. the percentage identities with respect to the homologues from shewanella denitrificans are shown in table  <dig>  which shows that the clpp subunit is the most stable, followed by signal peptidase  <dig> and then pepsin. the pepsin homologues are changing at twice the rate of the other two families. the closest homologues to s. denitrificans signal peptidase  <dig> and clpp are the respective proteins from s. loihica. however, of the shewanella pepsin homologues, that from s. loihica is most distantly related to s. denitrificans, even more distantly related than the sequence from a species in a different genus, colwellia. to put the percentage identities into a geological time-frame, percentage identities were calculated for cathepsin d, a pepsin homologue found only in animals where divergence times can be estimated from the fossil record. the percentage identity between cathepsin d sequences from human and pig is 88% , and human and xenopus tropicalis is 73% ; while that of human cathepsin d and nemepsin- <dig> from the nematode ancylostoma caninum is 52% . the mutation rate for pepsin homologues amongst bacteria must therefore be considerably higher than eukaryote members of the family, and this rapid mutation rate might explain their placing near the root of the phylogenetic tree.

the protein sequences from shewanella denitrificans were compared with orthologous protein sequences from other bacteria. sequences were aligned with muscle  <cit>  and percentage identities calculated using alistat .

the evidence as to whether the ancestral pepsin gene in bacteria originated from a horizontal gene transfer from a eukaryote or not can be summed up as follows. the positioning of most of the bacterial pepsins close to the divergence of the two subfamilies on the phylogenetic tree, the cytoplasmic location and lack of disulfide bridges and the scores from alien hunter imply no lateral transference; the absence of homologues in other closely related bacterial species and archaea and the apparent fast mutation rate are points in favour of horizontal gene transfer.

if the bacterial genes are the result of lateral gene transference from an ancient eukaryote gene, then there is no known current eukaryote gene that resembles it, because nearly all modern pepsin homologues are secreted proteins and the ancient gene product would presumably be cytoplasmic. the eukaryotic peptidases that are most closely related to the bacterial homologues are the memapsins, as can be seen in fig.  <dig>  the memapsins and bacterial pepsins cluster with high confidence. it is possible that memapsins, which are widely distributed in mammalian tissues, might be closer to the ancestral peptidase from which all other vertebrate pepsin homologues are derived.

aspartic-type peptidases unrelated to pepsin are known in bacteria, including the gpr peptidase from bacillus megaterium   <cit>  and omptin from escherichia coli   <cit> . neither peptidase is inhibited by pepstatin. sporulation factor spoiiga   <cit>  has also been claimed to be an aspartic peptidase because of the presence of a single asp-ser-gly motif , but this alone is not sufficient because a same motif occurs around the active site asp of the serine-type peptidase subtilisin. pepstatin-sensitive aspartic peptidases have previously been found in escherichia coli and haemophilus influenzae, but the sequences were not homologous to that of pepsin but homologues of gluconate permease  <cit> . a recent publication  <cit>  has reported an acidic peptidase from a synergistes species isolated from the anaerobic digester used for treatment of tannery solid waste. this peptidase is inhibited 75% by  <dig>  mm pepstatin, but not by inhibitors of other catalytic types. no sequence is available, but this may be the first characterized pepsin homologue from a bacterium. unlike the homologues from the marine bacteria, this is presumably a secreted protein. no complete genome sequence for any synergistes species is publicly available, so we were unable to test for the presence of a pepsin homologue. the genomes of dethiosulfovibrio peptidovorans and thermanaerovibrio acidaminovorans, both of which are members of the same bacterial phylum synergistetes, have been partially sequenced . these were searched with the amino acid sequences of pepsin homologues from shewanella amazonensis and sinorhizobium medicae, but no pepsin homologues were found, even at an e value of  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the pepsin family of peptidases  is not just confined to eukaryotes, but is also present in some bacteria. these bacterial homologues are predicted to be intracellular, whereas nearly all other members of family a <dig> enter the secretory pathway. the bacterial homologues are structurally similar to pepsin, consisting of two lobes each of which bears one active site asp. two of the genes for bacterial pepsins might be derived from horizontal gene transfer from a eukaryote, but whether all the bacterial genes for the bacterial pepsins are so derived is debatable, and evidence is presented for and against the case. if no horizontal gene transfer has occurred, then the hypothetical gene duplication and fusion event that gave rise to the ancestral pepsin gene would therefore have occurred before the divergence of bacteria and eukaryotes. if so, this has implications for the origin of the viral and retrotransposon peptidases in family a <dig>  which were either derived from the single-lobed ancestral sequence, or secondarily from the horizontal transfer of half a pepsin gene from a host. for the retropepsin gene to be derived by vertical transfer the ancestral gene would have to have been present in a prokaryote. however, retroviruses infect only eukaryotes and retrotransposons are unknown in prokaryotes, making a more recent horizontal transfer the more likely origin of the retropepsin gene.

