BACKGROUND
the genetic information of the eukaryotic organisms is divided into a nuclear genome and cytoplasmic genomes . nevertheless, mitochondrion and chloroplast contain only a few hundred genes, and their functionality is largely dependent on nuclear genes. this condition imposes a complex coordination between nuclear and cytoplasmic gene expression activities to assure that all mitochondrion and chloroplast proteins are timely and correctly formed  <cit> . alloplasmic lines, alien cytoplasm substitution  <cit> , offer a unique opportunity to study the nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions and the traits whose expression is dependent on the coordinate activity of nuclear and cytoplasmic genes  <cit> . the most relevant cytoplasm-inherited trait is cytoplasmic male sterility   <cit> , although other traits are also known .

alloplasmic lines created using a nuclear genome from triticum spp. and a cytoplasm from aegilops were the first ones created in grasses  <cit> . nevertheless, the instability of some of the traits and a detrimental phenotype reported in the aegilops-triticum system has fostered the investigation of new cytoplasmic-nuclear systems. due to its high crossability with other members of the triticeae tribe  <cit> , hordeum chilense roem et schultz has been of interest as a source of new traits to be transferred to wheat, and it has also been suggested as a basis for new cytoplasmic-nuclear systems  <cit> . aside from the possible beneficial effect that can be derived from the introgression of cytoplasm genomes from wild species into crops, a detrimental effect has also been consistently reported up to this point. it was observed that the alloplasmic lines carrying the aegilops spp. or h. chilense cytoplasm performed worse than the euplasmic line in regard to many agronomic traits  <cit> .

a non-natural combination of nuclear and cytoplasm genomes results in an essential alteration of the gene balance that infringes on the adaptability of the new genotype and brings about changes in quantitative traits and biological functions under the influence of mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes  <cit> , which, in turn, can have an adverse effect on the responses to biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . the chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes work in coordination with the nuclear genome to support their functions and their adaptation to the changeable environmental conditions  <cit> . conversely, alteration of the cytoplasm genome has a relevant impact on nuclear gene expression. for instance, many nuclear genes were found altered in a brassica napus cms line, particularly those encoding proteins involved in the organelles protein import machinery and the genes expressed in stamens and pollens, as well as the genes implicated in cell-wall remodeling or architecture  <cit> . although substantial work has been carried out to investigate gene expression in alloplasmic lines  <cit> , a majority of these studies were devoted to genes associated with floral organ development in cms brassicaceae <cit> . as such, the absence of published comparative studies investigating the alteration in transcript and metabolite profiles, due to a foreign cytoplasm, limits the understanding of nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction and its output on the cellular processes. the central role of the chloroplast and mitochondria on plant cell metabolism and the known potential of cms in crop breeding call for a comprehensive understanding of the global changes occurring as a result of foreign cytoplasm integration.

very often the analysis of nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction is carried out by means of nuclear mutants  <cit> , on the contrary, differences detectable between an alloplasmic line vs. the corresponding euplasmic can reveal the impact of small variations of the cytoplasm genome on the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk. this study was carried out to assess the impact of alloplasmic lines on cell functionality. parallel transcript and metabolite profiles were performed on three wheat alloplasmic lines obtained by cytoplasmic genome introgression from wild species  into cultivated wheat and in their respective euplasmic genotypes. the effect that phylogenetic relatedness has on gene expression and metabolic regulation of common wheat is discussed. we hypothesize that, in order to maintain its functionality, the cell must integrate the perturbation caused by a non-natural nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction and reorganize its regulatory system and metabolism accordingly.

RESULTS
the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an alien cytoplasms has an impact on the nuclear transcriptome
three wheat alloplasmic lines and the corresponding euplasmic controls were subjected to transcriptome analysis to assess the effect of cytoplasm substitution on gene expression. the alloplasmic lines t <dig> and t <dig> were developed through the introgression of the cytoplasm from ae. uniaristata  and ae. tauschii  in the nuclear background of t. aestivum cv. chris by prof. s.s. maan  <cit> . the alloplasmic line th <dig> was produced by introgressing the h. chilense accession h <dig> cytoplasm into the nuclear background of t. aestivum accession t <dig>  <cit> . the seeds of the alloplasmic lines were multiplied at ias-csic and verified for cytoplasm identity with specific cytoplasm markers. t <dig>  t <dig> and th <dig> were selected, based on published data  <cit> , in order to represent the largest cytoplasmic diversity compatible with an overall normal phenotype . a global gene expression analysis was performed on rna samples isolated from the fully expanded leaves of two-week old plants grown at  <dig> μe m-2 s- <dig>  array hybridizations were carried out using the affymetrix wheat genome array. a principal component analysis , performed on the transcriptome dataset, identified two main components that explain  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the variance . the first component separated the alloplasmic lines developed in the genetic background of the accession t <dig> from those developed in the genetic background of the cultivar chris. the second component allowed for the separation of the alloplasmic line th <dig>  from the corresponding euplasmic, but not the separation of the other two alloplasmic lines  from the cv. chris. the pca results suggest the existence of important differences between the two genetic backgrounds t <dig> and chris; therefore, all the findings of this work are based only on the comparisons between each alloplasmic line and its corresponding euplasmic.

a welch t-test, using a two-fold change cut-off and a false discovery rate correction for multiple testing, identified  <dig> probe sets, each of them representing a putative gene, differentially modulated in at least one experimental comparison . when the wheat nuclear genome was combined with the cytoplasm of h. chilense,  <dig> genes significantly altered their expression , whereas  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes were significantly modulated in the alloplasmic lines carrying the cytoplasm of ae. uniaristata and ae.tauschii, respectively. two up-regulated  and five down-regulated genes  were common in all comparisons , underlining some common responses across all alloplasmic lines. significantly, the five down-regulated sequences were all encoded by the chloroplast genome.

the up- and down-regulated genes were divided into classes according to their expression behavior and classified using wheat gene identifier categories of the mapman software  <cit> . figure  <dig> summarizes the metabolism overview of up- and down-regulated genes in the h. chilense alloplasmic line vs. the corresponding euplasmic control according to the mapman classification. the results showed that the genes associated with mitochondrial electron transport, photosynthesis, redox and hormones were generally up-regulated, while the genes associated with lipid metabolism , secondary metabolism, and signaling were mainly down-regulated.

the analysis of the sub-cellular localization of the proteins, encoded by the genes that modulated in response to cytoplasm substitution, identified  <dig> genes coding for plastid-targeted proteins and  <dig> genes coding for mitochondria-targeted proteins . among them,  <dig> plastid and  <dig> mitochondrial-localized proteins were encoded by cytoplasmic genomes.

a validation experiment was carried out with six differentially expressed genes  selected for their role in the chloroplast-retrograde signaling pathway . the tested genes showed a value of  <dig>  of the pearson correlation coefficient between array and qrt-pcr expression values with an expression trend conserved across the samples between array and qrt-pcr results .

a significant proportion of the genes that were altered in response to the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an alien cytoplasm can be traced back to specific cellular processes or metabolic pathways. the most relevant ones are described in the next sections.

rna maturation-related processes in the organelles are sensitive to perturbations of the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk
the nucleus controls organelle gene expression through a number of nuclear-encoded factors that act post-transcriptionally on specific organelle target transcripts  and that regulate the maturation, stability and/or translation of organelle transcripts. rna maturation in mitochondrion and chloroplast, including rna splicing, is highly dependent on nuclear-encoded splicing factors. a general consequence of the perturbation induced in the alloplasmic lines was a strong modulation of the nuclear genes coding for organelle-targeted maturases. the probe set taaffx. <dig> .s1_at homologous to atnmat <dig>  a maturase with demonstrated mitochondrion localization  <cit> , was up-regulated with a log <dig> fold change of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  in alloplasmic lines carrying ae. uniaristata, ae. tauschii and h. chilense cytoplasm, respectively. similarly, ta. <dig> .a1_at homologous to atnmat <dig>  localized in both mitochondrion and chloroplast  <cit> , was also up-regulated with a log <dig> fold change of  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig>  in the same comparisons indicated above.

although the targets of atnmat <dig> and atnmat <dig> are still unknown, it should be noted that the rna coding for five chloroplast encoded genes, cyt b <dig> , ribosomal protein rps <dig>  nadph-quinone oxidoreductase and abc transporter permease, were down-regulated in all alloplasmic lines, an expression trend that suggests a possibly functional link between the up-regulation of nuclear-encoded maturase genes and chloroplast expression.

furthermore, the wheat chip array carried a probe set  annotated as chloroplast maturase k  in plexdb , an essential component for the splicing of plastid rnas. this probe set was down-regulated in the alloplasmic line carrying the h. chilense cytoplasm. the plastidial matk is associated with several chloroplast genes with class ii introns  <cit> ; one of them, the mrna precursor coding for ribosomal protein rpl <dig> , was also down-regulated with a log <dig> fold change of - <dig>  in the same alloplasmic line.

the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an alien cytoplasms alters the chloroplast retrograde signaling
to coordinate nuclear gene expression with the functional or metabolic state of plastids, the plant cells have acquired retrograde signaling pathways from plastid to nucleus, including redox signaling, mg-protoporphyrin ix , signals that are generated by inhibiting plastid gene expression or by accumulating various reactive oxygen species , such as hydrogen peroxide , singlet oxygen , hydroxyl radical  and superoxide anion   <cit> . excess light can potentially regulate nuclear gene expression by affecting tetrapyrrole biosynthesis. plants exposed to high light, as was the condition for the transcriptomic experiment here reported, require specific adaptations that are mediated by chloroplast retrograde signaling  <cit> . therefore, we reasoned that alterations in this signaling pathway should be evident in the experimental dataset, and a specific mining work was dedicated to finding genes that represent the key components of this signaling with an altered expression in response to a cytoplasm substitution.

hema <dig> encodes one of the three isoforms of the glutamyl-trna reductase, which catalyzes the first key regulatory step of the tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, and three probe sets  corresponding to hema <dig> were up-regulated in the alloplasmic line carrying the cytoplasm of h. chilense. it is known that the accumulation of chlorophyll precursors, such as mg-protoporphyrin ix, may stimulate the expression of the nuclear gene hsp <dig> <cit> . importantly, in the h. chilense alloplasmic line, the up-regulation of hema <dig> was associated with a parallel up-regulation of hsp70- <dig> .

low concentrations of ros act as signaling molecules for a number of regulated processes during plant growth and development  <cit> , as well as in response to a variety of environmental stimuli  <cit> . the existence of a specific 1o <dig> signaling pathway has been shown in arabidopsis through a mutant analysis of flu   <cit>  and its regulators named executer   <cit> . three probe sets , corresponding to flu, and one probe set , corresponding toex <dig>  were all up-regulated in the alloplasmic line carrying the h. chilense cytoplasm, in comparison with the corresponding euplasmic. furthermore, the same alloplasmic line was characterized by an up-regulation of three probe sets , corresponding to lsd <dig> , a putative regulator of the hypersensitive response and light acclimation driven by ros accumulation  <cit> . notably, the up-regulation of lsd <dig> was associated with an altered expression of  <dig> probe sets involved in the hypersensitive response to biotic stress belonging to the pathway of methyl jasmonate and salicylic acid . among these sequences, there were enzymes involved in the synthesis of salicylic acid , the wrky <dig> transcription factor , lipoxigenase  <dig> , dir <dig> , fmo <dig>  and several other pathogen responsive proteins. furthermore, in the h. chilense alloplasmic line, we found several down-regulated genes involved in programmed cell death: acd <dig> , stp <dig> , vep <dig>  and two probe sets annotated as putative metacaspases   <cit> .
h. chilense 
cytoplasm compared to the corresponding euplasmic line t20

since flu, ex and lsd <dig> are key components of the ros chloroplast retrograde signaling  <cit> , the identification of these genes, among those altered in the h. chilense alloplasmic line, as well as of other downstream genes, suggests that a change in the chloroplast genome has a direct impact on the chloroplast retrograde signaling mediated by 1o <dig> 

the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an alien cytoplasm alters the expression of photosynthetic components
retrograde signaling is known to control the expression of many genes coding for components of the psii, and indeed, a number of these genes, mostly encoded by the chloroplast genome, were changed in the alloplasmic lines . two genes  coding for the cytochrome b <dig> alpha chain  were down-regulated in all alloplasmic lines, while a gene coding for a component of the psbm protein  was strongly down–regulated in the h. chilense alloplasmic line . furthermore, eleven genes coding for chlorophyll a/b-binding protein , five genes related to lt29/apx <dig>  were up-regulated in the alloplasmic line carrying the h. chilense cytoplasm. lastly, the alloplasmic line carrying the ae. tauschii cytoplasm showed a down-regulation of a gene encoding a psbx-related protein .

nadh-plastoquinone oxidoreductase chain  <dig> , a component of the chloroplast nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, was down-regulated in all alloplasmic lines. furthermore, a probe set, corresponding to atp synthase , was up-regulated in the alloplasmic line with the h. chilense cytoplasm.

to conclude, the findings described above highlight that the substitution of the wheat cytoplasm with the cytoplasm of h. chilense, impacts the expression of several nuclear genes encoding photosynthetic components, suggesting a modification of the nuclear-chloroplast cross-talk, at least under high light conditions.

the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an alien cytoplasm modifies the expression of genes coding for components of the mitochondrial electron transport chains
the mitochondrial electron transport chain is comprised of four large protein complexes  that interact with each other via the small lipid ubiquinone and the small protein cytochrome c  <cit> . three probe sets  related to nadh dehydrogenase , the first step of the oxidative phosphorylation, had an altered expression profile in the alloplasmic lines. the first two genes were up-regulated in the alloplasmic line with the h. chilense cytoplasm, while the last one was up-regulated in the alloplasmic lines with the ae. uniaristata and the h. chilense cytoplasms. furthermore, four probe sets , related to different subunits of the cytochrome c oxidase   <cit> , were up-regulated in the alloplasmic line with the h. chilense cytoplasm. taaffx. <dig> .s1_s_at, involved in cytochrome c oxidase biogenesis  <cit> , was, instead, down-regulated in the ae. tauschii and h. chilense alloplasmic lines. notably, most of the genes described in this paragraph are encoded by the mitochondrial genome .

the expression of genes involved in cytoplasm male sterility is dependent on the interaction between nuclear and cytoplasm genomes
the transcriptome comparison of the alloplasmic line, carrying the cytoplasm of h. chilense with its euplasmic control, highlighted the alteration of several genes known to be involved in the determination of cytoplasm male sterility . three up-regulated probe sets  were related to lox <dig> , while two down-regulated probe sets  were annotated as lox <dig> . lox <dig> and lox <dig> play a role in the biosynthesis of jasmonate, and both are involved in the determination of male sterility  <cit> . loxes catalyze the addition of oxygen to polyunsaturated fatty acids to produce the unsaturated fatty acid hydroperoxide. linoleic and linolenic acids are the most common substrates for lox  <cit> , which favors free fatty acids to sterified ones  <cit> . loxes are also involved in oxylipin biosynthesis during stress, a process mainly associated with wounding and pathogen attack  <cit> .

lipid metabolism is essential for normal pollen development  <cit> . a starting point in fatty-acid synthesis is the conversion of acetyl-coa into malonyl-coa. six down-regulated probe sets  are all related to fatty acyl-coa reductase , a putative male sterility protein involved in wax biosynthesis  <cit> . furthermore, a probe set , corresponding to male sterility  <dig> , and two probe sets , related to the cer <dig>  both involved in the synthesis of the lipids of the outer pollen wall  <cit> , were down-regulated in the alloplasmic line with the h. chilense cytoplasm; these two genes belong to a family of genes encoding far enzymes. in the same sample, three additional probe sets , related to pop <dig>   <cit> , an enzyme of the gaba-shunt involved in the conversion of the non-protein amino acid gaba to succinyl-semi-aldehyde  <cit> , were also down-regulated, while a probe set , related to plantacyanin involved in anther development and pollination, was up-regulated.

gc-ms analysis reveals the impact nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction has on leaf metabolism
considering that the nucleus-chloroplast cross-talk is essential for the adaptation of the leaf metabolism to environmental variations, gc-ms-based metabolite profiling was done on the alloplasmic lines and corresponding euplasmic controls grown at two light intensities  to test if a substitution of the cytoplasm impairs light response.

to acquire an overview of the global changes in leaf metabolism across genotypes, and conditions, the gc-ms dataset was subjected to pca  <cit> . the analysis revealed a clear separation of the samples due to light effect on pc <dig>  in both euplasmic backgrounds, accounting for more than 60% of the variance. these results suggest a comparable response to light intensity of the alloplasmic lines and their respective euplasmic controls, implying relatively functional mechanisms of electron dissipation and chloroplast functioning.

nevertheless, substituting the wheat cytoplasm with the h. chilense cytoplasm led to a perturbation of the central metabolism in response to high light , resulting in a separation of the euplasmic control from the h. chilense alloplasmic line with the pca not observed under low light  . on the genetic background of chris, the alloplasmic line carrying the ae. uniaristata cytoplasm showed a slight separation from the euplasmic control under ll, while separating from the ae. tauschii alloplasmic line. under hl, the alloplasmic line carrying the ae. tauschii cytoplasm grouped together with the euplasmic control and separated from the other alloplasmic line , implying the existence of processes that affect the central metabolism in a species-specific manner.

the alteration in the metabolite profiles in response to light intensity was validated by a two-way anova, separately testing the factors of cytoplasmic substitution, light treatment and their interaction . as expected, light was confirmed as having a major impact on the metabolite profiles of all genotypes . substitution in t <dig> with the h. chilense cytoplasm led to the alteration in the abundance of 33%  of the annotated metabolites, while the interaction arising between genotype and light accounted for the change in 31%  of metabolites . in the chris series, cytoplasm substitution caused a significant change in the abundance of 22%  and 24%  metabolites in alloplasmic lines with ae. uniaristata and ae. tauschii cytoplasm, respectively. the interaction between genotype and light treatment caused 16%  and 33%  of metabolites to be significantly altered in alloplasmic lines with ae. uniaristata and ae. tauschii cytoplasm, respectively . the average extent of the change in metabolite abundance was also dependent on the nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction. for example, the average fold change in the h. chilense cytoplasm-substituted plants was  <dig> -fold, while in the chris series, the average fold change in metabolite abundance was  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold in ae. uniaristata and ae. tauschii, respectively.

substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with a distant relative h. chilense cytoplasm alters leaf metabolic response to light
under ll, the comparison between the alloplasmic line carrying the cytoplasm from h. chilense and the corresponding euplasmic revealed significant variations in the abundance of amino acids , sugars , sugar phosphates, mannitol, myo-inositol, organic acids  and putrescine   <cit>  . markedly, in the alloplasmic line, homoserine, an intermediate in the synthesis of the aspartate-derived amino acids  <cit> , was reduced to 10% of its content in the euplasmic control. a three-step pathway converts l-aspartate into homoserine; hence, the accumulation of aspartate and the low homoserine level might suggest a compromised step in the biosynthesis. the coordinated up-regulation of myo-inositol pathway-related genes was shown under environmental stresses  <cit> , and often, the role of these metabolites is reported in the literature to be associated with stress, as they serve as osmoprotectants  <cit> .

ae. uniaristata and ae. tauschii cytoplasm substitutions showed milder effects on the metabolism of their euplasmic lines, compared to the effect of h. chilense. in several instances, the two aegilops cytoplasms affected the metabolism in an opposite manner, while not showing significant alterations in stress-associated processes . yet, a decreased level of intermediates associated with the tca cycle  characterized both lines.

in the aegilops series under hl, only a few metabolites were significantly altered, and as observed under ll, ae. uniaristata and ae. tauschii had opposite trends on some of the most significantly altered metabolites, e.g., homoserine and 5-caffeoylquinate . more significant metabolic alterations were found in the comparison between the h. chilense alloplasmic line and the corresponding euplasmic control under hl . in the h. chilense alloplasmic line, hl-induced alterations included a drop in the abundance of amino acid alanine, aspartic acid, homoserine and serine, compared to the euplasmic line. significant increases in content were observed in sugars , sugar phosphates and mannitol. the increase in glycine, glucose and most of the sugar phosphates in the h. chilense alloplasmic line could also reflect an enhancement in the photorespiratory metabolism, a finding supported by the up-regulation in the same alloplasmic line of several key genes of the photorespiration, e.g., glycolate oxidase , serine hydroxyl-methyl transferase  and glutamine synthetase . the remarkable enhancement in raffinose abundance  and its downstream metabolite galactose is suggestive of a stress response. under hl conditions, organic acids  were at lower levels in the h. chilense alloplasmic line. succinate can be produced from within the tca cycle or by the conversion of gaba to sucinyl-semialdehyde and succinate, a reaction governed by gaba-transaminase and succinic semialdehyde-dehydrogenase; the former gene was shown to be down-regulated at the transcript level . the analytical details are reported in figure  <dig> and additional file 4: tables s <dig> and additional file 5: table s <dig>  the decrease in shikimate intermediates, quinate and shikimate, may have supported the production of secondary metabolites.

the direct comparison between the transcriptomic and metabolomic data in the h. chilense alloplasmic line exposed to hl allows the identification of some correspondences between changes in the expression of genes coding for enzymes and the corresponding metabolites . the most clear was the up-regulation of phospho-glucomutase , sucrose synthase  and β-fructofuranosidase  mrnas that were associated with an increased accumulation of sugars and sugar phosphates.

substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with an h. chilense cytoplasm had no effect on fatty acid accumulation
following the alteration of enzymes involved in lipid biosynthesis in the gene expression profiling of the alloplasmic line carrying the h. chilense cytoplasm, a fatty acid analysis was carried out for this alloplasmic line and its euplasmic control. eleven detectable fatty acids were annotated with linolenic acid  having the highest level in the alloplasmic line and its euplasmic control, compare to the other annotated fatty acids. nevertheless, no significant differences were detected between the alloplasmic line and the euplasmic control grown at hl . the possible explanation for the differences in the fatty acid regulation at the metabolite and gene level could be that there are yet unknown regulatory genes that may participate in a post-translational process and hence do not affect the final metabolite level.

discussion
the development of alloplasmic lines via alien cytoplasm substitution provides a unique tool with which to study the nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions in plants. hexaploid wheat resulted from a combination of three nuclear genomes  with a cytoplasm genome from ae. speltoides <cit> . the crossability of hexaploid wheat with most triticeae species has permitted the development of a panel of alloplasmic lines where the wheat nuclear genome has been coupled with cytoplasm genomes from species with different degrees of phylogenetic relatedness. the current work investigated the transcript and the metabolite profiling of three wheat alloplasmic lines carrying the cytoplasm of two very closely related species  and one of a more distant species . the results showed that the h. chilense cytoplasm had a greater effect on the transcriptomic and metabolite profiles of its euplasmic control than did the aegilops cytoplasms on theirs. it has been suggested that the negative effects produced by substituting a native cytoplasm with a cytoplasm from a more or less related species are dependent on the evolutionary distance between the two species  <cit> . these features were generally considered as the consequence of an incompatibility between nuclear and organelle-encoded components of mitochondria and/or chloroplast after their evolution into separate species. during evolutionary processes, nuclear genomes may have accumulated mutations, while organelle genomes accumulated compensatory mutations and vice versa. therefore, the juxtaposition of cytoplasm and nucleus from distantly related genera exposes those non-compensated mutations that lead to detrimental effects on those traits determined by nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions  <cit> . hence, the replacement of the wheat cytoplasm with the cytoplasm of the closely related species aegilops had a limited impact on gene expression and central metabolism. in contrast, the cytoplasm of the phylogenetically more distant species h. chilense altered the expression of functionally relevant genes and led to impaired cellular functioning, which in turn, activated stress-related processes at the metabolite level. nevertheless, the changes at the transcript level of the lipid biosynthetic genes were not reflected in the abundance of fatty acid. this discordance in omics data is not exclusive to this study. in fact, an extensive review by fernie and stitt  <cit>  postulated that quite often, there is little linear relation between transcriptomic and metabolomic data, implying a higher level of the regulation and structure of metabolic networks. we suggest that phylogenetic relatedness infers the degree of compatibility between nucleus and cytoplasm genomes, and in turn, the co-evolution of nucleus and cytoplasm has shaped the regulatory mechanisms that control the cross-talk between the cellular genomes.

specific signaling mechanisms are affected by cytoplasm substitution
the present study was carried out in the fully expanded leaves of plants grown at  <dig> μe m-2 s- <dig>  a condition that enables the highlighting of differences due to the activation of light-stress-associated processes known to be relevant for chloroplast and mitochondrion functionality. since the cross-talk between nucleus and cytoplasm genomes is controlled by defined anterograde and retrograde signaling mechanisms  <cit> , the alterations detected with transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis can be used to highlight specific signaling pathways sensitive to small variations in the cytoplasm genome.

the plastid transcripts undergo an extensive and complex maturation process that includes the splicing of introns and rna editing which require specific proteins encoded exclusively in the nucleus. most introns in organelles are group ii introns, whose catalytic mechanism closely resembles that of the nuclear spliceosome. the plant nuclear genome contains four organelle maturase-related genes, out of the context of their evolutionary-related group-ii introns dedicated to the nuclear genes  <cit> . all the encoded proteins are targeted to mitochondria/chloroplast  <cit>  and act in-trans in the splicing of organellar-encoded introns. the finding that two  out of four nuclear maturase-related genes were up-regulated in all alloplasmic lines identifies the anterograde signaling that controls the rna-maturation-related processes as one of the most sensitive to a perturbation of the nuclear-cytoplasmic interaction. although no specific targets have been demonstrated so far for atnmat <dig> and atnmat <dig>  correlative evidence supporting a defective maturation process for some cytoplasmic-encoded genes can be found in the down-regulation of five chloroplast-encoded genes in all alloplasmic lines, a trend opposite to the maturase up-regulated expression.

although no chloroplast retrograde pathway is well-understood mechanistically, several signals of various natures have been reported to trigger retrograde signaling from chloroplasts to nucleus, among them the signals generated by ros accumulation. the different forms of ros cause similar cellular damages, but each of them is involved in the activation of a specific signaling pathway  <cit> . high light conditions, as those employed in this work, are known to generate ros, and consequently, the results from our study identifying a number of modifications can be linked to ros-mediated retrograde signaling pathways. light acclimation processes in plants act to dissipate the excess excitation energy and optimize photosynthesis under variable light intensity. under high light conditions, the excitation energy might not be sufficiently quenched by the psii reaction center or by carotenoids, promoting the formation of the triplet-excited state of the chlorophyll and leading to the generation of 1o <dig> <cit> . we found that the retrograde signaling pathway triggered by 1o <dig> was specifically altered in the alloplasmic line carrying the h. chilense cytoplasm. transcriptomic analysis revealed an up-regulation of flu and ex <dig>  two of the key genes identified as essential and specific components of the 1o <dig> signaling.

flu is a negative regulator of chlorophyll biosynthesis that prevents the accumulation of intermediate that are potentially extremely destructive when illuminated, causing a massive release of 1o <dig>  the accumulation of 1o <dig> leads to rapid and selective transcriptional reprogramming and finally induces programmed cell death in flu plants. the primary effect of 1o <dig> generation in the arabidopsis flu mutant is the activation of a broad range of signaling pathways known to be involved in biotic and abiotic stress responses  <cit> . flu and ex are considered specific markers of the 1o <dig> pathway; therefore, their up-regulation demonstrates that a change in the chloroplast genome has a direct impact on the chloroplast retrograde signaling controlled by 1o <dig>  the up-regulation of d <dig> can also be interpreted as a consequence of the production of 1o <dig> which, in turn, promotes the irreversible oxidation of the d <dig> protein  <cit> . in cyanobacterial cells, singlet oxygen has been shown to cause direct photo-damage to psii and the d <dig> protein  <cit>  and to prevent psii repair by suppressing the elongation of the d <dig> protein  <cit> .

a number of flu-downstream genes were also found up-regulated in the h. chilense alloplasmic line. lsd <dig> is a key gene controlling the cross-talk between ros and sa-dependent pathways, leading to light acclimation and pathogen defense responses  <cit> . the up-regulation of the lsd <dig> gene, a negative regulator of cell death, in the h. chilense alloplasmic line was associated with the altered expression of  <dig> probe sets involved in the hypersensitive response to biotic stress belonging to methyl jasmonate and salicylic acid pathways  and with the down-regulation of several genes involved in programmed cell death. these results suggest that a change in the chloroplast genome has a direct impact on the chloroplast retrograde signaling that integrates light acclimation, cell death and immune defense responses, including genes engaged in ethylene, ros, salicylic acid, glutathione, aba, sugar and auxin signaling.

in line with the observation reported above, several significant metabolic alterations found in the h. chilense alloplasmic line can be associated with a typical response to high light mediated by the ros signal  <cit> . it is known that soluble sugars, especially sucrose, glucose and fructose, are involved in the responses to a number of stresses, and they act as nutrient and metabolite signaling molecules that activate specific hormone-cross-talk transduction pathways, thus resulting in important modifications of gene expression and proteomic patterns. various metabolic reactions and regulation directly link soluble sugars with the production rates of ros, such as mitochondrial respiration and photosynthesis regulation and, conversely, with anti-oxidative processes. a metabolic analysis of the h. chilense alloplasmic line showed significant increases in sugars, sugar phosphates and mannitol, with a remarkable enhancement in raffinose abundance  and of its downstream metabolite galactose. the accumulation of raffinose is in agreement with the up-regulation of two key enzymes  of the raffinose metabolism . these oligosaccharides are associated with a number of stresses in plants  <cit>  e.g., drought, salt, temperature  <cit>  and light  <cit> . they function mainly as osmoprotectants, and raffinose is known to play a key role in ros scavenging and the protection of the metabolism in chloroplasts from the oxidative damage caused by hl  <cit> . the increased abundance of a number of polyols could further support a limited response to light of the alloplasmic line  <cit> . for example, polyols are reported to play an important role in the protection of sensitive enzymes and membranes from ros in the cytoplasm  <cit> . taken together, these results suggest that, the h. chilense alloplasmic line is likely impaired in electron dissipation, and thus, exposure to light leads to enhanced ros generation and the induction of ros-scavenging processes and the accumulation of membrane protective compounds.

cytoplasm male sterility-associated genes are modulated in response to cytoplasm substitution
although the alloplasmic lines here tested were all fully male fertile, the finding that some genes known to be involved in the determination of cms have an altered expression due to the substitution of a wheat cytoplasm with the cytoplasm of h. chilense further demonstrates the involvement of the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk in cms, as already reported for cms that originated after inter-species crosses  <cit> . it can be suggested that in the specific h. chilense alloplasmic line here employed , the mechanisms leading to cms have been only partially modified without a phenotypic effect, while a more strong de-regulation of the genes here described  might lead to male sterility. indeed, the male fertility of the h. chilense alloplasmic lines varies depending on the h. chilense accession used. some h. chilense accessions give full fertility, while others lead to male sterility as was the case of the h <dig> accession  <cit> . the fertility restoration of cms in the msh <dig> system is caused by genes located on chromosome 6hch <cit> . notably, ten probe sets, corresponding to genes modulated in the h. chilense alloplasmic line and related to cms , matched to brachypodium genes from chromosome  <dig> in the region syntenic with barley chromosome 6h  <cit> . one of them  also found a match in the barley genome zipper on chromosome 6h . these genes may be good candidates by which to investigate the restoration of cms in the msh <dig> system.

CONCLUSIONS
the replacement of the wheat cytoplasm with the cytoplasm of a related species affects the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talk leading to transcript and metabolite alterations. the alteration of the nuclear-cytoplasmic cross-talks might reflect an impaired light response capacity that exposes the alloplasmic lines to some degree of stress, as suggested by the altered expression of ros-responsive genes and the accumulation of stress-related metabolites. the extent of these modifications was limited in the alloplasmic lines with the aegilops cytoplasm, and more relevant in the alloplasmic line with the h. chilense cytoplasm. we consider that, this finding might be linked to the phylogenetic distance of the genomes.

