BACKGROUND
lung transplantation represents the only prospect of improved survival and quality of life for patients with end stage pulmonary disease. brain stem death  is a pre-requisite for the majority of heart and lung transplantation, yet this process adversely affects organ function, with lung being the most adversely affected. in australia and new zealand, less than 50% of lungs offered for donation post bsd are suitable for transplantation, as compared with over 90% of kidneys, resulting in patients dying for lack of suitable lungs  <cit> . we have been investigating the impact of bsd on pulmonary structure, remodelling and function to understand the process in the hope of ameliorating organ injury. management of the bsd donor has been shown to positively impact both the number of organs which can be successfully transplanted and the function in these organs. early organ dysfunction has a major impact on both short and long term survival as well as prolonged icu and hospital stays, with the associated costs and risks of nosocomial infections in these immunocompromised patients. hence, a clear understanding of the molecular changes associated with bsd may lead to further improvements of organs for transplantation. we have previously developed a  <dig> hour bsd model in the rat  <cit> . a clinically relevant model of bsd is an important key towards the understanding of the lung dysfunction post bsd, and we have subsequently developed a novel, clinically relevant  <dig> hour ovine model. the ovine models are treated in an animal icu setting, with similar electrolyte management and hormonal resuscitation  and vasopressin) to mimic treatment given to human lung transplant donors prior to transplantation.

the haemodynamic changes in the systemic circulation in bsd are well described and are due to an initial catecholamine storm followed by relative hypotension, secondary to ischaemia of the sympathetic chain of the spinal cord  <cit> . we have previously described in the ovine model that pulmonary pressures post bsd rise by levels of  <dig> or more, as compared to 2– <dig> times in the systemic circulation  <cit> . the changes are more sustained and may therefore contribute to the changes in pulmonary microcirculation following bsd. ongoing studies within our group are assessing changes in gene expression in both pulmonary artery and parenchymal tissue, as both may be affected by the same genes, and the differences in the localisation, organ structure and cell types needs to be taken into consideration. similar gene expression levels in both organs will determine whether the pulmonary artery can be used as a valid representation of lung expression changes in the event of bsd. the determination of common stably expressed genes in both organs will enable reliable identification of gene expression changes in the donor lung prior to transplantation using excess pulmonary artery samples.

gene expression in the organ donor is known to correlate to outcome post transplantation. in a recent study, gene expression of donor tissue prior to transplantation was correlated with severity of pgd and long term transplant outcome  <cit> . gene expression studies using real time rt pcr are an integral part of understanding the impact bsd has on lung function. a clearer understanding of gene expression changes post bsd may lead to novel avenues of research to improve the lung function in both the donor and recipient. however, the donor population is inherently heterogeneous and the management varies substantially between centres. use of an animal model allows for a more homogenous population and standardisation of management, minimising variation in assessing gene expression.

accurate normalisation is critical in accounting for varying amounts of cdna input and enzyme activity. as this is a novel ovine model, the first step in obtaining reliable data from this model is to standardise the housekeeping genes. the use of internal controls is the standard method for correcting for differences in input and enzyme activity and therefore the choice of internal standard is important in obtaining consistent and reliable results. several studies have shown the importance of using multiple, stably expressed reference genes  <cit>  and that changes in the housekeeping gene can lead to changes in the significance and expression of the target gene. we elected to use the genorm program  <cit>  which has been widely used by many researchers and has been statistically validated  <cit>  to evaluate the expression of six candidate normalisation genes  and their expression stability in pulmonary artery and lung.

the aim of this study was to develop a set of reference genes that can be used for normalisation of expression data in the pulmonary artery and lung of bsd sheep. the global aim is to develop a more complete understanding of the changes seen in the target gene population in the sheep post bsd.

RESULTS
primers were selected based on generation of the lowest cycle threshold  and reaction specificity . analysis of melting temperatures showed only one peak and a lack of non-specific fragments and primer dimers. melt curve analysis of a representative gene actb is shown in figure  <dig> 

gene
atheoretical melting temperature calculated with primer express software .

bpcr efficiencies were determined using the formula 10-1/slope

we selected  <dig> commonly used reference genes  of varying functional classes . a dilution matrix of forward and reverse primers was performed in the range of  <dig> nm to  <dig> nm to determine the optimal concentration for each primer pair.

the ct-value of the candidate normalisation genes is shown in figure  <dig>  this shows a wide range of ct-values within each tissue for pulmonary artery  and lung . however, the expression pattern for the majority of genes is remarkably similar across these two tissues, such that if a gene, like actb, is highly expressed in pulmonary artery , it is also highly expressed  in lung tissue.

the genorm program was used to identify the most stably expressed reference genes  <cit> . this program ranks candidate reference genes according to a stability value m. this value represents the mean pairwise variation between a candidate reference gene and all the other studied genes. the lowest m value indicates genes with the most stable expression. stepwise elimination of successive genes showed that ppia and actb were the most stably expressed genes in sheep pulmonary artery and pgk <dig> and actb were the most stably expressed genes in sheep lung . further analysis was performed separating out the controls from the pulmonary artery and lung. when analysed separately the optimal reference genes for control and bsd pulmonary artery, and control and bsd lung were identical. this shows the high stability of these reference genes and that there is tissue-associated variability of gene expression in bsd, underlining the importance of choosing the most stable normalisation genes.

genorm was also used to determine the optimal number of reference genes for normalisation. the software calculates the normalisation factor  from at least two genes at which the variable v defines the pairwise variation between sequential nfs. this means that v2/ <dig> shows the variation of the nf of two genes in relation to three genes. we used a cut-off value of  <dig> , below which the addition of an extra gene will not significantly improve normalisation  <cit> . based on this assumption the addition of a third gene is not required for either pulmonary artery or lung  where the v2/ <dig> values are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. in fact, the addition of a third reference gene actually increases the pairwise variation to  <dig>  for pulmonary artery and  <dig>  for lung.

discussion
real time rt pcr is a sensitive and accurate technique for measuring gene expression but it is important to correct for such factors as differences in sample input and enzyme efficiency. this can be achieved by normalising to a reference gene. ideally a reference gene is ubiquitously expressed across all tissue types and under all experimental conditions. in sheep bsd however, little is known about the ideal genes to use for normalisation and many previous studies have only utilised a single reference gene in normalising gene expression data  <cit> . this is not ideal as variation in the housekeeping gene can lead to changes in the quantification of the gene of interest. the use of multiple reference genes is therefore important in obtaining accurate results, particularly in detecting small differences in gene expression. in order to achieve this we used the technique described by vandesompele et al as a statistically validated technique which uses mean pairwise variation to determine the optimal number of reference genes.

we chose six commonly used reference genes from the literature. there was tissue-associated variability in the genes selected for normalisation, with ppia and actb being the most stably expressed in pulmonary artery and pgk <dig> and actb the most stable in lung. when controls were analysed separately in the different tissue types the reference genes selected were identical showing a consistent level of expression for each reference gene in both control and bsd groups. several studies have shown that housekeeping genes show variability within each tissue  <cit>  emphasising that the stability of each housekeeping gene needs to be studied in each separate tissue and experimental set-up.

interestingly actb is the most stably expressed gene in both pulmonary artery and lung. traditionally this gene has been used in many studies to normalise gene expression data but recently has been shown to vary considerably depending on the cell type and tissue  <cit> .

genorm analysis indicated that only two reference genes were needed for accurate normalisation. a cut-off value of  <dig>  has been recommended  <cit>  below which the inclusion of additional reference genes is not required. the addition of a third gene was shown to increase the variability in pulmonary artery and lung, therefore we used the geometric mean of the two most stably expressed genes.

the optimal number of subjects for such a study is unclear. the financial restraints and ethical considerations must be thought of simultaneously with the scientific merit of increasing the cohorts. whilst a larger number in each study group may have been of interest, the high stability of the selected reference genes this study indicates that the chosen sample size is appropriate and at the very least serves as a good guide. this study lays the groundwork for a better understanding of the molecular changes occurring in bsd and ultimately in optimising donor management in the lung transplant population.

CONCLUSIONS
this study identifies a new set of reference genes in pulmonary artery  and lung  that can be used for normalisation of expression data in a  <dig> h bsd sheep model. it also demonstrates tissue-associated variability in the selection of these genes and emphasises the importance of selecting the most stably expressed genes across lung and pulmonary artery tissue for standard normalisation in gene expression studies.

