BACKGROUND
actin cytoskeleton  provides tracks for myosin-mediated movements of organelles in plant cells  <cit> . the dynamic nature of the cytoskeleton depends on actin-binding proteins which control the assembly of actin filaments  and their organization into higher-order structures  <cit> .

on the basis of ac, chloroplasts change their intracellular arrangement in response to light. these movements are controlled only by blue light in higher plants  <cit> . weak blue light  induces an accumulation response in which chloroplasts gather along the cell walls perpendicular to the light direction. strong blue light  induces an avoidance response in which they stay at the walls parallel to the light direction, away from the most illuminated parts of the cell. the light signal is perceived by phototropins , blue-light photoreceptors localised at the plasma membrane  <cit> . both phototropins mediate chloroplast accumulation, whereas phot <dig> mediates the avoidance response  <cit> . chloroplasts of several algae, mosses, ferns and aquatic angiosperms respond also to red light  <cit> .

chloroplasts move along afs using myosins associated with their membrane  <cit> . microtubules do not seem to be involved in the directional redistribution of chloroplasts in higher land plants  <cit> . in spite of recent advances little is known about the pathway upon which the blue light signal is transmitted from phototropins to the motor apparatus . only two types of secondary messengers have been critically discussed in this context: ca2+ ions and the phosphoinositide kinases.

calcium ions regulate the activity of many cytoskeletal proteins and act as secondary messenger in several plant signalling pathways including those initiated by phototropins  <cit> . as shown in studies employing the aequorin ca2+ reporter system, bl acting through phot <dig> induced an increase in cytosolic ca2+ in arabidopsis and tobacco seedlings  <cit> . phototropin  <dig> was also responsible for triggering an influx of ca2+ across the plasma membrane in arabidopsis seedling hypocotyls  <cit>  and for activating ca2+ channels at the plasma membrane of arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts  <cit> . calcium ions have been postulated as a potential secondary messenger in red light-controlled chloroplast movements and cytoplasmic streaming in the aquatic angiosperm, vallisneria gigantea  <cit> . the function of ca2+ in bl-induced movements still awaits clarification. manipulating cytosolic calcium homeostasis with various calcium antagonists was shown to interfere with both wbl and sbl chloroplast responses  <cit> . however, this does not explain the role calcium ions play in their mechanisms.

a second category of potential secondary messengers has been proposed, based on different effects of wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphoinositide-3-kinases, on accumulation and avoidance chloroplast responses in the duckweed lemna trisulca  <cit> . the authors put forward a model linking the phosphoinositide kinases and other phosphoinositide cycle enzymes with light signal transduction. according to this model the direction of chloroplast movements is determined by phosphoinositides, whereas ca2+ ions are required only to control the activity of the motor apparatus.

in the last few years we have sought a target of the phototropin-mediated signal which initiates the chloroplast redistribution. in the red-sensitive species actin cytoskeleton was shown to play that role for the phytochrome-mediated signaling  <cit> . our recent results point to myosin rather than to actin as the target in blue-sensitive higher plants  <cit> . up till now, the light effects on ac were studied using fixed tissue. here, we attempted to visualize the cytoskeleton in living mesophyll cells. the truncated plastin-gfp construct  <cit>  was successfully expressed in mature tobacco leaves giving a stable, fully functional transgenic line. the objective of the present study was to perform life imaging of the actin dynamics in this transgenic nicotiana tabacum system, and to take a step toward identifying secondary messengers and relations between them in blue light-controlled chloroplast movements. to achieve the latter goal we compared the effects of calcium agonists/antagonists and of wortmannin on ac and on the chloroplast responses.

RESULTS
characteristics of the transgenic tobacco line
the expression of plastin-gfp did not affect the responses of chloroplasts in nicotiana tabacum. the amplitudes and kinetics of these responses were about the same in both transformed and non-transformed three-month-old plants . notably, the chloroplast redistribution was much weaker in younger plants grown in vitro for up to two months after each passage . instead of filamentous structures present in three-month-old plants, fluorescent speckles and diffuse fluorescence were observed throughout the young tissue . obviously, the actin tracks necessary for chloroplast movements were undeveloped in young plants.

the expression of plastin-gfp was generally low, with varying levels in different cells and tissues. two plant generations were screened for the most uniform expression of plastin-gfp in the spongy mesophyll cells. the best plant was reproduced vegetatively and used in further investigations. the varied expression of plastin-gfp between plants coming from different generations, observed in the confocal images at the protein level, was confirmed by rt-pcr at the level of mrna . no differences in germination, development and flowering were found between transgenic and wild type plants. also the efficiency of photosynthesis measured as in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence was identical in the two groups .

general outline of experiments
samples from one leaf, subjected to identical treatment, were concomitantly used for measuring the movement activity of chloroplasts and for testing ac by confocal microscopy. chloroplast movements were activated with blue light. to seek bl-specific effects on the organization of ac, the samples tested microscopically were irradiated with blue or red light. red light, inactive in chloroplast redistribution, was used as control. the effects of compounds disturbing calcium homeostasis  were compared in the above two experimental settings, and then ca2+ ions were added to counteract the antagonists. because earlier investigations showed that mg2+ could eliminate the inhibitory effects of egta on chloroplast redistribution  <cit> , all experiments were also repeated with ca2+ substituted by mg2+. visualization of changes in the cytoskeleton was supported by quantitative image analysis. additionally, a potential interaction between ca2+ and phosphoinositide-mediated signal transduction pathways was tested by compensating wortmannin inhibitory effects on chloroplast responses with addition of both divalent cations.

actin organization in continuous light
in dark-adapted cells distinctly outlined actin bundles formed a branched network . the chloroplasts were associated with basket-shaped structures consisting of thin afs . these baskets were tightly bound together around adjacent chloroplasts and attached to cortical actin bundles. circular structures of various sizes were sporadically seen in the cytoplasm . numerous small loops were present, predominantly on the surface of chloroplasts . most of them contained mitochondria .

the organization of ac was modified after irradiation with wbl. this light induced an accumulation response of chloroplasts, shown in fig. 1a and 1d as decrease of light transmission Δt through the leaf. the afs reorganized without losing their clear-cut appearance . the quantitative analysis showed a distinct narrowing of actin bundles in weak light . single chloroplasts were wrapped in discrete bundles finer than those present in the dark . the general distribution of mitochondria with respect to chloroplasts did not change as compared with the dark-adapted material .

after the tissue was exposed to sbl the image of almost all cell actin became diffuse with occasional single wide strands to which chloroplasts were attached . the chloroplasts took on the profile position characteristic of the avoidance response . the baskets on chloroplast surfaces became diffuse but the small loops containing mitochondria were still conspicuous . the connection between the baskets and the actin network appeared looser than in the dark-adapted or wbl-treated cells. the f-actin image started to get diffuse as early as several min after sbl irradiation even if the tissue had been pre-irradiated with wbl. the wide strands were seen reorganizing upon irradiation with strong light . the "diffusion effect" was reversible and the reconstruction of a distinct, branched actin network took place in the sbl-irradiated samples subsequently treated with continuous wbl . this reconstruction was observed no sooner than  <dig> min after the onset of weak light exposure.

the effects of blue light were compared with those produced by red light . almost the same images of the actin network were obtained after exposure to bl or rl with equivalent quantum fluxes . strong light produced indistinguishable images of widened f-actin bundles and foamy chloroplast baskets irrespective of wavelength. hence, no blue-specific differences could be detected in the actin structure. the quantitative results in fig.  <dig>  and additional file  <dig>  support this observation.

effects of ca2+, ca2+ + ionophore a <dig> and mg2+
the effect of extracellular calcium on the structure of the actin cytoskeleton and on chloroplast movements was studied using a  <dig> mm solution of calcium nitrate. the image of ac became more distinct after the addition of ca2+. the effect was visible in the dark-adapted mesophyll cells and even stronger after wbl or wrl irradiation . photometric transmission changes reflecting the chloroplast responses to bl were about the same as with the control . exposure of the of ca2+-treated tissue to sbl and srl produced similar wide bands of afs with side adhering chloroplasts. all formations observed in these images looked very similar to those from sl-irradiated controls .

the concomitant application of ca2+ ionophore a <dig> worsened the cytoskeleton image typical of the ambient ca2+-solution, particularly after exposure to either wbl or wrl . the addition of ionophore a <dig> to the calcium nitrate solution reduced amplitudes by about 40% and velocities by about 50% in both chloroplast responses .

as shown in fig.  <dig> the actin cytoskeleton at higher extracellular mg2+ concentration looked similar to that at the presence of ca2+ both in dark-adapted and wl-irradiated tissue. the tendency to widening was occasionally visible in strong light  but the quantitative analysis showed that mg2+ ions subdue the strong light effect . the parameters of chloroplast responses were somewhat lower with mg2+ than with either ca2+ or the control, however, the difference was statistically insignificant .

effects of egta and egta + calcium ionophore a23187
potent inhibition of chloroplast responses concomitant with dramatic changes in ac organization were observed in tissue incubated with  <dig> mm egta for  <dig> min to  <dig> h in the dark . egta caused the formation of a characteristic spotted pattern all over the cell. at the same time, a dense network of fine afs formed at the chloroplast surfaces . loops of various sizes with a fluorescent-green tint inside were visible in some cells . numerous chloroplasts were grouped into tight clusters . after exposure to weak light, the spotted pattern persisted but the chloroplast baskets became clearly visible: very fine filaments appeared on the surfaces of chloroplasts . the energies of f-actin patterns corresponding to chloroplast baskets were  <dig>  for dark-adapted vs  <dig>  for wb . the increase in energy signifies growing inhomogeneity of ac i.e. the emergence of distinct afs. this difference was detectable at all percentiles . the structure characteristic of treatment with egta disappeared in strong light. simultaneously, filamentous actin reappeared in the cells in the form of a few widened strands .

when egta was applied together with the calcium ionophore, both accumulation and avoidance responses were almost eradicated . strong inhibition of the chloroplast movements was observed as early as  <dig> min after the beginning of incubation. along with the arrest of movement, the addition of the calcium ionophore accelerated and intensified changes in the ac organization produced by egta .

reversion of egta effects by ca2+ and mg2+
calcium and magnesium ions reversed the damage caused by egta in the dark-adapted cells when used directly after the chelating agent . irradiation with wl helped the reconstruction of the filamentous structure of actin. sharper afs were restored in the presence of mg2+ than in the presence of ca2+ . both ions caused the chloroplasts to separate from the egta-induced clusters . while the structure of the actin network was considerably improved by ca2+, the chloroplast responses were reactivated only by 50% . as with its effect on the cytoskeleton, mg2+ restored both chloroplast responses to blue light somewhat better than ca2+ .

effects of trifluoperazine and their reversion by ca2+ and mg2+
trifluoperazine , a blocker of calmodulin caused destabilization of the ac as early as  <dig> min after application. chloroplast clusters formed in most cells as with egta . ac-associated fluorescence disappeared after  <dig> h of incubation in the dark . early exposure to light, especially wbl, brought about a reconstruction of actin bundles and chloroplast separation . in spite of ac recovery, the chloroplasts did not respond to light in the tfp-treated tissue. the first disturbances were detected after  <dig> min, and  <dig> min later the avoidance response was practically extinguished. both responses were completely inhibited after  <dig> min treatment with tfp .

the effect of tfp was reversed by calcium and magnesium in the dark . both ions caused the chloroplasts to separate from the tfp-produced clusters. even though both ions prompted the recovery of chloroplast movements, magnesium was notably twice as effective as calcium in the reactivation .

irrespective of the ionic/pharmacological treatment, the effects of bl and rl on cortical ac were comparable. irradiations with equivalent quantum fluxes of sb and sr and/or wb and wr resulted in formation of f-actin patterns of similar energies, respectively. no blue-specific differences could be detected .

effects of wortmannin
wortmannin , an inhibitor of phosphoinositide-3-kinase, had a dramatic effect on chloroplast movements at a concentration of  <dig> μm . the accumulation response was eliminated and the avoidance response was reduced by half after  <dig>  h exposure. again, ca2+ and mg2+ negated the inhibition, with full recovery of the avoidance response obtained with both investigated ions. the influence of wm was stronger on velocities than on amplitudes, but they were similarly reactivated by ca2+ and mg2+ . in this case, however, the inhibitory effect on the movement was not reflected in the shape of cellular actin: ac remained completely unaffected by wm . only when the concentration was increased to  <dig> μm did some perturbations in the continuity of actin bundles become perceptible . this higher concentration of wm abolished both chloroplast responses to light.

discussion
the widening of actin strands upon sl-irradiation can be interpreted as a relaxation of the structure of actin bundles. it might be a result of some yet undefined interaction between filaments  in sl, leading to the formation of looser bundles. the differences between the organization of cytoskeleton in wl and sl may have consequences for the manner in which actin anchors the chloroplasts in a cell under different light conditions. the tendency of chloroplasts to be displaced during centrifugation was investigated in lemna trisulca, a model species used in studies on blue-activated chloroplast movements in higher plants. the ability of chloroplasts to resist centrifugal force depended on light pre-treatment. whereas wl anchored chloroplasts in the cells, sl loosened the binding and made them easier displaceable by centrifugal forces  <cit> . the relaxation reported currently might be the basis of the mentioned sl effect.

circular forms of afs sometimes occurred in dark-adapted or wbl-treated tobacco cells. similar forms had previously been observed in fixed adiantum protonemal cells and assigned a role in chloroplast anchoring  <cit> . however, in adiantum the circles had a much bigger diameter and were found only in irradiated tissue.

the differences observed in tobacco are in contrast to the results obtained with fixed tissue of a. thaliana, where no structural dissimilarities of actin were detected between leaves treated with wbl or sbl  <cit> . the different susceptibility of actin to light in arabidopsis as compared to nicotiana might be attributed to a non-identical organization of the filament bundles in these species. this could account for three unsuccessful attempts to transform arabidopsis leaves with the plastin-gfp construct used in this study whereas siliques and sepals showed an effective transformation . on the other hand, the discrepancy between the actin images obtained for sbl-irradiated tobacco and arabidopsis could be a consequence of the fixation procedure used for the latter species.

seeking bl-specific actin reorganization we compared the effects of blue and red light on the actin cytoskeleton. as with fixed cells, rl and bl effects were similar, even though rl induces no directional chloroplast movement in tobacco  <cit> . this lack of difference confirms our previous conclusion that the directionality of chloroplast responses is not based on bl-specific changes of f-actin, and that other factor must determine the direction of chloroplast movement.

the presence of the dense cortical f-actin network associated with chloroplast baskets was demonstrated in living tobacco cells as in other reports dealing with fixed actin in arabidopsis  <cit> . the structure of the actin baskets and their interactions with the cortical ac seem to be of key importance for chloroplast positioning in higher land plants. even though irradiation with wl and/or sl changed the structure of actin baskets in living cells, they were always tightly associated with chloroplast surfaces.

the significant improvement of the cytoskeleton image by ca2+ and mg2+ may be due to the binding of these ions to either afs or plastin. contrary to our results, external calcium and magnesium had no visible effect on the phalloidin-labelled ac organization in tobacco by- <dig> protoplasts  <cit> . in poppy pollen tubes, f-actin was fragmented into punctate foci at increasing concentration of cytosolic free ca2+  <cit> .

the damage to ac made by external egta depleting the cytosolic ca2+ confirms the obvious fact that calcium is important for the maintenance of microfilament integrity. the formation of the well structured filamentous actin on the surfaces of chloroplasts  may be due to ca2+ extraction from these organelles during wbl irradiation. blue light of  <dig> μmol m- <dig> s- <dig> produced a transient increase in cytosolic ca2+ in a.thaliana leaves, which originated partly from internal calcium stores  <cit> . our results can be interpreted in terms of bl causing an efflux of calcium from chloroplasts, and its continuous chelating by extracellular egta. this combined action of light and egta might have induced the transient formation of fine actin baskets on chloroplast surfaces, whereas egta prevented a stable restoration of actin cytoskeleton in the cells.

along with the destruction of the actin network, egta strongly inhibited chloroplast responses in tobacco, similar to the effects previously reported for ferns and water angiosperms  <cit> . combined treatment with egta and a <dig> merely accelerated and intensified the effects of egta. the ionophore facilitated the efflux of calcium from the cells.

trifluoperazine, a blocker of calmodulin completely inhibited the chloroplast movements in tobacco, similar to the inhibition previously reported for lemna  <cit> . tfp also caused the disappearance of almost all ac-related fluorescence after  <dig> h dark-incubation. light effected a partial reconstruction of afs in the presence of tfp, most probably due to an increase in the cytosolic ca2+ concentration. remarkably, chloroplast responses were not restored. even though ca2+ presumably released by bl efficiently rebuilt the tfp-destroyed afs, it was not capable of reactivating chloroplast responses. this may suggest that calmodulin per se is involved in transmitting the directional signal.

both ca2+ and mg2+ effectively restored the egta- and tfp-damaged actin cytoskeleton. the differences between the actin bundles restored by these ions might be attributed to differences in de novo actin polymerization. in a study on rabbit skeletal muscle, mg2+ played a stronger role in the mechanism of actin polymerization than ca2+ due to faster nucleation of mg-atp-actin than ca-atp-actin  <cit> . indeed, mg-atp-actin nucleates three orders of magnitude faster than ca-atp-actin  <cit> . besides, actin containing tightly-bound mg2+ differs structurally and functionally from actin containing tightly-bound ca2+  <cit> .

both ions were shown to restore not only the actin cytoskeleton, but also chloroplast responses in egta/tfp treated tobacco cells. ca2+ has previously been reported to restore the egta-inhibited chloroplast photo-orientation in adiantum protonemal cells  <cit> . mg2+ has been shown to counteract the inhibitory effect of egta in lemna when applied together with the chelator  <cit> . it was hypothesized that mg2+ blocked the calcium channels through which ca2+ was removed from the cell by the external egta. extracellular magnesium has indeed been shown to significantly modifiy the transport of all major ions, h+, ca2+, and k+ in bean mesophyll cells  <cit> .

remarkably, mg2+ was twice as effective in restoring chloroplast photo-responses than ca2+ in samples pre-treated with tfp. how was mg2+ able to fully recover the directional chloroplast movement? could it act indirectly, bypassing calmodulin or triggering other pathways that substitiute for calmodulin activity? it is difficult to answer these questions because magnesium homeostasis is still poorly understood  <cit> . the molecular details of mg2+ transport between cellular compartments in plants are still far from clear  <cit> . mg2+ ions are stored mainly in vacuoles. a large part of the cytoplasmic magnesium is complexed by atp. the concentration of free mg2+ in the cytosol must therefore be strictly regulated, which is a pre-condition for playing a role in signal transduction  <cit> . in animal systems, magnesium has been postulated as acting as an intracellular messenger  <cit> . could it play such a role also in plant cells?

the strong inhibition of chloroplast movement by wortmannin shows that the model assigning phosphoinositide kinases a key role in the transduction of the orienting bl signals in lemna  <cit>  may be valid also for higher land plants. on the other hand, the model needs further refinement. firstly, wm at a concentration of  <dig> μm, which is strongly inhibitory for both chloroplast responses, had no effect on tobacco ac. thus, the bl signals are not directed to actin, which is consistent with our former conclusion  <cit> . small disturbances in the network were perceptible only at  <dig> μm, above the range of concentrations commonly used in plants  <cit> . secondly, the striking recovery of wm-inhibited movements obtained with ca2+ shows that this ion is not only needed for controlling the motor apparatus  but also that it transmits the signal downstream of the phosphoinositide kinases. our results suggest therefore further complications in the model of signal transduction.

all investigated remedial activities of extracellular ca2+ could be also mimicked by mg2+, in most cases even more efficiently. thus, our results point to the possibility that mg2+ is a regulatory molecule cooperating with ca2+ in the signaling pathway of bl-induced tobacco chloroplast movements. it has to be stressed that extracellular ca2+/mg2+ reactivated the directional movements even though applied non-directionally. thus, an asymmetric, polar distribution of some yet undisclosed cellular elements with which this ion interact seems to be required to define the direction of chloroplast movements in higher plants.

CONCLUSIONS
the actin cytoskeleton in the mesophyll of tobacco is sensitive to weak and strong light irrespective of its spectral region . thus, the directionality of chloroplast responses is not based on specific blue light-induced changes of f-actin but on other, yet unidentified factor.

the structure of the actin baskets surrounding chloroplasts, and their interactions with the cortical actin cytoskeleton appear to be crucial for chloroplast positioning in higher land plants.

the striking recovery of wortmannin-inhibited movements obtained with ca2+ shows that these ions play at least two roles in the mechanism of the movements: they control the motor apparatus and transmit the light-generated signal downstream of the phosphoinositide kinases.

our results show for the first time that mg2+ is a regulatory molecule cooperating with ca2+ both in the maintenance of the actin network integrity and in the signaling pathway of chloroplast movements in tobacco.

