BACKGROUND
advances in molecular marker development and in genome mapping have resulted in high-density molecular-marker linkage maps in crops, and have provided tools for dissecting the genetic variation of complex traits. map-based strategies were successfully used for the positional cloning of genes that underlie quantitative trait loci   <cit> . despite the success of these strategies, gene discovery is still limited to those loci that have large effects upon quantitative variation  <cit> .

over the last few years, there has been renewed interest in the study of naturally occurring variation in crop genetic collections. motivations for such studies are  to use natural allelic diversity for the evaluation of gene function,  to find new genes or new alleles involved in specific aspects of plant physiology or development and  to try to understand the molecular basis of adaptation to local environments  <cit> . association genetics or linkage disequilibrium studies test for a statistical association between genotypes at a marker locus and the phenotypes in a set of unrelated individuals  <cit> . polymorphisms of interest are detected in a large range of genetic backgrounds. the extent of linkage disequilibrium , the non-random association of alleles at two or more loci, is a sample specific property and depends on the biological model studied. in contrast to the situation in multigenerational pedigrees, ld in natural populations is not broken artificially and we need to overcome this restriction.

the primary obstacle to successful association studies or linkage disequilibrium  mapping is the nature of the genetic structure of populations  <cit> . the presence of subgroups with different allele frequencies, within the population studied, can lead to spurious associations. domestication of most of modern crops occurred between  <dig>  and  <dig>  years ago and shaped the allelic frequencies distribution among plant populations. knowledge about genetic structure can aid in inference of evolutionary history like domestication  <cit> .

the large sample size to be analyzed constitutes another constraint in diversity studies, whereas studying a subset might be more efficient if this sample spans the full range of variation  <cit> . the first challenge in molecular diversity analysis is thus to sample core collections that better fit the range of morphological and genetic variations found in the global collection. for example, single nucleotide polymorphism  candidate markers, discovered in a small number of accessions, can be easily genotyped on a larger sample for diversity analysis and association mapping. several methods have been proposed for constructing core-collections. some of these take advantage of molecular markers  <cit>  and seem to perform better when used for sampling autogamous plants  <cit> . the genetic structure of a core collection has to be checked to avoid spurious correlation between molecular polymorphisms and traits in association studies.

tomato  emerged as a model species for the study of fleshy fruited plants because of the extent of genetic and genomic resources available  <cit> . the large range of phenotypic variation and large collections of genetic resources available for crops are prerequisites for using an association strategy. the cultivated tomato is highly autogamous and shows a large range of morphological diversity but low genetic diversity compared to other solanum relatives  <cit> . this can be explained by successive bottlenecks:  domestication associated with isolation of the crop from the andes  to central america,  transfer of few cultivars to the mediterranean basin by conquistadors in the 16th century and  modern breeding  <cit> . cherry tomato, i.e. s. lycopersicum var. cerasiforme , is the expected ancestor of the domesticated form. in its native andean region, wild and feral forms can be found and s. l. cerasiforme is also described as highly invasive  <cit> . cherry tomato accessions are also found as landraces from temperate to subartic regions. in coastal ecuador and peru, s. pimpinellifolium, genetically close to s. lycopersicum and strictly wild, is found growing in sympatry with tomato landraces and cherry tomato . wild and feral s. l. cerasiforme  exhibit two allozyme-diversity patterns: one similar to the allozyme-diversity pattern exhibited by cultivated tomato and another one similar to the wild s. pimpinellifolium allozyme-diversity pattern  <cit> . based on isozymes, s. l. cerasiforme accessions also show an outcrossing rate comparable to the rate of outbred species  <cit> . rick and holle  suggest that tomato should have undergone natural introgressions from wild and feral accessions. moreover, nesbitt and tanksley  <cit>  demonstrated that, around the fw <dig>  locus, the s. l. cerasiforme genome is a mosaic between s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium genomes due to frequent hybridizations between the two species. this is evidence of frequent hybridizations in this autogamous complex of species. the admixture hypothesis of s. l. cerasiforme has never been tested on the whole genome and would be further evidence of a natural high rate of hybridization. moreover, s. l. cerasiforme and s. pimpinellifolium are involved in the domestication of tomato but the process remains to be clarified.

molecular markers like simple sequence repeat  markers have often been used to clarify genetic structure in plants  <cit> . in tomato several studies used ssr markers but focused only on wild relatives  <cit>  or on elite germplasm  <cit> . no study used a broad sample of cultivated, landraces, and wild accessions. the goal of the present study is to clarify the domestication process of tomato and to confirm the admixture status of s. l. cerasiforme. to achieve this goal we analyzed the genetic structure of a genetic resource collection, that includes predominantly s. l. cerasiforme accessions, and we compared this to the genetic structure of s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium. we assessed the amount of genetic diversity in the collection and sampled nested core collections of wild and cultivated tomato that will be used in future diversity studies. for this purpose we used a set of  <dig> ssr markers dispersed over the genome to survey the genetic diversity present in a sample of  <dig> accessions.

RESULTS
microsatellite diversity
the microsatellite markers used  revealed different diversity patterns in the total collection including green fruited species, s. cheesmaniae  and red-fruited accessions  . ssr markers revealed  <dig> to  <dig> different alleles and an average of  <dig>  alleles per locus. this mean dropped to  <dig> alleles per locus when rare alleles  were removed. in the red-fruited tomatoes group, the average allele number per locus was na =  <dig>  but was equivalent to the total collection when removing rare alleles . the average expected heterozygosity over all loci was  <dig>  with large variation among loci . rare heterozygous genotypes were found for all loci in the total collection  but were distributed across individuals.

locus
positiona 
a linkage group and map position are based on the tomato expen  <dig> map .

a number of allele per locus , c expected heterozygosity, d observed heterozygosity

a much higher genetic diversity was found in wild s. pimpinellifolium  than in the cultivated s. lycopersicum  . the observed heterozygosity was also higher for s. pimpinellifolium  than for s. lycopersicon . the reason for these heterozygosity patterns could be the difference in the reproductive regime between s. pimpinellifolium accessions and s. lycopersicum. the s. l. cerasiforme exhibited an intermediate pattern of diversity.

number
allele
a specific alleles are identified when they are found only in one sample. b expected heterozygosity, c observed heterozygosity

genetic structure of the sample
the genetic structure in the red-fruited accession sample was analyzed with the model-based clustering algorithm implemented in the structure <dig>  software . to avoid redundancy in the collection, we kept only one individual when several accessions were identified with the same ssr fingerprint at all loci. hence,  <dig> individuals  were removed. thus, we detected the genetic structure of a sample of  <dig> accessions. because s. l. cerasiforme genome was described as a mosaic between s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium genomes, all the red-fruited accessions were used as a broad sample. s. cheesmaniae and s. galapagense accessions have not taken part in the domestication process of tomato and were not included in this analysis.

the evanno et al.  correction of the structure <dig>  outputs was used . the first peak of Δk, for k =  <dig>  corresponded to the presence of two main clusters and a potential sublevel of clustering was suggested by the secondary peak of Δk, for k =  <dig>  the classification of accessions into clusters by the model-based method was used to study the sublevel clustering of the red-fruited tomato sample. for all kopt, memberships were consistent between all runs.

for kopt =  <dig>  clustering divided the total sample into two groups. group  <dig> consisted of the main part of s. pimpinellifolium  with  <dig> accessions from s. l. cerasiforme whereas group  <dig> consisted of the main part of s. lycopersicum and of the s. l. cerasiforme samples. group  <dig> represented the 'wild' part of the sample whereas group  <dig> represented the 'domesticated' part of the sample. this classification accounted for 35%  of the total genetic variance; individuals within group accounted for 51%  of the total variance and the variance within individuals explained five percent  of the total variance. when individuals were assigned with a minimal membership of 70% into a corresponding cluster, twenty three percent  of the s. l. cerasiforme accessions was in admixture between 'wild' and 'domesticated' groups.

a pairs of markers were considered in significant ld using the threshold p-value <  <dig> .

for kopt =  <dig>  the group  <dig> divided into subgroups a and b and the group  <dig> divided into subgroups c and d. when individuals with a membership lower than 70% were not taken into account, the hierarchical amova indicated that 37%  of the variance was due to variation among groups, 13%  of the variance was due to variation among subgroup within groups and 45%  of the variance was due to variation among individuals within subgroup  was due to variation within individual). pairwise estimates of fst indicated a high degree of differentiation between the four clusters with values ranging from  <dig>  between clusters c and d to  <dig>  between clusters a and d .

individuals were clustered corresponding to their maximal membership. all comparisons were significant 

the cluster a consisted of moderate to large fruited individuals with a large part of s. lycopersicum accessions, whereas cluster b consisted of small fruited accessions with the cherry type accessions representing the main part of this subgroup. the 'wild' group was divided into the cluster a and b; both consisted of s. l. cerasiforme and s. pimpinellifolium accessions. when individuals were assigned with a minimal membership of 70% into a corresponding cluster, individuals were found in admixture between intra-specific groups but most admixture accessions were inter-specific admixes .

number of individuals
a individuals were classified in a cluster if their membership for this cluster was higher than 70%. a number of individual in each cluster. b allele number. c expected heterozygosity

groups  <dig> and  <dig> were considered as main samples and analyzed separately using the same hypothesis. the optimum number of sublevel populations within the groups  <dig> and  <dig> was two, which is consistent with the kopt of  <dig> for the whole sample. classification of individuals in each cluster was consistent with results based on structure <dig>  outputs of the total sample. for kopt =  <dig>  there were differences between individual's memberships and species classification . some individuals were misclassified.

we also analyzed the genetic structure of each species separately  and the memberships of individuals was consistent with clustering found in the whole red-fruited tomato sample. individuals previously found in admixture clustered in independent groups.

the pattern of genetic diversity within the subdivision was analyzed . the two 'wild' clusters presented the highest he but subgroup a had a low value of he compared to subgroup b. the numbers of statistical pairwise comparisons for non random association of alleles  are homogeneous among subgroup a, c and d but much higher for subgroup b and for the 'wild' and 'domesticated' admixed part of s. l. cerasiforme. the clustering allowed linkage disequilibrium to decrease in each subgroup compared to the whole sample.

the first axis of principal coordinate analysis of the red-fruited tomatoes separated 'wild' s. pimpinellifolium from 'domesticated' s. lycopersicum . the second axis separated subgroups a and b on one hand and subgroups c and d on the other hand. the s. l. cerasiforme accessions were divided among subgroups b and the admixed cluster. the interspecific admixed group showed a continuum between 'wild' and 'domesticated' clusters.

sampling of the core collection
core collections of s. l. cerasiforme accessions were built using the maximization or m strategy algorithm implemented in mstrat software v. <dig> . analyses were first performed on all cherry tomato accessions only . before sampling the core collections, the whole sample was analyzed to compare two sampling strategies. we also determined the size of the smallest subset that captured all molecular and phenotypic alleles present in the whole sample. both molecular and phenotypic data were used for these analyses. the phenotypic quantitative variables were split into  <dig> classes of equal dimension . random and m sampling strategies were compared. ssr allelic richness  was calculated for each core collection size. the  <dig> ssr alleles were used both as markers, to implement the m and random strategy, and target variables, to compare these two strategies . the difference between the random and m curves indicated that the m strategy performed better in sampling a core collection for the s. l. cerasiforme sample. the optimal size for the core collection, obtained at the plateau of the m curve, was reached for  <dig> s. l. cerasiforme accessions.

the phenotypic diversity captured when sampling only with ssr alleles is shown in figure 4b. the plateau of the m curve was reached for  <dig> individuals and a weak difference in performance between the two strategies was observed.

when both molecular and phenotypic data were used as marker variables , the m strategy showed higher performance in sampling procedure than a random strategy and gave an optimal size of  <dig> individuals . finally, core collections were sampled using both molecular and morphological data. to define the final core collection, accessions were classified by the number of times they were sampled in the fifteen replicates and the most frequently sampled accessions were chosen.

four nested core collections composed of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> s. l. cerasiforme accessions were sampled . fourty to 98% of ssr alleles were captured when accession's number increased from  <dig> to  <dig> . the number of phenotypic classes captured, increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  when accession's number increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  the  <dig> accession sample did not show any genetic structure when it was analyzed with the model-based method.

a each quantitative variable was split into  <dig> classes of equal dimension  when looking for the whole cerasiforme sample and number of classes. b soluble solid content  and titratable acidity were only used to analyse core collections representativeness and were not used as active variables for the sampling of these core collections. c a* describes how red/green a color is.

for fruit weight , soluble solid content  and titratable acidity , the core collection of  <dig> accessions best represented the phenotypic variability of the global sample even though extreme phenotypes were not represented . the sample consisting of  <dig> accessions seemed to be the best compromise because of its small number of accessions and its representativeness.

to complete representativeness of these core collections, ten accessions from s. lycopersicum, two accessions from s. pimpinellifolium and four wild related accessions  were added to each of the core collections to constitute mixed interspecific core collections. the core collection of  <dig> accessions was also completed with seven other accessions from s. lycopersicum and eight accessions from s. pimpinellifolium also sampled separately using  <dig> ssr alleles and  <dig> morphological traits with the m strategy.

discussion
previous studies on the genetic structure of tomato collections focused on cultivated accessions  <cit>  or on the relationship between cultivated and wild relatives  <cit>  but did not use a broad sample of wild and cultivated tomatoes with s. l. cerasiforme as the main sample. ssr markers have already been shown to be useful for genetic analysis in studies focusing on inferring interspecific relationships or confirming ssr reliability for genetic mapping  <cit> .

differences were observed among ssr markers. for example, a higher number of alleles was identified in the two-base motif markers compared to other three-base or complex motif markers . a significant difference was observed between the number of alleles with at-rich motifs and non at-rich motif markers . two base at-rich motif markers also displayed higher expected heterozygosity. this kind of ssr marker might be useful for inferring fine relationships between close accessions. because of the higher mutation rate in the at-rich motif markers, some misevaluation might occur because of homoplasy  for distant individuals  <cit> . ssr markers with lower mutation rates with three-base or complex motifs are more reliable markers for inferring interspecific relationships.

ssr markers had between two and  <dig> different alleles in the total collection  and the allele number decreased between one and five alleles when looking in the red-fruited tomato sample and only for allelic frequency higher than 5%. the pattern of genetic diversity inferred from ssr alleles also showed an important decrease in diversity  when comparing s. pimpinellifolium and s. lycopersicum accessions. furthermore, the observed heterozygosity is lower than expected for all species due to the reproductive regime of red-fruited accessions, but also to the way genetic resources were maintained. the red-fruited accessions are mainly autogamous  and the green fruited accessions are mainly self-incompatible   <cit> . the decrease of allele number and diversity in red fruited accessions is probably due to the restriction of allogamy. the drop in diversity between the wild and domesticated species has been previously described  <cit>  and was explained by successive bottlenecks starting from domestication and continuing with modern breeding of s. lycopersicum. this species presents a high selfing rate which hampers restoration of genetic diversity lost during domestication. s. pimpinellifolium showed higher diversity because of its wild status  and because it benefited from intercrossing. in fact, partial allogamous populations of s. pimpinellifolium were described in northwestern peru. while they migrated away from that territory, selection has favored self pollination  <cit> . the higher rate of observed heterozygosity shown by s. pimpinnellifolium is thus a residue of intercrossing from allogamous accessions.

all red-fruited plants used are progenies from self-compatible accessions where seeds are produced through self-pollination. because of the inbred nature of most accessions, only one plant was used for genotyping. the amount of diversity in this sample is thus underestimated. there is a bias when analyzing observed heterozygosity on artificially self-pollinated accessions but the residue of intercrossing observed testifies to ancestral intercrossing. the estimation of observed heterozygosity should be done on the initial population  to assess the intercrossing rate of these populations. however, the homozygosity of accessions will help in dissecting the genetic bases of agronomical traits using diversity studies.

s. l. cerasiforme showed an intermediate amount of genetic diversity between s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium. this particular position has already been described using allozymic variation  <cit>  and both patterns of genetic variation close to s. pimpinellifolium and s. lycopersicum were encompassed. cherry type tomatoes, found in coastal peru or ecuador and which were described as feral, wild, or used as cultivated landraces, may have played an important role in the evolution of domesticated tomato  <cit> . this variety characterized by morphological traits like fruit size and seed weight spans a genetic continuum between 'wild' and 'domesticated' forms of the crop. current results suggest that this group of s. l. cerasiforme evolved through hybridization between s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium. the wild and feral parts of s. l. cerasiforme accessions, which have been described as highly invasive, adapted rapidly thanks to the increase in genetic variance, new gene interactions, masking or unloading of deleterious recessive alleles, or the transfer of favourable genes  <cit> .

genetic structure was highlighted by the model-based method developed by pritchard et al.,  for human genetics. this method performed better than clustering methods based on pairwise genetic distance because only a modest number of loci was used  <cit> . the higher level of genetic structure allowed most of the s. lycopersicum and a part of s. l. cerasiforme accessions to be assigned to a 'domesticated' group and most of the s. pimpinellifolium to the 'wild' group. the other part of the cherry tomato sample was classified in an admixture position, which is consistent with the distance-based method. the subdivision of the 'domesticated' group in large and small fruit size accessions is consistent with the results of van berloo et al.  with aflp markers. these authors found higher differences between cherry versus beef and round tomatoes than between round and beef tomatoes themselves. homozygosity creates departure from hardy-weinberg equilibrium which is one of the hypotheses to apply the model-based method. this limitation was overcome using haploid genotypes. simulations showed that dominant markers can give results as accurate as codominant markers  <cit> . we can thus validate our clustering though genotypes were coded in haploid setting. however, caution must be exerted when interpreting biological significance of the clustering because results are sensitive to the type of genetic marker used, the number of loci scored, the number of population sampled and the number of individual typed in each sample.

no relationship between the geographical origin and genetic structure was found within the wild group. geographic distributions of genetic variability were highlighted for s. pimpinellifolium across coastal peru and ecuador, using isozyme markers  <cit> . regional distribution of isozyme allelic variants and morphological traits for s. l. cerasiforme was also described  <cit> . this could be explained by differences in property for markers used. allozyme markers and morphological traits may be under selective constraint in natural populations in contrast with ssr markers which are usually described following the neutrality hypothesis. moreover, the results cited above, were obtained for offspring directly collected from natural populations. we employed a different approach using highly inbred plants: diversity patterns were compared among clusters and not among natural populations. the ssr markers presented in this study should be genotyped for natural populations of s. pimpinellifolium or s. l. cerasiforme to elucidate the correlation of geographical and genetic structures.

the lower amount of diversity and the highest number of alleles in ld in the subgroup a could be explained by reproductive isolation with a high frequency of short-style flowers in the original population . this trait is characteristic of strictly autogamous tomato accessions  <cit> . this morphological change, that favors selfing over outcrossing, could also explain the genetic structure  <cit> . the higher genetic diversity of subgroup c in the 'domesticated' groups could be due to a more ancient and less drastic genetic bottleneck caused by domestication. the drop in genetic diversity in subgroup d is likely due to modern selection which focused on yield and fruit size. the interspecific admixed cluster presented high value of diversity index which is inconsistent with highly autogamous and domesticated forms but confirmed the hypothesis of frequent recombination between cultivated s. lycopersicum and wild s. pimpinellifolium. these results suggest a two-step selection for fruit size during domestication of tomato from s. pimpinellifolium to s. lycopersicum. a first step may have allowed selection of cherry type with moderate fruit size probably with fixation of autogamy. the human migration may have resulted in transfer of cultivated tomato from the andes to central america with selection for larger fruit size. in mexico, tomato reached a fairly advanced stage of domestication before being taken to the old world by conquistador  <cit> . the role of the 'admixed' part of s. l. cerasiforme, in tomato domestication can't be established because hybrid pattern could be due to ancient or recent outcrossing events.

the admixed s. l. cerasiforme cluster is of particular interest for mapping complex traits. this subsample could be used in an admixture mapping strategy that falls between linkage analysis and association mapping, and is a good approach for initial genome scan  <cit> . the extent of difference in allele frequency between the ancestral populations is crucial in detecting strong associations between phenotypes and molecular polymorphisms. this difference in allele frequency was obvious in 'wild' and 'domesticated' tomato groups as it represented the main genetic structure level highlighted with the model-based method. in humans, admixture mapping has already been performed to map two loci responsible for hypertension  <cit> . this method will be assessed in future studies for identifying new qtls or candidate genes linked to fruit quality traits.

the number of pairwise markers at linkage disequilibrium  decreased in the different groups compared to the total red-fruited accessions. strong ld between distant or independent markers arises as a consequence of genetic linkage, of the rate of recombination, drift or non-random mating, and as a consequence of population structure. information on genetic structure of the collection and the membership information for all individuals will be useful in future association mapping to avoid spurious associations due to strong ld over the genome  <cit> .

however, more markers are needed to efficiently tag the genome and better unravel the genetic structure of the cultivated s. lycopersicum and s. l. cerasiforme. furthermore, more markers will also be of great interest for estimating individual's kinships. new statistical methods for association studies use both genetic structure information and kinship estimation  <cit> .

this study provided a set of nested core collections for s. l. cerasiforme accessions which was completed by selected accessions of s. lycopersicum, s. pimpinellifolium and wild relatives representing parents of different mapping populations. we focused on s. l. cerasiforme because of  its close relationship with s. lycopersicum,  its genetic diversity which is higher than that of s. lycopersicum and  its high range of variation in fruit quality traits. because of differences in genetic and morphological diversity patterns in 'wild' versus 'domesticated' forms of the tomato continuum, core collections were sampled using both phenotypic and molecular diversity. for sampling core collections, the gain when scoring with the maximization strategy was higher than with the random strategy. this is not surprising given the high level of selfing in s. l. cerasiforme and the pattern of genetic structure uncovered in our sample, both factors that favor the marker assisted sampling strategies over pure random strategies  <cit> . moreover  <dig> ssr markers were not sufficient to differentiate all accessions based on their genotype. markers with higher mutation rates will be more accurate in differentiating individuals based on fingerprinting but will decrease the accuracy of sampling core collections with the m strategy.

moreover, the m strategy sampled molecular diversity but also morphological diversity even for traits that were not used as markers for sampling the collection.

the four core collections proposed will have different goals. the  <dig> mixed core collection  will be useful for detecting snps by sequencing. snp markers will then be genotyped on the whole tomato collection for association studies or on mapping populations for qtl localization. sampling this collection was a preliminary step for future studies on exploring the natural diversity of tomato that will unfold as the tomato genome sequence becomes available  <cit> . for example, simon et al.  <cit>  crossed arabidopsis thaliana reference genotypes  with several accessions from a previously defined core collection  <cit> . the authors built  <dig> recombinant inbred line family and this new ril set offered improved accuracy for qtl localization than previous ril families.

the  <dig> s. l. cerasiforme core collection will be useful for direct association studies. this core collection maximizes the power of associations between phenotypes and allele frequencies. the core collection was test with the model based methods and showed no genetic structure. a broad geographic origin  and large phenotypic variation for fruit quality traits were represented. the  <dig> mixed core collection will help in understanding domestication of tomato from s. pimpinellifolium. identified alleles of interest in admixed s. l. cerasiforme could be assigned to s. pimpinellifolium or to s. lycopersicum to identify their wild or cultivated origins. core collections will be used to detect genes associated with domestication i.e. under differential selective constraints in domesticated and wild clusters, and to test their potential for breeding  <cit> . the  <dig> and the  <dig> s. l. cerasiforme core collection are interesting for rapid sequencing and identifying snps and for evolutionary genomics studies, respectively. these core collections will be of interest for new high-throughput analysis of fruit quality integrating 'omic' information such as metabolomic, proteomic or transcriptomic analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
this study highlighted the unknown genetic structure of our wild and cultivated germplasm, enhancing the understanding of the history of the tomato complex. it clarified the position of s. l. cerasiforme in the evolution of the cultivated tomato. part of this sub-species is genetically close to the cultivated s. lycopersicum group and the other part is in admixture between cultivated and wild related groups. this admixed cluster is of high interest for increasing resolution of association genetics. we created nested core collections implemented with accessions from s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium that maximize genetic diversity. these core collections are available for the tomato community and can be used as standardized panels for identifying novel interesting genes or polymorphism. future studies will focus on the characterization of s. l. cerasiforme to understand the domestication process in more detail and to prospect for new interesting alleles.

