BACKGROUND
deep-sea hydrothermal vent ecosystems are driven by unique physical, geochemical and biological processes with specialized energy sources at the origin of the trophic web. since the discovery of hydrothermal vents and their associated fauna in the galapagos rift, evidence of the establishment of dense faunal communities based on chemosynthesis have mounted over the past decades, and generally in relation to areas where tectonic movements and deep ocean volcanism are active  <cit> . hydrothermal vent ecosystems are characterized by the synthesis of organic matter by means of chemo-autotrophic bacteria using reduced elements extracted from the hydrothermal fluids as source of energy  <cit> .

mussels in the genus bathymodiolus are biomass dominant at many known deep-sea hydrothermal vent and cold seep habitats. survival in such extreme conditions requires unique anatomical and physiological adaptations. for example the development of specialized gill epithelial cells harboring methanotrophic and thiotrophic endosymbiont bacteria constitutes one the best recognized adaptation strategies to chemosynthetic environments  <cit> . dual symbiosis thus provides a clear nutritional advantage to bathymodiolid mussels, allowing them to obtain energy from both sulfide and methane at the vent sites  <cit> . near the mid-atlantic ridge, and in the vicinity of the azores region, bathymodiolus azoricus subsists at vent sites, amid unusual levels of heavy metals, ph, temperature, co <dig>  methane and sulfide, while coping successfully with environmental microbes  <cit> .

despite its prominence as a model to study physiological adaptation to extreme physical and chemical conditions  <cit> , there is currently no large scale genome project for bathymodiolus species. gene expression profiles are limited to a few est projects mainly originated from the evolution and genetics of marine populations team at the biological station of roscoff, france. in a recent analysis, the screening of cdna libraries from whole bodies of b. azoricus resulted in  <dig> contigs and  <dig>  singletons. many genes known to be involved in both metallic and oxidative stress responses were then identified  <cit> . however, these data remain private and there is currently no published reports based on those sequences. more recently, the effect of temperature on the vent mussel b. thermophilus was investigated by means of subtractive suppression hybridization experiments aimed at the identification of genes differentially expressed in response to different temperatures regimes  <cit> .

thus far, knowledge of deep-sea biology or of the molecules involved in the maintenance of homeostasis in hydrothermal vent animals has been limited in part by the lack of information about their genomes and systematic sequencing of expressed sequence tags to identify protein coding genes on a large scale. the deep-sea vent biological systems represent the opportunity to study and provide new insights into the basic physiological principles that govern the defense mechanisms in vent animals and to understand how they cope with microbial infections. the problem of microbial threat and the need for immunity exist in both deep sea and shallow water bivalves however differences in the genes of marine organisms living in so distinct habitats are likely to occur. in order to significantly increase the number of b. azoricus genes in the public database and to discover new deep-sea vent adaptation-related genes in b. azoricus, and particularly for immune-related genes we have conducted a high-throughput experimental approach using pyrosequencing, on the  <dig> gs flx  with titanium chemistry, to sequence the transcriptome of b. azoricus gill tissues. in the absence of a reference genome, this sequence method, which has not yet been widely applied to hydrothermal vent animals, holds great potential for discovery of genes and genetic markers in unconventional model species through de novo transcriptome sequence assembly. the assembled and annotated sequences were produced and have been organized in a dedicated database, accessible through the website, http://transcriptomics.biocant.pt:8080/deepseavent providing an extensive catalog of genes expressed in gill tissues harboring immune cells, the hemocytes, of the deep-sea vent mussel bathymodiolus azoricus.

RESULTS
sequence analysis
a cdna library was constructed from mrna of fresh gill tissues from bathymodiolus azoricus collected at deep-sea vents and sequenced in a single gs flx titanium plate. a total of  <dig>  raw nucleotide reads were produced with an average length of  <dig> bp, corresponding to  <dig>  mb. after removal of the smart adaptors, by a custom script, the sequences were assembled with the mira software. a total of  <dig>  quality reads were assembled into  <dig>  contigs of which  <dig>  were singletons corresponding to a total of  <dig>  mb. the length of the consensus sequences varied from  <dig> bp to  <dig>  bp, with an average length of  <dig> bp. a summary of data is indicated in table  <dig> 

*contigs without blastx matches at an e-value cut-off of 10- <dig> were queried again with blastx with an e-value cut-off of 10-2

** the difference between the number of transcripts and total number of amino-acid sequences is due to the possibility of a contig having more than one annotated protein hit.

 <dig>  contigs were longer than  <dig> kb, and  <dig> longer than  <dig>  kb. the distribution of contig length and est assembly by contig are shown in fig  <dig> 

functional annotation
the contigs were annotated taking into consideration the identity of the translation frame, the conserved protein domains and gene ontology  terms. to obtain the translation frame, all contigs were queried against the ncbi protein database  using blastx algorithm  <cit> , resulting in  <dig>  significant matches for an e-value ≤ 10- <dig>  the process was repeated for contigs without hits, increasing the e-value cut-off to 10- <dig>  and resulting in the identification of  <dig>  additional contigs. the remaining contigs were processed through the estscan application  <cit> , from which it was possible to identify the coding frame for  <dig>  additional contigs. a total of  <dig>  putative amino-acids sequences was obtained following this approach. the entire set of amino-acid sequences hits was queried against the interpro database of protein families and functional domains http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro <cit> , from which  <dig>  were identified as bearing conserved protein domains. the same set of sequences was annotated with gene ontology  terms resulting in  <dig>  functional assignments according to the organizing principles of go describing gene products and their properties. this classification scheme was useful to assign bathymodiolus contigs to one of the major go annotation categories, i.e., biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions in a species-independent manner  <cit>  .

the largest proportion of go assigned sequences fell into broad categories for all three major go functional domains as presented in fig  <dig>  within the biological process, 31% and 32% of assignments corresponded to "cellular process"  and "metabolic process  respectively, followed by the "localization"  and "establishment of localization"  go categories. furthermore, the matches of molecular function terms were most prevalent within the "binding"  and "catalytic activity" , followed by the categories "structural molecule activity"  and "transporter activity" . finally for the cellular component go the most evident matches were within the "cell part"  and "cell"  terms, followed by "organelle"  and "macromolecular complex" . together, these go classes accounted for most of the assignable transcripts, and may represent a general gene expression profile signature for b. azoricus from the lucky strike hydrothermal vent field.

the contigs without any homology may correspond to one of the following categories: a) novel or diverged amino acid coding sequences that are specific to bathymodiolus species, b) represent mostly 3' or 5' untranslated regions  that would lack protein matches as they are non-coding or c) contain sequences to short to result in significant hits.

despite that the gene ontology project is aimed at describing gene product characteristics and gene product annotation data, by ways of a direct acyclic graph  structure of controlled vocabularies, the process of assigning go terms to gene products might prove difficult given the current go structured vocabulary and the systematic relationship between the go terms. this follows from the fact that go describes how gene products behave in a cellular context and thus a gene product might be associated with or located in one or more cellular components; it is active in one or more biological processes, during which it performs one or more molecular functions.

immunity, stress and bacterial genes in bathymodiolus azoricus gills
the innate immune system acts to protect the individual from invasive bacteria, viruses, and eukaryotic pathogens by detecting molecular signatures of infection and initiating effector responses. it probably originated early in animal phylogeny and is intimately related with wound healing and tissue maintenance functions among invertebrates  <cit> . this defense system is essential for the survival of invertebrates which do not possess immunoglobulins and rely on unique capabilities to detect and respond to microbe associated molecular patterns  such as lipopolysaccharides , lipoteichoic acids, lipoproteins, peptidoglycan  and  β-d-glucans  <cit>  present on the cell surface of microorganisms. upon recognition of the mamps, signal transduction molecules and transcription factors are set to mediate and control the expression of immune effector molecules, for example, the antimicrobial peptides. the vent mussel b. azoricus has been the subject of previous studies, in our laboratory, aiming at the characterization of its cellular and humoral immune reactions as a means to better understand physiological adaptations to vent environments. given the limited immune gene expression information available for this non-conventional model organism, a query-based strategy was used to identify coding sequences within the deepseavent database, for the selection and retrieval of nucleic acid information of cdnas corresponding to genes potentially involved in immune and inflammatory reactions. therefore, the selection of candidate genes presented in table  <dig> was based on queries using specific descriptors matching immunity and inflammation-related criteria allowing thus the identification and retrieval of relevant cdna sequences from the transcriptome library.

the identification of putative genes was based on go annotation and querying the deepseavent database
a number of putative genes which have not previously been identified in b. azoricus were classified within the context of go representation and to one of the following immune categories: immune recognition, signal transduction, transcription and effector molecules , providing thus a classification resource for the investigation of specific processes, functions or cellular structures involved in animal physiological responses, particularly immune and stress-related responses, as demonstrated for the de novo analysis of the acropora millepora larval transcriptome  <cit> .

subsequently, the physical counterpart of these putative genes was confirmed by semi-quantitative reverse transcription-pcr, using primers specifically designed on the basis of the newly identified est sequences and using the same source of cdna as for  <dig> pyrosequencing. consequently,  <dig> sequencing artefacts could be discarded on the assumption that pcr amplifications of partial cdna of the candidate genes were successfully obtained. even though the transcriptome library was normalized, it is still qualitatively possible to visualize different cdna abundance as pcr amplifications revealed different amplicon intensities for some of the confirmed genes, presumably due to different mrnas prevalence in the normalized cdna library . this was further analyzed by quantitative pcr  utilizing non-normalized cdna as template for amplification of immune-related genes. indeed, results demonstrated the differential abundance of transcripts in the non-normalized transcriptome library confirming that genes tested in our study are not expressed at the same level and are likely representing the transcriptional activity at the time animals were collected from the bottom of the sea . particularly, the metal-binding metallothionein gene was highly expressed in the non-normalized transcriptome library, probably reflecting the physiological need for continuous production of this protein to overcome the metal stress occurring at vent sites and to regulate intracellular levels of metals. other immune response representatives also showed increased levels of expression as compared to the remaining genes studied. these include immune recognition molecule aggrecan and c-lectin, cell signalling molecule integrin, signal transduction complex component irak, and antibacterial protein defensin, , all providing evidence of a functional immune system in b. azoricus.

the selected putative genes are being currently investigated under controlled conditions in our laboratory, to assess the effect of long-term acclimatization in aquaria at atmospheric pressure, the effect of de novo hyperbaric stimulations in the ipocamp chamber and the effect of exposure to marine vibrio bacteria, on b. azoricus transcript profiling experiments  <cit> .

furthermore, this search-based analysis was also particularly important to determine a "bacterial fingerprint" in b. azoricus gill tissues, since we expected the vent mussel to have a rich microorganismal community and more specifically a substantial accumulation of endosymbiont bacteria within its gill tissues. the selection of poly-a rna as the starting material for our transcriptome library likely eliminated many potential microbial sequences. however,  <dig>  contigs in deepseavent presented protein match hits to bacterial phylotypes, supporting the evidence for the presence of bacteria in gill tissues of b. azoricus, and representing thus a potential bacterial fingerprint, most likely of chemoautotrophic nature, in deep-sea hydrothermal vent mussels. additionally, a number of bacterial sequences were ascribed to several non-cultured marine bacteria, to chemolithoautotrophic, sulfur- or methane-oxidizing bacteria as evidenced, for instance, by the presence of the soxb, soxy, soxh, methane monooxygenase, biopolymer transport protein exbd/tolr genes when querying our database using interpro or go terms as "methane" or "sulfur". similarly, searches using the genera calyptogena and riftia names returned several hundreds of putative protein sequences, the majority of which associated to endosymbionts from the giant hydrothermal vesicomyid clam and vestimentiferan tubeworm, respectively from the east pacific rise hydrothermal region.

such an approach has the potential to reveal sequences that have apparent bacterial origin including many genera of species that have been associated with mussel pathogens or as normal flora in the gut system  <cit> . in this case, mutualistic interaction between symbiont bacteria and their animal hosts may be taken to another level of analysis based on transcriptome sequencing. new genes involved in host recognition of endosymbionts and immune-effector mechanisms underlying host defense responses may shed light into understanding mutualism better and provide explanations as to how endosymbiont bacteria, living inside the bacteriocytes of vent mussels, are able to evade immune recognition, during early stages of acquisition and how mutualism is maintained. one possible explanation might lie within the immune response itself, where constitutive immune responses of bacteriocytes towards the dense population of endosymbionts, might be expressed at different levels of the rest of the body and therefore, keeping endosymbionts under control  <cit> . this hypothesis is currently under experimental consideration in our laboratory.

deep-sea vent mussel comparison to shallow water mussel
the deepseavent database was compared to mytibase, a recently created est database from the shallow water mussel, mytilus galloprovincialis  <cit> . the comparison was restricted to the amino-acid sequences with interpro annotation from both databases and by setting the blast parameters to an e-value of 10- <dig> and bit scores ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  under such conditions  <dig>  and  <dig>  amino-acid sequences, respectively, were identified. furthermore, the shared amino-acid sequences were analyzed in relation to the distribution of go functional annotation categories, using the  <dig>  sequences retrieved with a bit score of  <dig>  the highest percentage of common go-annotated sequences  between the two databases corresponded to the categories, cell killing, cellular component biogenesis, macromolecular complex and structural molecule activity .

biological process
vs
cellular component
molecular function
the fixed e-value 10- <dig> was kept for three different bit-scores . the number of contigs with go ontology assignments shared between both databases is shown together with respective shared percentage

the biological significance of these findings was not immediately evaluated due the comparatively low amount of amino-acid sequences available in the mytibase as compared to deepseavent. however, representatives of broad go categories are present in both mytibase and deepseavent databases, suggesting that mussels originated from distinct marine habitat may share common biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions.

such inter-database computational analyses offers now the potential to unravel genes specifically involved in hydrostatic pressure and chemosynthetic environmental adaptations by comparing transcriptome profiles from two closely related mytilid family members living in very distinct marine habitats.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of our results with recently published transcriptomic studies on b. azoricus confirms the efficacy of  <dig> sequencing to reveal a large number of putative transcripts and significantly improve the genomic knowledge on this deep sea animal. the use of  <dig> pyrosequencing to develop a new est collection containing potentially  <dig>  new transcripts provides a new resource for genome-wide association studies of vent mussel physiological variations, which is the focus of ongoing projects in our laboratory, addressing in particular the molecular adaptation mechanisms of b. azoricus to deep-sea hydrothermal vent environments. this new resource now gathered in the deepseavent database will set the stage for innovative work and the establishment of large scale expression studies to validate the deep-sea vent mussel as a bone fide experimental model to study the biology of adaptation to deep-sea hydrothermal vent environments.

