BACKGROUND
in most day to day situations, we are exposed to many different sound inputs simultaneously. during encoding and perception, these concurring sound inputs interact with each other. a well known phenomenon in this regard is the elevation of the hearing threshold for a test sound in presence of a competing sound. this phenomenon, called 'simultaneous masking'  <cit> , can be divided into two categories depending on whether test signal and competing sound are presented to the same ear  or to different ears . in humans, simultaneous masking has been investigated in a series of psychoacoustical experiments  <cit> . however, the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms remain unclear.

in the case of ipsi-lateral masking, interactions already take place at the cochlear level, thus this type of masking is often referred to as 'peripheral masking'  <cit> . the traveling wave induced by a test signal overlaps with the deflection pattern produced by the masker on the basilar membrane. thus, the simultaneously presented masker distorts the auditory nerve discharges elicited by the test signal. a magnetoencephalography  study  <cit>  investigated the auditory evoked responses elicited by the test tone presented together with continuous band-eliminated noises characterized by different eliminated frequency sections centered around test tone frequency during ipsi-lateral masking. band-eliminated noises with relatively narrow eliminated bands caused smaller n1m  responses as compared to band-eliminated noises with wider eliminated bands; the n1m response was interpreted as reflection of the ipsi-lateral masking effect.

during contra-lateral simultaneous masking, signal and masker are presented to opposite ears; therefore, interactions can only take place in the central auditory pathway. thus, this type of masking is referred to as 'central masking'  <cit> . the threshold shift produced by contra-lateral masking is much smaller compared to ipsi-lateral masking. a maximal shift was observed when a tonal masker similar in frequency to the test tone was presented to the contra-lateral ear  <cit> . an electroencephalographic experiment  <cit>  showed that the auditory steady state response , which is considered to have a primary auditory cortex origin  <cit> , became smaller when contra-laterally presented continuous maskers became louder. these results indicated that contra-lateral masking effects can be observed also in primary auditory cortex. however, an meg study  <cit>  showed that contra-laterally presented continuous noise did not cause a significant n1m decrement in response to the test tone. both studies adopted similar broadband noises as maskers, but test stimuli differed. in the former study,  <dig>  ms square pulses at a rate of  <dig> hz were presented, whereas the latter study used a  <dig> hz square wave tone. hence, the different contra-lateral masking effects observed between studies might have been caused by the different generators of assr  and the n1m  as well as by the different spectral and temporal features of the test stimuli.

both spectral and temporal features of test stimuli and maskers might play an important role for simultaneous masking effects. in a psychoacoustical experiment, fletcher  <cit>  presented a test pure tone stimulus simultaneously with a narrow-band noise characterized by a pass-band centered at the pure tone frequency. the hearing threshold for the test tone increased until the pass-band of the narrow-band noise reached a certain bandwidth : beyond that bandwidth, the hearing threshold remained constant. fletcher concluded that only those parts of the noise close in spectral content to the test tone frequency could have contributed to the elevation of the hearing threshold irrespective of temporal sound features. however, temporal features of sound signals might also influence the simultaneous masking effect  <cit> .

recent neuroimaging techniques revealed functional hemispheric asymmetries of spectral and temporal neural processing. a left hemispheric dominance for temporal processing and a right hemispheric dominance for spectral processing were observed by means of positron emission tomography  and functional magnetic resonance imaging . in psychoacoustical experiments  <cit> , it has been shown that both temporal and spectral processing are important for the encoding of the test stimulus during simultaneous masking. thus, according to the results of pet and fmri  <cit> , simultaneous masking effects might differ between left and the right hemispheres. however, the exact underlying neural mechanisms and the hemispheric differences related to simultaneous masking remain elusive.

the goals of the present study were:  to investigate interactions between auditory neurons characterized by similar or different receptive fields during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking, and  to investigate the hemispheric differences in neural activities in human auditory cortex during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking by means of meg. the results of this study were expected to yield new information about underlying neural mechanisms and hemispheric differences for the processing of complex sound stimuli during simultaneous masking.

RESULTS
an example of individual magnetic field waveforms  for the no masking condition  demonstrates the n1m response peaking approximately  <dig> ms after the onset of the test stimulus  as most pronounced component of the auditory evoked fields. p1m waves  were also visible, but small and variable across subjects. thus, in the present study, we focused on the n1m response. the source waveforms also exhibited the p1m-n1m response complex to the onset of the ts . an example of individual magnetic field waveforms  for the assr  for the no masking condition is displayed in figure 1d. the signals exhibit the transient evoked gamma-band response and the development of the assr after ts onset . the waveforms show clear polarity reversal. even though the field amplitudes were smaller compared to the n1m, the iso-contour plots of the magnetic field distribution demonstrates a pattern typically resulting from dipolar sources .

the goodness of fit of the equivalent current dipoles  for n1m and assr in the control condition was above 90% for all participants. the grand averaged ecd source locations  in y-z-plane  and y-x-plane  demonstrated a significant separation between n1m and assr sources in the medial-lateral  direction  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , right hemisphere: t =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). in both hemispheres, assr sources were located significantly more medial than n1m sources, and both assr and n1m sources were located more anterior in the right hemisphere  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , assr: t =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

the grand averaged source strength waveforms elicited by ts presented to left and right ears for each masking condition across all subjects are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. the figures exhibit the p1m-n1m response complexes to the onset of the ts for the contra-lateral and the control condition. in case of ipsi-lateral masking, n1m responses were small and delayed.

ipsi-lateral masking
the means of the normalized n1m and assr source strength decrements obtained in the ipsi-lateral condition are displayed in figure  <dig> with lower and upper 95% confidence limits. a repeated measures analysis of variance  applied to normalized n1m source strength decrements during ipsi-lateral masking resulted in significant main effects for ts-type  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ) and hemisphere  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ), as well as a significant interaction between ts-type and hemisphere  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). the stimulation side had no effect on these significant differences. these findings indicate that larger normalized n1m decrements were obtained for the pass-band stimulus  compared to the stop-band stimulus , and for the right hemisphere compared to the left. this result means that the ipsi-lateral masking effect on the n1m was more effective when stimulus and masker shared spectral content, and less effective when stimulus and masker were different in spectrum. in addition, the ipsi-lateral masking effect on n1m was stronger in the right hemisphere, and this hemispheric difference was independent of stimulation side. the significant interaction between ts-type and hemisphere shows that this hemispheric difference was mainly caused by sb.

a repeated measures anova applied to normalized assr source strength decrements during ipsi-lateral masking resulted in a significant main effect for ts-type  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) and stimulation-side  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ); however, neither a significant main effect for hemisphere nor an interaction was found. these findings indicate that similar n1m and assr decrement patterns were obtained for ts-type. however, contrary to the n1m decrement pattern, assr decrements did not show a significant hemispheric difference, but a significant difference for stimulation-side. this result means that the ipsi-lateral masking effect on the assr was stronger when stimulus and masker were presented to the left ear, and this stimulation-side difference was not hemisphere specific.

contra-lateral masking
the means of the normalized n1m and assr source strength decrements across subjects for the contra-lateral masking condition are presented in figure  <dig>  a repeated measures anova applied to the normalized n1m source strength decrements during contra-lateral masking resulted in significant main effects for ts-type  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) and hemisphere  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ), as well as a significant interaction between ts-type and hemisphere  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). these findings indicated that the n1m decrement pattern observed during contra-lateral masking was identical to the n1m decrement pattern observed during ipsi-lateral masking, even though the masking effects during contra-lateral masking were far smaller than during ipsi-lateral masking. contra-lateral masking effects were larger for the test sound of similar frequency and for the right hemisphere. this hemispheric difference was independent of stimulation side.

the normalized assr decrement during contra-lateral masking was significantly different from zero  in all conditions . this means that the assr was significantly smaller during contra-lateral masking compared to the control condition, even though the contra-lateral masking effect was far smaller compared to ipsi-lateral masking. a repeated measures anova applied to the assr ratios during contra-lateral masking revealed neither a significant main effect nor a significant interaction.

threshold shift
the means of the threshold shifts obtained during ipsi- and contra-lateral masking are displayed in figure  <dig>  a repeated measures anova applied to ipsi-lateral masking resulted in a significant main effect for ts-type  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ). no significant main effect for stimulation-side and no significant interaction were found. the ipsi-lateral masking effect was stronger for pb. a repeated measures anova applied to contra-lateral masking also resulted in a significant main effect for ts-type  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ), but neither a significant effect for stimulus-side nor an interaction were found. the contra-lateral masking effects were far smaller than the ipsi-lateral masking effects; however, masking patterns were similar.

discussion
by using a complex stimulus design and by combining  <dig> hz amplitude-modulated test stimuli of different spectral characteristics  with a comb-filtered noise  masker, in this study we were able to simultaneously examine both assr  and n1m . the results offer new insights into auditory neural interactions and hemispheric differences during simultaneous masking. these interactions depended on:  the frequency components of the stimuli,  level of the auditory system , and  the hemisphere. there were two main findings. first, we observed that n1m and assr decrements during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking depended on spectral differences between masker and test stimulus. second, we obtained an inter-hemispheric difference for n1m response during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking.

ipsi- and contra-lateral masking
in case of ipsi-lateral masking, both peripheral and central auditory pathways contribute to the masking effect. by contrast, in the case of contra-lateral masking, only neural interactions in the central auditory pathway contribute to the masking effect. consequently, stronger masking effects should be expected for ipsi-lateral masking. our meg and behavioral results indeed confirm this hypothesis: significantly stronger masking effects on n1m and assr were found for ipsi-lateral compared to contra-lateral masking. during ipsi-lateral masking, displacements of the basilar membrane interact due to simultaneous presentation of ts and cfn, and such interactions along the basilar membrane are primarily responsible for n1m and assr decrements. however, overlapping basilar membrane displacements cannot explain the n1m and assr decrements observed during contra-lateral masking as masker and test sounds were presented to different ears. therefore, we assume that these decrements were caused by neural interactions in the central auditory pathway. the significant assr decrements during contra-lateral masking imply that inhibitory neural interactions had already taken place in primary auditory cortex. however, it is possible that the central masking effects occurred at lower level, as anatomical studies in cat have shown that the superior olivary complex is the primary binaural interfering station  <cit> .

influence of spectral components
n1m and assr decrements were more pronounced for pb compared to sb during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking. in case of ipsi-lateral masking, these different decrements between pb and sb could be explained by the critical band concept suggested by fletcher  <cit> . those parts of the basilar membrane corresponding to the pb frequencies were already displaced by the continuous cfn overlapping in frequency content with the pb stimulus. this overlap resulted in smaller evoked responses elicited by pb compared to sb, which had less overlapping frequencies with the cfn. these findings support the results of a previous meg study showing that n1m amplitude became smaller with increasing frequency overlap between masker and test tone  <cit> .

during contra-lateral masking, binaural interactions between auditory neurons activated by left and right ear stimulations contributed to the significant n1m decrements. our results showed significantly different n1m decrements between pb and sb. this result indicates that inhibitory neural interactions also depended on the frequency similarities between masker and test stimulus during contra-lateral masking. in accordance with previous psychoacoustical work  <cit> , our meg and behavioral data showed that the strongest masking effect was observed when a similar frequency sound was presented as masker to the opposite ear.

hemispheric differences
normalized n1m decrements were significantly smaller in the left hemisphere during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking. this result indicated that the left hemisphere might play a dominant role for sound processing in noisy environments. recent neuroimaging studies  <cit>  suggested a left hemispheric dominance for temporal and a right hemispheric dominance for spectral processing. the left hemispheric dominance for temporal processing can be considered as important during ipsi- and contra-lateral masking because temporal processing is essential for the segregation of target sounds from non-target sounds  <cit> . the temporal structure of the test signals might play an important role for sound detection. in the present study, test stimuli were characterized by a modulation envelope similar to a speech signal, whereas the masker was not. hence, temporal cues might play an important role for the perception and the segregation of the test stimuli during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking. temporal cues are likely dominantly processed in the left hemisphere. that would lead to larger neural activities and smaller masking effects in the left hemisphere.

the hemispheric difference in auditory neural activities might be also explained by the 'asymmetric sampling in time' concept as suggested by poeppel  <cit> . the author assumed that the left human auditory cortex has shorter temporal integration windows , whereas the auditory cortex of the right hemisphere needs longer time windows  to extract auditory information from the signal. an fmri study  <cit>  supported the hypothesis by demonstrating that the activities in the higher-order superior temporal sulci of left and right hemisphere depended on the modulation rate of the sound signals. under natural circumstances, the quick analysis of deviant sound signals in noisy environments is essential for survival . therefore, the finer temporal resolution in the left hemisphere would play an important role for the monitoring and the detection of deviant sound signals in noisy situations. the results also showed that hemispheric differences during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking were mainly caused by sb. therefore, spectral cues seem to be helpful for the left hemisphere to separate signal from noise. this might indicate that spectral differences between signal and noise allow quick and rough segregation of sound signals in noisy environments in the left hemisphere by applying short temporal integration windows at the expense of slow and fine frequency analysis, which is dominantly accomplished in the right hemisphere. thus, these results support the 'asymmetric sampling in time' concept by demonstrating that the masker affects the n1m response less in the left hemisphere compared to the right.

a previous meg study  <cit>  demonstrated that the n1m amplitude was significantly larger in the contra-lateral hemisphere, and another meg study  <cit>  showed right hemispheric laterality of the assr in addition to the effect of stimulation side. these results seem to be contradictory to the results obtained in the present study. here, in order to clarify masking effects, we normalized n1m and assr source strengths during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking with respect to the source strengths obtained in the control condition in left and right hemispheres individually. hence, the contra-lateral n1m dominance and the right hemispheric assr laterality, which were obtained in the control condition, do not contribute to the hemispheric differences reported here.

n1m decrements during contra-lateral masking
we observed n1m decrements during contra-lateral masking, whereas in another meg study  <cit>  this effect did not reach significance. several explanations for this apparent discrepancy appear conceivable: first, in the previous study  <cit> , a shorter time interval between stimulus onsets was used . our longer time interval of  <dig> – <dig>  s is expected to result in larger n1m source strengths, which in turn might have lead to the observed higher sensitivity of the n1m decrements during contra-lateral masking. second, we used complex stimuli consisting of several frequency components  instead of the pure tone used in the previous meg study  <cit> . these comparably complex stimuli might have also contributed to the increment in n1m source strength, because complex sounds activate more neurons in non-primary auditory cortex than pure tones  <cit> . third, we used a cfn composed of narrowly defined band-passed noises as masker. compared to the broadband noise used in the previous meg study  <cit> , the cfn might selectively have activated neurons that correspond to the pass-band frequencies of the cfn. such frequency specific neural activities elicited by the contra-laterally presented cfn might have more efficiently contributed to the significant n1m decrements we have observed here. fourth, in the present study, we used amplitude-modulated sounds characterized by specific temporal structures causing temporal encoding corresponding to the stimulus envelopes. temporal neural activities elicited by the amplitude-modulated sounds might have caused the significant n1m decrements observed in the present study, as galambos and makeig  <cit>  showed significant contra-lateral masking effects by presenting a sound with a specific temporal feature.

right ear advantage
assr decrements were significantly different between ears during ipsi-lateral masking: decrements were more pronounced for left compared to right ear stimulation. the less pronounced assr decrements during ipsi-lateral masking might reflect the so-called 'right ear advantage' suggested by a previous study  <cit> . the author proposed that the right ear advantage was due to the amount of efferent inhibition, which is relatively small in right compared to left ear stimulation. thus, the smaller number of inhibitory efferent neurons in the right ear might cause the less pronounced assr decrements during ipsi-lateral masking.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we have observed smaller n1m decrements in the left hemisphere during both ipsi- and contra-lateral masking. this suggests left hemispheric dominance for auditory processing in noisy environments. as test stimuli, we used amplitude-modulated sounds characterized by 'fine structure' and 'envelope' at the same time. these sounds are similar to speech signals, but do not carry speech information  <cit> . therefore, our results may be interpreted as reflection of basic hemispheric specialization contributing to higher-level auditory analysis such as speech processing in noisy environments.

