BACKGROUND
α-dystroglycan  is the peripheral subunit of the dg complex that lies at the basement membrane/sarcolemma cellular crossroad and that is important for muscle fibers’ stability. α-dg glycosylation pattern is considered crucial for its function in terms of laminin binding affinity, and a disruption of the α-dg/laminin network is at the basis of a group of diseases spanning from the severe congenital to the much milder limb-girdle muscular dystrophies, defined as secondary dystroglycanopathies  <cit> .

the dg complex is composed of two subunits  that are liberated upon an early processing step of a unique precursor of  <dig> aa in humans , that is thought to take place within the endoplasmic reticulum right after translation. the α-dg is an extracellular protein, highly and heterogenously glycosylated, whilst the β-dg subunit is transmembrane. a biochemical analysis of the α-dg subunit reveals a structural organization characterized by two terminal globular portions separated by an elongated central section   <cit> . although a few glycosylation sites have been proposed and/or localized within the two globular domains of α-dg, most of the o-linked oligasaccharidic chains protrude from thr and ser residues placed within the central mucin-like domain  <cit> .

the whole maturation process of α-dg is known to be highly regulated and to take place in the typical subcellular locations, where multiple enzymes are required for the post-translational modification of the α-dg core protein  <cit> . an ever growing list of acclaimed, putative or uncharacterized glycosyltransferases  is thought to be involved in the decoration of α-dg along the endoplasmic reticulum and the golgi apparatus. it is quite unlikely that α-dg would represent the unique target of such a large number of enzymes  <cit> . nevertheless, a long list of nonsense or missense mutations affecting these enzymes seems to lead to muscular dystrophy phenotypes whose major molecular trait is believed to be a reduction of α-dg functionality, depending on the alteration of its glycosylation shell. the general concept is that a hypoglycosylated α-dg would be less active in binding laminin- <dig>  or other matrix binding partners, thus provoking a reduction of the overall stability of the sarcolemma preceding the onset of inflammation, fibrosis and necrosis typical of many severe muscular dystrophies.

on such premise, it is rather clear that the mucin-like central section of α-dg represents its most interesting functional hot spot. recently, several works have highlighted specific thr  residues as glycosylation sites and/or identified the structure of the modifying saccharides  <cit> . however, three-dimensional structures referring to this specific domain of α-dg alone or in complex with laminin or other ligands are not available yet.

an approach that has been particularly successful in our lab for the study of the subdomain organization of α- and β-dg subunits, is represented by the expression of unmodified recombinant peptides spanning portions or isolated subdomains of both the dg subunits  <cit> . therefore, we have attempted a similar approach for the study of the mucin-like portion of α-dg. we have been able to obtain reasonable amounts of a recombinant protein spanning the entire mucin-like portion of human α-dg in a soluble fashion, and we have characterized its conformation with a series of biophysical techniques. such recombinant peptide may be useful and pave the way for further biochemical and biotechnological studies on this important domain of α-dg.

RESULTS
the mucin-like domain cannot be quantitatively obtained in a glycosylated fashion from eukaryotic cells and therefore we decided to apply our e. coli-based recombinant approach already used for the expression and purification of other dg domains  <cit> . the primary structure of the portion of human α-dg under analysis, including the arg-val site that we have found to be sensitive to proteases , is reported in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

samples collected after each step of the expression and purification protocol were separated by sds-page . it is noteworthy that the electrophoretic mobility of the purified mucin-like domain, α-dg, is much lower than expected on the basis of its molecular mass as reported for natively unfolded proteins  <cit> .

the protein yield is good , and the full-length protein is relatively stable, since it can be submitted to thrombin digestion and retrieved in a thioredoxin-free form. in addition, the protein remains soluble during all the purification steps. nevertheless, it is evident a c-terminal processing event  that is likely to take place within the e. coli cells, and that we have also observed after repeated cycles of freezing and thawing .

in order to further characterize the two protein bands observed in sds-page, we have employed capillary electrophoresis analytical techniques coupled with esi -ion trap mass spectrometry detection . the total ion current  ce-ms profile of the purified α-dg mucin-like domain, α-dg, is characterized by an intense wide peak in a migration window within a  <dig> - <dig>  min time range, containing a small unresolved peak at the front . the deconvolution of the esi mass spectrum registered between  <dig>  and  <dig>  min  revealed the presence of two protein species in the main peak, corresponding to the full-length α-dg  and to its truncated form devoid of the c-terminal fragment , confirming the occurrence of a proteolytic cleavage. to prevent possible degradation due to dilution, a very concentrated sample was analyzed, which produced the loss of resolution power that usually characterizes ce separations. the analysis of the esi mass spectrum registered between  <dig>  and  <dig>  min  also enabled identification of the shed c-terminal fragment . the panel ii in figure  <dig> shows the relative deconvoluted esi mass spectrum.

to evaluate the stability of the mucin-like peptide, we have analyzed its behavior by dynamic light scattering  as a function of temperature. in table  <dig>  the z-average  and polydispersity index , a measure of the distribution of the molecular masses, as well as the corresponding peak size, intensity  and mass  values are reported; the intensity peak distribution is also shown in figure 3a. the experimental diameter of the full length α-dg, associated to the lower peak size , was similar to the theoretical one, calculated on the basis of its molecular weight . the presence of aggregates, represented by the higher peak of figure 3a, accounts for only 1% of the total mass contribution to the scattered light of the protein solution.
α-dystroglycan

the protein melting point is defined as the temperature at which the protein is fully denatured. the change in size that accompanies the protein denaturation is identified using dls techniques. figure 3b shows the temperature dependent z-average diameter and scattered intensity of α-dg in phosphate buffered saline . although α-dg lacks secondary structure elements, as estimated by submitting its primary structure to several different softwares available for secondary structure prediction , the observation that the z-average diameter and scattering intensity values remain constant at temperatures lower than 40°c suggests the presence of a defined conformation of the protein; above this temperature the mean dimension of the protein increases exponentially, thus indicating the formation of denatured aggregates.

the fluorescence emission at 280 nm and the absorbance spectra of α-dg are reported in figure 4a and b. lacking tryptophan and phenylalanine residues, the intensities measured were those of the single tyrosine residue in position  <dig> , with an absorbance and fluorescence maximum at  <dig> and 307 nm, respectively.

finally, the change in fluorescence intensity of α-dg as a function of guanidine hydrochloride concentration is reported in figure 4c. the protein shows an early decrease of fluorescence intensity upon unfolding, and the process seems to be already concluded at low guanidine concentration , thus confirming the unstable nature of the domain.

overall, both dls and the observed fluorescence behavior are in line with the idea that the recombinant mucin-like domain still possesses some sort of defined conformation at room temperature, although displaying a low stability as such conformation can be rapidly lost when increasing the temperature and/or the chaotropic agent concentration.

moreover, the reduced stability of the mucin-like peptide has been also confirmed by limited proteolysis at room temperature. trypsin-based limited proteolysis of the mucin-like domain completely disrupts the protein in one hour , in a fashion that is reminiscent of what we have observed for the natively unfolded n-terminal β-dg domain  <cit> . it should be noted that typically stable proteins, including the c-terminal domain of α-dystroglycan, are resistant to limited proteolysis for up to 3 hours or longer  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the data reported in this paper show that the recombinant mucin-like domain of α-dg, which we have produced in a non-glycosylated form, although quite unstable can be expressed and purified in reasonable amounts. our results seem to be in line with what previously observed with ovine submaxillary mucin, in which the apomucin form collapses from an extended conformation when o-galnac o-glycosylation is removed  <cit> .

although our unglycosylated mucin-like peptide is clearly different from hypoglycosylated α-dg found in patients, may our results add some new insight into the current molecular view of dystroglycanopathies?

in muscles affected by dystroglycanopathies, α-dg is still localized at the sarcolemma, due to the non-covalent and sugar-independent interaction with the β-subunit  <cit> . the current molecular view of dystroglycanopathies implies that the observed reduction in sarcolemma stability would originate from the reduction of the binding affinity displayed by α-dg towards laminin, an event whose molecular basis is represented by an alteration of the o-mannosylated α-dg moieties and not by its dramatic hypoglycosylation. in addition, no evidence have been collected so far on the fact that the hypoglycosylated α-dg isoform found in patients affected by dystroglycanopathies would be significantly destabilized and therefore exposed to preferential proteolysis. of course, studies aiming at the analysis of the biochemical characteristics and stability of these hypoglycosylated α-dg molecules are warranted in order to further clarify this interesting point.

however, surely an extreme, but fascinating, view emerging from the data herein reported, is that α-dg glycosylation would be required primarily for stabilizing the conformation of its mucin-like domain , as also proposed by tran and colleagues  <cit> , and secondarily for laminin binding. although in the dystroglycanopathies currently known it is more common to observe a reduction of some specific o-man  rather than of o-galnac  glycans, it is not unreasonable to foresee still unidentified cases of dystroglycanopathy in which a scenario would emerge of a significantly reduced level of glycosylation and consequent destabilization of the hypoglycosylated α-dg molecule.

interestingly, 20 years ago protease inhibitors  were already tested in japan for their potential beneficial effect on duchenne mice  and patients with some encouraging results  <cit> . a similar action has been recently observed using batimastat   <cit> . perhaps, in the future these drugs might be also tried more specifically on mouse models or patients affected by dystroglycanopathies, although a dangerous undesired effect of these protease inhibitors could be to inhibit the furin-driven proteolysis of the n-terminal domain of α-dg that seems to represent a necessary step along its maturation pathway  <cit> .

last but not least, from an exquisitely experimental point of view, our novel recombinant peptide may represent an interesting target to be employed to test in vitro the enzymatic action of pomt <dig> and pomt <dig>  the first known players along the α-dg glycosylation cascade  <cit> .

