BACKGROUND
moulting is a cyclic process that occurs in all arthropods, from insects to crustaceans, and is essential for growth, reproduction and metamorphosis. the crustacean moult cycle encompasses the period between two successive moults and has been subdivided into  <dig> major stages; intermoult, pre-moult, ecdysis, and post-moult  <cit> . the intermoult period is the longest stage of the moult cycle, during which muscle regeneration and the accumulation of energy reserves such as glycogen and lipids occurs  <cit> . pre-moult sees the atrophy of somatic muscle, the resorption of the old exoskeleton, and the formation of a new exoskeleton in preparation for the onset of ecdysis  <cit> . ecdysis, or the moult itself, involves the shedding of the exoskeleton through a rapid uptake of water from the environment, causing the exoskeleton to rupture  <cit> . further water uptake occurs during post-moult facilitating the expansion of the new, still soft, exoskeleton; this expansion is essential for the growth of the animal. exoskeletal hardening, via sclerotization and mineralisation, then takes place  <cit> .

moulting is regulated by an elaborate interplay of hormones, including those which promote, and those which negatively regulate moulting. among the hormones involved in the induction of moulting are two families of nonpeptidergic hormones: the steroids , and the sesquiterpenoids  and crustacean methyl farnesoate )  <cit> . ecdysteroids initiate and coordinate each moult, and are synthesised and secreted by the y-organs  <cit> . mf is synthesised by the mandibular organs, and has been implicated in the regulation of crustacean morphogenesis  <cit> , metamorphosis  <cit> , reproduction  <cit>  and moulting  <cit> . mf has been shown to directly stimulate the secretion of ecdysteroids in cancer magister y-organs  <cit> . additionally, the duration of premoult was significantly reduced in the prawn penaeus setiferus that had been implanted with mandibular organs from c. magister  <cit> .

the negative regulatory centre in crustaceans is the sinus gland/x-organ complex, a neurohaemal organ located in the eyestalk  <cit> . the sinus gland/x-organ complex is responsible for the synthesis and storage of a number of inhibitory neuroendocrine hormones, including the moult-inhibiting hormone , mandibular-organ inhibiting hormone  and crustacean hyperglycaemic hormone   <cit> . the mih of crustaceans continually inhibits ecdysteroid secretion by the y-organs whereby synthesis of ecdysteroids and subsequent moulting occur only after mih secretion ceases  <cit> . chh, however, plays a multifunctional role as it is central to carbohydrate metabolism, is involved in moult regulation, reproduction, and osmoregulatory function  <cit> . it has been shown to inhibit ecdysteroid synthesis within the y-organs of carcinus maenas   <cit> . furthermore, a synergistic action of suppression of ecdysteroid synthesis in the y-organ has also been observed to occur when mih and chh are incubated together  <cit> . chh receptors have been found on y-organ cells  <cit> , suggesting a physiologically relevant role for chh in the regulation of ecdysteroid synthesis. chh has also been shown to influence the iso-osmotic uptake of water during ecdysis, which facilitates body expansion enabling somatic growth  <cit> . regulation of mf synthesis is negatively controlled by moih  <cit> , and is thought to occur, in part, through the inhibition of the enzyme farnesoic acid o-methyltransferase  that catalyses the final step in the mf biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . eyestalk ablation has traditionally been used to induce moulting. this results in a reduction of circulating mih and therefore promotes the production of ecdysteroids. however, while eyestalk ablation can be effective at inducing moulting, it also leads to lethal ecdysis in some species  <cit> .

moulting is a complex process that is affected by a range of external and internal factors including temperature, photoperiod, nutritional state and eyestalk integrity. in order to explore the molecular events associated with the moulting process, microarray technology has been implemented to investigate differential gene expression in portunus pelagicus at various stages of the moult cycle. microarray technology offers the potential to examine the expression patterns of many genes simultaneously, thus gaining a more comprehensive understanding of gene function, interaction, and regulation. this has enabled both the assessment of expression profiles of known genes, and the discovery of new genes that play a role in the moult cycle of crustaceans. p. pelagicus  was used as a model species to study moulting as its life cycle has been closed at the bribie island research centre , eliminating the need for wild caught animals.

RESULTS
overview of p. pelagicus est sequence distribution
a total of  <dig> clones were sequenced from the cdna libraries used to construct the p. pelagicus cdna arrays. prior to array printing,  <dig> of these were sequenced in order to determine the quality of each cdna library. factors such as sequence length and redundancy were considered in the assessment. a 30% redundancy of  <dig> s rrna was determined in the initial sequencing stage. the proportion of  <dig> s rrna was greatly reduced  by screening the libraries prior to printing the arrays, demonstrating the successful removal of  <dig> s rrna from the original cdna libraries. the majority of the sequencing however, was carried out subsequent to microarray analysis to identify genes that demonstrated differential expression profiles across the moult cycle.  <dig> clones were randomly selected from a list that displayed differential expression  patterns between moult stages. this approach enabled the identification of genes likely to be involved in, and important for, crustacean moulting. the  <dig> cdnas were assembled in sequencher based on sequence similarity; this resulted in  <dig> singletons and  <dig> contigs, representing  <dig> unique putative genes. sequence annotation was via blastn, blastx and pfam domain analysis. the expressed gene sequences were grouped according to the following biological functions: cuticular proteins associated with arthropod exoskeletons, famet, proteins belonging to the hemocyanin gene family , lectins , proteins relevant to lipid metabolism , mitochondrial proteins , muscle related proteins , phenoloxidase  activators , ribosomal proteins , and other sequences that did not fall into these groups. unannotated transcripts, were so termed, because they displayed no significant sequence similarity with sequences deposited in the ncbi database and were therefore not able to be annotated by blast analysis. the percentage distribution of the  <dig> sequenced cdnas is depicted in figure  <dig> 

the largest group of transcripts depicted here  represents cdnas that could not be annotated via the genbank database. transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins such atp synthase, cytochrome oxidases and nadh dehydrogenase make up 24% of the total cdnas isolated in this study. cuticular protein transcripts constitute 14%, while transcripts of the hemocyanin gene family and those related to muscle function and development comprise 6% each, of the total cdna population. phenoloxidase  activators such as serine proteases, antimicrobial and clotting protein transcripts contribute to 5% of all sequenced cdnas. other transcripts encoding diverse proteins not classified into the other groups include ovary development-related protein, opsin, ferritin, heat shock protein, tubulin, notch protein, arginine and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, and transcripts that contained ct, gt or ac repeats, represent 5% of the total population. lectins, such as the c-type lectin receptor and mannose-binding protein, as well as ribosomal proteins, each contributed to 3% of all sequenced cdnas. fatty acid binding protein and diazepam binding inhibitor transcripts, that are associated with lipid metabolism, constitute 2% of the overall transcript population, while famet transcripts represent the smallest group that form 1% of all cdnas sequenced within the scope of this microarray study.

gene expression profiles across the moult cycle of p. pelagicus
moult stage-specific differential gene expression analysis was carried out on p. pelagicus crabs from the following moult stages: post-moult, intermoult, early pre-moult, late pre-moult and ecdysis, using custom prepared p. pelagicus cdna microarray slides. a loop design, in which consecutive moult stages were compared via dual channel microarray hybridisations, was employed for the analysis . this format enabled the generation of a time series plot of differentially expressed genes across the moult cycle.

analysis with genespring using k-means clustering revealed seven main subsets of transcripts that displayed differential expression profiles across the moult cycle of p. pelagicus. they were grouped into clusters labelled a-g according to their expression patterns. not all of the  <dig> clones selected for sequencing fell into these clusters and many of the transcripts associated with these clusters were not sequenced.

the transcripts assigned to cluster a are relatively down-regulated at the time of moulting, expression subsequently increases at each consecutive stage, peaking in early pre-moult then plateauing or declining slightly in late pre-moult in preparation for ecdysis. in this subset, four clusters  were deemed to have similar expression profiles and hence collectively termed cluster a; this group is shown in figure  <dig>  table  <dig> describes the composition of cluster a, referring to each individual cluster respectively . the largest proportion  of sequenced transcripts in cluster a are of mitochondrial origin, 15% are metallothionein, 10% actin, 9% myosin, 8% opsin, 4% ferritin, while ribosomal rna and elongation factor make up  <dig> % each, hemocyanin, chitinase and a ct repeat sequence contribute to 1% of the transcripts sequenced from cluster a.

portunus trituberculatus mitochondrial dna
portunus trituberculatus mitochondrial dna
portunus trituberculatus mitochondrial dna
transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

cluster b consists of transcripts which are down-regulated in the moult and post-moult stages, expression then increases dramatically in intermoult, remains high in early pre-moult and begins to decline in late pre-moult. this group is depicted in figure  <dig> where three clusters  were deemed to have similar expression profiles and hence collectively termed cluster b. table  <dig> describes the composition of cluster b; each subset of cluster b is referred to individually. hemocyanin makes up 33% of the sequenced transcript population, cryptocyanin 23%, trypsin 15%, cathepsin 6%, chymotrypsin 5%, carcinin 3%, while fatty acid binding protein, dehydrogenase, atp synthase, fumarase and arginine kinase each make up 2%. additionally 6% of the sequenced transcripts remain unable to be annotated.

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

cluster c is a relatively small group of transcripts , in which expression is down-regulated in the moult and post-moult stages, increases substantially in intermoult, then drops dramatically in early and late pre-moult . of the sequenced transcripts from cluster c, three are cuticle proteins .

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

the transcript profile that is represented in cluster d displays expression that peaks in the post-moult stage, decreases dramatically in the intermoult and early pre-moult stages, then begins to increase again in late pre-moult and ecdysis. figure  <dig> depicts the four k-means clustering maps that collectively make up cluster d, while table  <dig> describes transcript identity and number. the sequenced transcripts from cluster d consist of 58% cuticle proteins, gastrolith protein and vermiform cuticle protein each constitute 2%, while 38% were unable to be annotated.

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

the group of transcripts represented in cluster e display expression profiles which are relatively low during the moult, post-moult and intermoult stages, then increase in the early pre-moult stage and remain high in late pre-moult. this group is depicted in figure  <dig> where two clusters  were deemed to have similar expression profiles and hence collectively termed cluster e. table  <dig> describes the composition of clusters e <dig> and e <dig>  in this cluster 31% of sequenced transcripts are fatty acid binding proteins, carcinin and c-type lectin receptor each make up 25%, 13% are vermiform cuticle proteins and 6% of the sequenced transcript population is clotting protein.

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

cluster f is depicted in figure  <dig> and features transcripts whose expression is highest in the moult and post-moult stages, decreases substantially in the intermoult and early pre-moult stages then begins to increase again in late pre-moult in preparation for ecdysis. table  <dig> provides a description of the identity and number of the total transcript population for cluster f. a high proportion of the sequenced cdnas  are mannose-binding proteins, 23% are cuticle proteins, 8% represent myosin, while 31% remain unannotated.

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

the expression profiles of the transcripts comprising cluster g show relatively low expression levels in the moult stage, an increase to peak levels in the post-moult and intermoult stages, then a dramatic decrease in the early pre-moult stage which begins to increase again in late pre-moult. the gene expression pattern for cluster g is presented in figure  <dig> table  <dig> describes the identity and number of the transcripts assigned to cluster g, of which the sequenced transcripts comprise of 50% cuticle proteins and 50% unannotated sequences.

transcript # indicates the number of copies of each gene present within the cluster.

discussion
a holistic approach to gene expression profiling was employed in order to gain a greater understanding of the molecular events associated with the crustacean moulting process. a p. pelagicus moult cycle specific cdna microarray, containing sequences from  <dig> cdna clones derived from whole crabs in addition to individual organs such as the brain, eyestalk, mo and y-organ from all moult cycle stages, was developed for this study. by comparing the expression patterns of transcripts from each moult cycle stage it was possible to identify genes with potential involvement in various aspects of the moulting process.

genisphere's 3dna dendrimer labeling technology, which overcomes some difficulties associated with direct or indirect labelling methods, was used in this study. this technology allows the labelling of cdna via a target capture sequence oligonucleotide rather than incorporating the fluorescent dye directly during cdna preparation, thus avoiding inefficient synthesis and hybridization of the cdna to the array that results from the incorporation of fluorescent dye nucleotide conjugates into the reverse transcript. additionally, the signal generated from each message will be independent of base composition or length of the transcript .

the sequencing of  <dig> clones from two libraries  generated from p. pelagicus, revealed that a significant portion of these cdnas  could not be annotated via the genbank database . however, these transcripts may nevertheless represent genes with a significant role in the process of moulting in crustaceans, as they were isolated within the scope of the moult cycle-related differential gene expression analysis study.

cellular energy requirements across the moult cycle
transcripts representing mitochondrial proteins, such as atp synthase, cytochrome oxidase, and nadh dehydrogenase form the second largest group  of cdnas isolated during this microarray study . such proteins are required for cellular energy homeostasis as they are a part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain  <cit> . nadh dehydrogenase and cytochrome c oxidase are two of the three energy-transducing enzymes in the mitochondrial electron transport chain. mitochondrial  ribosomal and elongation factor transcripts, were identified in cluster a  which display an expression profile of relatively low expression during ecdysis then a gradual increase across the rest of the moult cycle generally peaking in early pre-moult then decreasing slightly in late pre-moult. the expression profile of these transcripts appears to reflect an increase in the energy requirements of the animal as the moult cycle progresses. lower levels of mitochondrial gene expression at ecdysis suggests reduced energy requirements during moulting, with a recovery in metabolic activity appearing in the post-moult stage and returning to normal during interphase, reflected in the increase in mitochondrial gene expression observed in cluster a. interestingly, studies into the ecdysteroid responsive genes of cherax quadricarinatus revealed that moult induction through endocrine manipulation resulted in differential expression of genes predominantly belonging to a group known to be involved in metabolic functions such as digestive enzymes, carbohydrate metabolism and mitochondrial respiration  <cit> . these transcripts however, were down-regulated in pre-moult when compared to control animals in intermoult, possibly indicating that moult induction creates metabolic stress which may impact on metabolic function. hormonal effects of mitochondrial transcription have also been reported in mammals; thyroid hormones for example stimulate mitochondrial activity as well as gene expression  <cit> . moulting in crustaceans is under the hormonal control of ecdysteroids, which in c. sapidus peak in pre-moult and return to basal levels in the post-moult stage  <cit> . the results presented here reflect this pattern of hormonal stimulation of mitochondrial transcription, as the moult cycle progresses in p. pelagicus, genes associated with energy production including mitochondrial and ribosomal transcripts, show an increase in expression levels across consecutive stages of the moult cycle.

a similar expression profile occurs for further transcripts of atp synthase, arginine kinase and fumerase . these transcripts show down-regulation in the moult and post-moult stages and then an increase in expression levels in the intermoult and pre-moult stages. phosphagen kinases  function in temporal atp buffering and in intracellular energy transport  <cit> . phosphagen kinases are abundant in muscle, where they maintain atp homeostasis during muscle contraction  <cit> , in the gills which function in nitrogen excretion and gas exchange  <cit>  and in cell migration  <cit> . interestingly, arginine kinase is the sole phosphagen kinase found in arthropods  <cit> . the enzymatic activity of arginine kinase in c. maenas was found to vary significantly according to tissue type with the highest levels observed in the claw muscle  <cit> . given the important role that arginine kinase plays in energy production we postulate that atp buffering by arginine kinase may occur temporally as well as spatially in order to meet the fluctuating metabolic requirements experienced across the moult cycle. the enzyme fumarase facilitates the production of energy in the form of nadh in the mitochondria. the expression profiles observed here for fumarase, suggest that it could be important in meeting the high energy demands of growth during the moult cycle.

cuticular protein expression
transcripts encoding cuticular proteins represent 14% of the total cdnas isolated in this microarray study. several patterns of moult cycle differential expression were observed for cuticular proteins, implying that each group has a specific but varying function depending on which stage of the moult cycle up-regulation is detected. for instance a peak in expression during intermoult was found to occur for cuticle proteins cut <dig> and cut <dig>  . this expression pattern was also identified using an independent data analysis method, where up-regulation was observed in intermoult when compared to both post-moult and early pre-moult  <cit> , both of these transcripts code for proteins that contain three cuticle_ <dig> domains. proteins with the cuticle_ <dig> domain are associated with calcified cuticle in decapod crustaceans  <cit> . the specific up-regulation of these cuticle trancripts in the intermoult phase indicates that formation and/or repair of the exoskeleton may continue throughout the intermoult phase and that these genes operate separately to those involved in the formation of new cuticle during the pre- and post-moult stages. the largest proportion of cuticle protein transcripts  was found to occur in cluster d. the transcripts identified in this group include p. pelagicus cuticle protein genes bd <dig> , bd <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cut <dig> , cb <dig> , p. pelagicus vermiform cuticle protein ver3-like , and c. quadricarinatus gastrolith protein  . here we see an expression profile of up-regulation in the moult and post-moult stages  then a sharp decline during intermoult and early pre-moult, followed by a recovery in the late pre-moult stage. gap <dig> was found to be directly involved in the deposition of amorphous calcium carbonate in the gastroliths of c. quadricarinatus  <cit> . based on the expression profile observed for transcripts ver <dig> and gap <dig> in cluster d, a role in the calcification of the crustacean cuticle seems likely.

a similar pattern is seen in cluster f which contains 13% cuticle protein transcripts, composed of p. pelagicus cuticle protein bd <dig>  and cbm . transcripts with the abbreviation bd, code for proteins with a pfamb_ <dig> domain  <cit>  which has yet to be annotated but has been isolated from the calcified cuticle of other crabs  <cit> . cut transcripts, when translated, contain the protein domain cuticle_ <dig>  also associated with calcified cuticle. cb transcripts, on the other hand, code for proteins with a chitin_bind_ <dig> domain. in addition to its chitin binding function, this chitin binding domain also occurs in proteins which have been demonstrated to function in calcification of the crustacean exoskeleton  <cit> . cmb  is another transcript group with chitin binding abilities, prevalent in insects and involved in the structural formation of the peritrophic membrane   <cit> ; it has also been found in penaeid prawns. despite the differences in domain type, and hence assumed functional difference, these transcripts follow a synergistic pattern of expression, which displays up-regulation at ecdysis with a peak in post-moult. the high level of expression in post-moult together with functional annotation suggest that these genes are involved in the synthesis and hardening of the post-moult crustacean cuticle. p. pelagicus cuticle protein cut <dig>  and cb <dig> , observed in cluster g, present with a slightly different profile where expression is highest in post-moult and intermoult, decreases dramatically in early pre-moult then begins to increase again in late pre-moult. the incidence of cuticular protein up-regulation in intermoult, when compared to early pre-moult , is perhaps unexpected because the exoskeleton is considered to be fully formed by the intermoult stage. this may indicate a continued synthesis and/or repair of the exoskeleton well into the intermoult period followed by a down-regulation of cuticular protein expression in the pre-moult period, in preparation for the degradation and eventual shedding of the exoskeleton at ecdysis. stillman also reports a peak in transcript levels of certain cuticle protein genes in the middle of the moult cycle  <cit> .

additionally, two transcripts that displayed similarity to a low-density lipoprotein receptor class a  domain containing chitin binding protein from drosophila  exhibited two different types of expression profiles, ver <dig> in cluster e and ver <dig> in cluster d. the opposing expression profiles of clusters d and e , together with the specificity of the transcript type identified in each cluster, suggests different physiological roles and modes of action for ver <dig> and ver <dig> 

differential expression of the hemocyanin gene family
transcripts belonging to the hemocyanin gene family represented 6% of all sequenced cdnas ; these include hemocyanin, cryptocyanin and metallothionein. moult cycle-related differential expression of hemocyanin and cryptocyanin was evident in cluster b where high levels of expression are seen in the intermoult and pre-moult stages. recent studies examining global expression patterns of c. magister juveniles also found differential expression patterns occurring across developmental stages for both hemocyanin and cryptocycanin  <cit> . hemocyanin is an oxygen transport protein that is found in the hemolymph of crustaceans  <cit> . in addition to its ability to reversibly bind oxygen, hemocyanin also displays po activity  <cit>  which is important to the sclerotization or hardening of the newly synthesised cuticle  <cit> . hemocyanin has been located in the cuticle of the prawn penaeus japonicus during the intermoult and postmoult stages of the moult cycle. here the enzymatic activity of cuticular hemocyanin was higher than that of hemocyanin derived from the hemolymph  <cit> . additionally, ecdysone  has been found to bind to proteins within the crustacean hepatopancreas and cuticle  <cit> . more recent studies on the tarantula, suggest that this protein may be hemocyanin. the spider hemocyanin was found to bind both ecdysone and 20-oh-ecdysone, albeit with low affinity which is thought to be compensated for by its high concentration  <cit> . the authors calculated that up to 75% of the ecdysteroids can be transported by hemocyanin. considering the important role hemocyanin is thought to play in cuticle formation and ecdysone transport, the high levels of hemocyanin gene expression observed in the present study in both the intermoult and pre-moult periods reflect the dual functionality of hemocyanin in preparation for arthropod ecdysis.

cryptocyanin is structurally related to hemocyanin however it lacks the ability to bind oxygen  <cit> . instead cryptocyanin is involved in protein transport and in the formation of the new exoskeleton in crustaceans  <cit> . the similarity in gene expression profiles of crytocyanin and hemocyanin, together with their structural relatedness, suggests a similarity in function with respect to cuticle synthesis, both through direct incorporation and the potential transfer of other cuticular components. metallothionein on the other hand was up-regulated gradually across the moult cycle  where expression was lowest at ecdysis and peaked in early pre-moult. this expression profile was also observed for transcripts associated with mitochondrial energy metabolism such as atp synthase, cytochrome oxidase and nadh dehydrogenase. metallothionein is a ubiquitous heavy metal-binding protein, involved in copper homeostasis and detoxification  <cit> . studies in c. sapidus have demonstrated the presence of metallothionein in pre-moult crabs, suggesting that metallothionein is required for the regulation of biologically available copper ions necessary for the oxygen binding properties of hemocyanin  <cit> . crustacean metallothionein has also been implicated in the regulation of energy metabolism by affecting mitochondrial respiration. investigations on h. americanus demonstrated that metallothionein is present in the intermembrane space of hepatopancreatic mitochondria and is able to regulate the oxygen consumption of mitochondria in a zinc-dependant manner  <cit> . the synchronous expression profile of metallothionein and several genes involved in mitochondrial respiration, observed here in cluster a, support the hypothesis of a regulatory role for metallothionein in energy production. metallothionein was also found to exert a protective effect against the highly reactive oxygen species generated by oxygen metabolism in the presence of zinc  <cit> . free zinc in quantities equivalent to those tested when bound by metallothionein increased the levels of reactive oxygen species by four fold. crustaceans have been found to store considerable levels of metals such as calcium, copper and zinc in the hepatopancreas during the pre-moult stage of the moult cycle  <cit> ; moreover induction of metallothionein levels in the hepatopancreas occurs at high zinc concentrations  <cit> . the accumulation of zinc in the hepatopancreas during pre-moult, together with the role of zinc in inducing oxidative stress, accentuates the requirement for protective measures against free radical formation in this moult cycle stage. the peak of metallothionein expression in pre-moult lends further support to the implied role of metallothionein in metal detoxification and energy metabolism.

phenoloxidase activity
po activators such as the serine proteases trypsin, chymotrypsin, and trypsinogen, in addition to antimicrobial and clotting proteins, made up 5% of the total distribution of sequenced cdnas . trypsin and chymotrypsin both displayed moult cycle related differential expression in that they were highly up-regulated in intermoult and pre-moult when compared to ecdysis and post-moult . trypsin is one of the major digestive proteases secreted by the hepatopancreas  <cit> , chymotrypsin also, is a serine protease recently identified in the digestive systems of crustaceans  <cit> . studies on penaeus vannamei revealed that mrna expression of trypsin is at a maximum during early premoult, then declines sharply in late premoult. the specific activity of trypsin also followed this pattern, suggesting the regulation of trypsin biosynthesis is, at least in part, transcriptional and may be under the influence of ecdysteroid hormones  <cit> . further research on the midgut gland of p. vannamei showed that mrna expression of trypsin also differed across the moult cycle  <cit> . they found a high level of trypsin expression in intermoult, a peak in early pre-moult, followed by a decline in late pre-moult with lowest levels in the post-moult stage; these figures correlate strongly with the results from this study in p. pelagicus. sanchez-paz and garcia-carreno suggested that this expression pattern may be explained through feeding behaviour during the moult cycle, as trypsin is a digestive enzyme and feeding occurs mostly in the intermoult and pre-moult stages. interestingly, trypsin and chymotrypsin are the only two digestive enzymes that were found to be differentially expressed across the moult cycle in this study, presumably additional digestive enzymes would be up-regulated if these expression profiles were due solely to feeding behaviour. perhaps a further explanation of trypsin and chymotrypsin activity may be attributed to their roles in the phenoloxidase  cascade. the po pathway has typically been associated with immunity but is also involved in important structural aspects of the crustacean cuticle such as melanisation and sclerotization  <cit> . the po cascade requires activation which is achieved via several mechanisms including c-type lectins, and the proteases trypsin  <cit>  and chymotrypsin  <cit> .

trypsin and chymotrypsin expression correlates strongly with hemocyanin expression , and may be involved in activation of the po pathway and the stimulation of hemocyanin into an active phenoloxidase-like enzyme, that is associated with melanin synthesis and sclerotization in the newly developing cuticle in p. pelagicus.

genes involved in cuticle hardening
lectins, which include the calcium dependant lectin group  receptor, mannose-binding protein, mucin and a proline rich protein, represent 3% of the cdnas isolated in this study . c-type lectin receptor transcripts followed the expression pattern observed in cluster e, with relatively low levels in moult, post-moult and intermoult then an increase in the pre-moult stages . conversely, the mannose-binding protein  was highly expressed at ecdysis and post-moult.

glycoproteins, such as the mannose rich variety found in the calcified cuticle of c. sapidus, have been found to be associated with the regulation of biomineralisation  <cit> . shafer and colleagues describe an alteration in the lectin-binding characteristics of mannose rich glycoproteins at the time of onset of calcification. glycosylated cuticle proteins are thought to act as pre-moult inhibitors of calcification, deglycosylation of these proteins occurs specifically after ecdysis likely initiating the deposition of calcium  <cit> . in this study both the c-type lectin receptor and the mannose-binding protein display significant moult cycle-related differential expression. the c-type lectin receptor is up-regulated in the pre-moult stages, coinciding with the formation of new cuticle, which must remain uncalcified prior to moulting, while the mannose-binding protein is up-regulated in the moult and post-moult period. the temporally specific, and high levels of, up-regulation of both of these genes have been proposed to be involved in the regulation of calcification in the crustacean cuticle  <cit> .

lectins  are also involved in immune function through the lectin-complement pathway, in which the mannose-binding lectin recognises infectious agents and triggers po activation  <cit> . po activity also plays a role in cuticle sclerotization  <cit>  and melanisation  <cit> . the up-regulation of mannose-binding protein observed here during periods of cuticle hardening, coupled with its role in the activation of the po cascade, suggest that it also participates in the sclerotization of the crustacean exoskeleton.

muscle formation
muscle-related cdnas such as actin, myosin and thymosin, constituted 6% of all the transcripts isolated during the moult cycle-related microarray experiments . differential expression of muscle-related transcripts was observed across the moult cycle where a gradual up-regulation of actin and myosin transcripts was observed between edcysis and the early pre-moult stage . actin possesses diverse cellular functions which include the provision of mechanical support in the cytoskeleton, the mechanism for muscle contraction in muscle cells, and the binding of atp in the cytosol  <cit> . myosins are a large family of motor proteins that facilitate actin-based motility, via an interaction with actin and the hydrolysis of atp  <cit> . muscle mass, particularly in the claws of large decapod crustaceans, undergoes cyclic atrophy during pre-moult followed by regeneration during the post-moult and intermoult periods  <cit> . the up-regulation of actin and myosin observed from moult through to early pre-moult is consistent with the observation that muscle deposition and growth occur mainly in the intermoult period.

lipid metabolism
transcripts encoding the lipid metabolism proteins diazepam-binding inhibitor and fatty acid binding protein constituted 2% of all sequenced transcripts . fatty acid binding protein transcripts were found in cluster e, where an up-regulation is observed in the pre-moult stages when compared to the rest of the moult cycle. the fluctuation of lipid composition in the hypodermal membrane of the exoskeleton has been demonstrated in several crustacean species. observations in c. pagurus show that the hypodermis increases in lipid content just before secretion of the new exoskeleton begins in pre-moult  <cit> . cuticular lipid levels in c. sapidus have been shown to increase during pre-moult and peak dramatically post ecdysis before returning to intermoult levels  <cit> . these cuticular observations reflect the changes detected in the hemocytes of c. maenas which become loaded with lipid prior to ecdysis. hemocytes aggregate beneath the hypodermis and apparently transfer the lipid to the newly forming cuticle  <cit> . furthermore, fatty acid binding proteins have been isolated from the hemocytes of the crayfish pacifastacus leniusculus and the prawn penaeus monodon  <cit> . the moult cycle-related changes to the expression of fatty acid binding protein, demonstrated here, may facilitate the deposition of lipids in the cuticle of crustaceans.

CONCLUSIONS
tracing the temporal expression patterns of genes involved in the crustacean moult cycle provides a platform for gaining a greater understanding of gene function, interaction, and regulation with respect to the moulting process. the expression data presented here provide a chronological depiction of the molecular events associated with the biological changes occurring during the crustacean moult cycle.

transcripts associated with energy production, such as mitochondrial and ribosomal genes, increased in expression as the moult cycle progressed. atp synthase catalyses the synthesis of atp  via a proton gradient  <cit>  generated by cytochrome oxidases and nadh dehydrogenase which are the proton translocating enzymes of the mitochondria  <cit> . arginine kinase and fumerase are also involved in cell metabolism and energy production, where arginine kinase plays a role in the maintenance of atp levels in cells with fluctuating energy requirements  <cit> , while fumarase is a catalyst in the krebs cycle and has also been associated with growth and development. here we find an increase in these metabolic transcripts across consecutive stages of the moult cycle with a peak in pre-moult. this may reflect greater physical and/or biological activity in the animals in comparison to their relative sedentary state after moulting occurs, and also greater metabolic demands due to animal growth and new cuticle formation.

a number of genes likely to play an important role in the formation and hardening of the crustacean exoskeleton, such as cuticle proteins, po activators, lectins, fatty acid-binding proteins and members of the hemocyanin family, have been identified by virtue of protein domain annotation and differential gene expression data. these genes display expression profiles specific to function across the moult cycle. temporal variation in expression has even been observed between individual cuticular protein transcripts containing the same protein domains . this suggests a difference in functionality for each gene, indicating that transcripts from a similar group may play a distinct and different role in the formation of the crustacean exoskeleton.

glycosylation of cuticular proteins in the crustacean exoskeleton has been implicated in the regulation of cuticle calcification  <cit> . the recognition of glycosylation sites by mannose-binding lectins is also involved in the activation of serine proteases, which in turn activates the po cascade  <cit> . considering the involvement of pos in the sclerotization of the arthropod cuticle, and the potential role of mannose binding protein in the initiation of mineralisation, the specific up-regulation of mannose-binding protein exclusively during these stages indicates that it plays an important role in exoskeletal hardening. additionally, transcripts potentially involved in the deposition of lipids in the newly forming cuticle of crustaceans, were up-regulated in the pre-moult stage of p. pelagicus.

a large diversity of genes representing many important biological functions related to moulting in crustaceans were able to annotated, and their expression profiles mapped across consecutive stages of the moult cycle of p. pelagicus in a time series manner. this approach aims to enhance the knowledge of the molecular mechanisms and regulating factors involved in the moult cycle, and allows the identification of target genes which may control important aspects of various stages of the moult cycle.

