BACKGROUND
the industrially important protein producer, the filamentous fungus trichoderma reesei, a clonal derivative of the ascomycete hypocrea jecorina, is adapted to growth in nutrient poor environments, where it is able to use complex plant material as carbon source. t. reesei and a number of other filamentous fungi and cellulolytic bacteria produce and secrete plant polymer hydrolyzing enzymes, such as cellulases and hemicellulases, into their surroundings to break down the polymers into easily metabolizable monomers  <cit> .

because of its ability to synthesize and secrete large amounts of proteins, t. reesei has gained industrial importance in production of enzymes of native and heterologous origin. carbon catabolite repression  of t. reesei negatively regulates the powerful production machinery of the hydrolytic enzymes when a preferred carbon source, such as glucose, is available. inducers of hydrolytic enzyme expression are often small oligosaccharides or derivative parts of the polymers from the environment of the fungus. the inductive signaling leads to synthesis of specific sets of enzymes  <cit> . in t. reesei, d-xylose, xylobiose, sophorose, and lactose have been observed to trigger production of particular enzyme sets  <cit> . sophorose, a molecule of two beta- <dig> -linked glucose units, is an efficient inducer of cellulose gene expression at low concentration  when t. reesei is growing on a non-repressing carbon source, such as sorbitol or glycerol  <cit> . however, in high glucose concentrations ccr overrules the inductive signals in t. reesei  <cit> .

sorbitol as a carbon source neither provokes ccr nor triggers the cellulase gene expression in t. reesei  <cit> . nevertheless, cellulase production is positively correlated with the ability of different t. reesei strains to grow on d-sorbitol  <cit> , which could be converted to l-sorbose  <cit>  that induces cellulase expression in t. reesei  <cit> . in t. reesei l-arabinitol 4-dehydrogenase  is involved in the initial oxidization of d-sorbitol at c <dig> to convert it to d-fructose  <cit> . a specific sorbitol dehydrogenase converts sorbitol to fructose in aspergilli fungi  <cit> .

cre <dig> is the key mediator protein of ccr in t. reesei  <cit> . trichoderma cre <dig> has a 95% sequence similarity with aspergillus crea in regions of the zinc-finger and proline-serine-threonine-rich domain and the complete sequences are 46% identical  <cit> . cre <dig> is structurally also highly similar to mig <dig>  a key protein in glucose repression in yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . however, the functional dissimilarities observed between cre1/crea and mig <dig>  in spite of the sequence and structural similarity, have led to the conclusion that glucose repression functionalities in filamentous fungi and yeasts have evolved separately  <cit> . pfeiffer et al argued that the evolution from unicellular to undifferentiated multicellular organisms, like t. reesei, has been facilitated by the general preference of high yield energy generation through respiration even in the presence of a preferred carbon source  <cit> . in contrast to ccr regulation in s. cerevisiae, it has been shown that in t. reesei ccr does not cause repression of genes encoding the tca cycle enzymes or respiratory pathway components  <cit> . david et al observed differences in the distribution of intracellular carbon fluxes in central carbon metabolism between a. nidulans reference and a carbon repression deletion mutant  strains when they were grown on glucose  <cit> .

despite the industrial importance of t. reesei, its genome has only recently been sequenced  <cit>  and its metabolism, beyond that related to protein production and secretion, is narrowly studied. in the present work, computational carbon path analysis  <cit>  was utilized to reconstruct the biosynthetic pathways of amino acids. that was essential for quantitative flux analysis, as no metabolic network model was available for t. reesei. the localizations of the key reactions in the biosynthetic pathways of amino acids were determined from the 13c-labeling patterns of proteinogenic amino acids and by computational estimation of targeting peptide sequences. the intracellular metabolic flux ratios in the central carbon metabolism were determined utilizing fractional 13c-labeling and metabolic flux ratio  analysis  <cit>  in a wild type  strain and in a Δcre <dig> mutant strain , when grown on the repressive carbon source glucose and on the neutral carbon source sorbitol. additionally, the effect of sophorose induction of cellulase gene expression on the relative fluxes in the central carbon metabolism was quantified. to the authors' knowledge this is the first time that the metabolic pathways of t. reesei have been reconstructed and in vivo fluxes in the central carbon metabolism of t. reesei have been quantitatively studied.

RESULTS
13c-labeling in batch cultures
metabolic flux ratio  analysis was performed for the t. reesei wild type  and Δcre <dig>  strains growing in minimal medium in flasks with fractional glucose and on fractional sorbitol with and without induction of cellulase gene expression by sophorose. since 13c-metabolic flux ratio  analysis is based on biosynthetically directed fractional  labeling of the constituents of biomass biopolymers, it requires constant intracellular flux distribution during the labeling  <cit> . constant flux distribution can be achieved in a chemostat culture, where the specific growth rate is constant, or in a batch cultivation during exponential growth. in the exponential growth phase when the cells are growing at their maximum specific growth rate and the changes in the extracellular conditions are still insignificant a quasi-steady state can be assumed  <cit> . precultivations were performed to determine the exponential growth phases and the maximum specific growth rates for the t. reesei wild type and Δcre <dig> strains . cultures with different growth profiles were then sampled for quantitative flux analysis at equivalent growth stages, in the exponential phase. the maximum specific growth rates of t. reesei on glucose were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  h- <dig> and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  h- <dig> for the wild type and Δcre <dig> strains, respectively. when grown on sorbitol the maximum specific growth rates for the wild type and Δcre <dig> strains were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  h- <dig> and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  h- <dig>  respectively. the maximum specific growth rates of a. nidulans wild type strain and that of a crea deletion strain have been observed to be  <dig>  h- <dig> and  <dig>  h- <dig>  respectively, when grown on glucose  <cit> .

reconstruction of pathways through the metabolic network leading to amino acid synthesis
in order to quantify the in vivo flux ratios in the central carbon metabolism of t. reesei by 13c-labelling and metafor approach  <cit> , it was necessary to obtain a model of the amino acid biosynthesis pathways. however, no curated metabolic model exists for t. reesei. thus, the pathways for synthesis of the carbon backbones of the proteinogenic amino acids from the carbon source molecules in t. reesei were reconstructed by retrace pathway analysis  <cit> . retrace analysis results are summarized in table  <dig> and fully reported in additional file  <dig> 

paths paths found, zo highest fraction of transferred atoms, avgsc average reaction scores, bestsize the size of the pathway achieving zo reported, avgsize average pathway size, minpoor minimum number of reactions with a score under 50

retrace analysis confirmed, for most of the proteinogenic amino acids, that the biosynthetic pathways of amino acids identical to the pathways in s. cerevisiae are present also in t. reesei. therefore the carbon backbones of the proteinogenic amino acids in t. reesei evidently originate from the precursor metabolites similar to the ones in s. cerevisiae  <cit>  . for some proteinogenic amino acids  retrace was not directly able to identify the biosynthetic routes that are active in s. cerevisiae because alternative reactions with higher scores strongly directed the search or because of errors in the atom mapping in the kegg reaction database. however, the manual inspection of all the pathways identified directly from the carbon source or from different precursors, confirmed that the biosynthetic pathways for all proteinogenic amino acids relevant for metafor analysis, except for arg and lys, that are known to operate in s. cerevisiae, are also present in t. reesei.

the fungal biosynthetic pathway of lys from oga  <cit>  was not found by retrace because of inconsistencies in the atom mapping in the kegg reaction database. however, because the reactions of the alternative biosynthetic route of lys which is active, for example in bacteria, did not gain good scores for presence in t. reesei, the fungal pathway was assumed prior to the 13c-pathway analysis. pathways from oga to arg were identified by retrace but the pathway known to be active in s. cerevisiae was not found among them. most of the identified pathways were directed through 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase reaction  in the reverse direction, which forms a false shortcut path between oga and arg.

after the unsuccessful direct search of pathway from oaa to thr, thr biosynthesis pathway was searched from asp, an intermediate in the pathway from oaa to thr. genome level evidence of the presence of the pathway was found. the biosynthetic pathway of ile that is active in s. cerevisiae was not found directly from precursors oaa and pyr because the pathway proceeds first from oaa to thr and that pathway was not directly identified as discussed above. the reactions further from thr were identified with high scores for genome level evidence of their presence in t. reesei and thus, the pathway that is known to be active in s. cerevisiae is evidently present also in t. reesei. tyr biosynthesis pathway was found from precursors downstream to 3-pyruvate and only the transamination was lacking from a complete pathway. however, a high scoring hit for a transaminase sequence was separately searched and identified in the genome of t. reesei. most of the high scoring alternative pathways could be excluded because only the anabolic pathways are active in the exponential growth and in absence of amino acids in the medium.

13c-pathway analysis and prediction of subcellular localization of key enzymes
the pathways of amino acid biosynthesis reconstructed in t. reesei corresponded to the pathways utilized by s. cerevisiae. the fragmentomer data from 13c-labeling of proteinogenic amino acids provided further confirmation for this . the 13c-labeling patterns of the carbon backbones of proteinogenic amino acids originate from the 13c-labeling of their precursor metabolites in central carbon metabolism and thus, the 13c-labeling patterns of amino acids can be propagated to the precursors to identify the active pathways. in particular, the lys 13c-labeling pattern indicated its synthesis from oga via α-aminoadipate pathway, as in yeasts  <cit> . however, in contrast to s. cerevisiae and a number of other yeast  <cit> , the 13c-labeling pattern of asp indicated that it primarily originated from mitochondrial oaa under all the studied conditions . mitochondrial asp synthesis has previously been observed in yarrowia lipolytica  <cit> . furthermore, identical 13c-labeling patterns were observed in asp and thr. this confirmed thr synthesis from asp and excluded a contribution from the reversible threonine aldolase reaction  <cit> .

a three carbon fragment of mitochondrial oaa   remains intact in the synthesis of the tca cycle intermediate oga and therefore the 13c-labeling pattern of oaamit can be partially observed in glu that originates from oga. in the exponential growth phase it is reasonable to assume unidirectional transport of oaa across the mitochondrial membrane, which has previously been experimentally shown in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . when the backward transport from oaamit to oaacyt is negligible, a three-carbon fragment of oaacyt  is produced from pep, a precursor of phe and tyr, via glycolysis and by pyruvate carboxylase. the fractions of intact cα-cβ bonds in asp and thr were highly similar to the corresponding intact carbon fragments in oga, propagated from glu, but clearly different from the corresponding intact carbon fragments in pep, propagated from phe, tyr in t. reesei, indicating the primarily mitochondrial origin of asp. since the c3-c <dig> bond of oaamit remains intact in the tca cycle, oaamit serving as a precursor for asp and thr biosynthesis was further supported by the high similarity in the fraction of molecules having the corresponding c-c fragment intact, i.e. the c3-c <dig> fragment of oaa, propagated from asp, thr, and c1-c <dig> fragment of oga, propagated from glu, .

additional support for mitochondrial asp synthesis was obtained from sequence analysis. evidence of mitochondrial targeting peptide sequence was identified in one of the t. reesei genome sequences with homology to the aspartate aminotransferases in s. cerevisiae by targetp analysis  <cit>  . this strongly supported the mitochondrial localization of one of the encoded enzymes. however, no evidence of mitochondrial targeting peptide was identified by targetp analysis of the t. reesei sequence with homology to the s. cerevisiae pyruvate carboxylase that produces oaa. thus, oaamit could originate both from transport across the mitochondrial membrane and from the tca cycle.

pyruvate is a precursor of ala and val biosynthesis. if the pyruvate pools in cytosol and mitochondria possess significantly different 13c-labeling patterns, for example as a result of malic enzyme flux, a mitochondrial localization of pyruvate-based amino acid synthesis can be confirmed from the 13c-labeling data  <cit> . however, the fractions of intact two-carbon fragments pyr c1-c <dig> and c2-c <dig> observed in ala and val and the corresponding two-carbon fragments in pep, a direct precursor of pyrcyt, observed in phe and tyr, were not significantly different under the studied conditions. therefore, the 13c-labeling patterns could not be utilized to assess the localization of the synthesis of pyruvate-based amino acids. strong evidence of a mitochondrial targeting sequence in the t. reesei sequence that showed homology to the acetolactate synthase in s. cerevisiae was identified by targetp  <cit>  . in yeast the first enzyme in val biosynthesis, the acetolactate synthase, has been reported to be localized in mitochondria  <cit> , whereas cytosolic and mitochondrial isoenzymes of alanine aminotransferase have been observed  <cit> .

ser originates from glycolytic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate and can be further converted to gly and a c <dig> unit by the reversible reaction of serine hydroxymethyl transferase . gly could also originate from threonine aldolase or from the reversible reaction of the glycine cleavage pathway . in s. cerevisiae glycine cleavage pathway is active inside mitochondria  <cit>  and although both mitochondrial and cytosolic isoenzymes of shmt exist in s. cerevisiae  <cit> , the effect of the glycine cleavage pathway on the ser-cα f fraction has not been observed in s. cerevisiae batch cultures grown on glucose  <cit> . in t. reesei the activity of the glycine cleavage pathway was observed in the 13c-labeling pattern of ser, since ser-cα f fragmentomer fraction of ser molecules with both carbon bonds cleaved was higher than the fraction of fully cleaved pep, a three carbon lower glycolytic intermediate. the fraction of fully cleaved pep molecules was observed in phe and tyr-cα f fragmentomer fractions . two t. reesei sequences were observed to have homology to the s. cerevisiae shmt sequences. in one of them a strong evidence of a mitochondrial targeting pre-sequence was found by targetp  <cit>  . therefore, shmt activity likely occurs in both cytosolic and mitochondrial compartments of t. reesei. the ser 13c-labeling pattern observed in t. reesei indicates either a partially cytosolic localization of the glycine cleavage pathway or protein synthesis occurring primarily from a mitochondrial pool of ser. targetp analysis of the t. reesei sequence homological to sequence of the s. cerevisiae glycine dehydrogenase, the p-subunit of the gly cleavage system, showed no clear indication of a mitochondrial targeting pre-sequence  <cit>  .

amino acids belonging to the glu amino acid family, glu, pro and arg, showed a highly similar 13c-labeling, as expected, in both strains grown on glucose and in the wild type strain culture grown on sorbitol . in contrast, a significant variation was observed in the glu, pro and arg fragmentomers in cultures when their pre-cultures were mixed before sophorose induction experiment. this observation may be explained by differential mobilization of amino acids from cellular compartments resulting from the perturbation when the cultures were mixed prior to the induction period.

metafor analysis of t. reesei
the relative fluxes merging at the branching points of central carbon metabolism of t. reesei were determined by bdf 13c-labeling with glucose and sugar alcohol sorbitol as carbon sources. the flux ratios of the wild type and Δcre <dig> t. reesei strains determined in batch cultures on glucose, on sorbitol and on sorbitol with sophorose induction of expression of cellulase genes are shown in table  <dig> 

sd standard deviation, ub upper bound, lb lower bound

respiratory pathway flux of t. reesei
the relative anaplerotic flux  describes the relative activities of the biosynthetic and respirative carbon fluxes in the tca cycle. the anaplerotic flux replenishes carbons to the tca cycle flux by importing c <dig> compounds as there is drain of carbon to biosynthesis. david et al concluded that the tca cycle was more active in Δcrea mutants of a. nidulans than in the wild type when grown on glucose  <cit> . however, they suggested that it resulted from a higher atp demand in the deletion strain possibly caused by active futile cycles instead of derepression of the respirative pathway flux. no significant difference was observed in the anaplerotic flux ratios between the t. reesei wild type and Δcre <dig> strains grown on glucose. thus, in t. reesei the tca cycle was as active relative to biosynthesis in the Δcre <dig> strain as in the wild type strain and so, cre <dig> does not mediate repression of respirative pathway flux in t. reesei either.

a difference was observed between the two t. reesei strains when grown on sorbitol. the relative anaplerotic flux was 26% in the wild type strain and 42% in the Δcre <dig> strain . this may indicate that there was a difference in the specific growth rates of the two strains on sorbitol.

previously, an excess of glucose has been found to only partially repress the gene expression of the enzymes of the tca cycle and the components of the respiratory chain in t. reesei  <cit> . that is in contrast to the effect of excess of glucose on s. cerevisiae, where glucose repression extensively downregulates the respiratory pathway at the transcriptional level  <cit> . the anaplerotic flux ratio in t. reesei wild type strain was higher on glucose  than that on sorbitol  . the results indicated a higher activity of respiratory metabolism relative to biosynthesis on the non-repressing carbon source sorbitol than that on the repressing carbon source glucose. a complete oxidation of sorbitol, that is a more reduced carbon source than glucose, results in a higher relative flux of electrons per carbon source molecule to the respiratory chain than during growth on glucose. thus, if t. reesei respired at maximum rate during the batch growth on glucose, fluxes producing reduced cofactors, for example biosynthetic pathway fluxes or the tca cycle fluxes, would have decreased on sorbitol.

small fractions of pyrmit originating from malate via the action of the malic enzyme were observed in both strains under almost all conditions .

pentose phosphate pathway  of t. reesei
a lower fraction of triose phosphates originated from pentose phosphates in the wild type strain  than in the Δcre <dig> strain  when grown on glucose . in batch cultures under excess glucose conditions, the gluconeogenesis by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and the reverse transport of oaa across the mitochondrial membrane are assumed to have negligible fluxes  <cit> . for this purpose the fraction of pep originating from the pentose phosphate pathway  was calculated neglecting any contribution of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase to the 13c-labeling pattern of pep, propagated from phe, tyr. the fraction of pep originating from ppp represents the flux via ppp relative to the total flux to pep. however, this fraction is not a direct measure of the flux through the oxidative branch of the ppp but includes molecules that have only gone through reversible reactions in the non-oxidative ppp. furthermore, the standard deviation is always high because only 40% of the triose phosphates that originate from the ppp have different 13c-labeling patterns than the triose phosphates originating from glycolysis.

the differences in the relative flux through the ppp to the triose phosphates can be caused by differences in the glycolytic rate or in nadph demands, since the oxidative branch of the ppp is usually the main source of cytosolic nadph. a low glycolytic rate could allow the label scrambling in the non-oxidative part of the ppp to affect the 13c-labeling patterns of a large fraction of triose phosphates.

the reversible fluxes through the reactions of transketolase and transaldolase, observed in the 13c-labeling patterns of pentose phosphates that can be detected in his, were clearly different in glucose and sorbitol cultivations . the fraction of pentose phosphates that had gone through a transketolase reaction  was 51% and 42% when glucose was the carbon source for the wild type and the Δcre <dig> strains, respectively. when grown on sorbitol the fractions were higher, 72% and 79% for the wild type and the Δcre <dig> strains, respectively. the fraction of pentose phosphates cleaved in the transaldolase and transketolase reactions  was 25% and 23% when grown on glucose, whereas when sorbitol was the carbon source they were 46% and 54% for the wild type and the Δcre <dig> strains, respectively. the higher fractions of pentose phosphates cleaved in the reactions of transketolase or transaldolase when grown on sorbitol could be a result of entrance of sorbitol in the central carbon metabolism and into the ppp directly in a form of fructose 6-phosphate  <cit> .

effect of sophorose induction of cellulase gene expression on metabolic fluxes
induction of cellulase gene expression with sophorose did not cause any significant changes in the metabolic flux distributions in the central carbon metabolism of t. reesei. therefore, the induction of cellulase gene expression did not affect the relative fluxes to different amino acid families or the ratio of anabolic and catabolic activity of the central carbon metabolism. alteration in the relative biosynthetic rates of different amino acids would have occurred if the amino acid composition of the induced cellulases had been significantly different from the amino acid composition of the proteins generally produced by t. reesei which was not observed.

flux ratio profiles of t. reesei, s. cerevisiae and pichia stipitis indicate differences in preferred utilization of pathways
the anaplerotic flux ratios determined hereby in the wild type and Δcre <dig> t. reesei strains in batch cultures, both grown on glucose, were substantially lower and similar to what has been observed in fully respiratory metabolism in s. cerevisiae in glucose-limited chemostat cultures, where there is no glucose repression  <cit>  . the extensive glucose repression of the tca cycle and the respiratory pathway activity in s. cerevisiae result in high anaplerotic ratio in batch cultures on glucose  <cit> . the anaplerotic flux ratios in the t. reesei strains with glucose as a carbon source were also similar to the ones observed in p. stipitis, both when grown on glucose in batch cultures and in glucose-limited chemostat cultures  <cit> . p. stipitis completely lacks aerobic alcoholic fermentation.

it has previously been determined that glucose does not cause extensive repression of the gene expression of the tca cycle and the respiratory pathway components in t. reesei  <cit>  as it does in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . the 13c-labeling and metafor analysis results on the level of in vivo fluxes confirmed that for highly efficient energy generation through complete oxidation of carbon source t. reesei indeed uses primarily the respirative pathway also when growing on a preferred carbon source glucose. the regulatory differences between t. reesei and s. cerevisiae have been explained as adaptation to different growth environments. s. cerevisiae is adapted to nutrient rich environments in which it has competitive advantage from fast nutrient utilization and a high rate of atp production through the fermentative pathway, whereas t. reesei is adapted to nutrient poor environments where it benefits from high energy yield  <cit> . it has also been postulated that undifferentiated multicellular organisms, of which t. reesei is an example, have gotten evolutionary advantage from preferring the high energy yield from respiratory metabolism  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
biosynthetic pathways of t. reesei were reconstructed for most of the proteinogenic amino acids by using a computational carbon path analysis method retrace. the method was used to search for pathways from a metabolic network consisting of all reactions found in a comprehensive metabolic reaction database, and to subsequently rank the pathways according to the degree of support from the t. reesei's genome  <cit> . contiguous pathways, identical to the amino acid biosynthetic routes of s. cerevisiae, were found with high genome-level evidence. the 13c-labeling patterns observed in this study were in good accordance with the compartmentalized model of eukaryotic central carbon metabolism, originally developed for s. cerevisiae  <cit> . however, in contrast to s. cerevisiae, asp synthesis was observed to occur primarily from the mitochondrial pool of oaa in both t. reesei strains under all the studied conditions.

the t. reesei wild type strain is known to exhibit carbon catabolite repression of hydrolytic gene expression during growth on glucose, whereas in the Δcre <dig> strain the repression is partially disturbed  <cit> . the respirative pathway in t. reesei does not become transcriptionally downregulated by the carbon catabolite repression as in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . however, it is the in vivo fluxes that are the ultimate phenotype of an organism. in the present work, the effect of carbon catabolite repression on in vivo fluxes in t. reesei was, for the first time, quantitatively studied. the relative anaplerotic flux to the respirative pathway flux was characteristic to primarily respiratory metabolism in the both t. reesei strains under all studied conditions. thus, t. reesei utilizes primarily respiratory metabolism also when growing on a preferred carbon source glucose. however, the observed relative anaplerotic fluxes suggested that the respirative activity of the tca cycle is even slightly higher when t. reesei grows on the neutral carbon source sorbitol than when it grows on glucose. only minor differences were observed between the in vivo flux distributions of the wild type and the Δcre <dig> t. reesei strains. this indicates, that cre <dig>  the key repressor of utilization of alternative carbon sources, does not mediate carbon source dependent metabolic state alterations in the central carbon metabolism of t. reesei. the induction of cellulase gene expression with sophorose did not result in significant changes in the relative requirements of proteinogenic amino acids or in the ratio of anabolic and oxidative activities of the tca cycle.

