BACKGROUND
host-specific differentiation of parasites, also referred to as specialization, may arise as a consequence of limited dispersal or adaptive constraints  <cit> . some parasite species or lineages may indeed have evolved a restricted host range simply because they have not come in contact with other host species, for instance when these occur in allopatry. alternatively, host specificity may arise because of adaptive specialization  <cit> , where trade-offs or fitness costs of being generalist parasites can lead to host-specific differentiation even in sympatry  <cit> .

host specificity is often expected to lead to cospeciation, i.e. parasite speciation tracking that of the host. for inferring whether cospeciation has occurred, one usually compares host and parasite phylogenies. cospeciation yields congruent phylogenies , as has been previously illustrated, for example in the cases of animal hosts and parasitic lice  <cit>  and of some mutualist associations  <cit> . in contrast, the colonization of new hosts, either followed by parasite speciation  or not , generally decreases phylogenetic congruence  <cit> . additional processes are also expected to reduce the congruence between host and parasite phylogenies, such as species extinctions  <cit>  and duplications .

several recent studies comparing the phylogenies of highly specific parasites and their hosts revealed widespread incongruence  <cit> , showing that apparently strict host specificity is not sufficient to impede host shifts over the long term. in cases of host shifts, colonization is expected to be most likely between geographically overlapping hosts. the probability of the parasite being able to develop on a new host may also be influenced by the degree to which the new host shares chemical, physiological and ecological characters with the original host. investigating geographical and ecological similarities between hosts can therefore help reconstructing evolutionary history of host shifts.

in addition, if related parasites more easily infect hosts with similar ecologies and if chemical, physiological and ecological characters in part covary with phylogeny, false conclusions can arise from cophylogeny analyses. in the first place, host shifts will preferentially occur between phylogenetically closely related hosts  <cit> , which can generate similar degrees of congruence between parasite and host phylogenies as would cospeciation  <cit> . second, generalist parasites that can infect several host species are likely to be found on closely related host species, either because these generalist species are the result of a lack of parasite speciation following host speciation or of host range expansion among phylogenetically close hosts that share biochemical and ecological characteristics. if generalist species are not recognized as such, intraspecific nodes in parasite phylogenies may be mistaken for speciation events and then misinterpreted as cospeciation events if the generalist parasites infect sister host species. this latter potential pitfall in cophylogeny analyses has not been investigated yet to our knowledge.

the anther smut fungus microbotryum violaceum  deml & oberw.  fuckel)  is an obligate parasite on many caryophyllaceae. it has been recorded on  <dig> plant species in europe and on  <dig> plant species in north america  <cit> . the caryophyllaceae – microbotryum pathosystem is a model in many fields of evolutionary biology  <cit> . in diseased plants, diploid teliospores of m. violaceum replace pollen in the anthers, and are dispersed by insect visitors. host specific divergence of m. violaceum has been of debate for about a century. spore color  <cit> , mating behavior  <cit> , morphological differences  <cit> , and cross-inoculation experiments  <cit> , all suggested that m. violaceum strains found on different host species were at least partially differentiated. more recently, genetic analyses of m. violaceum populations from many hosts have revealed strong genetic differentiation  <cit> . finally, an approach using multiple gene phylogenies has firmly established that most host races of m. violaceum represent multiple independent evolutionary lineages, highly specialized on a single or a few host species  <cit> . microbotryum violaceum is thus a complex of more than fifteen true sibling species, showing a strong post-zygotic isolation  <cit> .

the host family, caryophyllaceae, has a global distribution with highest diversity in the holarctic, but also high diversity in the mediterranean and irano-turanean region  <cit> . the majority of the approximately  <dig>  species of the family are heliophytes occurring in dry, open habitats. some species are restricted to mountainous regions and the family is totally absent from lowland rain forests  <cit> . microbotryum violaceum commonly causes disease on species from two subfamilies of the caryophyllaceae, the alsinoideae and the caryophylloideae, and is most prevalent on perennials  <cit> . the systematics of the caryophyllaceae still mainly relies on morphological characters although there have been recent efforts to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationship among genera based on molecular data  <cit> . this is unfortunately insufficient for addressing questions on the caryophyllaceae – microbotryum association.

the goals of this paper are to reconstruct the evolutionary history of associations between the microbotryum anther smut fungi and their caryophyllaceae hosts and to test the effect of parasite species delimitation on cophylogeny analyses. we addressed the following questions:

1) what is the evidence for cospeciation and/or host shifts in this system?

2) does delimitation of cryptic fungal species influence the results of cophylogeny analyses?

3) do host shifts occur preferentially onto phylogenetically close hosts?

4) does geography explain parasite similarity?

5) do ecological factors, such as pollinator spectra or plant habitat, influence host shifts?

RESULTS
host phylogeny
the topologies of the host phylogenetic trees based on the its, intron trnl and spacer trnlf sequences showed no significant incongruence neither when assessed via an approximately unbiased  tests  nor when inspected by eye . a tree was therefore constructed using the concatenated loci . this tree adds support to the monophyly of the genera dianthus, saponaria, and lychnis, as previously reported for a smaller set of species  <cit> . within silene, we identified two highly supported clades, that we named silene type i and silene type ii.

p-values lower than  <dig>  indicate that the likelihood of the topology obtained using one focal gene is significantly different from the likelihood of the enforced topologies . na indicates that no tests were possible because the phylogenetic relationships potentially incongruent between the alternative topologies were not resolved in the focal topology.

smut phylogenies and identification of phylogenetic species
our current findings lend additional support for the existence of a number of cryptic microbotryum species, each specific to one or a few host species  <cit> . as before, the species status of the various clades rests on the congruence of the phylogenetic relationships of many strains inferred from the three fungal genes analyzed . this congruence is only not met for the clade formed by the strains collected from s. acaulis as observed previously  <cit> . for these strains the γ-tub phylogeny differs from the two other single gene phylogenies . the two placements of this lineage being basal, this incongruence is probably due to an ancient introgression or hybridization  <cit> . without the s. acaulis strains there was no remaining incongruence: all supported nodes were identical in the three gene trees. we therefore concatenated the three genes in a dataset without the s. acaulis strains, yielding the same tree topology as in the individual phylogenies but with higher support for some nodes .

p-values lower than  <dig>  indicate that the likelihood of the topology obtained using one focal gene is significantly different from the likelihood of the enforced topologies . when the microbotryum strains parasitizing s. acaulis were removed in the fungal trees, all topologies were identical.

in addition to the cryptic species identified previously  <cit> , three new phylogenetic species could be inferred from the strains analyzed in this study, respectively on l. flos-jovis, on saponaria officinalis, and on s. otites . we had access to only a single strain from s. lemmonii and stellaria sp. plants, so we could not infer the existence of specific fungal phylogenetic species on these hosts. however, because these strains were both strongly separated from other identified phylogenetic species in their respective clades and because they were isolated from phylogenetically or geographically very distant hosts, we nevertheless considered them as separate lineages in the comparison of host and fungal phylogenies below. for stellaria, this choice is in agreement with an its phylogeny supporting the monophyly of several strains collected from this genus with the same phylogenetic placement as ours  <cit> .

on the  <dig> host species screened in the end we identified a total of  <dig> parasite species . most of them appeared specific to a single host species. for both atocion rupestris  and saponaria ocymoides the two strains analyzed belonged to different fungal species. because these hosts are seldom infected  we suspect that we picked up transient opportunistic infections, so we did not consider these plant species as true hosts of the corresponding fungal species. the fungal species identified on the dianthus species and on gypsophila repens appeared generalist, i.e. able to infect several host species. speciation on these hosts may alternatively be too recent to have allowed for sufficient molecular divergence for us to detect.

for some of the subsequent analyses , all nodes must be resolved. in that case, we used a previous study that obtained high supports to resolve one of our polytomies  <cit>  . for the remaining polytomies, we considered several alternative topologies  including the branch of the fungal species on s. acaulis for parasite phylogeny at the two alternative placements.

eight data sets were used. for the fungi, "a" trees contain one strain per smut species and per host  and "b" trees a single representative per smut species , and two possible topologies were used, "1" and "2", depending on the position of mvsa. for the plants, poorly supported nodes were resolved in order to maximize the congruence with the fungal trees in the "max" trees and minimize it in the "min" trees, and the "t" trees contain only host species on which fungal species are well established . see also figs.  <dig> and  <dig> for the correspondence between host and parasite phylogenies for the least congruent combinations.

eight data sets were used; see legend from table  <dig> for their correspondence. two sets of costs were used: c) maximizing the likelihood of cospeciation events: cospeciation = - <dig>  duplication =  <dig>  sorting events =  <dig>  host shifts = 2; d) minimizing the number of events: cospeciation =  <dig>  duplication =  <dig>  sorting events =  <dig>  host shifts =  <dig> 

eight data sets were used using fungal topologies described in table  <dig>  plant trees had to be adjusted to be compatible with the fungal tree as the icong program does not allow for multiple associations. in the name of the plant tree "d" indicates that hosts harbouring several fungal species were duplicated and "s" indicates that one host was chosen for generalist parasite species. these choices were made to maximize or minimize further the congruence with the fungal tree as compared to max and min trees . p-value <  <dig>  indicated that the congruence between host and parasite trees was higher than that of two random trees.

comparison of plant and fungal phylogenies
we used two approaches for comparing host and parasite phylogenies: the more conventional one considered as a separate taxon the parasite strains from different host species such that generalist species were represented by as many terminal branches as host species on which they occurred , while the second approach compared species phylogenies  . in both cases, some broad-scale congruence between the host and parasite phylogenies appears by visual inspection  while fine-scale congruence between the host and parasite phylogenies is weak, in particular among the parasites of silene. however methodological analyses reconstructed different evolutionary histories for microbotryum-caryophyllaceae association depending on which approach was chosen.

when considering as a separate taxon the parasite strains from different host species , all methods used for comparing these host and parasite phylogenies revealed a significant number of cospeciation events or of congruence level as compared to random associations. treemap  <cit> , which seeks to minimize host shifts, inferred a significantly higher number of cospeciation events than expected from a random distribution but required many duplications and extinctions to achieve this  and five distinct smut species were inferred on the ancestral host. the results were similar regardless of which topology was chosen for the unresolved nodes. interestingly, treefitter  <cit>  inferred a much higher number of host shifts than cospeciation, duplication and extinction events, and this was true regardless of the topology and the costs chosen . the number of inferred cospeciation events was nonetheless higher than expected from a random distribution in all cases. parafit  <cit>  detected a significant correlation between the plant and fungal trees . the icong index  <cit>  also indicated that the congruence between plant and fungal trees was significant or marginally significant . furthermore, we found a significant positive relationship between the genetic distances between pairs of host plants and the distance between the pairs of associated microbotryum species using a mantel test .

the second approach, that we consider more correct, retains a single representative per fungal species, associated to each of the multiple hosts for generalist species , which leads to ignore the opportunistic infections. this differs from the conventional approach in that it requires the proper delimitation of parasite species since species are not defined by the host, but rather as a lineage with an independent evolutionary history. in this case neither treemap  nor treefitter  inferred significantly more cospeciation events than expected from a random distribution, regardless of the chosen topologies for the unresolved nodes. for one of the two possible topologies of the plant phylogeny , treefitter even inferred only host shifts when costs where set to minimize the total number of events. furthermore, the pairwise plant and microbotryum genetic distances were not significantly correlated . only the parafit and icong analyses remained significant , indicating that the parasite and host phylogenies were still more similar than expected by chance. the significant associations in the parafit results included both associations between dianthus and saponaria host species and their parasites, and some of the silene species. the significance of these associations may be due to the symmetry of the two trees regarding the main clades: for instance, parasites found on dianthus and saponaria are monophyletic as are the plants.

we conclude that the failure to appropriately delimit parasite species and represent generalist parasite species as several separate taxa  had introduced a bias. inspection of nodes for which reconciliation analyses supported cospeciation in treemap showed that the strains harboured by dianthus spp. that belonged to the same generalist fungal species were considered as lineages arisen by cospeciation in the treemap reconciliation. in the parafit analyses, this same group of strains contributed almost half of the significant associations . thus, cospeciation events were inferred where there had been no speciation at all, but rather a failure to speciate or a host range expansion towards closely related hosts. thus failure to delimit parasite species inflated the significance of congruence between the host and parasite trees.

geographic patterns
most european host plant species used in this study have overlapping ranges. for instance, all the phylogenetic species, except those of the genus stellaria, include at least one sample from the western alps and most of them at least one sample from the french pyrenees . the current geographic distribution of host species therefore appears to contribute little to the phylogenetic relationships among fungal species. in north america the hosts represent a clade whereas the smut sample collected from s. lemmonii was not related to smuts from the two other north american hosts . therefore we found no geographic pattern explaining the phylogenetic relationships of the fungal species.

relatedness among fungal species and host ecology
in cases of host shifts, host ecology may play a role by facilitating contact between a parasite and a new host that has, for instance, similar pollinators or habitats as the original host. we therefore investigated whether recent host shifts, detected from non-congruence in the terminal branches of the host and parasite phylogenies , occurred between hosts with similar ecologies such as type of habitats and pollinator guilds. we detected several interesting ecological similarities among hosts with related smut lineages : the pair s. vulgaris/l. flos-jovis grows on well drained soils, such as calcareous meadows, at least in the western alps, which could have facilitated potential host shift  <dig>  sphingidae, noctuidae , apidae and syrphidae all visit silene nutans, l. flos-cuculi, s. vulgaris, s. latifolia and s. dioica and may thus have been the agents of host shifts  <dig> and  <dig>  regarding potential host shift  <dig>  lychnis flos-cuculi, s. vulgaris, as well as s. nutans are often found together on shady borders between fields and woods. the dianthus spp. and g. repens both grow on exposed rocky areas and are pollinated by syrphidae, potentially favouring host shift  <dig>  intriguingly, s. otites shares little similarities with other silene from which it could have inherited its parasites. it is mainly wind-pollinated, only shares butterflies as insect pollinators with s. lemmonii which could have facilitated host shift  <dig>  but these two plant species have no current geographical overlap to our knowledge. this suggests that the incongruences  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  between host and parasite phylogenies, if indeed the results of host shifts, may have been facilitated by ecological similarities of the plants. however, the lack of specificity of insect pollinators, the large overlap of the ecotypes of the different hosts and the probable rapid evolution of ecological traits at the examined scale render any such conclusions speculative.

discussion
caryophylloideae phylogeny
the host phylogeny, here including  <dig> species within the sub-family caryophylloideae provides interesting insights in itself, because the relationships among caryophyllaceae are still poorly known, in particular at the sub-genus level  <cit> . it is striking that the three north american hosts appear monophyletic, branching within the european species. this would be consistent with their evolution by allopatric speciation following a single colonization event from europe, after the separation of these two continents. fossil records suggest an origin of the caryophyllaceae  <dig> mya in australia, the oldest fossils in europe dating back only 30– <dig> mya  <cit> , by which time north america was separated from europe by the atlantic ocean  <cit> .

our dataset, with additional species compared to previous studies  <cit> , further supports the monophyly of the genera lychnis, saponaria and dianthus but unfortunately fails to resolve the monophyly of the genus silene. the relative position of species within the dianthus clade was the least resolved, suggesting recent radiation of dianthus species. this may be particularly relevant for the study of microbotryum-caryophyllaceae association because the smut lineages on dianthus species also appear to be less host-specific than those on silene species.

importance of delimiting parasite species in cophylogeny studies
we detected a number of cryptic generalist species with multiple closely related hosts. when these were duplicated in the phylogeny to have one representative per host species, the congruence between the host and parasite phylogenies was artificially inflated. this shows that carefully delimiting parasite species boundaries in cophylogeny studies is important for assessing the degree of cophylogenetic history, although it is rarely done for micro-organisms. most often parasites are simply sampled from different host species and the resulting tree is compared to the tree for host species  <cit> . such an approach implicitly assumes that each host species harbours one distinct parasite species, an assumption that we here show to be both unfounded and of potentially great importance in this kind of study. the microbotryum-caryophyllaceae system shows further that generalist parasite species are likely to infect a range of closely related hosts. therefore parasite species boundaries must be carefully delimited to avoid erroneous interpretations of the degree of congruence between host and parasite phylogenies.

inference on microbotryum evolutionary history: host shifts versus cospeciation
after having carefully delimited fungal species, the number of cospeciation events inferred by treemap and tree fitter when reconciling the microbotryum phylogeny to that of their caryophyllaceaous hosts was not higher than expected from a random distribution, as suggested by a previous study on a smaller sample  <cit>  nor was there a significant correlation  between genetic distances of host plant and their respective anther smut species.

icong and parafit still detected significant congruence between the host and fungal phylogenies, the significant associations in parafit being mostly due to the parasite species found on dianthus and saponaria. the significance of the global parafit and icong tests therefore most probably stems, not from pervasive cospeciation events, but from the fact that the anther smut lineages infecting the dianthus and saponaria plants were monophyletic, as were the plants. this pattern is consistent with cospeciation or host shifts between closely related members of these clades, together with an absence of host shifts between distantly related hosts like silene and dianthus. host shifts appear to have occurred between hosts with limited phylogenetic distances in the microbotryum-caryophyllaceae disease system. incipient host shifts by microbotryum have been reported onto s. vulgaris from s. latifolia  <cit>  and onto gypsophila repens from the closely related petrorhagia saxifraga  <cit> . the large-scale congruence detected by parafit and icong is thus likely to be due to constraints impeding shifts to hosts that are genetically too distant. investigating the branch lengths and divergence times of the two phylogenies would be necessary to determine whether cospeciation occurred at all  <cit> . unfortunately, available fossil records do not allow calibration of the sequence divergence between the microbotryum and its host plant species  <cit> .

overall, our results suggest that cospeciation is not the rule in the microbotryum-caryophyllaceae system, that host shifts were pervasive, but that fungal species could not shift to too distant host species . comparing the results of reconciliation analyses to that of methods investigating simple congruence was important for identifying these constraints on host shifts imposed by host phylogeny.

several factors may have limited the power of our analyses on cophylogeny. first, our collection was restricted to the most common caryophyllaceae: we have sampled  <dig> host species of the more than  <dig> known to be infected with anther smut  <cit> . several additional independent fungal lineages that may show more evidence of cospeciation than the ones we have sampled are therefore likely to exist. however, larger sampling is more likely to decrease and not increase the global congruence between hosts and parasites if host shifts occur between moderately distant hosts as shown for microbotryum species on silene. and indeed larger sampling gave evidence for host shifts in the highly specific ant-fungus growing parasites . our conclusion that microbotryum has mainly evolved by host shifts is therefore highly likely to hold with a larger sampling. second, the lineages that appear to infect more than one host species could actually be host-specific but too recently divergent for our markers to detect differentiation. this would increase the congruence of the microbotryum and caryophyllaceae phylogenies, but would not decrease the high number of host shifts required to reconcile the two phylogenies. it would thus not affect our conclusions regarding m. violaceum evolutionary history: the microbotryum-caryophyllaceae system is another example of a host-parasite association where cocladogenesis is not the rule and highlights the importance of cross species disease transmission in the emergence of new parasites lineages  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
adaptive specialization that follows rare host shift events appears to be the major mechanism of speciation in microbotryum, as in many pathogenic fungi  <cit> . the frequency of host shifts in the microbotryum-caryophyllaceae system, and in several other highly specific plant-parasite associations  <cit> , illustrates that specialization is far from an evolutionary dead end and that the diversification of specialist species can occur by other phenomena than cospeciation. in agreement with this idea, most previous cophylogeny studies on parasites able to disperse to novel hosts have reported evidence for host shifts, even when the number of cospeciation events was found significant  <cit> . the possibility of host shift and the degree of relatedness between ancestral and new hosts will a priori depend on several factors, such as geography, ecology, and the genetics of specialization. current geographic distribution of host species seems to be of little relevance for understanding the association between microbotryum and its hosts at a local or regional scale. we detected some interesting examples of shared ecological traits that may have facilitated host shifts.

