BACKGROUND
grapes  are an economically important agricultural commodity, having an economic impact greater than $ <dig> billion to the american wine and grape industry alone . cultivated grapes are grown and consumed as fresh fruit, used as the root stocks for fruit producing scions, and in the production of a range of wines with distinct and complex flavor profiles  <cit> . grapevines are a long-lived perennial fruit species intertwined within the culture of many countries dating back more than 7000 years.

there are more than  <dig> distinct cultivars of grapes in the world. grape production is found on every arable continent around the globe  <cit> . grapevines have maintained a rich genetic diversity since domestication as a result of vegetative propagation practices that both immortalize existing traits and unknowingly encourage unique phenotypes to arise from clonal cuttings that carry somatic mutations  <cit> . regional environments often referred to as “terroir”, in conjunction with human selective pressures have shaped the cultivar characteristics associated with many of the popular wines enjoyed today  <cit> .

the color of a grape berry’s skin contributes a recognizable cultivar characteristic that differentiates red- and white-skinned grapes. anthocyanins are the purple, blue and red pigments that provide the color associated with the skins and wines from red cultivars, and are extracted from the berry skins during winemaking; they are crucial constituents for quality in high-end wines  <cit> . white cultivars do not synthesize anthocyanins as a result of two adjacent mutations within the genes of the myb transcription factors, in vvimyba <dig> and vvimyba <dig>  <cit> . human selective pressures from domestication are believed to have maintained this phenotype in many of today’s popular cultivars  <cit> .

other phenylpropanoids, besides anthocyanins, contribute to distinct cultivar differences in both grapes and wine. for example, genetic and environmental factors account for cultivar-dependent differences in abundance of the flavon-3-ols, catechin and epicatechin, in red wines produced from diverse regions  <cit> . wine and table grapes also differ in their concentrations of both hydroxybenzoic and hydroxycinnamic acids levels, with wine grape content significantly higher  <cit> . the qualities of bitterness and astringency in wine are attributed to monomeric flavan-3-ols and polymeric proanthocyanidins or condensed tannins , and have been studied for their effects upon human health, including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties .

cultivar differences also extend to subtle variations in amino acid composition at harvest . ammonia and certain amino acids are the main nitrogen-containing compounds assimilated by yeasts within fresh grape juice or musts before fermentation commences  <cit> . nitrogenous substances become available to yeasts from pressed berry juice or via extraction from the skins, in the case of fermenting red wines. the assimilable nitrogen levels in grapes must also play a role in determining the duration of fermentation, and musts are often amended with ammonium salts  to ensure efficient fermentation  <cit> . yeast assimilates free amino acids under anaerobic fermentation conditions, with the exception of proline that stoichiometrically requires oxygen for degradation  <cit> . aroma composition of wines shares a close relationship with must amino acid composition, where volatile compounds such as isoamyl acetate, isobutanol, isobutyric acid and methionol are significantly different among cultivars  <cit> . grape composition at harvest can therefore impact the quality of the finished wine.

the environmental influence of water deficit has been positively correlated with the enhancement of quality attributes such as color, aroma and flavor  <cit> . for example, deluc et al.  <cit>  investigated seasonal water deficit in cabernet sauvignon observing 2-fold increases in the accumulation of the five major anthocyanins, as well as significant increases to the myb transcription factors that regulate the final steps in anthocyanin biosynthesis. drought tolerance amongst cultivars also varies between grapevine cultivars and species  <cit> . wine produced from low water status vines had significant reductions in vegetal aroma, but were rated highly for fruity aromas associated with red and black fruit  <cit> . water-deficit-treated berries also showed significantly induced transcripts involved in fatty acid cleavage or hydroxylation of monoterpenes leading to plant volatile production  <cit> . severe water deficit can also increase berry nitrogen status  <cit>  by differentially affecting the transcription of amino acid metabolism, including proline, glutamate and phenylalanine  <cit> .

in the present study, an integrated analysis  is presented to test the uniqueness of three red-skinned and two white-skinned cultivars: cabernet sauvignon, merlot, pinot noir, chardonnay and semillon, respectively. here, the same berry samples from the same vineyard and climate, free of disease and insect pressures, were sampled and utilized for each omic analysis. the cultivars were exposed to a mild, seasonal water-deficit treatment from fruit set until harvest in  <dig> to provide a more diverse molecular expression that underlies the unique responses of each cultivar. the major goal of this research was to elucidate the major biochemical and signal transduction pathways that were active at berry maturity. this was accomplished using an omics approach to identify and quantify the relative abundance of transcripts, proteins and metabolites in the berry skins. another goal was to evaluate the platform performance of gene expression profiled by nimblegen grape whole-genome microarray and illumina rnaseq technologies. in addition to comparing abundance changes of individual proteins and transcripts, ancillary components of the berry biological system were determined through primary and secondary metabolite analyses using gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy  and liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy . interestingly, the cultivars’ proteomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic responses to the drought treatment were divergent, reflecting, at the level of the berry skin, unique grape profiles. in this comprehensive assessment of five grape berry cultivars at harvest, we found that there was concordance amongst the omics platforms in differentiating each cultivar’s uniqueness.

RESULTS
five omic data sets comprising transcripts, proteins, and metabolites, generated from the same harvested skins, were used to investigate cultivar differences in biochemistry and signal transduction at berry maturity. an emphasis upon known, biologically-important molecules of the mature berry that affect color and amino acid metabolism will be presented here.

growth conditions and physiological data
cabernet sauvignon, merlot, pinot noir, chardonnay, and semillon were grown at the university of nevada, reno experimental vineyard during the  <dig> growing season in relatively normal and stress-free conditions. this vineyard is located at high elevation  in a very dry climate , estimated daily evapotranspiration  and daily mean temperatures ). seasonal precipitation from fruit-set through veraison  was marginal, totaling  <dig>  cm, with daily mean temperatures of  <dig>  °c. the majority of rain accumulation occurred late in the season , which also coincided with a period of cooler daily mean temperatures  and the harvests for semillon, pinot noir, and merlot. the remaining growing days of the  <dig> season maintained warmer temperatures  and an absence of rain. cabernet sauvignon fruit were harvested the day prior to the season’s first freezing temperatures  in order to avoid potential frost damage to berries.fig.  <dig> seasonal precipitation and temperature at the nevada agricultural experiment station valley road vineyard were collected from the desert research institute’s weather station. the double sigmoidal phases of berry development are highlighted: pre-veraison in green refers to fruit set and enlargement before color change; veraison in pink refers to the transition in color of berries; and post-veraison in purple refers to full color change and heightened sugar and decreased organic acid levels until harvest. harvest time points in october  <dig> are denoted by cultivar abbreviations in their respective order of harvest: semillon , pinot noir , merlot , chardonnay , and cabernet sauvignon . a daily precipitation  values are illustrated by blue circles, scaled to the amount of precipitation on a given day. b the daily total penman evapotranspiration  values were based on the  <dig> kimberly-penman equation. c the daily high , low  and mean  temperatures and the extreme high  and low  are indicated



grapevines were grown in two adjacent experimental vineyards with independent irrigation controllers. merlot, pinot noir, and semillon were grown in the experimental south, which had a randomized-block experimental design . different rows were under different irrigation controls. drip irrigation was initiated when stem water potentials of the vines reached their target treatment level, stem water potentials  of − <dig>  mpa for control vines and − <dig>  mpa for a mild water deficit. mid-day stem water potentials were monitored weekly for well-watered - and water-deficit -treated vines to assess plant water status and to determine the amount of water to be applied to maintain stem water potentials over the season . the water potentials of vines were close to target stem water potentials at the time of harvest.table  <dig> mid-day stem water potentials at harvest time point. measurements conducted on mature, fully expanded leaves. values are mean ± se

vineyarda

anorth = cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay; south = merlot, pinot noir, and semillon


bmpa = megapascal


cinconsistencies between sample size were due to damaged leaves at time of sampling



berries were monitored weekly from fruit set through to harvest, to assess °brix and titratable acidity  levels by sampling two average clusters per replicate, cultivar and treatment from two non-adjacent vines. the timing of harvest for each cultivar was determined by berries sampled for a target °brix to ta ratio of  <dig> . the average °brix and ta  were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, with a ratio of  <dig> . for each cultivar, ww and wd grape berries were harvested on the same day. mild water deficit treatment had no significant effect upon berry diameter, °brix, or ta at harvest , with the exception of a 4 % reduction of pinot noir berry diameters that was statistically significant at p ≤  <dig> . reported physiological measurements and water deficit levels were similar to data reported by grimplet et al.  <cit>  in their proteomic analysis of grape berry tissues under water deficit.table  <dig> berry physiological measurements at the harvest time point


aww = well watered; wd = water deficit


bmeasurements conducted on individual berries


cmeasurements conducted on whole clusters


dexpressed in g l − <dig> tartaric acid

values are mean ± se, with n =  <dig> for berry diameter and n =  <dig> for °brix and titratable acidity  measurements. differences between treatments were determined to be significant  by the student’s t-test



comparative omic analyses of grape berry skin
our comparative omic analyses focused on the skins, which had been separated from the pulp and seeds of ripe berry clusters at harvest and rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. at least two clusters per experimental replicate  were harvested in preparation for each sample extraction and analysis . berry skins were combined from each experimental replicate and ground and mixed in liquid nitrogen before dividing samples into separate aliquots for chemical extraction. proteins were extracted from aliquots of three experimental replicates with a modified phenol-based protocol  <cit> , digested with trypsin and lys-c and analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry   <cit> . peptide to spectrum matching, protein identification, and normalized spectral abundance factors , were computed as described previously  <cit>  . approximately  <dig>  spectra per sample were assigned to peptides matching a total of  <dig> non-redundant vitis vinifera proteins in the uniprotkb database . from the non-redundant proteins,  <dig> were shared across all five of the cultivars and had spectra assigned for all experimental replicates .table  <dig> comparative omic analyses



total rna was extracted with a modified ctab protocol  from aliquots of five experimental replicates for nimblegen  grape whole-genome microarray analysis, with standard microarray processing and data normalization as in cramer et al.  <cit> . microarray analysis profiled  <dig>  genes as predicted in the 12x v <dig> annotation of the grape genome . ground skin sample aliquots from the same three experimental replicates used for the protein analysis were sequenced with an illumina hiseq  <dig> sequencing system to determine transcript abundance. transcript data were generated by aligning quality-filtered sequence reads to the grape genome  <cit> , assigning transcript counts to the v <dig> annotation with the htseq-count tool  <cit> , and then performing a differential expression analysis with the edger  <cit>  package . we detected the expression of  <dig>  transcripts of the  <dig>  transcripts in the v <dig> annotation.

metabolites were extracted in parallel from aliquots of all six experimental replicates, three additional replicates from the aforementioned, with a protocol previously described  <cit> . for metabolite analyses, the peaks of each metabolite were normalized to the total peak area giving a relative metabolic abundance value. the relative metabolic abundance from berry skins of primary and secondary metabolites  were analyzed by gc-ms and lc-ms based methods.

venn diagrams illustrate the distributions of identified  and quantified  proteins in the different cultivars. in each case, subsets of proteins were distributed to each cultivar. the majority of transcripts were assessed by both platforms . microarrays measured probe fluorescence for  <dig> transcripts that did not receive unique counts by rnaseq. a subset of  <dig> transcripts from both platforms could be paired to the quantified proteins. the majority of metabolites were measured in each cultivar , with the main metabolite differences attributed to the anthocyanin production in red cultivars.fig.  <dig> venn diagrams of the  identified and  quantified proteins, the overlap of  transcripts assessed with either platform, and  all the metabolites measured in each cultivar, cabernet sauvignon , merlot , pinot noir , chardonnay  and semillon 



the most abundant proteins and transcripts from each of the five cultivars were determined. only proteins detected in all samples  were assessed, but all transcripts measured were considered for this analysis in both platforms. the top ten most abundant proteins  surveyed in each cultivar consisted of only  <dig> proteins, many of which can be classified as pathogenesis-related . additionally, three of the proteins were in the top ten most abundant of each cultivar: β- <dig>   <dig>  glucanase , major latex protein  <dig> , and a peroxiredoxin- <dig> . both transcript platforms were assessed for the degree of concordance in reporting highly expressed transcripts. the top most abundant transcripts by microarray  consisted of a common set of  <dig> uniquely annotated transcripts from the cultivars. again, several of the top transcripts were pr protein-related including a class iv chitinase, a non-specific lipid-transfer protein and two thaumatins. five of the transcripts were also ranked in the top ten of each cultivar: invertases/pectin methylesterase inhibitor , chitinase class iv , putative ripening-induced protein  <dig> , photosystem ii protein d <dig> , and one transcript without a known annotation , chitinase class iv , abscisic stress ripening protein  <dig> , allergenic protein pt2l <dig> , and the same unannotated transcript in the microarrays . microarray transcripts that did not fully correspond with the rnaseq are annotated as containing probesets that potentially cross hybridize with other closely related genes. for example, all four probes that map to the cupin and photosystem ii protein d <dig> genes listed in table  <dig> have the potential for cross hybridization .table  <dig> top ten most abundant proteins quantified within each cultivar


aannotation by grimplet et al.  <cit> 


b
cs cabernet sauvignon, me merlot, pn pinot noir, cd chardonnay, sm semillon

the number within each cultivar column represents the abundance rank for that cultivar, with the number ‘1’ being the highest

q6veq6c
f6hfy8c
f6gxb0c
a5c670c
f6hpx1c

aannotation by grimplet et al.  <cit> 


b
cs cabernet sauvignon, me merlot, pn pinot noir, cd chardonnay, sm semillon


cnot identified in protein data set

q6veq6c
f6h8m0c
f6hmp0c

aannotation by grimplet et al.  <cit> 


bcs = cabernet sauvignon; me = merlot; pn = pinot noir; cd = chardonnay; sm = semillon


cnot identified in protein data set



a multifactorial  experimental design was used for each platform to determine significant differences  amongst treatments and cultivars. anova indicated that the cultivar level contributed the largest amount of significant changes in each of the data sets . statistically significant transcript abundance changes were found for both transcript technologies for cultivar, treatment, and cultivar x treatment effects  <cit> . neither the treatment effect nor the interaction effect  was statistically significant with the protein or metabolite data, but significant cultivar effects were found with protein and metabolite abundances.table  <dig> statistically significant results from each omics dataset adjusted for multiple testing using fdr 



differential expression analysis of transcripts was similarly performed for both platforms. standard processing and data normalization of the microarrays was performed. anova indicated transcript abundance of  <dig>  transcripts changed significantly with cultivar, the transcript abundance of  <dig> transcripts changed significantly with treatment, and  <dig> transcripts changed with the cultivar x treatment interaction term. rnaseq data were normalized and modeled with the standard edger pipeline. generalized linear models were fit to a multifactorial design formula  for significance testing, and indicated  <dig>  transcripts changed significantly with cultivar; the transcript abundance of one transcript changed significantly with treatment; and  <dig> transcripts changed with the cultivar x treatment interaction term.

there was a common set of  <dig> proteins that was quantifiable across each of the cultivars and treatments. this consistent set of proteins was considered for further reliable comparative quantitative analyses. the protein abundance of  <dig> proteins changed significantly with cultivar , but there were no significant changes in protein abundance for either treatment or cultivar x treatment interaction terms. in addition, the relative metabolic abundance of primary and secondary metabolites  changed significantly with cultivar, but no metabolite abundances were changed significantly for either treatment or cultivar x treatment interaction terms .

a comparison of tables  <dig> and  <dig> reveals that the percentage of the transcripts varied substantially with cultivar between the two transcriptomic platforms, 92 % for the microarray platform and 56 % for the rnaseq platform. the percentage of proteins varying with cultivar was approximately 69 % and the percentage of metabolites varying with cultivar was approximately 95 % for both platforms. thus, all omic platforms revealed a large variability in molecular abundance amongst all the cultivars.

in summary, data variability was mostly attributed to the cultivar effect. the mild water deficit treatment effect was much less. anova results indicate that mild water deficit did induce a significant change in the abundance of a small percentage  of transcripts. protein and metabolite abundances in this study were significantly affected only by a specific cultivar.

experimental samples from each platform were analyzed by principal components analysis  , which reduced the dimensionality of the data and allowed a clearer observation of the underlying structure. each pca biplot showed the directions where there was the most variance in the data. cultivars separated from one another similarly on the first principal component in each platform providing substantial concordance amongst the different omic approaches. generally, red cultivars separated from white, but pinot noir samples separated somewhere in between. biological variability in samples was evident particularly in protein and metabolite biplots. the secondary metabolites were separated along the first component, separating the red cultivars that synthesize anthocyanins, and anthocyanin moieties separated cabernet sauvignon and merlot from pinot noir. water-deficit and well-watered samples at harvest could not be differentiated clearly in pcas reflecting the results from the anova.fig.  <dig> principal components analysis of each omic platform. experimental replicates are labeled and colored consistently in each platform, cabernet sauvignon , merlot , pinot noir , chardonnay  and semillon . w = well-watered; d = water deficit. the following numbers refers to an experimental replicate sample



a functional analysis  was performed to identify gene ontology  categories for the quantifiable proteins with the bingo  plugin for cytoscape , using a custom annotation derived from uniprot , ensemblplants , and gramene   <cit> . there were  <dig> significantly overrepresented go categories after correcting for fdr . to aid our analysis, overrepresented go terms were visualized  with a treemap using revigo and the treemap r package that depicts loosely related go terms by color  <cit> . rectangles in the treemap are size adjusted to reflect their enriched p-value. the functional analysis examined the results both by the level of significance and by the number of constituents of each go category, in an effort to look beyond generic or overly encompassing functional categories . some of the major biological process go categories for proteins that were overrepresented included organic acid metabolic process, monosaccharide metabolic process, generation of precursor metabolites and energy, alcohol metabolic process, and response to abiotic stimulus.fig.  <dig> overrepresented go biological process terms. the functional analysis of  <dig> quantifiable proteins visualizes related terms by color, and rectangles were size adjusted to reflect their enriched p-value



correlations between proteomic and transcriptomic data
to investigate the linear relationship of the relative transcript abundance with relative protein abundance, we fit linear regression models to the transcript-protein pairs and computed pearson’s correlation. a direct sample-to-sample comparison was performed for the rnaseq using the same experimental replicates as were used in the proteomics. the microarray analysis contained two additional experimental replicates for each treatment and cultivar, preventing a direct one-to-one comparison between replicates; thus, mean expression  and abundance  values were computed for each treatment and cultivar prior to regression analysis. when the transcriptomic and proteomic abundance values were compared for all transcript-protein pairs by a single linear regression , the goodness of fit or coefficient of determination was low ; a small positive correlation between the pairs was observed  . regression with only the top 10 % most abundant proteins increased the correlation coefficient to  <dig>  with the rnaseq data, whereas use of the lower 90 % of the abundant proteins reduced the correlation coefficient to  <dig>  . there was essentially no correlation  with the rnaseq data and the least abundant proteins of 50 % or less. with the top ten most abundant proteins in the skins , the number of proteins with significant positive correlations increased to 57 %  and 71 %  for the microarray and rnaseq data, respectively . thus, there was an increase in correlation coefficient with increasing protein abundance, but for the majority of the proteins the correlation was very low.fig.  <dig> correlations between log <dig> transformation of the normalized protein and transcript abundance of five grapevine cultivars. the correlation between  <dig> transcript-protein pair abundance levels from either  rnaseq or  microarray analyses



some proteins with strong positive correlations included pathogenesis-related proteins, carboxyesterases and proteins related to phenylpropanoid and flavonoid production ; all of these proteins had a minimum pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>  . generally, protein-transcript pairs grouped together by cultivar and occasionally by skin color. stronger negative correlations were observed with the microarray data  than with rnaseq data . protein-transcript pairs with strong negative correlations included a translation initiation factor eif <dig> subunit  and a chlorophyll a-b binding protein , a constituent of the light-harvesting complex. other negatively correlated protein-transcript pairs included several heat shock proteins and a putative serine/threonine kinase.fig.  <dig> individual correlations between ten of the highest correlated protein-transcript pairs. linear regressions and pearson’s correlation of rnaseq and protein data sets were direct sample-to-sample comparisons. the uniprotkb accession number of each protein is given in parentheses



overall, for the abundance of the  <dig> proteins identified,  <dig> and 33 % had a significant correlation with their transcript abundance for microarray and rnaseq data, respectively. these data sets of significantly correlated protein-transcript pairs were analyzed for overrepresentation of functional categories using the go categories for biological processes . there were many functional categories overrepresented, however, these same categories were overrepresented also in the full set of  <dig> proteins. additionally there were no substantial changes in the percentages of each functional group in their respective data sets. thus, the correlation of the protein-transcript pair appears to be independent of their functional category.

transcriptomic platform concordance
the protein-transcript pair comparison indicated that a larger number of proteins were more significantly correlated with the rnaseq data than the microarray data. therefore, we measured how similar the two different platforms, open  and closed , measured gene expression levels by pearson correlation and linear regression, on a gene-by-gene basis. in cramer et al.  <cit> , we cautioned readers about the likelihood of cross-hybridization potential of approximately  <dig>  genes on the nimblegen grape whole-genome microarray. many of these transcripts belong to vitis gene families with high sequence similarity that creates an opportunity for at least one probe from a set of four probes to cross-hybridize with probes from another gene on the array. a global comparison of measureable transcripts shared between the methods presented an opportunity to investigate their concordance. in fig.  <dig>  a pairwise comparison of each platform’s transcript expression was separated into subsets by the number of probes with the potential for cross-hybridization . platforms were positively correlated as a whole , but the correlation decreased when examining subsets of transcripts based on the number of probes that cross-hybridize . in particular, lowly expressed transcripts in the rnaseq dataset had a variable range  of expression values measured by microarray.fig.  <dig> pairwise platform comparisons of measured transcripts. each subfigure  represents the rna-seq vs microarray data of the transcripts that are subset by the number of probes  with cross-hybridization potential on nimblegen microarrays. transcript expression values are the average treatment and cultivar expression level due to unequal experimental replicates between platforms, n =  <dig> for rnaseq and n =  <dig> for microarrays

probe counta

aflagged transcripts from cramer et al.  <cit> 


bcorrelation between rnaseq & microarray

pearson’s correlation of transcripts annotated for cross-hybridization potential. affected transcript counts for all transcripts and the subset paired with protein data



pathway omic analyses
to gain a better understanding of the biochemical processes in the mature berry skin and to emphasize how differentiated the cultivars were at harvest, we mapped our omic data sets to two important biochemical pathways for further analysis. we used the quantifiable protein data as a framework for each map and their matching transcripts. additionally, metabolite intermediates and final products were also mapped, including amino acids, flavan-3-ols, and anthocyanins. each pathway summarizes abundance differences depicted as side-by-side heat maps that display the ratio of the individual cultivars average to the overall cultivars average abundance for each data point. the omic data were overlaid onto customized metabolic pathway maps based upon annotated maps located at kegg  <cit> , plantcyc  <cit> , and vitiscyc  <cit> . mapped enzymes without heat maps did not contain protein data.

differences in phenylpropanoid through anthocyanin biosynthesis
a large number of proteins, transcripts and metabolites could be mapped in the phenylpropanoid pathway . there was a loose correspondence of proteins and transcripts from red-skinned grapes with their metabolites. we primarily observed higher protein abundance in the red cultivars for enzymes involved in phenylalanine through anthocyanin biosynthesis, such as flavanone 3-hydroxylase and leucoanthocyandin dioxygenase. missing spectra within the experimental replicates of the white cultivars was evidence of their lesser abundance. relative to the red cultivars, chardonnay and semillon proteins involved in phenylpropanoid and flavonoid were less abundant, although, a chorismate mutase  in chardonnay was an exception to that observation. chorismate is an important precursor that interfaces the biosynthesis of phenylalanine and tyrosine, tryptophan, folate, and phylloquinone  <cit> . four phenylalanine ammonia-lyases  were identified only within the red-skinned cultivars. phenylalanine ammonia-lyases  are a multigene enzyme family encoding the first committed step in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis  <cit> . chalcone synthase  and stilbene synthase  enzymes both catalyze reactions that condense the substrates 3-coumaroyl-coa and three malonyl-coa units in production of flavonoids and stilbenoids, respectively. three grapevine chalcone synthases  were identified within the proteomic data set  <cit> . udp glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase  proteins were observed only in the red cultivars. they catalyze the o-glycosylation of anthocyanidins or anthocyanins that enhance the stability and hydophilicity of anthocyanins in planta . of the proteins quantified in each cultivar, all but 3-dehydroquinate synthase  were significantly present at the cultivar level.fig.  <dig> the expression of three omic data sets in a simplified phenylpropanoid pathway from carbohydrates to anthocyanins. the relative abundances of transcripts, proteins and metabolites are displayed as colored boxes. relative abundance ratios are of the cultivar average relative to the average of all cultivars. only transcripts  paired to proteins are shown. the five anthocyanidins measured are organized into rows  and columns . results were derived from experimental replicates . proteins and metabolites absent for a specific cultivar are colored grey. cultivar order is from left to right: cabernet sauvignon , merlot , pinot noir , chardonnay , and semillon . enzymes and transcripts are given as ec numbers: 3-deoxy-7-phosphoheptulonate synthase , 3-dehydroquinate synthase , shikimate dehydrogenase , 3-phosphoshikimate 1-carboxyvinyltransferase , chorismate synthase , chorismate mutase , prephenate dehydratase , phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , trans-cinnamate 4-monooxyygenase , 4-coumarate-coa ligase , chalcone synthase , chalcone isomerase , flavanone 3-hydroxylase , dihydroflavonol 4-reductase , leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase , and udp glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase 



in contrast, the transcripts of differentially expressed genes  between cultivars in the phenylpropanoid pathway were generally few and occurring after naringenin chalcone in the pathway. more evident were differences between red and white cultivar degs of enzymes that centered on flavonoid and anthocyanin biosynthesis such as chalcone synthase, flavanone 3-dioxygenase  and udp glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase . these three enzymes had the most abundant transcripts mapped, and are similar to the gene expression for all cultivars but merlot  in boss et al.  <cit> . no members of the multi-gene stilbene synthase family were detected in the proteomic data set, but one stilbene synthase  encoding transcript  was significantly changed under the interaction term , with cabernet sauvignon experiencing a − <dig>  fold decrease in expression as a result of water deficit  <cit> . however, vvists <dig> was lowly expressed in microarrays  relative to other transcripts and contained few counts in rnaseq. only the udp glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase transcript  was significant at the treatment level in the microarrays, but each transcript, with the exception of the shikimate dehydrogenase, was significant at the cultivar level.

both primary and secondary metabolites were measured for each cultivar. shikimate was among the most abundant metabolites in cabernet sauvignon. aromatic amino acid biosynthesis stems from this intermediate product within the shikimate pathway  <cit> . phenylalanine, tryptophan and tyrosine amino acids were recovered in each cultivar. stilbenoids were also recovered to include cis- and trans-resveratrol, their glucosides and the polymerized δ-viniferin. catechin and epigallocatechin, two flavan-3-ol monomers, and procyanidin dimers b <dig> and b <dig>  consist of two molecules of -catechin or -epicatechin respectively. flavan-3-ols co-localize with anthocyanins in the hypodermal cells of the berry skin, comprising a diverse and highly abundant class of soluble phenolic compounds  <cit> . the astringent mouth feel sensations experienced in red wines are derived from these phenolic compounds, with increasing concentrations associated with quality wines  <cit> .

given that most observable protein and transcript ratio changes were centered at the end of anthocyanin biosynthesis, we present the relative abundance of these metabolites for the three moieties of anthocyanins that were determined . the importance of color to the sensory experience of red wines is derived from the red, purple and blue anthocyanin pigments produced in the berry skin. observable differences of anthocyanidin content and their glycosylated, acetylated and coumaroylated moieties amongst the red cultivars were strongly cultivar dependent. all metabolites were significantly different at the cultivar level except malvidin 3-o-glucoside and petunidin 3-o-glucoside. malvidin 3-glucoside had the largest relative abundance of any anthocyanin, and the acetylated and coumaroylated forms of malvidin were also in high abundance in cabernet sauvignon and merlot relative to the other four anthocyanins. mild water deficit did not have any significant effects on anthocyanin abundance in any cultivar. thus, all of the variation in metabolite composition could be attributed to the cultivar and not to water deficit.

differences in amino acid metabolism
the mature grape berry, via pressed must, provides a source of nitrogenous substances in the form of free amino acids and cleaved peptides, proteins and nucleic acid derivatives, and in mineral ammonium salts that collectively make up the fermentable nitrogen metabolized by yeast during alcoholic fermentation  <cit> . there was greater correspondence of the mapping of transcripts and proteins with the relative abundance of amino acids as compared with the phenylpropanoid pathway . three glutamine synthetases  were identified in each cultivar; glutamine synthetase is an important enzyme for the condensation of glutamate and ammonia into glutamine. glutamine synthetases  aid in berry nitrogen incorporation  <cit>  and were the most abundant of the enzymes related to amino acid metabolism in each of the five cultivars, with hundreds of peptides identified in each experimental replicate. of the mapped proteins quantified in each cultivar, all but ornithine aminotransferase  and ornithine carbamoyltransferase  were significantly different. transcript abundance differences between cultivars were muted, with the exception of an argininosuccinate lyase . only the arginase  transcript  in the microarray was significant for the cultivar x treatment term, but all transcripts were significant for cultivar. chardonnay contained the highest amount of each mapped amino acid , except for proline, which was highest in cabernet sauvignon . proline was also the most abundant amino acid quantified by gc-ms. the relative abundance of proline more closely corresponded with the protein abundance of pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, but did not correspond with the transcript abundance. the relative abundance of arginine was not significantly different in any measured cultivar, but the abundances of glutamine, glutamate, ornithine and proline were significantly different between cultivars. the higher relative abundance of ornithine, glutamate and glutamine in chardonnay corresponded to a higher relative transcript abundance of arginosuccinate synthase and glutamine dehydrogenase. the amino acids, glutamate and glutamine, are important sources of available nitrogen for yeast fermentation  <cit> .fig.  <dig> comparative analysis of three omic data sets related to amino acid metabolism. the relative abundances of transcripts, proteins and metabolites are displayed as colored boxes. abundance ratios are of the cultivar average relative to the average of all cultivars. only transcripts  paired to proteins are shown. cultivar order is from left to right cabernet sauvignon , merlot , pinot noir , chardonnay , and semillon . results were derived from experimental replicates . proteins and metabolites absent for a specific cultivar are colored grey. enzymes and transcripts are given as ec numbers: ornithine carbamoyltransferase , argininosuccinate synthase , argininosuccinate lyase , arginase , ornithine aminotransferase , pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase , l-glutamate gamma-semialdehyde dehydrogenase , glutamine synthetase , glutamate dehydrogenase , glutaminase , carbamoyl-phosphate synthase  , and glutamate decarboxylase . abbreviated products and intermediaries: γ-aminobutyic acid  and 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate 



discussion
the experimental design in this study allowed for a very powerful set of comparative analyses. first, all berry tissues were sampled from the same vineyard site, with vines exposed to the same environment, with nearly identical climate, water and soil . second, studying five cultivars further allowed for phenotypic variation of berry metabolism at harvest to be assessed  <cit> . third, the omic analyses benefited from using aliquots of the same tissue, allowing us to better correlate changes between the proteome and transcriptome and observe variations in intermediates and end-products of metabolism. finally, the power of two transcriptomic methods, closed and open platforms, provided an opportunity to examine potential cross-hybridization events of repeat elements, such as closely related gene family members.

omic analyses
while previous proteomic analyses have investigated the proteome of grape berry skin , our approach estimated protein abundance changes by label-free quantification using spectral counting. a recognized challenge in quantitative proteomics stems from missing data values across replicates for a variety of reasons  <cit> . despite the high dynamic range for identifying large numbers of proteins, current label-free proteomic methods are disadvantageous for the detection and quantification of low abundant proteins  <cit> . nevertheless, the proteomic results from this study did provide further insight into hundreds of proteins residing within a mature berry skin at harvest in three red and two white cultivars.

transcript profiling of grapevine was used to assess specific interactions related to cultivar or treatment affects. both whole and incomplete genome microarrays have been previously utilized in research  to investigate berry development and the effects of water and salinity stress in both vegetative and berry tissues. for example, a recent investigation of berry pulp and skin revealed a dynamic and active ripening process occurring in the late stages of berry development, with ethylene signaling appearing to play a bigger role in non-climacteric fruit ripening than previously thought  <cit> . transcriptionally, the mature berry was very active, and this was evident with the number of transcripts significantly changed for each factor and interaction term. in a previous study, water deficit had significant effects in the fruit of chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon, revealing distinct effects on transcript and metabolite abundance in the pathways for aba, isoprenoid and stilbene biosynthesis  <cit> . in our study, only transcription was sensitive enough to detect a significant treatment effect, probably due to the mild treatment level. in addition, the use of five experimental replicates in the microarrays and the detection accuracy of the rnaseq may have increased the ability to detect significantly changing transcripts. nevertheless, the transcript data presented here offers a rich data set of cultivar differences at harvest that can be used in the future.

other grape researchers have used high-throughput expression profiling technologies to globally characterize gene expression . dal santo et al.  <cit>  examined the phenotypic plasticity of corvina berries from the three most important wine regions around verona, italy at various stages of development that revealed a number of non-plastic genes that display stage-specific expression increases or decreases irrespective of vineyard, such as pr and photosynthesis-related transcripts. the observation of non-plastic transcriptome programming partly explains the strong presence of the pr proteins detected in our analysis that accumulate as a disease-prevention strategy.

comparative omic analysis has also been used to thoroughly investigate specific metabolic pathways, similar to the metabolic profiling done in this study. profiling of sauvignon blanc with whole genome microarrays  <cit>  putatively identified forty-two carotenoid biosynthesis genes that updated our understanding of one pathway responsible for flavor and aroma production in grapes.

more recently, the measurement of individual gene expression using rnaseq technologies have been used to further our understanding of the transcriptome and are greatly benefited by the higher dynamic range for detection of expression. with unprecedented sensitivity, zenoni et al.  <cit>  were the first group to utilize rnaseq to profile grape gene expression through berry development; with this approach they were able to identify differential splicing activity and single nucleotide polymorphisms. the observation of unique reads that did not directly map to the reference genome was particularly interesting, further highlighting the power of rnaseq. for example, de novo assembly of the corvina transcriptome  <cit>  revealed  <dig> new or unique genes  not annotated in the pn <dig> reference genome  <cit> . rnaseq has also been used to describe the expression of specific transcription factors over-expressed at single developmental stages, such as those belonging to the erf, wrky and upbeat transcription factor families  <cit> . knowledge of the timing of transcription factor activity can be used for generating new hypotheses for investigating the regulation of berry development. collectively, these studies have assisted in furthering our understanding of grapevines and improving the functional annotation of the genome  <cit> . these transcription studies are very powerful, often for the information not mentioned explicitly in the text but contained in their corresponding data sets.

the availability of the grape genome coupled with microarray and next generation sequencing technology allows global gene expression profiling. platform concordance was informative of how well each of the technologies performed at measuring transcript abundance. similar workflows were used beginning with identical tissue and methodology for total rna extraction and quality assurance checks  <cit> . samples also went through similar cdna syntheses prior to hybridization or library preparation. closed platforms like microarrays are not readily adapted to improvements made to genomes as are gff <dig> annotation files and suffer from potential cross-hybridization events. figure  <dig> illustrated the decrease of concordance between the platforms for annotated genes with the potential for one or more probe cross-hybridizations. many of the lowly expressed transcripts in the rnaseq were not accurately modeled in the arrays with a wide range of expression values. the dynamic range of detection was not as high in the microarrays, evident by the right-tail in the pairwise plots. but, the expression profiles of the arrays did follow the relative abundance levels of transcripts seen with rnaseq.

read numbers per gene are a function of the expression level of the gene, the number of reads generated by the technology and the length of the transcript for those reads to align with. inefficiencies in measuring gene expression can be related to the degree of read mapping due to poor or incomplete annotations, and rna that is lost during extraction, or during cdna conversion and ligation to adaptors. ultimately, measuring mrna levels is only a proxy for protein abundance, which is even more complicated when considering the importance of post-translational modifications that affect protein or enzyme activity. while the two transcriptomic platforms were highly correlated with each other, neither platform was an accurate predictor of protein abundance in general. the finding that the abundance of most transcripts is not correlated with the abundance of proteins from the same gene is consistent with a classic study in yeast  <cit>  and many other findings in plants . like the yeast study of approximately  <dig> proteins  <cit> , our study of approximately  <dig> proteins indicated that there was an increased correlation coefficient if one enriched the data set with more abundant proteins. nevertheless, even in the top 10 % of the most abundant proteins, the abundance of the majority of the proteins did not correlate with its transcript abundance, with less than 50 % of the proteins being significantly correlated with their transcript partner.

model assessment and correlation
why is the relationship of protein abundance to transcript abundance low? regulation of gene expression can be controlled at many different stages, which may explain partly the poorly observed correlation  <cit> . for example, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation related to the processing of rna  and the stability of the rna itself can determine the level of expression, where tissue specificity or stress response determines a specific isoform  <cit> . the general translation of mrna into protein can also be affected by translational regulation from different regulatory elements   <cit> . protein stability  might also be influenced by the specific isoform or by the conditions that lead to its formation. these examples do not even include the potential for post-translational modifications of the protein  <cit> , which only increases the complexity and reduces the probability for a high correlation of transcript abundance with protein abundance. yet, subsets of different transcript-protein pairs were strongly correlated, particularly some pathogenesis-related proteins in the skin. at least in the mature berry, the regulation of these genes appears to be tightly controlled at levels upstream of translation.

transcript-protein pair relationships that lack any correlation can also reveal insights into the biology shared across cultivars. for example, three of the top most abundant proteins quantified  assist in scavenging h2o <dig> and are involved in ascorbate-glutathione metabolism; they can offer protective qualities to a maturing berry, irrespective of cultivar, and benefit vine fitness  <cit> . both the protein and transcript abundances of ascorbate peroxidase and a glutathione peroxidase were high in each of the cultivars. these data support the hypothesis that high protein abundance levels at this berry developmental stage are important for sustained h2o <dig> scavenging and antioxidant activities.

effects on berry skin phenolics at harvest
phenylpropanoids, derived from phenylalanine, are a diverse class of secondary metabolites and are important factors that influence antioxidant activities in grapes and wines. the biosynthesis of small molecular weight phenolics, such as caffeic acid and caftaric acid, peak around the onset of ripening  and then decrease in the weeks thereafter  <cit> . as in castellarin et al.  <cit> , we wanted to link observable changes in our transcriptional and translational data sets with changes in metabolism following a seasonal water deficit. in the present study, numerous protein-transcript pairs and metabolites involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were mapped , showing the phenotypic diversity of various organoleptic properties  and berry biochemistry. enzymes related to anthocyanin biosynthesis were highly abundant relative to other enzymes mapped. similarly, deytieux et al.  <cit>  observed high relative abundance of chalcone synthase, flavanone 3-hydroxylase and udp glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase enzymes that initiate the gradual accumulation of these phenolic compounds.

many of the phenylpropanoids were among the most abundant metabolites measured, with the genotype determining the abundance distributions. metabolic profiling of anthocyanins in the three red cultivars revealed variation in the relative metabolic content of each selected metabolite . our results for high levels of malvidin were consistent with those reported previously for cabernet sauvignon  <cit> , malbec  <cit>  and yan <dig>   <cit> . the strong effect of cultivar was evident in protein and metabolite differences observed between the cultivars.

stilbene abundance also varied between cultivars when compared at harvest. in cabernet sauvignon and shiraz fruit, levels of trans-resveratrol accumulated at similar levels from veraison to maturity, whereas its glucoside, trans-piceid only increased in shiraz  <cit> . similarly, our cultivars displayed divergent stilbene levels at harvest, with the highest levels observed in pinot noir. this is consistent with two comprehensive studies of cultivar comparisons of stilbene concentrations  <cit> , in which pinot noir was the cultivar that had the highest stilbene concentrations. under more severe water deficit, trans-piceid metabolite abundance increases 5-fold along with increasing steady state transcript abundance in cabernet sauvignon, but not in chardonnay  <cit> . these observations are further supported by a 3-year survey of  <dig> italian red, white and pink grape cultivars, where large variability in stilbene abundance was consistent with gene expression analysis in the healthy, developing grape berries  <cit> . the abundance of different stilbenes, like other phenylpropanoids, can distinguish one cultivar from another.

importance of assimilable nitrogen in berry skins
assimilable nitrogen within grape must  can be a limiting factor to yeast growth during fermentation  <cit> . the total nitrogen content is distributed primarily in skins and seeds of ripe berries, with the amino acid content ranging from  <dig> to 40 % depending upon cultivar  <cit> . proline, arginine, glutamine, alanine, and glutamate are the major amino acids in fresh grape juice, but the specific composition and concentration of amino acids varies by cultivar, vineyard location and winemaking practices  <cit> . by sampling and processing berry tissues from the same experimental vineyards, we hoped to reduce some of the variability introduced in our previous studies where the metabolisms of cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay were compared from grapes grown in different geographic locations, root stock and trellis systems  <cit> . transcripts related to glutamine and glutamate metabolism were significantly different between cultivars. the metabolite abundance for these two amino acids in this study was low, and reflected different cultivar distributions . levels of glutamine and glutamate abundance decrease overtime from veraison to maturity in studies located in israel and australia  <cit> . proline is one of the major amino acid constituents in both juice and wine, and is formed from 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate  <cit> . in two studies, chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon and shiraz berry skins showed large increases in proline relatively late in the ripening process  peaking at maturity  <cit> . high proline abundance was observed in each of the cultivars in our study. ornithine, derived from the urea cycle, can function as a substrate for further amino acid biosynthesis when converted to glutamate 5-semialdehyde  by ornithine aminotransferase, which links proline and arginine metabolism  <cit> . non-protein amino acids like ornithine and γ-aminobutyric acid  also contribute to total available nitrogen content within grape must  <cit> . bach et al.  <cit>  observed varying gaba concentrations amongst  <dig> cultivars that changed with region, cultivar and year of harvest, observing the highest gaba levels in chardonnay. we did not directly measure gaba in this study, but we can hypothesize that gaba levels like other nitrogen contributing compounds measured in this study varied with the cultivar.

minor effects of water deficit
water deficit treatment did not significantly alter the abundance of proteins or metabolites in the five cultivars in this study. berry physiology was also unaffected by water stress, which indicated that the stress was mild. matthews et al. have shown that mild water deficit does not significantly affect levels of soluble sugars, titratable acidity or berry diameter . these grapes, however, did produce wines with significantly different flavor and aroma profiles  <cit> . in contrast, more severe water deficit causes significant reductions in berry diameter in cabernet sauvignon  <cit>  and chardonnay  <cit>  and significantly alters metabolite composition and abundance. the lack of significant differences observed in the present study was possibly related to the mild water deficit, thus inducing only small differences in metabolite abundance. with a higher number of replications and lower cv for the samples, statistically significant changes in metabolite abundance in response to water deficit may have been detected.

another explanation for only a few molecules with significant differences may be attributable partly to the single sampling time point at maturity. dai et al.  <cit>  surveyed a number of central metabolic signatures from whole berry samples displaying developmental specificity, with large abundance changes primarily occurring shortly before, through, and shortly after veraison. this argument is further supported by a fruit development experiment comparing cabernet sauvignon and shiraz berry skins  <cit> , which showed similar developmental trends in both central and secondary metabolites where large metabolic changes occurred early in development rather than at near-maturity. additionally, the mild water deficit very likely caused subtle omics changes that made it difficult to detect common responses with this level of replication.

post-veraison, the berry undergoes rapid cellar expansion and increases in soluble sugars for a time, but as development continues, progressively towards senescence, the berry undergoes withering or dehydration. perhaps the poor detection of treatment related effects was simply due to both treatments having experienced a degree of water deficit-related stress, although no visible withering or shrivel was observed. the high observed abundance of peroxiredoxin proteins across cultivars is consistent with the fact that they are known to be elevated in vines exposed to water deficit  <cit> , although other environmental stress factors such as high light or uv intensity could also influence protein abundance. in an extreme example, corvina berries undergo a withering process in the process of making the famous ripasso and amarone wines  <cit> . as a result of the mild water deficit used in this study, cultivar effects were the dominant differentiating factor in metabolic content.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study provides a rare and powerful glimpse into the molecular underpinnings of grape. it compares the skin of the berries of five cultivars of grapevines at maturity, a tissue that is a source of texture, color, flavor and aroma for grapes and wines. an enormous amount of effort and money went into collecting these data, but there was a much greater effort expended for the complex data analyses in this study. few plant studies have collected such a large amount of data from five molecular platforms from identical tissue samples coming from a very similar environment . the comparisons showed that the platforms were concordant with each other, that each variety can be distinguished from each other in a similar way with each of the platforms. yet each platform was reproducible, providing a unique view, showing unique differences at each molecular level, and revealing some of the complexity of these biochemical pathways.

the phenotypic variation in the cultivars resulted in unique and large differences in abundance in many of the most common classes of proteins and metabolites measured in berry skins. analysis of functional categories showed that metabolism was very active and there were substantial responses to abiotic and chemical stimuli in the berry skin. in this study, only transcript analyses were sensitive enough to detect significantly induced changes from the moderate water deficit treatment. overall, transcript abundance was poorly correlated with protein abundance. omic analyses elucidated cultivar differences in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and amino acid metabolism that influence winemaking, including color, astringency and yeast assimilable nitrogen levels. in addition, this study showed that there were significant differences in the classes of pathogenesis proteins in the berry skins of each cultivar in the absence of pathogenic pressures.

the models presented here are simple and crude. one of the goals of the systems biology approach  is to construct models and make predictions. this study represents only the first steps in the path of achieving such goals. the integration of the data here and the models constructed are just the beginning. these simple models showed again that biochemical pathways are complex and cultivars can vary significantly in simple primary metabolic pathways, such as amino acid metabolism, as well as more complex secondary metabolic pathways, such as phenylpropanoid metabolism. to be predictive, more data will need to be collected over time to better estimate molecular activities and transport. nonetheless, this study is valuable, depositing a large amount of information into public data repositories that can be used to build and create future molecular annotation and models. the data presented here can be utilized and explored for years to come.

