BACKGROUND
the development of numerous high-throughput experimental techniques such as dna microarrays, genome sequencing, and protein chips has revolutionized the analysis of biological systems and generated a catalog of information about a cell's components  <cit> . efforts are now focused on the integration of this data to enable the systemic understanding of cellular functions  <cit> . this integration is typically in the form of a mathematical model that can be used to simulate complex cellular behaviors based on a limited amount of biological data.

several modeling approaches have been implemented in the study of saccharomyces cerevisiae. flux-balance models of yeast have appeared for small-scale network reconstructions. most of these studies are specific for growth conditions, such as anaerobic, glucose-limited metabolism  <cit> , aerobic growth on galactose  <cit>  or growth on mixtures of glucose and ethanol  <cit> . in addition to flux-balance models, many dynamic models of simplified central metabolic networks in yeast also have been developed  <cit> , along with full-scale kinetic models specific to pathways such as glycolysis  <cit>  and the pentose phosphate pathway  <cit> . these models have been useful to study detailed metabolic events such as concentration changes of individual metabolites and key flux splits.

small-scale reconstructions can be limited in their prediction of cellular functions since these processes are typically dependent on the interaction of components at a whole-cell level. this has motivated the development of genome-scale models, several of which have already appeared for bacterial cells, including escherichia coli  <cit> , haemophilus influenzae  <cit> , and helicobacter pylori  <cit> . we have previously reconstructed a genome-scale metabolic network of saccharomyces cerevisiae based on its annotated genome sequence and a thorough examination of online pathway databases, biochemistry textbooks, and journal publications  <cit> . a total of  <dig> open reading frames,  <dig> metabolic reactions, and  <dig> metabolites are accounted for in this stoichiometric network, which includes both cytosolic and mitochondrial compartments. this genome-scale reconstruction is the most comprehensive model of yeast metabolism to date and has been previously validated through in silico gene deletion studies  <cit>  and the calculation of key physiological parameters  <cit> .

the reconstruction and analysis of genome-scale microbial networks have advanced significantly in recent years  <cit> , as has the development of a variety of constraint-based modeling methods that allow for the deduction a cell's phenotype based on its genotype and environmental conditions  <cit> . phenotypic phase plane  analysis is a constraint-based method used to obtain a global perspective of genotype-phenotype relationships in genome-scale metabolic networks. in phpp analysis, flux balance analysis and linear programming are used to map all of the cellular growth conditions represented by two environmental variables onto a two-dimensional plane and identify phases with distinct metabolic pathway utilization patterns. some applications of phpp analysis include the study of optimal growth rates  <cit> , adaptability of microorganisms  <cit> , metabolic network functions and capacities  <cit> , and the impact of gene regulations  <cit> . thus, phpp analysis provides a way to guide experiments and analyze phenotypic functions based on genome-scale metabolic networks.

the constraint-based modelling approach is based on the assumption that organisms have developed control structures to ensure optimal growth in response to environmental constraints  <cit> . numerous experimental observations have been made in support of this hypothesis  <cit> . the mathematical descriptions for the phpp have relevant metabolic meaning for the biological systems being studied. for example, any point in the phpp corresponds to a single solution of the linear programming problem, which metabolically represents a possible growth behavior. a phase or region in the phpp  represents a metabolic phenotype with specific pathway utilization. the shadow prices change continuously at the boundary from one phase to the next. accordingly, the metabolic phenotype will vary. metabolically, this is interpreted as a different optimal utilization of the metabolic pathways since each basis solution corresponds to a different flux distribution.

in this study, we formulate a glucose-oxygen phenotypic phase plane for yeast based on its recent genome-scale metabolic reconstruction  <cit> . the growth states predicted by the phpp are then characterized using shadow price analysis, in silico gene deletion simulations, and in vivo growth experiments. finally, we evaluate the network's predictions for these growth states by comparing in silico biomass formation and by-product secretion rates to in vivo measurements.

RESULTS
s. cerevisiae phenotypic phase plane 
the s. cerevisiae genome-scale metabolic network constructed by forster et al.  <cit>  was used to generate a phpp  <cit>  that describes yeast's metabolic states at various levels of glucose and oxygen availability . the surface of the three-dimensional phpp corresponds to the maximum growth rate allowable for each pair of glucose and oxygen uptake rates in the x-y plane . all feasible metabolic flux distributions lie on or below this surface. the two-dimensional projection of the phpp  has been divided into seven regions, or "phases," to allow for qualitative comparisons . the seven phases represent areas of the phpp that have distinct metabolic phenotypes as defined by shadow price analysis, which identifies how changes in metabolite levels affect biomass formation  <cit> . there also are two regions of the phpp with infeasible steady-state flux distributions: the area along the y-axis and the small square near the origin. growth is infeasible in the region between the ordinate and p <dig> since yeast cannot use more than six oxygen molecules per glucose molecule. the two red lines in fig. 1b are lines of optimality . logrowth represents optimal aerobic glucose-limited growth of s. cerevisiae in which substrates are completely oxidized to produce biomass and loethanol corresponds to maximum ethanol production under microaerobic conditions while growth is maximized.

simulation of optimal metabolic phenotypes
computer simulations  were used to illustrate the change of metabolic phenotypes described by the yeast phase plane. for the simulations, we arbitrarily set glucose uptake rate to  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr and varied the oxygen uptake rate from  <dig> to  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr. this allowed us to study the influence of a single environmental variable on cellular metabolism. small amounts of nh <dig>  sulfate and phosphate were introduced for the biomass synthesis. during anaerobic conditions , the growth rate was low and the respiratory quotient  was infinite by definition . as the oxygen uptake rate increased to  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr to reach logrowth, the growth rate increased to its maximum value and the respiratory quotient approached  <dig> . further increasing the oxygen uptake rate caused both the growth rate and respiratory quotient to decrease due to futile cycles in which a combination of two or more biochemical reactions resulted only in the hydrolysis of atp or other high-energy compounds  <cit> .

metabolic by-product secretion profiles also were calculated with increasing oxygen uptake rates. since alternative optimal solutions exist in the genome-scale metabolic flux models  <cit> , a range of secretion rates can be found amongst all of the equivalent optimal solutions for a fixed point in the phpp. remarkably, there was less than 1% difference between the maximum and minimum allowable secretion rates for a fixed maximal growth rate; thus, only the maximum predicted secretion fluxes for ethanol, succinate, glycerol, and acetate are shown . during anaerobic fermentation, ethanol, glycerol, and succinate were produced. maximum ethanol production occurred at an oxygen uptake rate of  <dig>  mmol/gdcw/hr, a condition defining loethanol. glycerol production ceased at this point. with a slight increase in oxygen uptake rate above loethanol, acetate began to be secreted but succinate secretion decreased to zero. ethanol and acetate were no longer secreted once the oxygen uptake rate was equal to or greater than  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr, a point on logrowth where the metabolic pathway utilization enables complete aerobic growth.

further characterization of oxidative-fermentative phases 
linear programming simulations generate parameters called shadow prices that can be used to evaluate how changes in metabolite availability affect the biomass formation  <cit> . shadow price analysis was used to further characterize the oxidative-fermentative phases. a positive shadow price indicated that a metabolite was available in excess, meaning that a decrease in its availability would increase biomass synthesis, and a negative shadow price indicated that a metabolite was limiting such that increasing its availability would increase the biomass synthesis.

in silico gene deletions were also performed in order to determine which reactions were essential in each phase. essential reactions were defined as those whose deletion resulted in no predicted growth . this approach was especially useful for interpreting the physiological differences between growth states in phases  <dig> –  <dig> since their phenotypes were indistinguishable in terms of their secretion profiles.

phase 2
in phase  <dig>  the ratio of oxygen uptake rate and glucose uptake rate  is lower than that on the line of optimality. as a result, the cell is oxygen limited and begins to ferment. mitochondrial nad+ is available in excess, meaning that the biomass synthesis would improve if its availability decreased. in order to maintain the cell's redox balance, the excess mitochondrial nad+ must be reduced. this is done through the production of acetate and ethanol, which begin to be secreted in this phase. thus it is the production of acetate and ethanol that makes the optimal growth rate less than that defined on the line of optimality.

phase 3
as the ratio of oxygen and glucose uptake rates is further decreased, three lower glycolysis reactions  become essential for growth in phase  <dig>  although these deletions severely hinder growth in phase  <dig> , the simulated growth rate is non-zero so these reactions were not considered to be essential. however, these reactions are essential in subsequent phases as the oxygen uptake rate is further decreased. due to the limited oxygen, more carbons "overflows" into the fermentation pathway while at the same time oxidative metabolism becomes less effective.

phase 4
shifting from phase  <dig> to phase  <dig>  the pentose phosphate pathway is utilized to generate nadph because not enough nadph is produced through respiration at the lower oxygen uptake rate. the nadph is then converted to nadh which is subsequently used for atp production.

phase 5
further lowering the ratio of oxygen and glucose uptake rates restricts the cell's ability to produce pyruvate in phase  <dig>  yeast can no longer utilize the oxidative pathways because an insufficient amount of cytosolic nad+ is produced. when comparing phases  <dig> and  <dig>  all of the metabolites with shadow price sign changes were folate intermediates. these are important energy carriers that are directly linked to the availability of both cytosolic and mitochondrial nad+ and nadp+.

phase 6
as you enter phase  <dig>  the acetate production is completely ceased. ethanol is secreted as the only metabolic by-product to balance the redox potential of the cell.

growth experiments
three groups of experiments were conducted under different growth conditions in the phpp . these three conditions were:

• aerobic, glucose-limited  growth experiments were conducted with a data acquisition and process control system. the dissolved oxygen  level was maintained above 30% by sparging the compressed air into the celligen® plus bioreactor during the cell cultivation. the system was controlled at the respiratory quotient of  <dig>  for optimal s. cerevisiae growth by rq-stat feeding strategy to maintain the glucose concentration at a low, stable level . the cell concentration rose steadily with almost no acetate or ethanol production and most of the carbon was incorporated into the yeast biomass.

• oxidative-fermentative  batch growth experiments were carried out by allowing an essentially unlimited supply of oxygen and glucose. the do level was maintained above 30% by sparging the compressed air into the shaker's flasks during the cell cultivation. ethanol and acetate were accumulated in the aerated processes .

• microaerobic  batch cultivations with s. cerevisiae were performed at a low dissolved oxygen level. the experiments were performed in side-arm flasks  in which a small amount of air was allowed to diffuse into the flasks via the cotton filter on the side arms. the do level was measured to be less than 5%. the initial glucose concentration and the limited oxygen supply resulted in high levels of ethanol and low levels of acetate.

integration of experimental data and in silico predictions
the s. cerevisiae phpp is a genome-scale model-based visualization platform which allows experimental data and simulation results to be displayed and compared. the three groups of batch and fed-batch experimental data are projected on fig. 3a using the experimentally measured our and glucose uptake rates. these rates were then used as constraints in the computer simulations. table  <dig> shows that the experimental observations and the in silico predictions are in good agreement.

abbreviations: oxygen uptake rate , glucose uptake rate 

units: growth rate , substrate uptake rates and metabolite production rates 

discussion
in this study, the s. cerevisiae genome-scale metabolic network constructed by forster et al.  <cit>  was used to generate a phpp  <cit>  that describes yeast's metabolic states at various levels of glucose and oxygen availability . examination of the s. cerevisiae phpp has led to clear interpretation and prediction of its metabolic capabilities. first, only a few distinct optimal s. cerevisiae growth phenotypes were found in silico, and these phenotypes correspond to well-defined phases of the phpp. second, two lines of optimality were identified in yeast's phpp: logrowth, which represents optimal biomass production during aerobic, glucose-limited growth, and loethanol, which corresponds to both maximal ethanol production and optimal growth during microaerobic conditions. the predictions of s. cerevisiae's phpp and genome-scale model were compared to independent experimental data. the results showed that the agreement between the computed and observed growth rates, uptake rates, and secretion rates was close to the measured values or within the experimental error, and qualitatively the predictions agreed with published literature.

analysis of experimental data within the phpp formalism suggests that yeast has only a few primary phenotypes, designated by the various phases. in p <dig>  the oxygen supply is sufficient for growth by aerobic respiration, resulting in carbon dioxide as the sole by-product. phases p2-p <dig> correspond to states of oxidative-fermentative growth, which is characterized by secretion of oxidative and fermentative metabolic by-products, i.e., acetate and ethanol, respectively. these states are highly similar since the phases are essentially co-planar in the 3-dimensional phpp . the secretion profile  does not show any phenotypic differences between phases p <dig> - p <dig>  however, through the use of shadow price analysis and in silico gene deletions, distinct pathway utilization patterns could be found for each phase. finally, p <dig> represents microaerobic conditions. in this environment, yeast grows primarily by fermentation and secretes ethanol, glycerol, and succinate . this limited range of metabolic states is strikingly different from that found for e. coli, whose glucose-oxygen phpp has five distinct optimal in silico phenotypes  <cit> . comparison of the simulation results generated by the e. coli  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae  <cit>  models indicates that e. coli's metabolic by-product secretion patterns are more sensitive to the our variation than those of s. cerevisiae. moreover, computer simulations show that when the our is lower than  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr at a glucose uptake rate of  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr, the tca cycle in e. coli is broken into two branched pathways, one operating as a reductive pathway reversing the usual sequence from succinate to oxaloacetate and the other continuing to operate oxidatively to convert oxaloacetate to α-ketoglutarate. for s. cerevisiae, the pathway still functions as a cycle even when the our is as low as  <dig> mmol/gdcw/hr. thus, it can be concluded by the comparison of e. coli and s. cerevisiae metabolic networks that yeast appears to be more robust to environmental perturbations. furthermore, we predict that yeast secretes fewer metabolic by-products under these conditions, suggesting that its metabolism is more efficient than that of e. coli. this may represent a universal difference in how prokaryotes and eukaryotes respond to shifts in environmental parameters.

another feature that distinguishes the s. cerevisiae phpp from the e. coli phpp is the existence of two definable lines of optimality. the conditions that define logrowth are similar to those that define e. coli's sole line of optimality, i.e. they both represent the relationship between the glucose and oxygen uptake rates that results in optimal growth rate. analysis of yeast's phpp suggests that at a specific ratio of glucose and oxygen uptake rates glycerol production is halted and nadh is re-oxidized by maximal ethanol formation. this phenomenon, defined by loethanol, has been supported by many research reports in the literature  <cit> . for example, cysewski and wilke  <cit>  found a sharp stimulation of the specific ethanol productivity at a very low but non-zero level of dissolved oxygen. later studies showed that a value of  <dig> ppb of dissolved oxygen maximized ethanol production in yeast chemostat cultures  <cit> . thus, loethanol, the second line of optimality predicted by the genome-scale model, is consistent with the experimental observations.

a useful application of the s. cerevisiae phpp is to qualitatively classify yeast's metabolic state based on phenotypic observations made in vivo . the metabolite concentration profile obtained from all of the experiments qualitatively agrees with the corresponding metabolic state predicted by the phpp. for example, in growth conditions near loethanol, cells are expected to grow almost entirely by fermentation, with significant production of ethanol and lesser amounts of glycerol, acetate and succinate secretion. this phenotype is qualitatively similar to experimental observation, in which more ethanol is produced than acetate as shown in fig. 3d. points in the phpp representative of the three data sets also were used to quantitatively predict yeast's metabolic phenotype . overall, the predictions are in good agreement with the experimental measurements. however, the predicted growth rates are slightly higher than the measured values. this difference may result from the model's prediction of optimal performance not reflecting suboptimal growth in vivo.

CONCLUSIONS
the genome-scale metabolic networks developed for other microorganisms, namely escherichia coli, haemophilus influenzae, and helicobacter pylori, have led to useful insights into substrate preferences, the effects of gene deletions, optimal growth patterns, outcomes of adaptive evolution, and shifts in expression profiles  <cit> . with the recent reconstruction of s. cerevisiae's genome-scale metabolic network  <cit> , these analytical techniques can now be applied to the first genome-scale model of an eukaryotic cell. by developing methods such as the phpp to explore in silico the metabolic capabilities of microorganisms, we can generate new hypotheses as to how these organisms operate, and, more importantly, we can gain insight into the impact of individual cellular components on the organism as a whole.

