BACKGROUND
the life history of many marine invertebrates is strikingly biphasic. in the most extreme cases, often termed maximally indirect development, adults and larvae differ so dramatically that they were originally described as different animals. such development is exemplified by the pilidiophoran worms of the phylum nemertea. during embryogenesis, a pilidium larva forms, complete with a domed episphere, apical sensory organ, blind stomach, and ciliated band for feeding and swimming. days to weeks after the larval body plan is established, a juvenile begins to develop from distinct rudiments, called imaginal discs, that eventually fuse around the larval stomach. once complete, the juvenile escapes the larval body and devours the larval tissues in a catastrophic metamorphosis.

the maximally indirect development of the pilidiophorans appears to be derived from more-or-less direct development  <cit> . the sister clade to the pilidiophora  and the basal palaeonemertea both have rather direct modes of development . both have ciliated larvae that gradually grow into juvenile worms rather than passing through a morphologically distinct larval stage. thus, the pilidium could be viewed as an insertion of a novel body plan into the life cycle of a more directly developing nemertean.figure  <dig> distribution of larval types and larval-juvenile axial orientations among major nemertean clades. phylogeny  shows relationships among three major nemertean clades. above: orientation of anteroposterior  axis of larva  and juvenile  of  a typical palaeonemertean larva,  a typical hoplonemertean larva, and  the larva of pilidiophoran micrura rubramaculosa  <cit> , in which the larval and juvenile ap axes coincide;  a typical pilidium, in which larval and juvenile axes are roughly perpendicular; and  the larva of m. akkeshiensis, in which larval and juvenile ap axes oppose one another.



if the pilidium is a true novelty, one might expect different mechanisms patterning the larval versus juvenile body. diversity of the orientation of the juvenile with respect to the larva within the pilidiophora provides indirect evidence of such mechanistic decoupling. while all pilidiophorans build worm-shaped juveniles inside larval bodies, the anteroposterior  axes of the larva and the juvenile appear to be decoupled. in a typical pilidium, the juvenile ap axis is roughly perpendicular to the larval ap axis . in some pilidia, however, the ap axis of the juvenile coincides with that of the larva, as in the sock-like larvae called pilidium incurvatum  <cit>  and pilidium recurvatum of riserius sp.  <cit> , the non-feeding bullet-shaped larvae of micrura rubramaculosa and m. verrilli  <cit> , and the trochophore-like pilidium nielseni  <cit>  . however, in the lecithotrophic larvae of m. akkenshiensis  <cit>  and several other species, the ap axis of the larva and juvenile oppose one another  <cit>  . this diversity suggests that pilidiophoran evolution may have been accompanied by the dissociation of axial patterning mechanisms between life history stages.

in order to understand the mechanics of pilidiophoran development and the origin of a novel larval body plan, we examined the expression of the hox genes during development of a pilidiophoran nemertean m. alaskensis. hox genes are highly conserved patterning genes that are expressed in and determine the identity of domains along the ap axis of many animals  <cit> . we also looked at expression of one of the three parahox genes, caudal , which is a posterior marker in other animals  <cit> .

very little is known about patterning mechanisms in nemerteans  <cit> . here, we report for the first time on the patterns of expression of hox genes in this phylum, specifically during the development of the pilidium larva, and discuss the relevance of these findings to the origins of the pilidium larva.

RESULTS
development of m. alaskensis
the development and a staging scheme for m. alaskensis is documented in detail by maslakova  <cit> , and is briefly summarized here. fertilized zygotes undergo spiral cleavage and pass through a square-shaped blastula  stage . by day  <dig>  they have developed into swimming gastrulae with an apical tuft. by day  <dig>  a ciliated band spanning two lateral lobes becomes evident. at about 3 days, the larvae begin to feed on microalgae . food particles pass through the funnel-shaped esophagus, which is equipped with two ciliated ridges, and enter the blind gut. as the larva grows, the lappets grow larger and two additional elaborations of the ciliated band appear, called the lobes . the first rudiments of the juvenile, the cephalic imaginal discs, appear as invaginations of the larval episphere as early as  <dig> to 7 days, and give rise to the juvenile head. we refer to this stage as the ‘cephalic-discs stage’ . the timing of development, especially the emergence of the juvenile rudiments, is highly variable, and depends on the water temperature, feeding regime, and, possibly, other factors. as the cephalic discs are growing, a pair of trunk discs invaginates from the hyposphere near the larval stomach. these discs give rise to the majority of the trunk of the juvenile. we refer to this stage as the ‘trunk-discs stage’ . the third and final pair of imaginal discs, called the cerebral-organ discs, arise as early as 2 weeks, as invaginations of the inner epidermis of the larval lappets at the lower end of the esophageal ciliated ridges. these discs are located anterior to the trunk discs , and give rise to the cerebral organs. thus, this stage is called ‘cerebral-organ-discs stage’ . at about the same time, an unpaired proboscis rudiment appears as a small cluster of cells near the larval epidermis in-between the two cephalic discs. the proboscis rudiment later fuses with the cephalic discs to form the head rudiment, while the trunk and cerebral organ discs fuse with each other to form the trunk rudiments. an unpaired dorsal disc arises dorsal to the trunk rudiments between the stomach and the larval epidermis, at about the same time as the proboscis rudiment. this characterizes the ‘head-and-trunk stage’ . as early as 4 weeks after fertilization, the dorsal disc fuses with the trunk rudiments and, subsequently, the head rudiment fuses with the trunk rudiment to form a toroid of juvenile tissue around the stomach. we refer to this stage as the ‘torus stage’ . the juvenile proboscis continues to grow, first extending beyond the margin of the juvenile head , then reaching the dorsal margin of the juvenile trunk epidermis . the juvenile tissues grow over the stomach and esophagus , eventually enclosing the gut . as early as 35 days, the juvenile ruptures the larval enclosure and engulfs the larval tissues in a radical metamorphosis.figure  <dig> development of micrura alaskensis. differential interference contrast images. lateral views except in . apical organ  orientated up, juvenile anterior to the left.  blastosquare stage. polar view .  feeding pilidium stage larva. esophagus , leads to blind stomach , which is dark red due to algal food. ciliated band, indicated with dashed line, spans lobes and lappets .  cephalic-discs-stage larva. one of the paired cephalic discs  labeled.  trunk-discs-stage larva. one of the paired trunk discs  labeled.  cerebral-organ-discs-stage larva. one of the paired cerebral-organ discs  labeled.  head-and-trunk-stage larva. cephalic discs have merged with each other to become the head rudiment . cerebral-organ discs have merged with the trunk discs to become the trunk rudiment . dorsal disc  is present.  torus-stage larva. all discs have merged together to form toroid of juvenile tissue around larval stomach. cerebral organ  is labeled.  extended-proboscis-stage larva. proboscis  has begun to grow over the esophagus towards the stomach. caudal cirrus  is evident. membrane housing juvenile  is decorated with red-brown pigment spots in a polka-dot pattern. amniotic pigment spots develop in earlier stages, but are quite clear in this image.  complete-proboscis-stage larva. proboscis has grown to meet stomach.  hood-stage larva. dorsal tissues of juvenile overgrow proboscis.  pre-metamorphosis-stage larva. juvenile is complete inside larva. metamorphosis  is rapid and radical; juvenile breaks out of larval body and devours all larval tissues in a minute or less.  juvenile after metamorphosis. larval structures, including amniotic pigment, are inside juvenile stomach.



m. alaskensis hox gene sequences
nine contigs containing hox gene sequences were recovered from the m. alaskensis developmental transcriptome. full coding sequences were isolated from seven of the nine genes. characteristic residues and motifs were found in all nine sequences and permitted assignment to known paralog groups  <cit> . see additional file  <dig> for alignment of m. alaskensis hox genes with those of other bilaterians. bayesian phylogenetic analysis supports assignment to paralog groups  based on the presence of characteristic residues . m. alaskensis has representatives from pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , pg <dig> , and pg9-pg <dig> . cdx and six3/ <dig> were also isolated and identified via phylogenetic analysis . additional file  <dig> lists details of each gene, including paralog group, length of predicted open reading frame, and genbank accession number.

six hox genes and the cdx gene have been previously cloned from a single nemertean species, the pilidiophoran ramphogordius  sanguineus  <cit> ; however, their expression had not been characterized. m. alaskensis genes malab, mahox <dig>  madfd, malox <dig>  maantp, and mapost <dig> isolated by us are orthologous to r. sanguineus genes lshox <dig>  lshox <dig>  lshox <dig>  lshox <dig>  lshox <dig>  and lshox <dig>  respectively.

gene expression in the development of m. alaskensis
no hox gene expression was detected at any stage of development in the larval body, cephalic discs, cerebral organ discs, or the proboscis rudiment. we are confident that the in situ hybridization protocol works on pilidial structures and early stages because we have expression data for other genes at early stages . hox genes were expressed at various later developmental stages in different patterns in the trunk discs and the dorsal disc, and, as a rule, expression became more prominent, and occupied larger domains in more advanced developmental stages.

labial 
no expression was observed in gastrulae or young pilidia . weak expression of malab is first noticeable in the trunk discs as soon as they emerge . at the head-and-trunk stage, expression becomes more prominent and occupies a broader domain in each trunk disc, and is also detectable in the dorsal disc . in complete-proboscis-stage larvae, expression extends to the anterior margin of the trunk disc, bordering the cerebral organ, and posteriorly throughout most of the juvenile trunk, except the very posterior .figure  <dig> expression of malab, mapb, and mahox <dig> in m. alaskensis larval development. all images and diagrams show lateral views with larval anterior up and future juvenile anterior to the left. asterisk marks apical organ. 
malab is expressed in the trunk discs  at trunk-discs stage. the cephalic disc  and stomach  are marked for reference.  in head-and-trunk-stage larvae, malab is expressed in portion of the trunk rudiment  and dorsal disc . the head rudiment  is marked for reference.  in complete-proboscis-stage larvae malab is expressed in a large portion of the juvenile posterior, from just up against the cerebral organ . 
mapb is expressed initially in trunk discs  at trunk-discs stage.  in head-and-trunk-stage larvae, mapb is expressed in a central domain of the trunk rudiment .  in torus-stage larvae, mapb is expressed in a small central domain of the juvenile posterior.  the onset of mahox <dig> expression occurs at the trunk-discs stage in the trunk discs .  in head-and-trunk-stage larvae, mahox <dig> is expressed in a central domain of the trunk rudiment  and in a portion of the dorsal disc . mahox <dig> is not expressed in the larval body or head rudiment .  in extended-proboscis-stage larvae, mahox <dig> is expressed in a narrow stripe of the juvenile posterior. proboscis rudiment  marked in image. anterior spots are amniotic pigment spots  that happen to be in focus in this image.  diagrammatically illustrate expression patterns in the three respective developmental stages.



proboscipedia 
similar to malab, expression of mapb is first evident in the trunk discs as soon as they emerge . by head-and-trunk stage, mapb is expressed clearly in the middle portion of the trunk rudiments, but not in the dorsal disc . about a fourth of each trunk rudiment is stained, forming a stripe about midway from the anterior portion of the trunk discs to the posterior tip of the trunk . by torus stage, the expression of mapb remains localized to a fairly narrow region of the trunk about midway between the cerebral organ and the posterior end .

hox <dig> 
as is the case with malab and mapb, no expression of mahox <dig> is detectable until the trunk-discs stage, and expression is first evident in the trunk discs . at the head-and-trunk stage, the expression domain occupies the anterior portion of the trunk discs . the size of the expression domain is similar to mapb. unlike mapb, expression of mahox <dig> at this stage is also detectable in the dorsal disc . at extended-proboscis stage, the expression in the dorsal disc and the trunk discs forms a continuous band encircling the juvenile trunk about half way between the cerebral organs and the posterior end .

deformed 
madfd is not expressed at early stages, including the trunk-discs stage . by the head-and-trunk stage, madfd is expressed in a very small patch in trunk rudiments, similar in location to mahox <dig>  but slightly more posterior, as well as in the anterior portion of the dorsal disc . by torus stage, madfd is expressed in a very thin band around the juvenile trunk .figure  <dig> expression of madfd, mascr, and malox <dig> in m. alaskensis larval development. all images and diagrams show lateral views with larval anterior up and future juvenile anterior to the left. asterisk marks apical organ. 
madfd expression is not evident during the trunk-discs stage anywhere in the larval or juvenile body, including the trunk discs , the cephalic disc , and stomach . 
madfd is first clearly expressed during the head-and-trunk stage in small domains of each trunk rudiment  and in a portion of the dorsal disc . the head rudiment  is indicated for reference.  in torus-stage larvae, madfd is expressed in a very narrow ring of the juvenile posterior. proboscis rudiment  marked for reference. 
mascr expression is not evident during the trunk-discs stage anywhere in the larval or juvenile body.  the onset of mascr expression occurs during the head-and-trunk stage in domains of each trunk rudiment  and in a portion of the dorsal disc .  in torus-stage larvae, mascr is expressed in a ring of the juvenile posterior with an additional few small spots of expression laterally towards the anterior of the juvenile . 
malox <dig> expression is not evident during the trunk-discs stage anywhere in the larval or juvenile body. faint background staining is observed in both pairs of discs.  the onset of strong malox <dig> expression occurs during the head-and-trunk stage in domains of the each trunk rudiment  and in a portion of the dorsal disc . faint background staining persists in all juvenile rudiments, including head rudiment  as well as portions of the stomach. 
malox <dig> is expressed in a patch near the posterior end of the juvenile in extended-proboscis-stage larvae.  diagrammatically illustrate expression patterns in the three respective developmental stages.



sex combs reduced 
similar to madfd, mascr is not apparently expressed until the head-and-trunk stage . at the head-and-trunk stage, mascr is expressed in a region of both trunk rudiments and the posterior region of the dorsal disc . the expression domain in the trunk rudiment is slightly wider than that of mapb, mahox <dig>  and madfd. during the torus stage, mascr is expressed in a thin belt around the juvenile trunk located somewhat more posterior to the domains of mapb, mahox <dig>  and madfd . a few small localized spots of expression occur laterally on either side of the juvenile trunk just anterior to the main expression domain .

lox <dig> 
the faint staining observed at early stages throughout the juvenile rudiments  likely represents either very weak expression or possibly just background staining . clear malox <dig> expression is first detected at the head-and-trunk stage in the trunk rudiments and dorsal disc . within the trunk rudiments, the expression domain of malox <dig> appears to be slightly broader than that of mascr. in extended-proboscis-stage larvae, the expression domain appears as a broad band encircling the juvenile trunk near the posterior end .

antennapedia 
expression of maantp is first detectable at the head-and-trunk stage . at this stage, maantp is expressed in posterior domains of the trunk rudiments and the posterior part of the dorsal disc . by complete-proboscis stage, expression is confined to a fairly broad band encircling the juvenile trunk near the posterior end .figure  <dig> expression of maantp, malox <dig>  and mapost <dig> in m. alaskensis larval development. all images and diagrams show lateral views with larval anterior up and future juvenile anterior to the left. asterisk marks apical organ. 
maantp expression is not evident during the cerebral-organ-discs stage anywhere in the larval or juvenile body, including the trunk discs , the cephalic disc , cerebral organ discs , or stomach .  initial maantp expression occurs during the head-and-trunk stage in domains of each trunk rudiment  and in a portion of the dorsal disc . the head rudiment  is indicated for reference. 
maantp is expressed in a patch near the posterior end of the juvenile in complete-proboscis-stage larvae. proboscis rudiment  marked for reference. 
malox <dig> is not expressed in trunk-discs-stage larvae. 
malox <dig> expression first occurs during the head-and-trunk stage in domains of each trunk rudiment , with no evident expression in the dorsal disc . 
malox <dig> is expressed in a small spot near the posterior end of the juvenile in extended-proboscis-stage larvae. 
mapost <dig> is not expressed in trunk-discs-stage larvae. 
mapost <dig> expression first occurs during the head-and-trunk stage in posterior domains of each trunk rudiment , with no evident expression in the dorsal disc . 
mapost <dig> is expressed in the juvenile caudal cirrus in hood-stage larvae.  diagrammatically illustrate expression patterns in the three respective developmental stages.



lox <dig> 
faint expression of malox <dig> is first evident at the head-and-trunk stage in the trunk rudiments . by the extended-proboscis stage, expression of malox <dig> appears as a patch near the posterior of the juvenile .

post <dig> 
mapost <dig> is not expressed in early stages , and is first detectable at the head-and-trunk stage at the very posterior of the trunk rudiments . no expression was observed in the dorsal disc. by the hood stage, mapost <dig> is expressed in a broad domain at the very posterior of the juvenile trunk including the juvenile caudal cirrus .

caudal 
in addition to the expression of hox genes, we also examined the expression of macdx during pilidial development. macdx is first expressed in the trunk-discs stage in the posterior portion of trunk discs. by the head-and-trunk stage, macdx is expressed in the posterior portion of the trunk rudiments . at the extended-proboscis stage, macdx is expressed in a ring around the juvenile trunk just anterior to the juvenile caudal cirrus .figure  <dig> 
macdx expression in m. alaskensis larval development. all images and diagrams show lateral views with larval anterior up and future juvenile anterior to the left. 
macdx is expressed in trunk discs of trunk-discs-stage larvae. a single trunk disc , cephalic disc , and the stomach  are labeled for reference. 
macdx expression in head-and-trunk stage occurs in posterior domains of each trunk rudiment , with no evident expression in the dorsal disc . the head rudiment  is indicated for reference. 
macdx is expressed just anterior to the juvenile caudal cirrus in extended-proboscis-stage larvae.  diagrammatically illustrate expression patterns in the three respective developmental stages.



discussion
the trochozoan hox complement typically contains  <dig> to  <dig> hox genes  <cit> . orthologs of all but two of the genes in the typical trochozoan repertoire were identified in m. alaskensis; we have not found orthologs of the central gene lox <dig> or of the posterior gene post <dig> in the m. alaskensis developmental transcriptome. attempts to isolate lox <dig> and post <dig> from genomic dna of m. alaskensis using degenerate pcr were not successful. both genes have been found in annelids, mollusks, and brachiopods, but not in bryozoans  <cit> . post <dig> and post <dig> are likely a result of a gene duplication that occurred in the trochozoan lineage  <cit> . lox <dig> and lox <dig> are also related by a duplication event that likely took place within the trochozoa  <cit> . one possible explanation for the absence of post <dig> and lox <dig> in m. alaskensis  is that the duplication events happened after the split between the nemertea and the other trochozoan phyla. alternatively, post <dig> and lox <dig> may have been lost in the nemertean lineage. post <dig> is not involved in axial patterning in either of the three annelid species  <cit>  or in the two mollusk species in which posterior hox genes have been analyzed. post <dig> is genomically disconnected from the rest of the cluster in the annelids capitella teleta and platynereis dumerilii  <cit> . this suggests that post <dig> may have been removed from participation in vectorial patterning in the trochozoan lineage. perhaps, its absence in the m. alaskensis developmental transcriptome is related to an evolutionary loss of body patterning function.

the principal and remarkable finding here is that, based on their expression, all nine hox genes in m. alaskensis likely participate in vectorial regionalization along the ap axis of the developing juvenile, but are not expressed at detectable levels in the pilidial larval body. furthermore, it appears that hox genes do not pattern the entire juvenile body, but only the posterior region, which develops from the trunk imaginal discs and dorsal rudiment. the canonical function of hox genes in other bilaterians, such as mollusks  <cit> , polychaetes  <cit> , deuterostomes  <cit> , and acoels  <cit> , is ap patterning of the juvenile/adult trunk. thus, with the caveat that we only have data for a single species, the role of hox genes in axial patterning of the adult body appears to be conserved in nemerteans.

although we do not have evidence from double labeling, based on the position of expression domains with respect to the morphological landmarks , it is quite clear that these domains partially overlap along the ap axis of the juvenile body. interestingly, the orthologs of anterior genes show earlier and more anterior patterns of expression compared to the orthologs of the more posterior genes. because we do not know the genomic organization of hox cluster in nemerteans , it is unclear whether the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of these genes in pilidial development corresponds to the order of arrangement in the genome. therefore we do not claim that hox genes in m. alaskensis exhibit co-linearity. nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the pattern of expression of hox genes in m. alaskensis development corresponds to the order of arrangement of their orthologs in animals with known genomic organization of the hox cluster .

one of the hox genes, mascr, has a peculiar pattern of expression: in a few small patches on the lateral surface of the juvenile trunk just anterior to its belt-like domain. the position of these dots roughly corresponds to the position of the nephridial openings in the juvenile trunk of m. alaskensis  <cit> . we do not claim here that this is what they are, because we do not have an easy way to label nephridial openings in the same preparation as the in situ hybridization, but the pattern is suggestive.

the parahox gene cdx patterns posterior structures in a number of spiralians, such as the gastropods gibbula varia and patella vulgate, the polychaete platynereis dumerilii, and the nemertean lineus viridis  <cit> . similarly, in m. alaskensis it is expressed in the posterior end of the developing juvenile.

because hox genes are not expressed during m. alaskensis embryogenesis or at any other time in the larval tissues, the pilidial body must be patterned by mechanisms other than hox genes. at this time it is unclear whether the pilidium larva and juvenile share other patterning mechanisms, or if the pilidial ap axis is patterned by a novel mechanism. preliminary experiments with inhibitors of the wnt and fibroblast growth factor pathways suggest that these may be involved in patterning the pilidium .

hox gene expression has been studied in many other animals, but most of those develop more or less directly  <cit> . in most direct-developers, the adult axial properties can be traced directly back to initial asymmetries in the egg  <cit> . even in some indirect-developers, such as some annelids or the fruit fly, a blueprint of the adult is already present at the larval stage  <cit> . in the pilidium, there is no clear early blueprint of the adult worm, and we found that hox patterning is not shared between early pilidial and adult stages. the same is true for another group of maximally indirectly developing animals: the sea urchins. in urchins, the hox genes are also more or less limited to patterning the juvenile structures as they form inside the larva  <cit> . but, in urchins, the adult body is highly modified and the hox expression pattern is difficult to relate to that in other bilaterians. nemertean adult body, however, is clearly comparable to that of other bilaterians. it is remarkable that hox genes maintain conserved expression in the juvenile body of m. alaskensis even though it develops separately from the larva and expression of hox genes is evident even before the individual juvenile rudiments form a contiguous domain.

expression patterns of hox and cdx genes in pilidial development suggest that the larval body may represent an ontogenetic ‘insertion’ into a more direct developmental program because these adult patterning mechanisms are not shared by the larva. thus, less constraint may exist on phase-specific evolution in the pilidiophorans than in animals whose larval stage preforms the adult. this may be relevant to how the pilidium arose, diversified, and how catastrophic metamorphosis evolved in nemerteans.

CONCLUSIONS
we find that hox genes in the pilidiophoran micrura alaskensis pattern the ap axis of the juvenile trunk as it arises from isolated rudiments inside the pilidium larva. the pilidium, an evolutionarily novel body plan, is patterned without the use of hox genes. the lack of shared axial patterning mechanisms  across the two life stages may help explain the extreme morphogenetic uncoupling between the larva and the juvenile.

