BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni is a gram-negative and microaerophilic bacterium that is considered the leading cause of human gastroenteritis worldwide
 <cit> . c. jejuni colonises the intestine of most mammals and exists as a commensal in the gastrointestinal tract of poultry
 <cit> . c. jejuni is typically transmitted to humans via consumption of undercooked food, unpasteurized milk, or contaminated water, or via contact with infected animals
 <cit> . as it passes from host  to human, c. jejuni must survive a great range of environmental stresses, including limited carbon sources, suboptimal growth temperatures, and exposure to atmospheric oxygen. specifically, as a microaerophilic pathogen, c. jejuni must adapt to oxidative stress during transmission and colonization. in addition, this bacterium may struggle to accumulate adequate amounts of nutrients during residence in natural environments and during host colonization
 <cit> . in food processing, c. jejuni must overcome high osmolarity conditions used for the inhibition of microbial growth in foods
 <cit> . furthermore, c. jejuni is able to adapt to a wide range of changing temperatures, from 42°c in avian hosts to ambient environmental temperatures or refrigeration conditions during food storage, higher temperatures during food processing and ultimately 37°c in the human host.

in order to survive these oxidative, starvation, osmotic and heat stresses, c. jejuni must be able to sense these changes and respond accordingly
 <cit> . the ability of bacteria to alter protein synthesis is essential to respond and adapt to rapidly changing environments
 <cit> . for example, several studies have focused on determining the mechanisms of c. jejuni survival at high temperatures. it has been shown that at least  <dig> proteins were up-regulated when cells were heat-shocked at temperatures ranging from  <dig> to 48°c
 <cit> , and a transient up- or down-regulation of 20% of c. jejuni genes was observed within 50 min of a temperature upshift from  <dig> to 42°c
 <cit> . however, the genetic response of this bacterium to osmotic stress is not well known. overall, despite the prevalence of c. jejuni infections, the molecular mechanisms that this pathogen uses to cause human disease, as well as the mechanisms utilized to adapt to environmental stresses encountered during both in vivo colonization and ex vivo transmission, are not well understood. a better understanding of these mechanisms is required in order to facilitate the development of appropriate intervention strategies to reduce the burden of c. jejuni-associated diseases
 <cit> .

aquatic environments are reservoirs for c. jejuni <cit>  and contaminated drinking water has been implicated in several c. jejuni outbreaks
 <cit> . acanthamoeba spp. are free-living amoebae which can be found widely in water
 <cit> . they have evolved efficient mechanisms to phagocytose and kill bacteria that they use as a source of nutrients
 <cit> . however, the relationship of amoeba with bacteria can be complex. we and others have indicated that amoebae can promote the survival of c. jejuni <cit>  and our study specifically showed that the bulk of this growth was extracellular. we also showed that while the majority of internalized c. jejuni does not survive ingestion by a. castellanii beyond 5 h, a very small number of bacterial cells are able to survive intracellularly and are thereby protected from external disinfectant killing during this time frame
 <cit> . during this period, chicks may still get contaminated by campylobacter from infected amoebae present in the water source, as it has been reported that intra-amoeba campylobacter can colonize broiler chickens and may represent a significant environmental source of transmission
 <cit> .

although the mechanisms of survival of c. jejuni outside the host are not fully understood, it has been proposed that stress-adapted c. jejuni can survive environmental stresses better than non-stressed cells
 <cit> . likewise, pre-exposure to stress may affect the interaction of stressed c. jejuni cells with amoeba. to date, little is known about the interaction of stressed c. jejuni and a. castellanii, but this needs to be investigated as both of these organisms occupy a similar ecological habitat
 <cit> . the importance of the interplay between c. jejuni and amoeba under stress conditions was recently highlighted by the fact that co-incubation with amoeba increases acid tolerance and survival of c. jejuni <cit> . therefore, the interactions between c. jejuni and acanthamoeba are relevant to the transmission of c. jejuni from the environment to new hosts.

several genes and the encoded proteins have been shown to be important for c. jejuni to adapt to environmental changes and to facilitate its interactions with eukaryotic cells. examples of potential relevance to this study are the ciab protein, which enhances invasion of eukaryotic cells
 <cit> , and the htra protein that degrades and prevents aggregation of periplasmic proteins that misfold during stress
 <cit> . another example is dnaj, which aids in protein folding and plays a role in c. jejuni thermotolerance and in chicken colonization
 <cit> . transcription of dnaj is up-regulated upon temperature stress
 <cit> .

the aims of this study were: 1) to investigate the effect of environmental stress factors, namely osmotic, heat, oxidative and low nutrient stresses on the survival of c. jejuni and on the transcription of virulence-associated genes  that are known to play important roles in the stress response of c. jejuni, its interactions with eukaryotic cells and the colonization of chickens
 <cit> ; and 2) to investigate the effect of these stresses on the uptake of c. jejuni by a. castellanii and on its intracellular survival. the underlying hypothesis was that pre-exposure to stress may prime c. jejuni for resistance to further environmental pressure such as phagocytosis by amoeba and intracellular killing, and this priming could be monitored via the levels of transcription of the chosen virulence-associated genes.

RESULTS
effect of environmental stresses on the survival of c. jejuni
as shown in figure 
 <dig>  exposure to low nutrient, heat and osmotic stresses strongly decreased the survival of c. jejuni in pure planktonic cultures  as assessed by colony forming unit  counting. while in the conditions tested,  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/ml were measured in the absence of stress, only  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/ml were measured after low nutrient, heat or osmotic stress, respectively, which amounted to ~  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> fold reductions in the cfu numbers. the results were statistically significant, with p values less than  <dig>  as per t-test. heat and osmotic stresses reduced the survival of c. jejuni the most. in contrast, exposure of c. jejuni to hydrogen peroxide  for 15 min only triggered a  <dig> fold  decrease of survival of c. jejuni since  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/ml were recovered.

transcription of virulence genes in c. jejuni under environmental stresses
three virulence-related genes, htra, dnaj and ciab, were chosen as reporters to monitor transcriptional regulation that occurred after exposure of c. jejuni to various stresses. first, quantitative real-time rt-pcr analyses were performed to check the basal level of transcription of each of the selected gene when the bacteria were grown in vitro in optimal conditions of osmolarity and nutrient availability  and of temperature  and oxygen concentration 
 <cit> . all three genes were transcribed constitutively at high levels, with respective levels of transcription of htra, dnaj, and ciab only  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  fold lower than the very highly transcribed 16s rrna internal control . secondly, the impact of stress on the levels of expression of these genes was tested. control experiments indicated similar levels of transcription of the 16s rrna gene under all stresses tested, apart from a small and non significant  <dig>  fold increase in osmotic stress conditions . therefore, the 16s rrna gene was again used as the reference to determine the change in transcription levels of virulence-associated genes induced by stress relative to bacterial cells in the absence of any stress. as shown in figure 
 <dig>  the transcription of dnaj and ciab was not affected by heat stress and only slightly altered after exposure to the other stresses. a modest up-regulation was observed under oxidative stress  while a modest down-regulation  was observed for both genes under low nutrient or osmotic stresses. the transcription of htra was moderately up-regulated under oxidative stress and slightly down-regulated under low nutrient stress, but the change was not statistically significant . in contrast, transcription of htra was up-regulated  <dig>  fold under heat stress  and down-regulated ~ <dig> fold under osmotic stress .

overall, the qrt-pcr experiments showed that the transcription of the three virulence-associated genes chosen was only slightly up-regulated under heat and oxidative stresses, but tended to be down-regulated under low nutrient and osmotic stresses, with htra showing the most down-regulation in response to osmotic stress.

effect of htra on the uptake of c. jejuni by a. castellanii and its intracellular survival
we showed above that the transcription of at least one of the few virulence-associated genes tested  was affected by osmotic stress at a level that could be biologically significant . transcriptional regulation of virulence-associated genes upon pre-exposure to stress may affect interactions of c. jejuni with host cells, including phagocytosis and the ability of c. jejuni to survive in host cells after internalization. to determine whether this was the case for interactions with amoeba, we tested the biological importance of the stress-related gene for which we had observed the largest transcriptional variations  using the htra mutant that was previously described
 <cit> . both bacterial uptake and intracellular survival were measured after interactions of 2 ×  <dig> bacteria with amoeba at a multiplicity of infection of  <dig> for 3 h at 25°c . the intracellular bacteria were enumerated using the gentamicin protection assay that we previously optimized for amoebae
 <cit> . immediately after elimination of extracellular bacteria by gentamicin treatment , no statistically significant difference was observed in the counts of internalized wild-type or htra mutant bacteria , with  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the original inoculum recovered, respectively. the counts of internalized bacteria recovered 5 h post gentamicin treatment decreased significantly to  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the original inoculum for the wild-type and the htra mutant, respectively. this decrease in intracellular survival was significantly greater for the htra mutant  compared to the wild-type strain  . while no htra mutants were detected at 24 h, ~1 × 103 cfu/ml of wild-type bacteria were recovered at this time point, representing a ~ <dig> fold reduction compared with the 0 h time point. these data indicate that htra is important for intra-amoebae survival in the 24 h time frame studied, but not for the uptake step. this suggests that pre-exposure to stress, via its transcriptional regulation on virulence-associated genes, may affect survival of intra-amoeba bacteria.

uptake of stressed c. jejuni by a. castellanii and intracellular survival
to examine the impact of pre-exposure to stressful environments on the degree of phagocytosis by amoebae and on the intracellular survival of wild-type c. jejuni in amoebae, stressed and non-stressed c. jejuni cells were co-cultured with a. castellanii. approximately  <dig>  × 108 cfu/ml bacteria were subjected to either the stress or control treatments before interactions with amoeba. the survival data presented in figure 
3b were normalized to account for the number of bacteria that had survived exposure to the stress tested  before inoculation of the amoeba. immediately after elimination of extra-amoeba bacterial cells by gentamicin treatment, approximately  <dig> % of the original non-stressed bacterial inoculum was recovered as internalized bacteria, but only ~ <dig>  and  <dig> % of the c. jejuni inoculum pre-exposed to low nutrient and osmotic stresses were recovered, respectively . no statistically significant differences were obtained with c. jejuni pre-exposed to heat and oxidative stresses compared with non-stressed bacteria. at 5 h post gentamicin treatment, only  <dig> % of the original inoculum was obtained for non-stressed c. jejuni. pre-exposure of bacteria to heat, starvation or osmotic stresses exacerbated the bacterial susceptibility to intracellular killing, since a significant decline of the number of surviving bacteria was observed upon pre-exposure to these stresses 5 h post-gentamicin treatment . at 24 h post gentamicin treatment, a few internalized bacteria  were observed with non-stressed inoculum. no bacteria that had been pre-exposed to heat, starvation or osmotic stress were detected. in contrast, pre-exposure to oxidative stress had no impact on internalization or intracellular survival of c. jejuni under the conditions and time frame studied.

effect of pre-exposure to stress on sub-cellular location of internalized bacteria
a detailed observation of c. jejuni cells internalized within the amoebae was carried out by confocal laser scanning microscopy . in the absence of any stress, live c. jejuni cells were detected by celltracker red staining inside the trophozoites immediately after gentamicin treatment . the intracellular bacteria were distributed as clusters within acidic vacuoles as observed by the simultaneous staining of acidic vacuoles by lysosensor green dnd- <dig> . pre-exposure of bacteria to low-nutrient, heat, osmotic or oxidative stresses did not qualitatively alter the sub-cellular location of internalized bacteria, as all were also recovered in acidic vacuoles .

in addition to the viable count assay for the quantification of intracellular bacteria and clsm analyses reported above, tem was also used to more precisely assess the effect of heat stress on intracellular location of c. jejuni within a. castellanii. heat stress was selected for tem studies because it decreased intracellular survival of c. jejuni, but it did not affect uptake. therefore this heat stress allowed visualization of numerous internalized bacteria at early time points. as shown in figure 
 <dig>  sections of infected a. castellanii cells obtained right after gentamicin treatment showed that c. jejuni cells were confined to tight vacuoles within the amoebae, whether they had been heat-stressed or not prior to co-culture with amoebae . at 5 h post gentamicin treatment, fewer internalized bacteria could be seen inside the amoeba vacuoles , and heat stress reduced the number of bacteria present in the vacuoles  compared with control bacteria . this corroborated the survival and clsm data described above.

discussion
effect of pre-exposure to stress on survival of c. jejuni
although c. jejuni has strict growth requirements
 <cit> , it has developed mechanisms for survival in diverse environments, both inside and outside the host, where it is subjected to various stresses
 <cit> . in agreement with prior studies
 <cit> , our data showed that heat, low nutrient and osmotic stresses significantly reduced the survival of c. jejuni in the absence of amoeba , as assessed by colony forming units counting. c. jejuni is known to turn into coccoid cells under sub-optimal culture conditions, which correlates with decreased culturability
 <cit> . however, we observed by clsm microscopy that, under the stress conditions applied, only a small proportion of the cell population turned into coccoid cells . therefore, coccoid formation could not account for the described decrease in viability.

pre-exposure to oxidative stress did not affect the survival of c. jejuni in comparison with non-stressed cells. this could reflect the fact that c. jejuni possesses mechanisms which can eliminate reactive oxygen species to prevent cellular damage
 <cit> . while these systems are not as developed as in aerobic bacteria and only allow survival of c. jejuni under moderate oxidative stress, their existence could explain why the limited oxidative stress imposed had no effect on the survival of c. jejuni. the oxidative treatment applied in this study was nevertheless shown previously to be sufficient to induce considerable transcriptional regulation
 <cit> , which we also observed for the ciab gene .

effect of pre-exposure to stress on the transcription of ciab, htra and dnaj
the transcription of virulence genes is modulated by different stresses in many bacterial pathogens
 <cit> . as a microaerophilic bacterium, c. jejuni must adapt to oxidative stress during transmission and infection
 <cit>  and, consistent with this idea, our qrt-pcr data showed that oxidative stress increased the transcription of the ciab gene . this is reminiscent of a previous report that culture with bile acid deoxycholate primes c. jejuni to invade epithelial cells by stimulating the synthesis of cia proteins
 <cit> . likewise, transcriptional regulation of ciab was observed under low nutrient and osmotic stresses, but in contrast to oxidative stress, slight decreases  of transcription were observed. this is in agreement with a prior report of decreased transcription of ciab under starvation stress
 <cit> .

htra is important for stress tolerance and survival of gram-negative bacteria as it degrades periplasmic proteins that misfold under stress
 <cit> . htra is also important for the virulence of c. jejuni <cit> , and we showed herein that htra is important for intra-amoeba survival of c. jejuni by using the htra mutant . however, limited data are available regarding htra transcriptional regulation during environmental stress in c. jejuni. our qrt-pcr results showed that heat, oxidative and low nutrient stresses only slightly altered htra transcription. because the basal level of transcription of htra is rather high and only limited variations in transcription were observed under stress, the levels of htra protein may be sufficient to maintain a proper periplasmic environment under all conditions tested. surprisingly, osmotic stress heavily repressed the transcription of htra . such down-regulation is counter-intuitive since hyper osmotic stress likely causes aggregation of proteins upon loss of cellular fluids by osmosis. other stress-response mechanisms may be up-regulated to counter-act the down-regulation of transcription of htra. their identity is up for debate since c. jejuni does not have the traditional cpx and rsea/b stress response systems
 <cit> .

while the dnaj chaperone plays a role in c. jejuni thermo-tolerance and in chicken colonization
 <cit> , and dnaj transcription was shown previously to be enhanced under heat stress
 <cit> , we did not observe any effect of heat stress on the transcription of dnaj. this discrepancy is likely due to the very different heat stresses applied. our study was geared at studying changes occurring during the chain of transmission  and during food processing  as also reported by gundogdu et al.
 <cit> , while available transcriptional studies are more focused on changes occurring during chicken/human host transition 
 <cit> .

altogether, although the levels of transcriptional regulation were generally low and varied between the three virulence-associated genes tested, similar trends were observed: up-regulations upon oxidative and heat stress versus down-regulation upon low nutrient and osmotic stresses. this indicates that stress-response mechanisms other than those encoded by the three genes investigated are more important in assisting cells to overcome low nutrient and osmotic stresses.

effect of pre-exposure to stress on uptake of c. jejuni by amoeba
since the modulation of virulence genes in response to stresses is a common phenomenon of pathogenic bacteria, it is important to get insight into the influence of these conditions on the interaction of bacteria with other organisms, such as amoebae, which exist in similar habitats
 <cit> . beyond the data presented herein, no data are currently available to determine whether pre-exposure to environmental stresses might affect bacterial uptake or intracellular killing by amoeba. other c. jejuni/amoeba studies were performed using bacteria grown in optimal culture conditions  which are not adapted to stressful conditions
 <cit> , or simply probe the ability of c. jejuni to sustain stressful conditions during or after interactions with amoeba
 <cit> . stress-induced bacterial adaptation to enhance the bacteria’s ability to survive a subsequent interaction with amoeba, and amoeba-mediated enhanced bacterial resistance to stress are complementary mechanisms that are important for the survival of c. jejuni in the environment. our data showed that low nutrient and osmotic stresses were the strongest factors which significantly affected the survival of c. jejuni  and the transcription of three virulence-associated genes , and also reduced the uptake of the bacterium by a. castellanii . our findings are consistent with previous studies that reported that starvation strongly affected c. jejuni invasion in caco- <dig> and macrophages
 <cit> .

in contrast, our data showed that heat and oxidative stresses did not affect the uptake of c. jejuni by amoebae. these findings differ from previous studies that reported that pre-exposure of c. jejuni to oxidative stress increased the invasion of c. jejuni in intestinal cells
 <cit> , and that heat stress reduced the invasion of c. jejuni in caco- <dig> and macrophages. these discrepancies are likely due to cell line-specific mechanisms of uptake and killing, variations in the nature and abundance of appropriate eukaryotic receptors
 <cit> , and differences in the experimental set up used to apply the heat stress as indicated above.

correlation between the effects of stress on transcription of virulence-associated genes and on uptake by amoeba
previous studies have shown that ciab, htra, and dnaj play important roles in the invasion of c. jejuni <cit> , but most of these studies involve epithelial cells which have little to no phagocytic abilities. the effect of ciab, htra and dnaj on interaction with amoeba in which entry is based on phagocytosis remained to be established. our working hypothesis was that transcriptional effects triggered on virulence-associated genes by pre-exposure to stress may affect subsequent interactions with amoeba, even if they did not affect bacterial viability. therefore, we examined whether down- or up- regulation of virulence-related genes correlated with decreased or increased bacterial uptake and/or intra-amoeba survival, with the understanding that correlation does not imply direct causality.

overall, our data only showed good correlation between down-regulation of transcription of the three genes investigated  and reduced uptake by amoeba for the starvation stress. one may argue that these data reflect the fact that starved bacteria do not have the resources necessary to alter their protein expression patterns in response to further stress  so that the kinetics of killing are altered. a resulting faster intracellular killing occurring during the 1 h-long gentamicin treatment could explain the apparent lower uptake values. however, ~20% of starved bacteria recovered at t <dig> after gentamicin treatment were recovered at 5 h. this is greater than observed for the heat-stressed bacteria for which the 5 h recovery was only 10% of the bacteria recovered at t <dig>  and for which no effect on uptake was detected at t <dig>  therefore, the lower recoveries observed after nutrient stress immediately after gentamicin treatment indicate decreased uptake and not enhanced initial killing.

for the three other stresses tested, we did not observe any clear correlation between gene transcription and uptake by amoeba. this could indicate that the genes may be more important for intracellular survival than for uptake, which we demonstrated with the htra mutant.

effect of pre-exposure to stress on intracellular survival in amoeba
the novelty of this study is that we investigated if pre-exposure to stressful conditions may prime the bacteria for resistance to further intracellular stress. the bacteria that had been pre-exposed to low nutrient, heat and osmotic stress were more sensitive to intracellular killing than control c. jejuni as seen at 5 h post gentamicin treatment. these results indicate that exposure of c. jejuni to these stresses prior to interactions with amoebae not only did not prime the bacteria to fight off the amoebae killing machinery, but also strongly compromised their ability to survive within the amoebae. these findings are consistent with previous data showing that pre-exposure of c. jejuni to environmental stresses  did not promote its survival within caco- <dig> cells or macrophages
 <cit> . heat-stressed bacteria were taken up at non-stressed levels but did not survive any better than starved or osmotically-stressed bacteria that had decreased uptake. this suggests that uptake and intracellular survival rely on distinct properties of the bacteria and that the impact of each stress on either step  is likely dependent on the repertoire of genes targeted by the transcriptional regulation response elicited by each stress.

CONCLUSIONS
the data presented indicate that environmental stresses such as nutrient starvation, heat exposure and hyper-osmolarity reduced the survival of c. jejuni in the absence of amoeba and also reduced its intra-amoeba survival. starvation and, to a lower extent, osmotic stress also reduced bacterial uptake by amoebae. the observed changes were not correlated directly with stress-induced changes in transcription of virulence-associated genes of c. jejuni except for the starvation stress. oxidative stress had no impact on bacterial survival in the absence of amoeba or on any aspects of amoeba/bacteria interactions, suggesting that c. jejuni is well equipped to fight off a moderate oxidative stress and that this pre-exposure does not enhance its ability to respond to further intracellular oxidative damage. overall, pre-exposure to stress in the outside environment does not seem to prime the bacteria for resistance against further insult by the amoeba killing machinery.

