BACKGROUND
the translation of genetic information into proteins is essential for all biological systems. in eukaryotes, the process is divided into at least three steps: initiation, elongation and termination, and all three steps of translation involve gtp-binding proteins and phosphorylations  <cit> . the structure of the gtp-binding proteins functioning at each step is well conserved from yeast to mammals, and these proteins are fundamental to living cells  <cit> . in the initiation and elongation steps, eif <dig> and eef1a, which deliver, respectively, the methionyl-initiator trna to the 40s ribosomal subunit and the aminoacyl-trnas to the a-site of the ribosome, were identified as the gtp-binding proteins  <cit>  while in the termination step, it is erf <dig>  <cit> .

translation termination takes place on ribosomes when a stop codon enters the ribosomal a site and signals polypeptide chain release from the peptidyl-trna located in the ribosomal p site. in eukaryotes, two polypeptide chain release factors have been described: erf <dig> recognizes and decodes all three nonsense codons and erf <dig> stimulates peptidyl-trna hydrolysis in the ribosome in a gtp- and erf1-dependent manner  <cit> . recent genetic and biochemical data suggest that the gtpase activity is required to couple the recognition of translation termination signals by erf <dig> to efficient polypeptide chain release  <cit> . furthermore, reconstitution in vitro of the eukaryotic translation initiation, elongation, and termination processes made it possible to propose a model for the mechanism of translation termination in eukaryotes. binding of erf <dig>  erf <dig>  and gtp to pretermination complexes induces a major structural rearrangement that leads to gtp hydrolysis for correct positioning of erf <dig>  followed by rapid release of the nascent peptide  <cit> . similarly, in prokaryotes, rf <dig> is involved in recycling of rf <dig> and rf <dig>  <cit> .

in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, erf <dig> and erf <dig> are encoded by essential genes, sup <dig> and sup <dig>  and often designated as sup45p and sup35p, respectively. erf <dig> and erf <dig> can interact both in vivo and in vitro  <cit> . the erf <dig> genes are conserved from yeast to mammals. in most species examined, erf <dig> consists of three domains  whose functions have been defined for s. cerevisiae erf <dig>  both the n and m domains are dispensable for viability and translation termination  <cit>  in contrast to the c-terminal region which carries the gtpase activity, interacts with erf <dig> and is indispensable  <cit> . all the mutants isolated up to now, showed a correlation between gtpase activity and viability.

the c-terminal domain of the erf <dig> proteins is highly conserved between species and shows significant homology  <cit> , as well as close structural similarities  <cit>  to the elongation factor eef1a. in s. cerevisiae, and also in other budding yeast species, the n and m domains are responsible for the formation of the prion-like  factor  <cit> . in   cells, erf <dig> forms aggregates which lead to defects in translation termination and consequently to omnipotent nonsense suppression. the n domains of higher eukaryotes have no obvious sequence homology with the corresponding domains of lower eukaryotes although, they have an unusual amino acid composition as do the yeast proteins  <cit> .

in this study, we identified a potential camp-dependent protein kinase a  phosphorylation site in the c-terminal region of the yeast sup <dig> protein. we show that the protein is phosphorylated in vitro by pka on threonine  <dig> , although no phosphorylation was detected in the conditions tested in vivo. alteration of this evolutionary conserved site modifies the in vivo and in vitro activity of the protein in translation termination. surprisingly our results demonstrate that sup35p mutants displaying very low gtpase activity are able to support cell growth.

RESULTS
conservation of the phosphorylation site among organisms
the amino acid sequence r/k-r/k-n-s/t is the consensus pka recognition site, and either s or t is the phosphorylation site. a putative pka phosphorylation site containing threonine  <dig>  is present in the s. cerevisiae erf <dig>  sequence and is conserved among others yeasts and fungi. in drosophila, human and mouse the site is degenerated, but t <dig> still belongs to a phosphorylation site, recognized by the ck <dig> protein kinase . in a sequence-based approach, the evolutionary conservation of all pka consensus sites in the s. cerevisiae proteome was systematically assessed within a group of related yeasts  <cit> . the study demonstrated that the likelihood of phosphorylation correlated well with the degree of conservation of the pka consensus sites. the evolutionary preservation of the erf <dig> phosphorylation site thus suggests that this site probably plays an important role in vivo. to test the functionality of the pka phosphorylation site of sup35p, we generated threonine to alanine  or aspartate  mutants. alanine cannot be phosphorylated, whereas aspartate mimics the presence of phosphate groups.

sup35p is phosphorylated in vitro by pka
his-tag fusion polypeptides, with either the entire full-length wild-type sup35p or the a and d mutants, were generated in e. coli and purified by ni2+-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity chromatography. the purified proteins were incubated with the pka catalytic subunit and atp. incubation of wild-type sup35p resulted in the appearance of a 32p-labeled species of  <dig> kda  . phosphorylation was completely inhibited by pki, a specific inhibitor of pka. incubation of either mutant a or d with pka and atp resulted in a reduced phosphorylation. . therefore, the t <dig> residue of sup35p is phosphorylated in vitro by pka, and the consensus phosphorylation site of sup35p is not the only one to be phosphorylated by pka in vitro. this is not surprising as kinases are known to also have non specific activity in in vitro conditions.

to verify the phosphorylation state of the t <dig> residue, in vitro phosphorylated wild-type, a and d proteins were submitted to western blot analysis using an antibody specific of substrates phosphorylated by pka. as expected, only the phosphorylated wild-type protein was detected, the phosphorylated a and d proteins were not, and none of the non-phosphorylated proteins was revealed by the antibody .

the expression of full-length sup35p was relatively poor in e. coli cells, while a much greater amount of protein could be recovered from constructs expressing the c-terminal domain alone. furthermore, the purified full-length proteins were unstable and precipitated rapidly upon storage, probably due to the presence of the aggregating n-terminal domain. consequently, the same experiments were performed with the c-terminal part of the wild-type, a or d mutant proteins purified as his-tag fusion polypeptides from e. coli. we wondered if the sup35pcter  alone could be phosphorylated by pka in vitro. the results show that the truncated proteins behaved as did the corresponding full-length proteins. the c-terminal part of sup35p was phosphorylated by pka in vitro, and the a and d mutants were also phosphorylated but to a much lower extent .

to search for a difference in electrophoretic mobility between the in vitro phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated protein forms, we performed sds-polyacrylamide gels in various conditions , but no change in the electrophoretic migration was seen between the protein forms .

the in vitro phosphorylated residue is threonine 341
to check which residue was phosphorylated by pka in vitro, the phosphorylated full-length his-tag fusion sup35p was subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. the maldi mass spectrum of the unfractioned tryptic digest allowed us to obtain 70% sequence coverage . a peptide whose mass did not correspond to the mass of any predicted tryptic peptide was detected, but it was about  <dig> da above the theoretical mass of the peptide . the possible presence of one phosphate group was fully relevant, as long as the sequence of this tryptic fragment is rytildapghk, and contains  <dig> potential phosphorylation sites . this was confirmed by performing an on-target dephosphorylation experiment . as the signal of the alkaline phosphatase-treated sample was diminished by  <dig> da compared to the untreated peptide,  was indeed a mono-phosphorylated species.

to further investigate the phosphorylation site of the peptide , we purified the tryptic digest by reversed phase hplc separation. each fraction collected was analysed by maldi mass spectrometry prior to and after on-target dephosphorylation, and  was recovered in the presence of two other minor peptides . peptide  of the hplc fraction was sequenced by psd-maldi tof mass spectrometry. the psd spectrum of the derivatised peptide   is shown fig. 3b. the β-elimination occurring  suggested phosphorylation on the t <dig> residue rather than on y <dig>  because such β-elimination is observed for phosphorylated serine or threonine, but not for tyrosine. this was confirmed by the presence of a mass difference between two adjacent peaks corresponding to a dehydroamino-2-butyric acid product .

search for a pool of phosphorylated sup35p in vivo
to determine whether sup35p is phosphorylated in yeast cells, we labelled with orthophosphate a culture of the sup35-deleted strain that contains a plasmid-encoded sup <dig> wild-type gene fused to a c-terminal ha-tag, and immunoprecipitated sup35p with an ha-specific antibody. western blot analyses of the immunoprecipitated proteins and the immunoprecipitation supernatants showed that approximately one third of the sup <dig> proteins was immunoprecipitated. the same experiments were performed using a strain deleted of pka, and also in a sup35-deleted strain expressing a plasmid coding for the a mutant protein fused to the ha-tag and unable to be phosphorylated on t <dig>  labelling and immunoprecipitation were carried out on exponentially growing cells, as well as on stationary phase cells. in spite of numerous attempts, we did not observe a radioactive pool of sup35p . since the fs <dig> strain carries a  determinant, it seemed possible that the aggregation of sup35p could alter protein phosphorylation, or decrease immunoprecipitation efficiency and as a result could reduce the immunoprecipitated sub-fraction of phosphorylated sup35p. to test this possibility, similar experiments were performed in a sup35-deleted strain carrying only the c-terminal domain of sup35p, fused to a c-terminal ha-tag and again, no radioactive pool of sup35p was detected .

mutation t341d compromises cell viability, t341a does not
complementation assays of a sup <dig> gene deletion were performed with the mutated alleles. a strain deleted for the endogenous sup <dig> gene and saved by an ura <dig> plasmid-encoded wild-type sup <dig> gene was transformed with a his <dig> vector carrying either the wild-type sup <dig> gene, or one of the mutants, or an empty vector. plasmid shuffling  <cit>  was then carried out by plating the transformants onto medium supplemented with 5-fluoroorotic acid, an uracil analog that allows the formation of colonies only from cells that have lost the wild-type sup <dig> plasmid with the ura <dig> marker. the ability to form colonies indicates that the sup35p mutant alone can support viability, while the absence of colonies indicates that the mutant form of sup35p is unable to support cell viability. the wild-type and the a mutant were able to grow but not the d mutant, suggesting that the t <dig> residue is subjected to functional constraints and that the introduction of a negative charge in this position alters cell viability. the a mutant behaved like the wild-type strain and did not show thermosensitivity at 37°c . a glutamate mutant  was also constructed to mimic the presence of phosphate groups, and presented the same phenotypes as the d mutant. the essential function of sup35p is located in the c-terminal domain, thus c-terminal-t341a and c-terminal-t341d mutants were also constructed and used in such a complementation assay as above. surprisingly, both mutants were able to complement the loss of wild-type sup35p , indicating that the n-terminal part of sup35p might be implicated in the lethality observed in presence of the full-length sup35p d mutant.

t341d sup35p is not degraded in vivo
to check if the lethality of the d mutant was due to the degradation of the protein, western blot analyses were carried out to monitor the steady-state levels of the mutant forms of sup35p. protein extracts were obtained from sup35-deleted strains carrying either one of the mutated full-length alleles on a centromeric his <dig> plasmid . to permit valid comparisons, the amounts of total protein extract loaded per well were the same. the results indicate that each mutant form of sup35p was present at a steady-state level similar to that of the wild-type sup35p . thus the incapacity of the full-length d mutant to grow does not result from sup35p degradation.

the sup35pcter t341a and t341d mutations decrease the efficiency of translation termination in vivo
mutations in the gene encoding erf <dig> have frequently been reported to exhibit an omnipotent suppressor phenotype, where readthrough is thought to increase at all stop codons  <cit> . we examined how mutation of t <dig> affected the efficiency of translation termination at each of the three stop codons by using a dual reporter system  <cit> . the dual reporter plasmids contain an upstream lacz gene and a downstream firefly luciferase gene separated by different in-frame stop codons in the tobacco mosaic virus readthrough context. these constructs made it possible to monitor the translation readthrough of different termination signals in different genetic contexts by measuring firefly luciferase activity, while the β-galactosidase activity served as an internal normalization control.

the sup35-deleted strain saved by either a plasmid-encoded c-terminal wild-type, c-terminal a mutant or c-terminal d mutant gene was transformed with the dual reporter constructs, readthrough activities were measured and statistical analyses using the mann-whitney non parametric test were performed  <cit> . yeast strains expressing the c-terminal a or d sup35p as the sole source of sup <dig> protein exhibited a significantly increased readthrough level compared to cells expressing wild-type sup35p . the readthrough efficiency of the a mutant was  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold higher than the wild-type . the d mutant showed a stronger increase in readthrough with increase factors ranging from  <dig>  for the tag codon  and  <dig>  for the taa codon , to  <dig>   for the tga codon compared to the wild-type c-terminal sup35p.

gtpase activity of the a and d mutants
the sup45p- and ribosome-dependent gtpase activity of the a and d mutant sup35pcter was checked in vitro by accumulation of pi using the modified charcoal precipitation assay as described  <cit> . the d mutant was practically inactive in the gtpase assay whereas the a mutant exhibited residual gtpase activity  .

interaction of a and d sup <dig> proteins with sup45p 
translation termination is triggered by a complex consisting of sup45p and sup35p  <cit> . we analyzed the capacity of the a and d mutant proteins to interact with the sup45p partner by a two-hydrid approach. interactions were visualized by growth on a medium lacking histidine with  <dig> mm 3-aminotriazol added. the two mutant sup <dig> proteins could still interact with sup45p, but with various efficiencies. the results indicated strong interaction between the wild-type proteins, decreased interaction between sup45p and the sup35p a mutant, and the weakest between sup45p and the sup35p d mutant . the frequency of diploid cells interacting with each others was estimated for these three diploids. three independent cultures were prepared in minimal medium lacking uracile and leucine for each diploid, and plated onto either a minimal medium lacking histidine, uracile and leucine to count the cells presenting a sup35p and sup45p interaction, or a minimal medium lacking uracile and leucine to count diploid cells. the results indicated an interaction in 64% of the cells between the wild-type proteins, in 22% of the cells between the sup35p a mutant and sup45p, and in 15% of the cells between the sup35p d mutant and sup45p.

a similar picture of various interaction efficiencies of the a and d mutant sup35pcter with sup45p was also observed in another in vitro assay. it was shown that sup35p can stimulate the rf activity of sup45p in an in vitro system at low stop codon concentration while sup45p alone at the same concentration of stop codon is inactive  <cit> . the stimulation of sup45p activity in the presence of sup35p might be caused by mutual interaction of these proteins. the rf stimulating activity of sup35pcter towards sup45p was measured as described  <cit> . the stimulating rf activities of the a and d mutant sup35pcter towards sup45p were  <dig> and 35%, respectively compared to the wild-type sup35pcter activity .

discussion
the c-terminal domain of sup35p, implicated in translation termination, contains a consensus site for phosphorylation by pka. alignment of erf <dig> sequences showed that this site is highly conserved. kallmeyer et al.  <cit>  already addressed the absence of phosphorylation of sup35p in vivo, however le roy et al.  <cit>  demonstrated differential phosphorylation states of the human erf <dig>  which is highly homologous to the yeast sup35p. in addition, the serine/threonine protein kinase sch <dig>  whose activity functionally overlaps those of the pka and tor kinases, was recently identified in a proteome-wide screen for protein-protein interactions as forming a complex with, and presumably, phosphorylating sup35p  <cit> .

phosphorylation being sometimes very labile, the modified isoforms might be difficult to detect. this led us to run the experiment in conditions different from kallmeyer et al. we demonstrated that threonine  <dig> of the consensus site was indeed phosphorylated in vitro by pka. however, in the in vivo conditions tested, no pool of phosphorylated sup35p was observed. since budovskaya et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the presence of a highly conserved pka consensus site was a very strong predictor of physiological pka phosphorylation, we think it cannot be excluded that phosphorylation could occur, but in particular conditions we did not explore yet. however, the simplest interpretation is that sup <dig> protein is actually not phosphorylated in vivo. indeed, in vitro phosphorylation assays frequently identify non-physiological substrates for various kinases.

although no phosphorylation was detected in position  <dig>  mutant forms of sup35p, mimicking either a non-phosphorylated , or a constitutively phosphorylated  protein were constructed, anticipating that if phosphorylation actually occurs in particular physiological conditions, the residue involved would have an important role in the function of the protein. these mutations were incorporated either in the full-length protein or in the essential c-terminal domain. an almost two fold increase in the level of readthrough was observed with the c-terminal form of the t341a mutant and a four fold increase was observed with the c-terminal form of the t341d mutant, compared to the wild-type. consistent with these results, both mutant forms showed decreased interaction with sup45p, indicating that the termination complex is less actively formed. the highest readthrough levels obtained in the a and d mutants were observed with the tga stop codon. this observation is consistent with the hypothesis of salas-marco and bedwell  <cit>  that sup35p may help sup45p discriminate between ugg and certain stop codons.

when we checked for phenotypes, we found that strains expressing the c-terminal form of either mutant are viable, while the t341d mutation in the full-length protein context was not able to support viability. thus functional interaction between the n- and c-terminal parts of sup35p is responsible for the lethality of the full-length d mutant. the presence of the n-terminal part of sup35p was previously shown to decrease translation termination efficiency in a  background  <cit> . similarly, in a recent work volkov et al  <cit>  found that the n terminus acts as a negative factor, increasing nonsense suppression efficiency in sup <dig> mutants containing amino acid substitutions in the c-terminal domain. therefore, one reason for the lethal effect of the t341d mutation in the full-length protein could be a too important rate of nonsense readthrough, which could be incompatible with cell viability. strikingly, a y340h substitution  directed higher stop codon readthrough efficiencies in a full-length compared to a c-terminal context, while not affecting the pka consensus site. this is consistent with the results reported here for the t341d mutant. in the later case the consequence is even more drastic since the presence of both domains leads to lethality. volkov et al.  <cit>  concluded that the n-terminal extension of sup35p might decrease the gtpase activity in strains that contain amino acid substitutions in the c-terminal domain. in our case, the gtpase activity of the c-terminal d mutant is already extremely low, but if it is sufficient for cell growth, adding the n-terminal domain could reduce it to a non viable level.

the t <dig> residue is located in the gtpase fold of sup35p, between the switch i and g <dig> switch ii regions. the a and d mutations most likely affect the sup45p and ribosome-dependent gtpase function of the resulting proteins, since both of them display reduced gtpase activity in vitro. the a mutation exhibits a strong reduction of gtpase activity, and to date, the gtpase activity of sup35p was always shown to be essential for cell viability  <cit> . in the c-terminal d mutant, the gtpase activity is  <dig> times lower than in the wild-type but it is still compatible with growth. cell viability of both the full-length and the c-terminal a mutant could be explained by the residual gtpase activity , since the concentration of sup35p in yeast is  <dig> times higher than the concentration of sup45p . these results lead to two interesting conclusions: 1) even with a  <dig> times lower gtpase activity, this c-terminal d mutant is still active in termination and supports viability; 2) there must be a negative feedback link between this mutation in the c-terminal domain and the n-m domains of sup35p.

salas-marco and bedwell  <cit>  examined how mutations in the gtpase domain of sup35p influence translation termination, and suggested that the gtpase activity of sup35p is required to couple recognition of translation termination signals by sup45p to efficient polypeptide chain release. one of the mutants these authors described , which is unable to support viability and has the largest reduction in gtpase activity, could correspond to our d mutant, but none of the other mutants was comparable to the a mutant, with a growth similar to the wild-type and a low gtpase activity, nor to the c-terminal d mutant with its extremely low gtpase activity. recent findings shed light on the role of sup35p in translation termination  <cit> : based on in vitro evidences a model is proposed where the gtpase activity is needed for the correct positioning of the sup45p ggq in the ptc. this might lead to the release of sup35p-gdp from the ribosome or modify the interaction between sup35p-gdp and sup45p. sup45p would then trigger hydrolysis of the peptidyl-trna. our in vitro results are consistent with this possibility since the stimulating rf activities of the a and d mutant sup35pcter towards sup45p were clearly diminished.

differences in protein activities between the mutants studied here most likely depend on the structure of sup35p. only a small effect is observed on the interaction of the mutated proteins with its sup45p partner, but it is not an "all or nothing" response, and is probably due to a change in protein conformation. according to the crystal structure available for erf <dig> of schizosaccharomyces pombe  <cit> , the s <dig> residue, corresponding to s. cerevisiae t <dig>  is not directly involved in gtp binding but localizes at the surface of the protein. due to their high flexibility, large portions of the switch i and ii regions of the gtpase domain were not defined by electron density and hence are absent from the crystal structure . it is therefore difficult to precisely predict the impact of the mutations studied on the protein structure. this region was speculated to become ordered when the sup45p/sup35p-gtp complex associates with the ribosome, thereby stimulating the gtpase activity of sup35p in the presence of mg2+. in g proteins, it is well documented that these switch regions adopt different conformations depending on the nucleotide bound  and on the coordinate mg2+, which is an essential cofactor for gtp hydrolysis  <cit> . the d mutation might influence both regions, resulting in a dramatic conformational change and loss of gtp hydrolysis activity.

it has also been suggested that sup35p might be implicated in other pathways different than translation processes  <cit> . recent data focused on the relation between sup35p and the cytoskeleton since it interacts through its n-terminal domain with various proteins of the actin cortical cytoskeleton. the t341d mutation might thus lead to an altered protein unable to perform these other functions. since the interaction between sup35p and the cytoskeleton is not known to involve its gtpase activity, it might be this pathway that is involved in the essentiality of sup35p. this would explain why the d mutant, almost completely devoid of gtpase activity and highly deficient in termination, is nevertheless viable.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we characterized t <dig> as a new critical residue for peptide release factor sup35p activity. we demonstrate that this residue is involved in the activity of sup35p in translation termination and functionally interacts with the n-terminal part of the molecule. that an extremely low gtpase activity of sup35p is compatible with normal growth raises interesting questions about the absolute requirement of this release factor for cell viability. indeed the indispensability of the protein was so far related to its gtpase activity, and our work demonstrates either that extremely low gtpase activity is sufficient for cell growth, or that the protein is implicated in one or several other essential pathways not requiring the gtpase activity.

