BACKGROUND
strictosidine and its aglycon are the common first two monoterpene indole alkaloids  giving rise to more than  <dig>  specific mias in different plant species  <cit>  . some species-specific mias such as vinblastine and vincristine in catharanthus roseus or ajmaline in rauvolfia serpentina are well known for their highly valuable pharmaceutical properties  <cit>  . until now, few studies have addressed the physiological role of mias even though their high cytotoxicity points towards a role in plant defence  <cit> .

the first committed step in mia biosynthesis is carried out by strictosidine synthase  which catalyses the condensation of the indolic precursor tryptamine with the glucosylated secoiridoid precursor secologanin to produce strictosidine . subsequently, strictosidine β-d-glucosidase  hydrolyses the strictosidine glucose moiety producing an unstable aglycon that is rapidly converted into a dialdehyde intermediate and further into cathenamine  <cit>  . following an uncomplete c. roseus str sequence description  <cit> , the full cdna encoding these enzymes have been isolated from both c. roseus  <cit>  and r. serpentina  <cit> .

glycoside hydrolysis by specific sequestrated glycosidases activates many glycosylated secondary metabolites leading to plant defence strategies against herbivores  <cit>  such as those observed in the so-called "mustard oil bomb" glucosinolate-myrosinase defence systems in brassicaceae  <cit> . although the differential compartmentation has not been elucidated in every model, the accumulating glucosylated metabolites must be physically separated  from the activating β-glucosidases  <cit> . the activation of toxic or repulsive metabolites occurs following enzyme-substrate reunion during herbivore feeding  <cit> . such an activation mechanism has been proposed for strictosidine with the formulated hypothesis that upon cell damage, sgd would rapidly convert strictosidine into an aglycon  <cit> , which has been shown to have antimicrobial activity  <cit> . however, no formal demonstration of such a process has been published so far. interestingly, studies on ligustrum obtusifolium leaves showed that an unidentified sequestrated β-glucosidase was able to activate a compound chemically related to strictosidine, i.e. the phenolic secoiridoid glucoside oleuropein, leading to the production of an highly reactive dialdehyde that acts as a strong protein cross-linker with a potent chemical defence role  <cit> .

in this work, we evaluated the feasibility of such an enzymatic activation mechanism for strictosidine with the production of the dialdehyde intermediate by sgd. our efforts were focused mainly on the c. roseus model and to a lesser extent on the r. serpentina enzymes. electrophoretic-mobility shift assays  clearly show that the strictosidine deglucosylation product has/have in vitro protein cross-linking and precipitating properties that strictosidine does not have. we therefore carefully studied, using in situ hybridisation and gfp-imaging approaches, the cellular and subcellular localisation of str and sgd to ascertain the physical separation of both enzymes. our results reveal a common localisation of both gene products in the c. roseus epidermis, with str being sequestrated in the vacuole whereas sgd intriguingly accumulated as highly stable supramolecular aggregates within the nucleus. the results are discussed both in terms of physiological and ecophysiological perspectives.

RESULTS
the strictosidine deglucosylation product promote in vitro protein cross-linking and precipitation
the first step of this study consisted of testing the ability of crsgd to promote protein cross-linking in vitro using emsa with bsa as a standard protein . a typical yellowish precipitate  <cit>  specifically appeared when  <dig> mm strictosidine and the crsgd extract were mixed . the emsa supernatant analysis revealed that the bsa migrated correctly displaying a typical  <dig> kda band with similar coomassie blue staining intensities under the different control conditions, i.e. bsa alone or in presence of strictosidine, bsa in presence of strictosidine and a control e. coli protein extract, as well as bsa in presence of tryptamine or secologanin, the two strictosidine precursors  and bsa in presence of a protein extract from crsgd-overexpressing e. coli cells . interestingly, the  <dig> kda bsa band disappeared when bsa was incubated with strictosidine and a protein extract from crsgd-overexpressing e. coli cells in a similar way to bsa incubated with glutaraldehyde which is used as a protein cross-linking control . under these two conditions, most of the bsa was retained in the pellet since only traces of high molecular weight cross-linked bsa barely entered the gel. however, the heavy yellowish precipitation was specific to the sgd/strictosidine condition since it was not observed with glutaraldehyde. the hplc monitoring of strictosidine disappearance confirmed the specificity of the crsgd enzymatic reaction and excluded the possibility of non-specific degradation of strictosidine . similar results were also obtained even if less spectacular using  <dig> mm strictosidine . from these in-vitro results it was hypothesised that the specific strictosidine deglucosylation leading to a dialdehyde aglycon could have evolved as an activation process leading to protein cross-linking and precipitation that may help c. roseus in defence processes against herbivore attacks in a similar way as during the activation of the phenolic secoiridoid glycoside oleuropein in l. obtusifolium  <cit> .

crstr and crsgd are co-expressed in the epidermis of aerial organs
the in planta feasibility of the strictosidine activation following potential herbivore feeding necessitated a spatial separation of strictosidine and crsgd within distinct cell types and/or distinct organelles. in c. roseus, the mia biosynthetic pathway displays a complex multicellular spatial organisation with at least three groups of cell types being involved. the early steps of the monoterpenoid pathway occur within the internal phloem associated parenchyma specialised cells  <cit> . gene products from tryptophan decarboxylase , secologanin synthase , involved in the synthesis of tryptamine and secologanin, respectively, as well as from crstr are specifically localised to the epidermis  <cit> . finally, the last two steps in vindoline biosynthesis take place within specialised laticifer and idioblast cells  <cit> . no direct evidence of crsgd cell-specific localisation was available and it was therefore not possible to determine whether or not crstr and crsgd were located in different cell types. thus, the localisation of crstr and crsgd genes products were first studied at the cellular level. using in situ hybridisation, we clearly demonstrated that both genes were specifically expressed within the epidermis  and not within the laticifer-idioblast crd4h-expressing cells . this result was in agreement with recent transcriptomic analysis showing a relative enrichment of crsgd expression in the c. roseus epidermome  <cit> . this result also reinforced the definition of epidermis as a pivotal site for secondary metabolism in c. roseus  <cit>  and suggested that the epidermis as first barrier was involved in strictosidine-mediated defence processes. therefore, it was relevant to investigate the existence of a compartmentation between the site of strictosidine synthesis and the site of strictosidine deglucosylation among the different organelles of epidermal cells.

crstr is targeted to the vacuole through the secretory pathway allowing vacuolar strictosidine accumulation
contradictory density gradient and immunogold analysis reported crstr as being either surprisingly cytoplasmic  <cit>  or vacuolar  <cit> . therefore, we used the recently optimised biolistic-mediated transient transformation of c. roseus cells applied to gfp-imaging  <cit>  to illustrate the putative vacuolar crstr localisation but also to identify potential vacuolar targeting sequences. indeed, crstr-gfp appeared to accumulate within the vacuole  as previously suggested  <cit> . this was also in agreement with the predicted n-terminal signal peptide   followed by a vacuolar sorting-like sequence  reminiscent of npir vacuolar targeting n-terminal sequence of papain-like cysteine proteases from various plant species and sweet potato sporamin  <cit> . accordingly, a crstr n-terminus truncated version deprived from the n-terminal signal peptide and the vacuolar sorting-like tetrapeptide was neither able to enter the secretory pathway or reach the vacuole and consequently remained in the cytoplasm with a passive diffusion to the nucleus . in turn, the sole n terminal sequence was able to specifically drive the targeting of gfp to the vacuole . conversely, a single mutation  within the putative vacuolar sorting sequence  disabled the targeting of the fusion protein to the vacuole and rerouted it to the secretory pathway towards the plasma membrane-cell wall region  similarly to what was described in the case of sporamin  <cit> . finally, treatment with brefeldin a , a drug disrupting the er-to-cis golgi anterograde endomembrane transport system  <cit> , led to the retention of crstr-gfp within the bfa-induced disorganised er . this illustrates that the crstr vacuolar targeting was carried out via the classical er-to-golgi-to-vacuole route. the fact that strictosidine was synthesised in the vacuole does not necessarily imply that a strictosidine pool exists. therefore, we studied the strictosidine, catharanthine and vindoline contents within whole leaves of  <dig> week-old c. roseus in vitro plants using hplc . we measured  <dig> ±  <dig> μg of strictosidine per g of fresh young leaves in relative agreement with the detection of  <dig> ±  <dig> and  <dig> ±  <dig> μg per g of fresh mature and young leaves from greenhouse-raised mature c. roseus, respectively  <cit> . moreover, under our conditions, the strictosidine leaf content increased following methyljasmonate  and ethephon treatment mimicking herbivore and/or necrotrophic microorganism attack to reach  <dig> ±  <dig> μg.g- <dig> of fresh weight within one week . however, the catharanthine and vindoline contents were constitutively higher and slightly decreased following hormonal treatments . in order to better compare these strictosidine concentrations with the condition used in our in vitro emsa tests , we also estimated the results in mm strictosidine within the epidermis  since both str and sgd were localised to this cell type . the unit conversion takes into account the molecular weight of strictosidine , a rough estimation that at least 80% of the leave fresh weight correspond to aqueous vacuoles, and a 10-fold enrichment factor for the epidermis fraction as compared to the whole leaves deduced from  <cit> . indeed, concerning this last parameter, the recent c. roseus epidermome analysis revealed a 10-fold enrichment of the enzymatic activities of loganic acid o-methyltransferase  involved in secologanin biosynthesis and 16-hydroxytabersonine 16-o-methyltransferase  involved in vindoline biosynthesis, within the epidermome fraction of c. roseus young leaves as compared to the whole young c. roseus fraction  <cit> . as a consequence, it is reasonable to think that the strictosidine content within the epidermis was at least  <dig>  mm under normal in vitro conditions and reached  <dig> mm following hormonal treatment mimicking herbivore attack . therefore these values constitute a significant strictosidine pool and somehow validate the physiological relevance of the in vitro concentration  used during the emsa experiments .

crsgd is targeted to the nucleus using a bipartite nls sequence and adopts a multimerised organisation relying on an accessible c-terminus sequence
crsgd subcellular localisation appears to be unclear. it was indirectly hypothesised to be localised to the er based on in vivo apparition of strictosidine-induced yellow fluorescence in a cell domain described as the er in c. roseus cells and protoplasts and on the presence of a putative er-anchoring kkxkx c-terminal sequence  <cit> . the same authors also noticed putative peroxisome internal targeting sequences. we used the gfp imaging approach to further study the crsgd subcellular localisation. surprisingly, in c. roseus cells, crsgd-gfp perfectly colocalised with the nucleus marker  and was clearly excluded from the er  contradicting the previous proposed crsgd er localisation  <cit> . careful examination of the crsgd  <dig> residues allowed us to identify a c-terminal bipartite nuclear localisation signal   that included the putative kkxkx c-terminal sequence  <cit> . this sequence matched exactly with the bipartite nls consensus sequence  composed of two basic residues  followed by a spacer of up to  <dig> residues and ending with a  <dig> residue-sequence including at least three basic residues  as originally described for nucleoplasmin  <cit> . the reverse fusion construct, leaving the bipartite nls accessible , was still targeted to the nucleus and not to the er, but with a punctuated fluorescence pattern  rapidly switching to a fusiform fluorescence pattern as the time of protein expression increased . such aggregation-like pattern was in agreement with the proposed crsgd multimerised organisation  <cit> . in order to ascertain that this nuclear localisation actually corresponded to the fusion proteins and was not due to an improbable passive diffusion of gfp within the nucleus following cleavage from the fusion proteins, sds-page and anti-gfp western blots were performed on two c. roseus cell lines that were stably transformed with crsgd-gfp and gfp-crsgd constructs, respectively  and that constitutively displayed the same diffuse versus aggregated nuclear fluorescence patterns as the corresponding transiently transformed cells . accordingly, a single band around  <dig> kda was obtained with both crsgd-gfp and gfp-crsgd in close agreement with the theoretical  <dig> kda of the fusions based on the apparent  <dig> kda of sgd  <cit>  and the  <dig> kda of gfp . additionally, the respective subcellular localisation of crsgd-gfp and gfp-crsgd were confirmed within c. roseus leaf epidermal cells, i.e. the in planta crsgd-expressing cells . therefore, a functional analysis of the bipartite nls was conducted by either nls deletion or fusion experiments. the bipartite nls appeared necessary for the nuclear targeting but unnecessary for the aggregation like-pattern. indeed, crsgdΔnls-gfp was unable to reach the nucleus and perfectly colocalised with the cytoplasm marker yfp-gus  whereas gfp-crsgdΔnls also remained in the cytoplasm with rather a punctuated  and eventually a fusiform  cytoplasmic fluorescence pattern. furthermore, the bipartite nls was also sufficient for nuclear targeting since gfp-gus-nls displayed a nuclear localisation . the interaction of crsgd within the nucleus was further studied by bimolecular fluorescence complementation  in c. roseus cells . positive control of protein-protein specific interaction in the nucleus of c. roseus cells was obtained using a bzip63-yfpn and bzip63-yfpc double transformation  <cit>   whereas the absence of non specific interaction of crsgd with bzip <dig> was checked with the combinations of double transformation of constructs from both proteins fused either in n-terminus or c-terminus of yfpn and yfpc, respectively . the combinations of double transformation of the four crsgd bifc constructs always showed a specific nuclear fluorescence signal suggesting that crsgd was able to at least dimerise irrespective to the accessibility of its extremities . however, it was absolutely necessary that both coexpressed fusion proteins had the crsgd c-terminus extremity accessible  to display the typical punctuated/fusiform fluorescence pattern of the multimerised crsgd . taken all together, these results demonstrated that crsgd was addressed to the nucleus using a bipartite nls that was both necessary and sufficient for the nuclear targeting. they also suggested that crsgd was able to multimerise in this compartment, as well as in the cytoplasm, when the nls was deleted, via a sequence located upstream of the c-terminal nls. this sequence had to remain accessible to promote crsgd multimerisation since no multimerised organisation could be observed when crsgd was fused to the n-terminal end of gfp  or split-yfp . previous work under native conditions described crsgd as a more than  <dig>  kda multimerised complex  <cit> , although its inclusion in large aggregates has not been described before. plant b-glucosidases have been described to form multimers or to be included in insoluble aggregates in the cytosol and the chloroplast  <cit> . so far few plant b-glucosidases have been observed in the nucleus  <cit>  and, to our knowledge, none were found in aggregates. the observed crstr and crsgd subcellular compartmentation is in agreement with the potential for the strictosidine pool to be activated following strictosidine-sgd reunion during herbivore feeding.

the conserved differential localisation of str and sgd from r. serpentina and c. roseus suggests a common strictosidine activation mechanism in apocynaceae
with the sequences of str and sgd from r. serpentina also in hands , we studied the subcellular localisation of these enzymes in undifferentiated c. roseus cells. rsstr was targeted to the vacuole in the same way as crstr  in agreement with the predicted n-terminal signal peptide  and vacuolar sorting-like peptide . moreover, rssgd was localised to the nucleus with the same fluorescence pattern as crsgd according to the orientation of the fusion  in agreement with the predicted c-terminal bipartite nls . this common segregation of vacuolar str and nuclear sgd suggested that the proposed strictosidine activation-mediated defence process could be a common characteristic of other strictosidine-accumulating apocynaceae. the discrepancies between the observed common localisation of crsgd and rssgd as compared to the previous hypothesis of the crsgd er localisation could be either due to the low resolution of the strictosidine-induced yellow fluorescence pattern that made it difficult to distinguish the nucleus from the er  <cit> , or to the fact that this yellow fluorescence could also correspond to the product of an unidentified er-located mia biosynthetic enzyme positioned further downstream in the mia pathway. all together, crsgd and rssgd are now considered to accumulate as multimerised aggregates within the nucleus. it may first appear unusual to find metabolic enzymes within the nucleus. however, some examples have already been described. the flavonoid biosynthetic enzymes chalcone synthase  and chalcone isomerase  in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , and most interestingly, plant b-glucosidases in olea europaea and medicago truncatula  <cit>  have all previously been reported to be localised within the nucleus. finally, in c. roseus and r. serpentina this nuclear localisation could insure an efficient physical separation of sgd from the vacuolar pool of strictosidine in intact cells even though the nature of the sequestrating organelle  appears rather uncommon. in the mean time this dual subcellular compartmentation renders spatially feasible the massive activation of the strictosidine pool upon organelle reunion occurring during herbivore feeding.

the crsgd multimerisation is a specific and autonomous mechanism that increases the crsgd proteolysis resistance
one point that remained to be explored was the significance of the sgd multimerisation. it has previously been reported that the aggregation pattern of some plant-defence-related β-glucosidases helps to stabilise their activity  <cit> . we first studied whether the sgd nuclear aggregation was unique among mia-related β-glucosidases by analysing the targeting pattern of raucaffricine b-d-glucosidase , another r. serpentina mia-related β-glucosidase . interestingly, rsrgd was also targeted to the nucleus  in agreement with the predicted c-terminal bipartite nls  attributing additional intriguing importance of this organelle during the mia biosynthetic pathway. however, both orientations of the fusion  displayed a diffuse nuclear fluorescence pattern suggesting that sgd aggregation may be unique among mia-related β-glucosidases. therefore, it would be of interest to study the subcellular localisation and potential aggregation of two new β-glucosidases closely related to rgd  that have been implicated in terpenoid-isoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis in psychotria ipecacuanha  <cit>  and for which a predicted c-terminal nls has been identified .

previous reports have identified specific proteinaceous β-glucosidase aggregating factors that mediate the formation of β-glucosidase large insoluble aggregates in several systems  <cit> . in order to determine whether sgd aggregation could be under the control of one or more specific aggregating factors in c. roseus, we studied the localisation of crsgd in onion epidermis, a remote non mia-producing plant model. interestingly, crsgd was targeted to the nucleus  with a specific aggregation pattern when its c-terminus extremity was accessible in the fusion protein  suggesting that an autonomous aggregation could occur. in addition, we also evaluated the ability of recombinant crsgd produced in e. coli to multimerise in vitro. therefore, we performed emsa experiments  with corresponding zymograms using 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-d-glucoside  as a fluorogenic b-glucosidase generic substrate . while comparing boiled protein extracts from e. coli transformed with either the crsgd-overexpressing vector  or the empty vector negative control , crsgd appeared as a major monomer band  . in unboiled native samples, it was mostly converted into a low mobility band  which barely entered the gel. this band represents a native multimerised form of crsgd since it was specific to the crsgd-overexpressing vector condition , pointing once again to autonomous sgd aggregation. the β-glucosidase zymogram  revealed that the multimerised crsgd  constituted an active enzymatic complex as did a supramolecular form of crsgd  that was undetectable with coomassie blue staining . the β-glucosidases aggregates are often active  <cit>  but the physiological role of this aggregation remains unclear. previous authors have proposed that this aggregation provides a protective role against proteases  <cit>  and against herbivore chemical diversion strategies  <cit> . by incubating recombinant crsgd enriched protein extracts with increasing amount of proteinase k , we clearly demonstrated the low susceptibility of multimerised crsgd to protein hydrolysis attack, since pk treatment only caused a slight decrease of the multimer size without affecting its apparent activity . the autonomous sgd multimerisation may thus protect this enzyme from herbivore proteases. indeed, the saliva of the herbivorous butterfly heliconius melpomene has been shown to be enriched with proteases with high proteolytic activity  <cit> . furthermore, proteases have been identified in the midgut secretions of various herbivorous insect species.

CONCLUSIONS
physiological and ecophysiological implications
the physiological implications of these results were summarised on a working model . under normal physiological conditions leading to mia biosynthesis, the sequestration of strictosidine biosynthesis within the vacuole and its subsequent deglucosylation within the nucleus by a stable supramolecular sgd complex implies that an unknown transportation system of strictosidine across the tonoplast plays an important role in the control of the mia biosynthetic flux . members of the atp binding cassette  transporter superfamily have been demonstrated to recruit various alkaloids including the mia heterodimers vinblastine and vincristine and could therefore be interesting candidates for such transportation  <cit> . this unknown transportation step appears as highly rate-limiting during the mia biosynthetic pathway since we showed that meja and ethephon treatments led to an important increase of the strictosidine pool whereas the level of vindoline and catharanthine slightly decreased . at the moment, apart from an efficient physical separation of sgd from the vacuole-accumulated strictosidine which circumvents the potential deleterious effect of a massive activation of the strictosidine pool, the physiological reason for the intriguing sgd and rgd nuclear sequestration appears unclear. the role of sgd multimerisation may be to prevent both a potential leakage of sgd into the cytoplasm by passive diffusion and as a means to stabilise its enzymatic activity upon potential proteolysis attack. therefore, under normal physiological conditions, the control of strictosidine vacuolar efflux could insure that the level of activated dialdehyde, produced following strictosidine deglucosylation in the nucleus, is not too high to be fully metabolised by the following steps of the mia biosynthetic pathway . at this stage, since the implication of metabolons during plant secondary metabolisms is growingly recognised  <cit> , a tempting hypothesis is that an unknown enzyme could be in close proximity to the site of dialdehyde production in order to rapidly metabolise this activated metabolite, possibly constituting a nuclear metabolon with sgd. in this respect it is interesting to note that pioneer studies of the mia ajmalicine biosynthetic pathway referred to a so called "ajmalicine synthetase" large multienzyme complex that could encompass the glucosidase activity  <cit> .

in c. roseus young leaves, a strictosidine pool constitutively exists in the mm range and is 10-fold increased following hormonal treatment mimicking herbivore and/or necrotrophic microorganism attack whereas slight decrease is observed for vindoline and catharanthine, positioned downstream along the mia pathway . this is in agreement with a potential important triggering role for the strictosidine vacuolar pool during herbivore and/or pathogen attack. the second part of this model constitutes a so-called "nuclear time bomb" . we propose that the massive activation of the strictosidine vacuolar pool by the nuclear sgd complex could occur following cellular disruption, for instance during herbivore feeding or necrotrophic pathogen attack, and that the induced protein cross-linking and precipitation could be a mean for the plant to deter some herbivores from their feeding habit in a similar manner to the ligustrum/oleuropein system <cit> . the exact role of protein cross-linking and precipitation in the defence mechanism is here not fully understood partially due to the lack of knowledge on apocynaceae aggressors. however, induced protein cross-linking and precipitation could be either deleterious for the herbivore/necrotrophic pathogen enzymatic activities and/or could lead to decrease of nutritive value of the food as previously reported for the ligustrum/oleuropein system  <cit> . in the latter case, the larva of brahmaea wallichii, a ligustrum specialist herbivore has been shown to avoid the plant defence strategy by an adaptive evolution. in this instance, very high concentration of free glycine are found in the larval digestive juice which quench the protein-cross linking effect of the activated oleuropein aglycon  <cit> . to our knowledge, no such specialist herbivore has been described in c. roseus and r. serpentina  <cit> . such an activation of strictosidine is probably only a part of the plant defence strategies developed in these species given their metabolomic high complexity including numerous directly toxic compounds  <cit> .

