BACKGROUND
vertebrate skin coloration provides a promising model system for exploring the link between genotypes and phenotypes in an ecological and phylogenetic framework. indeed, color traits play crucial roles in thermoregulation, photoprotection, camouflage, and visual communication  <cit> , and can vary extensively among and within species and populations. moreover, colors and color patterns are amenable to objective quantification and modeling, providing an opportunity for integrated analyses of phenotypic variation. in particular, non-mammalian vertebrates, for example, squamates , exhibit a broad range of pigmentary and structural colors, generated by different types of chromatophores. in addition to melanophores, which produce black/brown melanins, squamates develop xanthophores and erythrophores, containing yellow and red pigments, respectively. these pigments are typically either pteridines, which are synthesized in situ from guanosine triphosphate, or carotenoids, which are metabolized from food in the liver and transported to skin via the circulatory system  <cit> . squamates additionally possess iridophores, which do not contain any pigment but generate structural coloration through interference of light waves with transparent guanine nanocrystals  <cit> . the spatial arrangement of all these cell types generates a broad range of colors and color patterns.

despite such a high potential for complexity and diversity, lizards and snakes remain relatively under-represented in evolutionary developmental studies in general  <cit> , and in analyses of color-pattern evolution in particular   <cit> . although chromatophores have been described in some squamates  <cit> , and their melanin pathway has been associated with adaptive color variation  <cit> , few data are available on the mechanisms that generate extensive variation in non-melanic pigments and structural colors in this lineage. the presence of such a variety of colors in squamates makes them appropriate models for investigating the essentially unknown genetic, developmental, and physical mechanisms generating a diversity of phenotypes through interactions between different types of chromatophores.

here, we used an integrated approach that combines histology, raman and uv spectroscopy, mass spectrometry , optics, and numerical simulations to investigate the morphological basis and the physical mechanisms generating variation in color traits in five representative tropical day gecko species of the genus phelsuma. more specifically, we show that 1) the reflectivity of the white belly, and of the dorsal pigmentary red spots and stripes, is increased by underlying, structurally disorganized broadband reflectors, whereas 2) the hue of the vivid dorsolateral background coloration is generated by structural, highly ordered narrowband reflectors, and is modulated both by the photonic crystal geometry and by a layer of yellow pigments. most importantly, we show that these interactions require precise colocalization of red and yellow pigment cells with iridophores characterized by different organizations of nanocrystals.

RESULTS
tropical day geckos of the genus phelsuma provide excellent models to study the morphological basis of color-pattern variation. most of the approximately  <dig> currently recognized species  <cit>  are characterized by an off-white ventral and a vivid dorsolateral coloration, with a blue/green background and red  spots or stripes on the back . this vibrant and contrasting color scheme is likely to be involved in mate recognition and/or camouflage  <cit> , and is highly variable within and among species. not only can the background color differ substantially among individuals , but also the size, shape and intensity of the red dorsal markings. in addition, several species, including phelsuma klemmeri, phelsuma quadriocellata and phelsuma lineata, have lateral black/brown spots or stripes, and a few, such as p. klemmeri lack red markings and exhibit a blue/brown background .

the skin organization in phelsuma geckos  resembles that of other lizards  <cit> : chromatophores are absent from the thin epidermis, but are abundant in the thick dermal layer, which contains, from top to bottom, yellow xanthophores or red erythrophores , iridophores containing nanocrystals, and dark-brown melanophores. here, we report on the chemical and optical analyses of pigments and guanine crystals, and provide a multilayer optical model that describes the interactions among different types of pigmentary and structural chromatophores generating a variety of skin colors in phelsuma geckos.

melanophores generate dark lateral spots and stripes
the skin of all geckos studied here, regardless of color, contains two types of melanophores : small light-brown cells that, when associated with iridophores, form ‘dermal chromatophore units’  <cit> , and large dark-brown cells at the base of the dermis. the former are dendritic cells with processes extending through the layer of iridophores for translocation of melanin granules in response to hormones, resulting in darkening of the skin  <cit> . for example, the melanophore processes cover the iridophores in the dorsal skin of p. klemmeri, giving it a light-brown appearance. moreover, in dark-brown lateral spots and stripes of p. klemmeri, p. quadriocellata, and p. lineata, small melanophores are abundant on top of iridophores, that is, in the layer typically occupied by xanthophores or erythrophores in other parts of the body . in p. lineata, melanophores are found in combination with red erythrophores in the red-brown regions of the lateral stripes. hence, in addition to their likely involvement in darkening of the skin, the small melanophores form dark lateral spots/stripes in some phelsuma geckos, whereas the larger and darker melanophores might protect the deeper layers from harmful uv radiation  <cit> . however, the homogeneous distribution of these two types of chromatophores in the skin of any color suggests that neither of them substantially contribute to color variation in phelsuma geckos.

pteridins contribute to red and green colors of dorsolateral skin
we could dissolve in nh4oh  both the red and yellow pigments, found respectively in red-skin erythrophores and green-skin xanthophores . this indicates that both pigments belong to the pteridine class rather than to the carotenoid class  <cit> . we confirmed these findings by raman spectroscopy and uv spectroscopy/ms . the raman spectra  of both yellow xanthophores and red erythrophores in p. quadriocellata, p. lineata, and p. laticauda are similar to that of xanthopterin  <cit> , a known pigment in squamates  <cit> . conversely, although the raman spectrum of yellow xanthophores in p. grandis also indicates xanthopterin, the spectrum obtained for the red erythrophores in this species is significantly different, suggesting the presence of other molecules.

we then performed uv chromatography/ms on pigments extracted from the red and green skin of p. quadriocellata, p. lineata, and p. grandis, and compared their spectra with those of available pteridin standards. we confirmed the presence of xanthopterin in the yellow chromatophores of p. grandis, and in both the yellow and red chromatophores of p. lineata. we also identified biopterin in the yellow and red chromatophores of p. quadriocellata and in the red chromatophores of p. grandis, and identified sepiapterin in the yellow chromatophores of p. grandis. finally, we found three unidentified molecules ) in all three species. it is, however, unclear which components contribute most substantially to the final pigmentary colors of the skin.

remarkably, although pigment compositions differ substantially between p. lineata and p. quadriocellata, the pigment compositions of xanthophores and erythrophores are identical within a species , strongly suggesting that the actual in vivo colors of these chromatophores  are determined by some other factors, such as the ph of the cellular environment of the pigment  or the redox state of the pigment molecules . supporting this hypothesis, the red color of dorsal skin changed to yellow when we lowered the ph of, or added an oxidant  to, the skin of p. quadriocellata or p. lineata, respectively . even though the exact in vivo processes generating variation in the ph or redox states are unknown, these results indicate that these mechanisms provide an additional source of color variation in squamates.

ordered multilayer interference reflectors generate structural blue or green
in all regions of the body, irrespective of its color, the skin of phelsuma geckos contains iridophores, with guanine nanocrystals, either well-organized in parallel layers , or highly disorganized  . using transmission electron microscopy  images, we measured the orientation of crystals relative to the skin surface, and computed the full-width half maximum  of the gaussian distribution of crystal orientation, and the ratio between the amplitude a of the gaussian curve and the amplitude y <dig> of the background generated by randomly oriented crystals . the a/y <dig> ratio represents the relative amount of crystals oriented parallel to the skin surface and varies from zero  to infinity . table  <dig> shows that blue/green skin is characterized by a narrower angular distribution of nanocrystals and a higher a/y <dig> ratio than white or red skin. this indicates that the ordered nanocrystals generate an intense narrowband structural blue or green color through a multilayer interference mechanism. this result is consistent with the pigment-removal experiments  discussed above, revealing the structural blue color of iridophores that are typically covered by the yellow pigmentary color of xanthophores in the green skin of some p. grandis individuals. note that crystal spacing  varies both among and within individuals .
phelsuma 
species

orientation 
a/y


 <dig> 


a
b
b
a/y


 <dig> 

a/y


 <dig> 

athe ratio a/y <dig> and the full-width half maximum  of the gaussian curve describe the crystal orientation relative to the skin surface .

bmean ± standard deviation are given for crystal height and spacing between layers of well-organized crystals in green and blue skin, and for crystal height and length in white and red skin. note that the parameters describing crystal orientation differ substantially between blue/green and white/red skin.

cthe two numbers shown for crystal height and spacing of green/blue skin in p. grandis individual  <dig> correspond to samples taken from the back and the neck . note that the spacing between crystal layers is substantially larger in the neck sample. additional data are provided for blue and green skin samples, including a comparison of the simulated colors to the real colors seen in the skin after pigment removal .

dna, data not available because of the absence of red skin in p. klemmeri.

to further test experimentally if the multilayer is responsible for the structural color component of blue/green skin in phelsuma, we applied mechanical or osmotic pressure to modify the distance between the guanine nanocrystal layers and therefore induce changes in structural coloration  <cit> . we found that mechanical pressure or dehydration applied to de-pigmented green skin  resulted in a shift to structural dark blue . note that complete dehydration made the layer of iridophores transparent, revealing the underlying melanophores , because a severe decrease in crystal spacing either obliterates coherent interferences , or causes a shift in the reflectivity peak beyond the optical visible range, that is, below  <dig> nm.

optical simulations of ordered multilayer interference match the reflectivities and colors produced by iridophores
we used a multilayer model  to simulate the reflectivity and colors produced by organized crystals using parameters such as crystal height  and spacing between crystal layers, estimated from tem images collected for a selection of green and blue skin samples . the measured and modeled reflectivities of four skin samples, covering the range of structural colors seen in the phelsuma individuals studied here, are shown . although we did not have tem data available for the sample of p. grandis number  <dig>  its color was similar to that of the p. grandis number  <dig> neck sample. in addition, we compared the rgb  colors predicted by the model to color pictures of all samples after pigment removal . overall, the reflectivities and the rgb colors predicted by our model were similar, but not always identical, to those perceived on the animals. this small discrepancy can be explained by, for instance, changes in cytoplasm osmolarity  during skin preparation for tem  <cit> . in addition, we found high reflectivity in the uv spectrum , which might be produced by a series of mechanisms such as coherent scattering on arrays of collagen fibers in the dermis  <cit>  or incoherent scattering  <cit>  on, for example, melanosomes or guanine crystals.

the collaborative interplay between the structural and pigment components is illustrated ; we measured the reflectivity of green skin before and after yellow pigment removal . the modeled reflectivity for an arbitrarily chosen crystal size  and spacing , shown as dashed blue line, closely resembles the measured reflectivity of green skin after pigment removal. when a  <dig> μm yellow pigment layer is included in the model, the resultant reflectivity  is a good match to the measured reflectivity of green skin before pigment removal. a similar reflectivity distribution  was obtained as the direct product of the blue line with the measured normalized transmittance of the yellow pigment . hence, the green color of the skin is due to the structure-based blue reflection filtered by the yellow-transmitting pigment.

optical systems based on multilayer interference usually show a spectral shift in reflectivity as the angle of the incident light changes  <cit> . this angular dependence is determined by the refractive indices of the alternating layers, and the ratio between the optical paths at different angles   <cit> . under very particular combinations of the refractive indices and thicknesses of its two components, a multilayer reflector can exhibit greatly reduced angular dependence  <cit> . only one of these conditions is met in phelsuma geckos: the optical paths in low  and high  index layers are close, making the multilayer a narrowband optimal reflector as a result of the collaborative effects of crystal and spacing interferences. however, the iridescence in phelsuma skin is much weaker than that predicted by the model  because of another reason, namely, the variable orientation of iridophores in the skin reduces or annihilates iridescence by averaging the contributions from different cells .

incoherent scattering by disorganized crystals enhances the reflectivity of red dorsal and white ventral skin
guanine crystals in iridophores of green and blue skin are well-organized, and therefore contribute extensively to the final background color of phelsuma lizards. remarkably, iridophores are also abundant in both the white ventral skin and red dorsal markings, but these cells are characterized by crystals with mostly random orientations and broad size distribution . this gives rise, as in some insects and fish  <cit> , to incoherent scattering. in other words, in contrast to iridophores in blue/green skin, which generate a narrowband distribution of reflected frequencies, iridophores in white and red skin form broadband reflectors with overall reflectivity of similar intensity to that measured on coherently scattering structures . hence, these cells with disorganized guanine crystals not only produce the white color of the belly, but also significantly enhance the reflectivity, and therefore the visibility, of the red pigmentary patterns on the back. in the absence of iridophores, the red spots would appear less bright because much of the incident light would be absorbed by the underlying tissues. the mechanisms responsible for the distribution of ordered versus disordered crystals and for this spectacular colocalization of pigment cells with a particular type of iridophores are unknown.

variation in skin coloration is explained by both structural and pigmentary components
variation in background coloration and dorsolateral patterns in phelsuma geckos  can be generated by changes in pigmentary and structural components. for example, variation in the intensity of the red dorsal patterns can be caused by differences in the density of erythrophores in the top dermal layer and/or in concentrations of red pigment in these cells. the color variation obtained from a simulated red pigment layer of variable thickness  on a fully reflecting background was a good match to the variation in intensity of the red markings seen among species or individuals . similarly, different densities of xanthophores and/or concentrations of yellow pigment, in combination with structural colors produced by iridophores, can lead to variation from blue to green. for example, the background skin color of p. grandis individual number  <dig>  varies from a greenish-blue to yellowish-green depending on the area of the body involved. this variation is explained by an increase of about 10% in spacing between guanine crystals . the colors of these two different zones on the skin  are in agreement with the predictions of our optical model . note that similar variation in skin color could also be due to modification of the thickness or density of the yellow pigment layer without any change in the structural component .

CONCLUSIONS
extensive variation in background coloration, and in dorsal and lateral color patterns, is present within and among species of the genus phelsuma . our analyses indicate that this variation is generated by a combination of features associated with pigmentary and structural color chromatophores . the black lateral spots and stripes found in some species, and the light-brown background coloration of p. klemmeri, are due to melanophores occupying the upper layers of the dermis. blue skin color is solely due to iridophores with well-organized guanine nanocrystals , whereas green skin is produced, depending on the species and the individual, either by structural green or by the interaction of structural blue with yellow pigments . dorsal marks are formed by red erythrophores, the reflectivity of which is enhanced by iridophores with disorganized crystals . in addition, the hue produced by erythrophore and xanthophore pigments is ph-dependent or redox-dependent in some species. most importantly, we show that the color patterns of phelsuma always require precise colocalization of different sets of interacting pigmentary and structural elements. for example, yellow and red chromatophores are associated with iridophores with ordered and disordered nanocrystals, respectively. this indicates the need to identify the developmental mechanisms responsible for the superposition of specific chromatophore types, opening up new perspectives for phelsuma lizards as model organisms in evolutionary developmental biology.

we also show that the exact combination of parameters producing a given color is difficult to predict without experimental estimation of parameter values . hence, exploring the genetic and developmental bases of phenotypic variation in ecologically important color traits in squamate reptiles will require integration of the structural and pigmentary color components and their interactions. the fact that red/yellow coloration in phelsuma is based on pteridines, the synthesis of which is controlled by enzymes that have been well studied in model organisms  <cit> , readily suggests candidate genes for this pigmentary aspect of color variation. furthermore, although guanine crystal formation in iridophores is poorly understood, and the genetic determinants of variation in size, shape, and orientation of nanocrystals are virtually unknown, several enzymes associated with aberrant iridophore phenotypes  <cit>  are candidates for variation in structural coloration in phelsuma.

