BACKGROUND
the fast progress of large scale gene sequencing projects has lead to a rapid increase in the amount of known protein sequences, extending the gap between known sequences and known structures  <cit> . high-resolution methods have successfully been applied to resolve the structure of many proteins at the atomic level but the class of experimental conditions to which they can be applied is limited by the crystallization process for x-ray crystallography and protein size for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy .

these limitations can be overcome by turning to different low resolution structure determination methods. small angle x-ray scattering   <cit>  is a well established low resolution method that relies on an isotropical 1-d description of the excess electron density of the sample versus the surrounding environment. recently, automated methods for high-throughput saxs analysis of bio-molecules have been developed  <cit> , opening the prospect of structure determination on a genomic scale from saxs experiments. saxs data provide information on the structure of a protein in solution, but the information content is small compared to x-ray crystallography or nmr data due to the inherent ambiguity arising from spherical averaging. this means that saxs data only provides structural information at low resolution; additional model constraints are therefore typically needed to assist the structural interpretation.

early saxs structure determination methods were based on ab initio shape determination using spherical harmonics expansions  <cit> . these methods provide good computational efficiency, at the cost of limitations in accuracy for complex shapes; for instance for proteins with internal cavities  <cit> . another modeling approach has been to fit the scattering curve using a gas of "dummy beads". this is done using conformational searches by a genetic algorithm in dalai_ga  <cit>  or simulated annealing in dammin  <cit>  and its optimized implementation dammif  <cit> . a higher resolution approach is found in the gasbor program  <cit> , where a saxs curve is fitted using a packed assembly of spheres in a pseudo-cα chain. this program does not use amino acid sequence information, but does enforce a realistic packing density for the cα atoms. in gasbor, the scattering intensity is calculated using the debye formula while simulated annealing is used for searching the conformational space. other recent structure prediction methods, such as the ornl  <cit>  and imp  <cit>  programs, utilize the saxs curve in the form of an extra energy term. since these methods are non-probabilistic, the weight that scales the saxs energy with respect to the other energy terms must be chosen heuristically  <cit> .

according to the bayesian probability calculus, the conditional probability of an event given some data depends on the likelihood , multiplied by the prior distribution   <cit> . if experimental data d is used to infer the structure x of a protein with a known primary sequence a, this results in the following expression:

  p∝p p  

such an approach was used by rieping et al.  <cit>  for inferential structure determination using nmr data. the likelihood function p accounts for the experimental data and quantifies the probability of observing data d given a protein structure x with sequence a. the prior, p, on the other hand accounts for general knowledge about protein structures with a given amino acid sequence  <cit> . in our case, the data d is the experimentally measured scattering curve i resulting from a saxs experiment.

for the evaluation of the likelihood, it is necessary to compute the probability of the scattering profile, i, given a proposal structure, x. this work therefore focuses specifically on the calculation of the theoretical saxs scattering curve i '. the likelihood can then be calculated by evaluating the discrepancy - in a probabilistic way - between the experimental curve i and the calculated curve i '. both the curve calculation and evaluation of discrepancy must be reasonably fast in order to be useful for macromolecular structure determination. we used the well-known debye formula  <cit>  for calculating the scattering curve, combined with a coarse-grained representation of protein structure in order to comply with the speed requirement. in such a coarse-grained representation, certain groups of atoms are represented by one scattering body or dummy atom  <cit> . the coarse-graining thus avoids a costly iteration over all atoms . the main goal of this study is therefore to obtain good point estimates of the form factors for these dummy atoms.

to illustrate and evaluate the potential of this approach in statistical inference of protein structure from saxs data, we also perform two decoy recognition experiments . in both cases, we use saxs curves calculated from the native structure by the program crysol as "experimental" data; the goal is to identify the native structure among a set of decoys by using the experimental data. in the first experiment, we use a simple likelihood function based on the saxs curves calculated by our coarse-grained debye method combined with a uniform prior. in a second experiment, we instead incorporate a probabilistic model of local protein structure as the prior distribution.

RESULTS
coarse-grained protein models
we used two coarse-grained models of protein structure, in which the amino acids were represented by one and two scattering bodies , respectively. in the two-body model, the amino acids - with the exception of glycine and alanine - were represented by two dummy atoms; one representing the backbone, and the other representing the side chain. the dummy atoms were placed at the respective centers of mass . exceptions were made for the representation of glycine and alanine due to their small size; in both cases, one dummy atom represents the whole amino acid. for the other  <dig> amino acids, a side chain specific dummy atom was combined with the generic, backbone dummy atom. as a result, a total of  <dig> form factors needed to be estimated for the two-body model: one for alanine, one for glycine, one for the backbone and  <dig> for the remaining side chains. for the one-body model, we used a straightforward approach with one dummy atom that is placed at the center of mass. hence,  <dig> form factors need to be estimated; one for each amino acid type. the one-body model results in roughly half the number of scattering bodies as compared to the two-body model for a given protein.

calculation of the saxs curves
the observed data in a saxs experiment is a one-dimensional intensity curve, i, where q = 4π sin/λ is the scattering momentum, λ is the wavelength and 2θ is the scattering angle. the calculation of a theoretical saxs scattering curve from structure is based on the well-established debye formula  <cit> :

  i=∑i=1m∑j=1mfifjsinq⋅rij 

where fi and fj are the scattering form factors of the individual particles i and j, and rij is the euclidean distance between them. the summations run over all m scattering particles.

since an average amino acid has around eight heavy atoms, and considering the pairwise character of the summation in equation  <dig>  it can be expected that a coarse-grained protein model with one or two scattering bodies per amino acid can lead to a computational speed-up of more than an order of magnitude .

estimation of scattering form factors
the estimation of the form factors was carried out using artificial saxs curves generated by the state-of-the-art program crysol  <cit> . we used a set of  <dig> high resolution crystal structures from the protein data bank   <cit> .

atomic scattering form factors are continuous functions of the scattering momentum q; the same can be expected for the coarse-grained form factors. in order to render the estimation of the  <dig>  or  <dig>  form factors tractable, we discretized the problem by considering resolution bins. we divided the relevant scattering momentum interval - ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  Å- <dig> - into  <dig> discrete bins, with a width equal to  <dig>  Å- <dig>  our strategy was to obtain a point estimate for each of the  <dig> or  <dig> form factors in each of the q-bins, resulting in a total of  <dig> and  <dig> parameters for the one and two body models, respectively. we will denote the vector of form factor values for a specific q-bin as fªq. our scheme is to sample form factor values from a suitable posterior distribution for each bin, then calculate a point estimate from the obtained samples. we start with the classic bayesian approach, and consider the following posterior distribution:

  p∝ppp 

where fªq is the 20- or 21-dimensional form factor vector for bin q and iq is the intensity calculated by crysol at a given q-bin for a certain structure x. the approach will be generalized to multiple structures below. we assume conditional independence between the structure x and the form factor vector fªq, that is, p = p, and a uniform density for the prior p. to evaluate the likelihood p - the probability of the data iq given the form factor vector fªq - we use the following strategy. applying fªq, we calculate the scattering intensity i′q for the given structure x using the debye formula  and evaluate the difference between the two intensities. the likelihood is thus expressed as:

  p=p) 

in the following, i′q will be used as a short notation for i′q. in order to calculate the likelihood, iq was interpreted as a sample from a gaussian distribution where the mean is given by i′q:

  p=n 

with σq being the standard deviation. the standard deviation σq was set to a value that is typically observed in real experiments . for multiple structures, the likelihood function simply becomes a product of gaussian distributions:

  p=∏i=1nn 

where n is the number of structures in the training set, i′q,i is the calculated scattering intensity curve for structure xi using fªq and iq,i is the intensity as calculated by crysol from structure xi. using this probabilistic model, it becomes possible to sample form factor vectors from the posterior distribution for a given bin.

the form factor vectors are sampled from the posterior distribution for each q-bin using a generalized markov chain monte carlo  method as implemented in the muninn program  <cit> .

form factor estimates
the resulting distributions for two q-bins are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig> . from these distributions, it is clear that some side chains are less determining for the scattering curve than others; the hydrophobic side chains of leucine, isoleucine and valine only contribute marginally at low resolution. these amino acids are most often buried in the hydrophobic core; as a result, their contributions to the scattering intensity for low q values - which is mostly determined by the protein's external shape - are rather small. the final step in the estimation is to obtain the point estimates for the form factor vectors from the samples; this is done by computing the centroid of these samples , which is an attractive point estimator for high-dimensional problems  <cit> . the resulting form factor curves as a function of q for the different amino acids and the generic backbone are shown in figure  <dig>  in all cases, the resulting curves are smooth in q. since the estimation of the form factors has been carried out independently for each q-bin, the observed continuity testifies to the efficiency and consistency of the mcmc procedure. the  <dig> form factors for the one-body model are shown in figure  <dig>  although using only one dummy atom per amino acid is computationally attractive, it comes at the cost of a significantly lower accuracy, except for very low resolutions . the difference is particularly significant in the central part of the q-range, which is of the highest interest for structure prediction  <cit> . therefore, we focus on the two body model in the rest of this article.

evaluation using a test set
the estimated form factors were assessed by calculating scattering curves for fifty proteins that have low sequence similarity with the proteins in the training set . the calculated curves were compared to curves generated by crysol, which uses full atomic detail. the results are shown in table  <dig>  the dissimilarities between the curves are quantified by a χ <dig> measure, s in the table, which is scaled by the standard deviations that were used in the training of the form factors . since the errors are within the usual magnitude of the experimental errors  <cit> , our results are in excellent agreement with the crysol predictions. scattering curves for six proteins of various sizes are shown in figure  <dig> 

s is the difference between the curves resulting from the two-body model and crysol in units of "experimental" standard deviations. rg is the radius of gyration computed from the pdb file coordinates.

protein decoy recognition
in order to investigate the utility of the coarse-grained model in inferential structure determination  <cit> , we carried out a decoy recognition experiment . as previously discussed, the bayesian approach to this problem employs the posterior probability distribution. the posterior probability distribution p is proportional to the product of the likelihood p and the prior probability p. below, we first test the model by combining the likelihood function with a uniform prior and subsequently with a suitable prior probability distribution, p. the performance of decoy recognition experiments is commonly evaluated using the z-score. the z-score is defined as the difference between the score of the native conformation and the average score of all conformations belonging to that decoy set, divided by the standard deviation  <cit> . ideally, the native structures have the lowest energy. for this experiment we used a decoy set from tasser  <cit> .

in the first test, the likelihood was used to assign an energy to the decoys, and a corresponding z-score was calculated. the results were compared to z-scores obtained using crysol . strikingly, the coarse-grained debye method is generally as good as crysol in identifying the native structure among the decoys. in some cases our method even performs better than crysol; the coarse grained approach is quite likely less sensitive to differences on the atomic scale.

the z-scores in the "debye" column were calculated solely using the likelihood derived from the two-body model. the z-scores in the "debye+torusdbn" column also include the prior distribution derived from torus-dbn

in the second part of this experiment, we also incorporated a probabilistic model of the structure of proteins as a prior. this model, called torusdbn, was previously developed in our group  <cit>  and evaluates the probability of observing a certain sequence of ϕ and ψ angles for a given amino acid sequence. torusdbn is a model of the local structure of proteins; non-local interactions such as hydrogen bonds or the formation of a hydrophobic core are not part of this model.

including the torusdbn prior in the definition of the posterior probabilities leads to a clear improvement in decoy recognition; the average z-score was enhanced by 16%. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  there is no correlation between protein size and z-scores; the performance stays constant over a wide range of protein sizes.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that it is possible to obtain accurate saxs curves from coarse-grained protein structures and matching estimated form factors without the use of ad hoc correction factors. we obtained point estimates of the form factors and assessed their performance for a diverse set of proteins; the resulting saxs curves are on par with the current state-of-the-art program crysol, at least up to scattering vector lengths of  <dig>  Å- <dig> . as a further validation of this model, we used a comparison of the z-scores for a set of protein decoys based on the saxs curves generated by crysol and by our coarse-grained debye method, respectively. again, the performance was excellent. including prior information from a probabilistic model of local protein structure  <cit>  further improved the decoy recognition.

before a rigorous incorporation of saxs information in a fully probabilistic model for data driven structure prediction is possible, two additional developments are needed: a proper description of the hydration layer that surrounds the protein  <cit>  and a probabilistic description of the experimental errors associated with a saxs data acquisition experiment  <cit> . we are currently implementing such an approach in the phaistos software package  <cit> .

