BACKGROUND
female mosquitoes must acquire a blood meal from vertebrate hosts in order to obtain the proper nutrients for completion of the gonotrophic cycle  <cit> . the site of blood meal digestion and nutrient absorption is localized in the midgut, which is also the entry site for blood-borne human pathogens. the blood feeding behavior of mosquitoes facilitates the transmission of many human pathogens, including dengue and yellow fever viruses, and malarial parasites  <cit> . because of the resurgence in dengue fever in tropical and subtropical regions of the world  <cit> , and the global persistence of malarial parasite infections  <cit> , it is critical to understand biochemical processes required for blood meal metabolism as a means to develop effective vector control strategies.

blood feeding in the dengue mosquito, aedes aegypti, induces the release of proteolytic enzymes in the mosquito midgut, which leads to the degradation of blood meal proteins into peptides and amino acids. these blood protein-derived peptides and amino acids are required for the synthesis of lipid and carbohydrate stores, and as a source of energy for egg production. the major classes of digestive enzymes in blood fed female ae. aegypti mosquitoes are trypsins  <cit> , chymotrypsins  <cit> , aminopeptidases  <cit> , and carboxypeptidases  <cit> . based on cleavage of the trypsin substrate analog bapna , we recently showed that trypsin-like activity in midgut extracts of dsrna-injected blood fed ae. aegypti mosquitoes was primarily due to two serine proteases  <cit> . one is the early phase trypsin, aaet, and the other, is a late phase trypsin named aaspvi, which is a member of the 5g <dig> superfamily  <cit> . rnai based studies using bapna assays to analyze midgut extracts for trypsin activity from 0- <dig> hr post blood meal  showed that aaet is the only trypsin-like protease during the first 1- <dig> hr pbm, whereas the aaspvi protease accounts for up to 75% of the bapna cleaving activity during the late phase of digestion from 12- <dig> hr pbm  <cit> . these same experiments also showed that another midgut protease, aaspvii, contributed significantly to overall fecundity in blood fed mosquitoes. interestingly, rnai knock down of aalt expression, also known as late trypsin, had no effect on bapna activity in midgut extracts, even though it reduced fecundity by ~30% as did the aaspvi rnai knock downs  <cit> . these data suggest that aaspvi, and not aalt, is the major late phase midgut trypsin in blood fed ae. aegypti, and are consistent with bioinformatic analyses of protease encoding genes in the ae. aegypti genome  <cit> .

trypsin belongs to the serine protease family, which includes chymotrypsin, elastase, and serine collagenase  <cit> . during catalysis, the active site serine becomes deprotonated and functions as a nucleophile attacking the carbonyl of the peptide substrate, leading to the formation of a tetrahedral intermediate  <cit> . serine deprotonation by histidine, and stabilization of the newly protonated histidine by a nearby aspartate residue, constitutes a charge relay system consisting of the classic catalytic triad ser-his-asp. structures of a large number of serine proteases have shown that they contain two six-stranded β-barrels and up to six disulfide linkages, which stabilizes the tertiary structure of these often secreted enzymes  <cit> . the substrate specificity of serine proteases is determined in part by an amino acid residue in the substrate specificity pocket. for example, trypsins contain an aspartate residue at this position and cleave the peptide bond on the carboxyl terminal side of arginine and lysine residues, which form an ionic interaction with the aspartate residue  <cit> . in contrast, serine collagenases have less well-defined substrate specificity pockets, and hence display a wider range of preferred cleavage sites in protein substrates  <cit> .

to better understand the biochemical properties of the aaet, aalt, aaspvi, and aaspvii midgut serine proteases, we engineered a heterologous enterokinase cleavage site into the propeptide region of the recombinant proteins and optimized a protein purification protocol using a denaturation/renaturation strategy. we quantitatively measured enzyme activity in the aaet, aalt, aaspvi, and aaspvii proteases using the artificial bapna substrate, as well as the natural substrates serum albumin and hemoglobin.

RESULTS
design of enterokinase cleavable forms of four midgut serine proteases
most digestive proteases in animals are synthesized as inactive precursor proteins that are proteolytically cleaved to generate the mature enzymatically active form. to determine if this is also true of the ae. aegypti aaspvi, aaspvii, and aalt midgut proteases, we used peptide specific antibodies in western blots of midgut extracts from blood fed mosquitoes. for these experiments, female ae. aegypti mosquitoes were blood fed, and 18- <dig> hr later, midguts were removed by dissection and divided into two protein fractions, the midgut epithelium and the food bolus. as shown in figure 1a, all three proteases were found to be present in two forms, with the smaller of the two proteins corresponding to the predicted molecular weight of the enzymatically active mature form. in the case of aaspvi, the predicted zymogen form was primarily localized to the midgut epithelium, with only the mature form found in the food bolus, whereas both the zymogen and mature forms of aaspvii and aalt were found in the food bolus.

as shown in figure 1b, we used bioinformatics to predict the most likely propeptide cleavage site in the aaspvi, aaspvii, and aalt proteases based on amino acid sequence alignment, which also included the early phase trypsin, aaet, and bovine trypsinogen. using the signalp  <dig>  algorithm to detect leader sequences in the full-length proteins  <cit> , each of the four mosquito serine proteases was predicted to contain a leader sequence targeting the nascent polypeptide to the endoplasmic reticulum. by aligning the amino acid sequences of the four mosquito proteases with that of bovine trypsinogen using clustalw  <cit> , it can be seen that the most likely propeptide cleavage site is between the amino acids gr-iv  or gr-vv .

we were unable to activate purified zymogen forms of these proteases in vitro, and high level bacterial expression and purification of recombinant mature forms of these four proteases failed to yield sufficient quantities of catalytically active enzymes . therefore, we engineered a heterologous enterokinase cleavage site  into an artificial propeptide region referred to as mek, which permitted purification of inactive enzyme that could be activated in vitro using commercial preparations of enterokinase  <cit> . as shown in figure 1c, the heterologous ddddk enterokinase cleavage site was linked to the n-terminal sequence mnnnlg derived from pmal-c4e, which we found to be associated with efficient mek protein cleavage by enterokinase in an in vitro reaction.

purification of recombinant mosquito midgut serine proteases in soluble form
based on other recombinant protease purification protocols that have been described  <cit> , we optimized a protein denaturation and refolding strategy to purify soluble mek forms of the proteases following iptg induction. we found that the pet29a vector and bl21-de <dig> bacterial expression system yielded the highest amounts of aaspvi-mek, aaspvii-mek, and aalt-mek proteins, whereas the aaet-mek protein was optimally expressed using the pet28a vector. following denaturation/renaturation, the soluble mek proteins were cleaved in vitro at 4°c with recombinant enterokinase to remove the propeptide , and then further purified using either a benzamidine column for aaspvi , an ion exchange column for aaspvii  and aalt , or a combination of a ni2+-chelating column and ion exchange column for aaet .

as shown in figure  <dig>  these fractionation methods led to protein preparations containing the mature form of each mosquito protease, which were ~90% pure based on sds-page analysis. importantly, we found that degradation of the in vitro activated proteases could be minimized by incubating the enterokinase cleavage step at 4°c, and including  <dig> mm dtt in the purification buffers . the rationale for this was based on the fact that serine proteases contain multiple disulfide bonds that must be properly formed to obtain an enzymatically active protein  <cit> . the dtt was removed during dialysis at 4°c to promote disulfide bond formation and enzyme activation.

enzyme kinetic analysis of mosquito proteases using bapna as a substrate
to determine if the enterokinase cleaved forms of the mosquito proteases were enzymatically active, we used the bapna assay as an indicator of trypsin-like proteolytic function, and compared the bapna cleaving activities to that of bovine trypsin . for these experiments, enzyme reaction rates were determined under steady state conditions at 24°c from linear portions of the a <dig> nm versus time plots using the extinction coefficient ∑ <dig> nm =  <dig> m- <dig> cm- <dig>  <cit> . the absorbance data were fit to the michaelis-menten equation and statistically analyzed by unpaired student's t-test using graphpad prism software. one unit of enzyme activity was defined as  <dig>  μmol of p-nitroaniline cleaved per min per mg of protein. the results are shown in table  <dig> where it can be seen that the specific activities of the aaet and bvt preparations were comparable, whereas the specific activities of aaspvi and aaspvii preparations were 5- <dig> times lower than aaet and bvt. as predicted from recent in vivo rnai studies  <cit> , aalt did not cleave bapna under any conditions, which directly demonstrates that aalt lacks trypsin-like activity. also listed in table  <dig> are the catalytic efficiencies of the enzymes , which show that aaet is ~ <dig> times more efficient than bvt, primarily due to a much lower km for bapna than bovine trypsin. the aaspvi and aaspvii mosquito proteases were also found to be more efficient in the bapna cleavage assay than bvt, with kcat/km values that were ~ <dig> times higher.

areaction conditions:  <dig> mm tris-hcl+ <dig> mm cacl <dig> ph  <dig>  and 24°c.

nd: not detected, exceeded lower level of detection for p-nitroaniline  > <dig>  abs units.

values were determined from a mean of three determinations.

enzyme activity assays based on in vitro cleavage of albumin and hemoglobin
we developed a quantitative in vitro cleavage assay using bovine serum albumin  and hemoglobin  proteins to determine if the relative cleaving activities of the recombinant enzymes using bapna were comparable to results using bsa and hb as in vitro substrates. as shown in figure  <dig>  partial proteolysis assays using bsa demonstrated that all four recombinant mosquito proteases degrade bsa to the same extent as bvt under these conditions, including aalt. we did however, notice some differences in the bsa cleavage patterns between the enzymes, which could be indicative of preferred cleavage sites.

to quantitatively compare the proteolytic activities of the mosquito proteases to each other, and to bvt, we measured disappearance of the full-length protein substrates, bsa  and hb , using conditions that led to complete digestion of the protein substrate over a  <dig> hr incubation period. representative examples of these cleavage assays are shown in figure  <dig>  with the analyzed data set presented in table  <dig>  for these calculations, protease activity was determined by measuring the digestion rate , and dividing it by the amount of enzyme used in the assay. it can be seen in table  <dig> that all four mosquito proteases and bvt had similar enzyme activities using bsa as the substrate, however, when using hb as the protein substrate, aaspvi was found to be  <dig>  times more active than aaet, aaspvii, and aalt. in contrast, aaspvi was found to have a lower catalytic efficiency in the bapna assay  than either the aaet or aaspvii enzymes.

aunits of nm min-1

bunits of nmol min- <dig> -1

rates were determined from plots of amount of bsa or hb  over time .

taken together, these bsa and hb cleavage assays confirm recent in vivo functional studies using rnai  <cit>  demonstrating that all four of these major mosquito midgut proteases encode high levels of proteolytic activity against the two most abundant blood meal proteins, despite the fact that aalt does not cleave bapna.

structural homology modeling indicates aalt is a serine collagenase
since recombinant aalt did not cleave the trypsin substrate analog bapna , but was just as active as the three trypsin-like proteases , we used the protein model portal  http://www.proteinmodelportal.org to identify the most closely related structural homolog to aalt. the pmp server aligned the input amino acid sequence with the sequences of  <dig>  million comparative protein models that were generated from  <dig>  million distinct uniprot entries  <cit> . the structural homology models for aaspvi and aalt were generated using  <dig> Å resolution structures of salmon trypsin , and a serine collagenase from the heel fly hypoderma lineatum , respectively. as shown in figure 5a, the heel fly collagenase scaffold and aalt model are nearly identical in overall structure, and both have a serine residue at the bottom of the substrate specificity pocket . this is distinct from aaspvi , which has an aspartate residue in the specificity pocket , as do all other trypsin enzymes  <cit> . an alignment of the aalt and aaspvi models is shown in figure 5c, where it can be seen that in addition to amino acid differences in the specificity pocket, there are differences in the structures of several loop regions.

discussion
biochemical studies of proteases are challenging for two reasons. first, most proteases are present at low amounts in tissues, and therefore must be isolated as recombinant proteins, usually from bacterial sources. however, since bacterial cells maintain a reducing environment, eukaryotic serine proteases expressed in bacterial cells are often improperly folded and localized to inclusion bodies as insoluble proteins. second, activated proteases will autodigest if not purified under inhibitory conditions, which for structural studies of serine proteases can be done using covalent modification of the active site serine with diisopropylfluorophosphate. however, to conduct enzyme kinetic analyses, the inhibition must be reversible, or if the inactive zymogen form of the enzyme is purified, it needs to be cleaved in vitro using a readily available activating enzyme. as has been done in several other studies in which recombinant serine proteases were expressed in bacteria  <cit> , we solved both the solubility and degradation problems. this was done by using a denaturation/renaturation protocol to refold soluble proteins, and by engineering in a heterologous cleavage site into the propeptide region to control in vitro activation . this combined experimental approach allowed us to answer three important questions in the field of mosquito biology, 1) which kinetic parameters differentiate the four most abundant midgut serine proteases in blood fed ae. aegypti mosquitoes?, 2) are the bapna cleaving activities of these four enzymes similar to the activities determined by an in vitro cleaving assay using natural protein substrates, such as albumin and hemoglobin?, and 3) if the late phase aalt serine protease is not a trypsin-like enzyme, then what is it?

using the substrate analog bapna, we showed that aaet is indeed a trypsin-like enzyme cleaving bapna more efficiently  than the three other mosquito serine proteases analyzed, including bovine trypsin . in addition, we demonstrated that aaspvii is also a trypsin-like enzyme, cleaving bapna more efficiently than aaspvi. this is an important finding because our earlier in vivo functional studies using an rnai strategy, suggested that aaspvii contributed very little to the bapna activity in midgut protein extracts  <cit> . surprisingly, aaspvi, which was shown to be responsible for ~75% of the bapna cleaving activity in midgut extracts in these same experiments, had the lowest specific activity in our in vitro bapna assays, owing to a low turnover rate as defined by kcat . it had previously been proposed that aalt might not be a trypsin based on the presence of a serine residue, rather than an aspartate residue, in the specificity pocket  <cit> . we were able to directly test this prediction using purified active aalt protein, and found that aalt was indeed lacking bapna cleaving activity, despite having similar rates of digestion to that of aaet and aaspvi using bsa and hb as substrates . this result is consistent with a recent bioinformatic analysis indicating that aalt is more closely related to serine collagenases than trypsins  <cit> , since most serine collagenases do not cleave the substrate analog bapna  <cit> .

structural homology modeling of aalt was done using a  <dig> Å serine collagenase structure from heel fly that was 40% identical to aalt at the amino acid level . it can be seen from this model that a serine residue sits at the bottom of the specificity pockets of aalt  and the heel fly collagenase , rather than an aspartate residue as in aaspvi  and all other bona fide trypsins  <cit> . it is likely that this amino acid difference in the specificity pocket of aalt is responsible for the lack of bapna cleaving activity. moreover, similar to the heel fly collagenase  <cit> , aalt might recognize and cleave after leu residues, rather than arg residues, given that both enzymes contain serine residues in the specificity pocket. however, further studies are needed to test this prediction.

why would blood fed mosquitoes secrete a collagenase-like enzyme into the midgut, considering that human blood contains very little, if any, collagen? one explanation might be that serine collagenases have been shown to be somewhat promiscuous with regard to substrate specificity, and therefore could function as garbage disposals in the digestion system, much like proteosomes do in the cytoplasm to degrade cellular proteins. this notion comes from the extensive biochemical analysis of a serine collagenase from the fiddler crab , which has a 37% sequence identity to aalt. these studies showed that the crab enzyme is a true collagenase, however, it was also found to have trypsin-, chymotrypsin-, and elastase-like substrate specificities and cleavage activities owing to a substrate specificity pocket that accommodates different basic, polar, and hydrophobic amino acids  <cit> . for a mosquito to have such an enzyme would be advantageous, since the mosquito must digest the blood meal fairly quickly in order to obtain the proper nutrients to fuel the gonotrophic cycle.

CONCLUSIONS
serine proteases expressed in the midgut of blood fed ae. aegypti mosquitoes are required for protein digestion and completion of the gonotrophic cycle, and could potentially be selective inhibitor targets for vector control. in order to quantitate enzyme activities in the four most abundant midgut serine proteases in ae. aegypti, we engineered a heterologous enterokinase cleavage site into an artificial propeptide region to permit the purification and in vitro activation of recombinant enzymes. we found that three of the four proteases  cleave the trypsin analog bapna in an in vitro assay, which confirms that they are trypsin-like serine proteases, whereas a fourth enzyme, misnamed late trypsin , does not cleave bapna and is structurally related to serine collagenases.

