BACKGROUND
angiogenesis, the generation of new blood vessels, plays an essential role under normal physiological conditions as well as during the pathogenesis of many diseases including atherosclerosis, macular degeneration, wound healing, diabetic retinopathy, and human malignancy  <cit> . remarkably, tumor dormancy is believed to be attributed, at least in part, to the lack of angiogenesis support. the transition from an avascular, dormant tumor to an aggressively growing angiogenic cancer is referred to as the "angiogenic switch"  <cit> . more than  <dig> years ago, it was hypothesized that inhibition of tumor angiogenesis would inhibit solid tumor growth  <cit> . since then, the expansion of angiogenesis research has resulted in the identification of various pro- and anti-angiogenic factors, such as fgf, vegf, angiopoietin, endostatin, vasostatin, and neuronal cell axon guidance molecules  <cit>  and the development of several anti-tumor angiogenesis medicines that have recently proven efficacious in the clinic  <cit> .

malignant tumors often express an array of angiogenic factors to potentiate angiogenesis and tumor growth  <cit> . ultimate angiogenic outcomes depend on the dynamic equilibrium between positive and negative regulators and the interplay among their signal transduction pathways, not on a single discrete pathway. avastin, a monoclonal antibody that specifically blocks vegf, is the first approved anti-angiogenic therapy. notably, combination with chemotherapies has been necessary for its clinical efficacy. moreover, tumors often develop drug resistance in response to anti-vegf therapy  <cit> . hanahan et al demonstrated one possible mechanism by which such drug resistance might develop <cit> . inhibition of vegf signalling by neutralizing antibody to vegfr <dig>  induces elevated expression of hypoxia associated proangiogenic factors such as fgf and ephrina <dig>  which subsequently reactivates vegf independent angiogenesis and tumor growth. thus, disrupting a single proangiogenic pathway by itself is often insufficient to achieve sustained therapeutic benefits. in this light, it is necessary to explore global functional association among angiogenesis-related genes rather than focusing on an individual or a few angiogenesis factors discretely.

importantly, angiogenesis involves intercellular interaction among vessel-forming endothelial cells, nonmalignant cells such as the supporting pericytes, immune and stromal cells, as well as the malignant tumor cells  <cit> . therefore, global gene-gene interactions during angiogenesis need to be explored in a multi-cell type context. human umbilical vein endothelial cells  are widely used to study vascular biology  <cit> . they form a lumen bearing capillary structure when co-cultured with normal human dermal fibroblast  cells  <cit> . it has also been noticed that huvecs change their cellular and molecular properties upon passage in vitro, a phenomenon thought to be due to in vitro cellular senescence  <cit> . in the present study, we determined that huvec competence and nhdf supportiveness for angiogenesis in this co-culture system are both cell passage dependent. gene ontology  analysis of differentially expressed genes showed that the cell passage dependent global transcriptional changes are highly related to angiogenesis. this enabled us to construct a comprehensive functional association network of differentially expressed genes using a natural language processing algorithm. we further developed a "network walking" algorithm to estimate network perturbation by small molecule kinase inhibitors. the simulated compound activity via network perturbation analysis was in good agreement with actual phenotypic activity in the cord formation bioassay.

RESULTS
characterization of an in vitro angiogenesis co-culture model by multi parameter high content image analysis
huvecs form a capillary structure when co-cultured with nhdf in vitro  <cit> . unlike the huvec matrigel™ assay, the huvec/nhdf cord formation co-culture allows us to study cell-cell interactions during long term  angiogenesis. the formation of the cord structure is a highly organized morphogenic process. we developed a high content imaging based assay to document and quantitate cord formation using the cellomics arrayscan platform. we were able to simultaneously assess dozens of morphological measurements, such as tube length, area, connectivity of the cord, branching, and number of nuclei within the cord. using this assay system, we tested a clinically approved antiangiogenic compound sunitinib . while  <dig> ng/ml vegf significantly increased angiogenesis,  <dig> nm sunitinib significantly inhibited angiogenesis .

to explore the phenotypic signatures induced by vegf or sunitinib, we performed principal component analysis  and hierarchical clustering . multivariate analyses using  <dig> morphological measurements clearly distinguished the three treatment groups, i.e. control, vegf, and sunitinib. in the pca analysis, the first three principal components captured more than 80% of the total variance. examining the pc loadings, we found that among the most discriminative features are the cord length , cord area, the branching segment count. the cord cd <dig> immunofluorescence intensity is also one of the features that significantly contributed to pc <dig>  likely due to the overall correlation of fluorescence staining to cord mass. interestingly, the cord width is not a discriminative feature for either vegf or sunitinib action. the current multi-parameter, high content analysis allowed for a detailed dissection of the phenotypic characteristics associated with a given factor or compound. shown in fig. 1d is the mean value plot of a few representative parameters. sunitinib significantly inhibited the mass of the cord in length and area, but not width. moreover, the number of nuclei per tube is significantly reduced, indicating that sunitinib could have anti-proliferation activity on huvecs in the co-culture. sunitinib treated cultures are less morphologically complex, as the number of connected cords, the branching nodes, and segment measurements are all significantly reduced.

huvec cord formation competence is cell passage dependent
it has been well known that huvecs change their biochemical and cellular behaviors when passaged in vitro  <cit> . we cultured huvec cells from a single batch to various passages  and tested them for cord formation competence. we found that they gradually lost cord formation capabilities upon passage . while early passage  huvecs formed very nice capillary structures and responded robustly to vegf when co-cultured with nhdf, late passage  huvecs lost cord formation capability and had diminished response to vegf .

we next profiled gene expression changes associated with huvec passage. since the loss of angiogenesis capability was proportional to the round of cell passage, we applied a statistical approach to identify genes with regressive expression patterns, i.e. their expression either increased or decreased over passage numbers. we identified  <dig> differentially expressed  genes which are listed in supplemental table  <dig> . in order to understand the biological relevance of the de genes, we analyzed the de genes by using the david functional annotation system  <cit> . table  <dig> lists gene ontology  terms significantly enriched with the de genes. the most significant biological processes  categories are cell cycle, proliferation and programmed cell death. expression profiles of the de genes involved in representative biological processes were analyzed by hierarchical clustering analysis. the majority of the de genes involved in mitotic cell cycle and proliferation were down-regulated, whereas the majority of genes related to cell death were up-regulated , which supports the replicative cell senescence hypothesis.

 <dig>  gene ontology;  <dig>  differentially expressed genes;  <dig>  false discovery rate

listed are go categories identified through enrichment testing of the differentially expressed genes from huvec using the david functional annotation system as described in the methods section.

profiling passage dependent angiogenesis support by dermal fibroblast cells
long term sustained angiogenesis in co-culture is supported by dermal fibroblast feeder layer cells, which are also affected by cell passage. while late passage  adult nhdfs demonstrated poor support for huvecs to form capillary structures, early passage  adult cells did well , suggesting that supportiveness of nhdfs in the angiogenesis assay is indeed cell-passage dependent. an early passage nhdf from a neonatal donor also supported angiogenesis in this assay .

differential angiogenesis supportiveness by nhdfs in the co-culture system represents a unique opportunity for us to dissect factors that may contribute to the complex intercellular communications during angiogenesis. to assess this, we profiled gene expression in the three listed preparations of nhdf cells by dna microarray analysis. between the supportive nhdf cells versus the non-supportive ones, we identified  <dig> non-redundant common de genes which are listed in supplemental table  <dig> . similarly, we used the david functional annotation system to examine the functional relevance to angiogenesis of these degs. table  <dig> lists the significantly enriched go terms. interestingly, blood vessel development and morphogenesis, angiogenesis and vasculature development were among the most significantly enriched biological processes, suggesting that these molecular changes were related to cellular potential to support angiogenesis. representative expression profiles of genes involved in blood vessel development and angiogenesis are shown in fig. 3b. this result is consistent with the supporting roles of nhdfs in this co-culture system. taken together, passaging nhdf cells in vitro adversely affects cellular capacity to support angiogenesis due to significantly orchestrated changes of many genes involved in a few related biological processes.

 <dig>  gene ontology;  <dig>  differentially expressed genes;  <dig>  false discovery rate.

listed are go categories identified through enrichment testing of the differentially expressed genes from nhdf cells using the david functional annotation system as described in the methods section.

establishment of a gene functional association networkthe fact that cell passage dependent gene expression in both huvec and nhdf cells influences angiogenesis supports modeling the angiogenesis network using the degs identified by these dna microarray experiments. to understand the functional association of these genes, we constructed a molecular interactome among the total  <dig> differentially expressed genes identified from either nhdfs or huvecs. the interactome consisted of over  <dig>  gene-to-gene connections retrieved from pubmed abstracts using the natural language processing algorithm in pathwayassist. we then refined the interactome by removing genes whose expression was not detectable by microarray analysis in the co-culture system. the resulted molecular interactome consists of  <dig> molecular relationships described by the following terms: binding, expression, molecular transport, protein modification and regulation . there were  <dig> unique genes in the interactome, among which  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in the co-culture system. thus, the interactome covers roughly 74% of the identified degs. the interactome displays the typical characteristics of a scale-free network  <cit>  . thirty genes with the highest connectivity are listed in table  <dig>  we further identified  <dig> angiogenesis-related genes by conducting automated querying of the pubmed abstract database using an in-house developed text mining tool, targetminer. the thirty most connected genes in the interactome were all angiogenesis related, accounting for over 33% of the total  <dig> connections in the interactome. this data suggests a high degree of relevancy of the interactome to angiogenesis.

genes within the regulation network or interactome were ranked by their connectivity in the network, i.e., the number of genes that they directly engaged with. listed above are the top  <dig> genes with the highest connectivity. gene symbols are those assigned by human gene nomenclature committee .

subnetwork analysis of oncogene involvement in angiogenesis
the information on which the network was based comes from many cell types. although we filtered and refined the network by only including genes that are present in the model, validating  <dig> individual network edges is challenging. we explored the feasibility of using the present network model to address known biological phenomena as a pathway toward functional validation of the network. examining the connectivity hierarchy, we found that oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are among the highest ranked molecules  based on the number of connections in which they are directly engaged. for example, the number of connections that p <dig>  src, and myc directly engaged is  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> respectively, ranking at the 2nd, 8th and 16th places in terms of connectivity in the interactome. this observation recapitulates the emerging role of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in angiogenesis regulation  <cit> . we focused our analysis on myc by first dissecting its interactions with other genes in the network. a subnetwork centered on myc was constructed from the initial interactome . it was found that myc is linked to a variety of angiogenesis regulators with high connectivity within the network, suggesting a central role of myc in angiogenesis regulation. we hypothesized that inactivation of myc function would have profound angiogenic defects in this co-culture assay. we tested this hypothesis by attenuating myc expression in huvecs using c-myc sirna. cord formation was significantly suppressed in simyc treated cultures . cord mass, branching pattern, and responsiveness to exogenous vegf were all inhibited, which is consistent with the network prediction. knockdown of myc expression by the sirna was confirmed in parallel by taqman rt-pcr analysis . the involvement of tgf-β, the top node in the present angiogenesis network was also validated .

assessment of compound antiangiogenic activity by network perturbation analysis
we further explored the application of network analysis to understand compound polypharmacology. since kinases have increasingly become effective targets for anti-angiogenic drug discovery  <cit> , we assessed kinase contributions to angiogenesis regulation in the co-culture model by network analysis. first,  <dig> kinases were mapped to the interactome with a total of  <dig> directly-connected genes, accounting for 44% of the total number of genes in the refined interactome. any mapped kinase is engaged in the rest of the network through multi-step connections. accordingly, we developed a "network walking" algorithm to model the connection cascade of kinases within the network. the methods are described in the method section and shown in a schematic diagram in fig.  <dig>  using this algorithm, the characteristic connection curves of the  <dig> mapped kinases were determined and are shown in fig. 7a. all kinases were able to connect to the rest of the interactome , and the connectivity plateaus at the connection of  <dig> within the interactome. this property was used to assess the potential maximal perturbation of the interactome if a given kinase is inhibited. while every connected molecule plateaus at the same number of connections, each arrives at a different rate, which can be assessed by the slope of the connectivity curve. since the spread of activity along the network can not reach  <dig> percent penetration at each step, and the penetration is expected to decay dramatically at later steps due to multiple inputs and outputs at each node, we thus defined a perturbation index calculated from the data collected by the network walking algorithm using a weighted sum method as described in the method section.

using network perturbation analysis to assess drug phenotypic activity, we tested three multi-targeted anti-angiogenic kinase  inhibitors: sunitinib, ptk <dig>  and ly <dig>  the analysis was performed based on the number and the identities of the kinases that are inhibited by a given compound at its respective potency as described in the method section. sunitinib and ptk <dig> have been previously tested in clinical trials  <cit> , while ly <dig>  is a novel lilly mak inhibitor with a distinct kinase activity profile. ly <dig> , an imidazopyridine, is an orally bioavailable, broad-spectrum inhibitor of the vegf and pdgf receptors. additionally, flt <dig>  kit, tie- <dig> and the eph family of receptors are also sensitive to this small molecule inhibitor . to differentiate these mak compounds, it is important to determine if the unique kinase profile of ly <dig> is advantageous to achieve anti-angiogenic efficacy. we simulated the potential network perturbation by the three molecules based on the integrated perturbation index of every kinase that a given smi is active against. the resulting theoretical dose response curves were used to estimate the simulated ec <dig> of network perturbation . the compounds were ranked by their simulated activities as ly2401401>sunitinib>ptk <dig>  with the ec <dig> values estimated to be  <dig>  nm,  <dig>  nm, and  <dig>  nm, respectively. the network analysis clearly differentiates these three mak molecules. interestingly, the network analysis predicted that sunitinib would be far more potent than ptk- <dig>  although their activities against kdr are rather close .

we then determined the actual angiogenesis activity of each compound by testing its dose dependent response directly in the cord formation assay. they were ranked in the same order as inferred by the network simulation . the observed ec <dig> values from multiple independent experiments were determined to be  <dig>  nm ,  <dig>  nm , and  <dig>  nm  for ly <dig>  sunitinib, and ptk <dig>  respectively . the actual compound activity in the cord formation bioassay was consistent with the predicted values based on the network perturbation analyses.

discussion
angiogenesis involves various cellular and multi-cellular events such as cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, migration, branching and sprouting. such complicated processes are integrated via intrinsic and extrinsic regulatory mechanisms. studying angiogenesis in the context of a global gene association network is critical to better understand angiogenesis and to improve cancer drug targeting strategies. for instance, through network analysis, peroxisome proliferative-activated receptor δ was recently identified as a "hub" node in a network that plays critical roles in mediating a tumor angiogenesis switch in human pancreatic cancers  <cit> . over several decades, many proangiogenic factors have been uncovered, subsets of which are used by various malignant tumors preferentially  <cit> . however, the proangiogenic signals used by tumors are not static. it is thus unlikely to find a pleiotropic therapy by targeting a single proangiogenic factor. moreover, tumors develop escape strategies by expressing alternative proangiogenic factors  <cit> . unsurprisingly, mixed results have been observed in clinical trials with anti angiogenesis agents being used as a mono therapy or in combination therapies  <cit> . it has been well accepted in the field that targeting a single gene is not sufficient  <cit> . however, how to target multiple genes? what are the desirable combinations of targets? and how to achieve efficacy with less rebound possibility? these are some key issues to be addressed. in this light, a comprehensive gene association network governing angiogenesis is needed to aid rational anti-angiogenesis drug design.

in the present study, we first characterized an in vitro angiogenesis co-culture model using high content imaging analysis and found that cord formation is highly cell-passage dependent. we then profiled huvec and fibroblast cells at different passages, from which we identified more than two thousand genes whose expression was passage-dependent. using a natural language processing algorithm, we retrieved a large collection of reported functional associations  among identified genes. analysis of the interactome indicated that it is functionally related to angiogenesis. topologically, it displayed a typical characteristic of a scale-free network system, that is, 20% of genes account for 80% of functional connections. the interactome recapitulated the involvement of oncogenes in angiogenesis regulation, which was subsequently validated by sirna mediated gene silencing. we further hypothesized that the interactome we constructed is essential and sufficient to support angiogenesis in the co-culture model system.

anti-angiogenic efficacy from a given drug can be thought of as its ability to disrupt essential functional associations in the interactome. conceivably, inhibitors capable of affecting more hub nodes should deliver faster and stronger network perturbation, eliciting enhanced anti-angiogenic efficacy. therefore, we implemented a network walking algorithm to calculate connectivity indices in the interactome. the connectivity index for the ith gene is a quantity extracted from the interactome that measures its effectiveness in perturbing the entire angiogenesis interactome on inhibition. this is important as a way to address the important polypharmacology of anti-angiogenic compounds.

the present study takes kinase inhibitors as an example. targeting multiple kinases is generally believed to be a viable antiangiogenic strategy and has been proven clinically  <cit> . sunitinib and nexavar , two small molecule kinase inhibitors, are currently registered therapies. however, ptk- <dig> failed to achieve statistical significance in clinical trials  <cit> , although the exact mechanism accounting for the failure is not clear. targeting the right spectrum of kinases by a single smi is critical for the development of successful anti-angiogenic drugs  <cit> . although many kinases are reportedly angiogenesis related, they may differ in downstream signalling events, crossreactivity, kinetics, etc. for a given small molecule kinase inhibitor, translation of its kinase profile to phenotypic activity is challenging. in the present study, we explored the feasibility of estimating the anti-angiogenic activity of a kinase inhibitor via network perturbation analysis. the current heuristic approach addressed the number and identity of the kinases that a given compound is active against as well as the respective potency. the simulation was conducted to estimate network perturbation by a novel mak compound ly <dig> along with two clinically tested mak compounds. the estimated anti-angiogenic activities for the three kinase inhibitors from the simulation were found to match well with their actual activities on separate bioassays . because the current network contains more than  <dig>  edges, it would be desirable if the network could be further refined by more stringent filtering to potentially increase its predictive power. this might be done by refining the network using network connections inferred directly through comprehensive microarray studies, or directly generated protein-protein interaction data. in addition, the complexity of the current interactome, which contains data of different types, makes systematic filtering in an unbiased way difficult and should be considered for future studies.

inferring a regulatory network from dna microarray data remains a great challenge despite the fact that numerous computational methods have been published  <cit> . biological processes are complex and involve hundreds of genes, thus requiring a large amount of diverse data. in addition, dna microarray experiments only interrogate transcriptionally-regulated genes, so it is inevitable that a significant portion of false positive and false negative interactions in an inferred network will be generated. in the present study, instead of directly inferring a regulatory network, we constructed an interactome from differentially expressed genes by applying a literature text mining technique to extract functional associations that had been observed from experiments; thus we anticipate fewer false positives. with the shortest path approach, we could recover functional associations among genes where the expression is not transcriptionally regulated, thus we anticipate fewer false negatives. for example, 20% of the genes constituting our interactome were not differentially expressed either in the huvec or nhdf cells, yet they ranked rather highly in the connectivity hierarchy. since the natural language processing of literature text can be error-prone, the interactome we constructed has its own limits. the current approach is limited to address the complexity of in vivo cancer angiogenesis which not only involves multiple cell type and signalling pathway interactions, but the interactions are also geometrically and temporally restricted. for example, anti-angiogenic drug-induced inhibition of vessel formation subsequently causes changes in blood flow and creates hypoxic regions in the tumor. such changes are highly heterogeneous and can be further compounded by many other human factors. although hif is one of the key nodes identified in our interactome, applying network analysis to address in vivo angiogenesis is still challenging. moreover, the current interactome is a collection of functional associations among participating genes without the inclusion of feedback regulatory mechanisms; it is not suitable for an advanced dynamic or kinetic analysis. for these reasons, we took advantage of a general statistical property of a biological network, namely, the characteristics of a scale-free network system  <cit> . the network walking algorithm captures unevenly distributed connectivity among functionally associated genes in the constructed angiogenesis interactome and uses that information to calculate how much and how fast an external perturbation of the network can be induced by a kinase inhibitor. this was then used to estimate potential potency of the inhibitor for its anti-angiogenesis effect. a near perfect match between estimated and measured potencies proves the statistical properties of the interactome are informative for network perturbation analysis. it would be also very interesting to extend our current network approach to other angiogenesis related data sets, such as the data generated from a time course study, as well as applications beyond angiogenesis in the future. in summary, our current effort defined a comprehensive gene functional association network and demonstrated the feasibility of assessing drug phenotypic activity through network perturbation analysis. corroborative studies with a larger pool of compounds, refined network parameters and an improved modelling approach would be warranted in further investigations.

CONCLUSIONS
we characterized an in vitro angiogenesis co-culture model via high content imaging analysis. we determined that huvec competence and nhdf supportiveness of cord formation are highly cell-passage dependent. we built a comprehensive gene association network to model angiogenesis regulation via complementary profiling of passage dependent gene expression in two cell types that constituted the co-culture model. we developed a novel algorithm to extract connectivity information from the gene functional association network. using multi-targeted anti-angiogenic kinase inhibitors as an example, our data indicate the feasibility of applying network perturbation analysis to assess drug polypharmacology and phenotypic activities.

