BACKGROUND
flight performance is a result of complex interactions between body morphology , behavior and the biological and physical environment  <cit> . in addition, body size has an important aerodynamic effect on flight performance  <cit> . one of the main reasons is that reynolds numbers change many orders of magnitude from small to large flying animals  <cit> . at small body sizes, viscous effects due to small perturbations in the air are dissipated more rapidly, while at larger body sizes those small perturbations can result in stronger unsteadiness of the flow fields around wings  <cit> . another aspect of morphology that has a large impact on flight performance is wing shape  <cit> . for instance, in insects, long and slender wings are optimal at long duration flight, while short and broad wings are optimal at slow and agile flight  <cit> . moreover, a broad wing base allows a wider speed range  <cit>  and a narrow wing tip allows less costly extensive flight  <cit> . other body traits such as the centers of body and wing mass are also very important in predicting flight performance  <cit> . it is important to note that wing shape has an allometric component  <cit>  and also a non-allometric component, since wings are complex structures and a simple proportional change of its shape with body size is unlikely  <cit> . for example, similar size clines may be achieved by different changes in wing proportions  <cit> . therefore, wing shape and wing size may function as independent components of wing morphology , although wing shape would be expected to improve flight performance for a given individual size  <cit> . hence, comparative studies on how wing shape changes with body size should be important for a better understanding of flight performance.

apart from body size, other variables might also affect the optimal wing shape, for example flight behavior  <cit> . we should expect a similar wing shape within certain flight behaviors, and at the same time variation of this shape related to body size. in a comparative analysis between size and wing shape it is therefore important to take behavior into account or using species with the same behavior. another variable that potentially could affect wing shape is the presence of ornaments on the wings that are used for sexual displays. these ornaments are typically positively sexually selected, either by male-male interactions and/or by female choice, and are condition dependent  <cit> . wing shape may thus also play a role in ornament sexual signaling, since it might maximize both flight performance  and ornament display   <cit> . for example, a large color patch at the tip of the wing should select for a broad wing tip shape  <cit>  while a high agility  should select for a broad and short overall wing  <cit> . hence, the optimal shape might be somewhere in between these two. therefore, the observed wing shape would differ from that predicted by aerodynamic theory per se.

in this study, we explore how wing shape is related to wing size , and discuss its implications on flight performance. for that purpose we compare males of damselfly taxa within the family calopterygidae. these species display territorial behavior  <cit> . territorial flight is a common flight behavior in insects such as butterflies and damselflies  <cit>  and is associated with broad and short wings, which are expected to improve flight agility  <cit> . many calopterygid males have wing coloration that is used for signaling in sexual selection processes  <cit>  and species discrimination  <cit> , and it is also selected by bird predators  <cit> . although calopterygid males all have more or less short and broad wings, males still show a wide variation in wing morphology, which is related to wing size and coloration  <cit> . the present study differs from our previous works on wing shape in calopterygidae  <cit>  in that here we focus explicitly on the allometric effects on wing shape and the expected consequences on flight performance.

we studied wing shape using uni- and multivariate methods. first, we quantified wing shape using the non-dimensional radius of the second moment of wing area  <cit>  . this parameter can be defined as wing area distribution along the wing axis and is proportional to the mean lift force and hence important for energetics of flight  <cit> . lower values involve a more basal distribution of the wing area and less energetically demanding flight with a wider range of available flight speeds  <cit> . it has also been used as an estimate of flight agility  <cit> , although this relationship might not be as straightforward. second, we estimated wing shape using geometric morphometrics which allowed the analysis and visualization of shape in a very precise way  <cit> . since these two estimates of wing shape differ in how they capture shape and since wing shape affects flight performance, we also explored the relationship between them and with size.

in the present work, we specifically studied  <dig> taxa of male calopterygid damselflies that differ in wing shape, wing size and wing coloration patterns. we first explored the allometry of wing shape  and the effect of wing coloration. we then compared wing shape captured by the rsm and by geometric morphometrics. we also investigated how the rsm and body length were related in a larger sample of both dragonflies and damselflies, by re-analyzing previously published data. finally, we also performed independent contrasts for taking into account the evolutionary relationships of our study taxa.

RESULTS
rsm and size
before correcting for phylogenetic effects, the rsm was related in a quadratic way to wing centroid size in both fore- and hindwings . thus, the smallest and largest taxa showed the lowest values of the rsm. the quadratic term was significant both for fore-  and hindwings . our study taxa were sorted in six different coloration groups according to the position, color and extension of wing coloration  <cit> . the quadratic term was mainly driven by the coloration group  <dig>  i.e. with a wing spot located at the wing base: the genera hetaerina and archineura . using geometric morphometrics, we visualized how the rsm was related to wing shape and wing centroid size in our study taxa. for forewings, shape changed from a long slender wing with a broad base at small size to a wing with a broad tip and narrower base at intermediate sizes, then changing towards a longer wing with a broad base and a more slender tip at larger sizes . hindwings showed a similar qualitative pattern. thus, overall wing shape did not change in a merely proportional manner with wing centroid size .

the rsm showed a linear relationship with wing shape estimated from geometric morphometric methods as shape scores, both for fore- and hindwings . this relationship was supported by a mancova on the shape components  . nevertheless, for similar values of the rsm very different shapes can be obtained, partially as a result of differences in wing size .

we also tested the relationship between the rsm and body length in a larger size range of dragonflies and damselflies, by re-analyzing previously published data  <cit> . the odonata groups  differed significantly in the rsm, but body length did not show a significant effect in the model . hence, we found no linear or hump-shaped relationship between the rsm and size when using a larger size range. calopterygid damselflies showed intermediate values of the rsm with respect to non-calopterygid damselflies and dragonflies .

after accounting for phylogenetic non-independence among our study taxa, a visual inspection of the relationship between the rsm vs. wing centroid size revealed that a quadratic term was no longer present . instead, a negative linear pattern was observed . therefore, the rsm tended to decrease with wing centroid size. we also note that at smaller sizes, the values of the rsm were more constrained, while at larger sizes there was more variation , i.e., at large size different wing shapes were observed.

rsm and wing coloration
in a previous study using  <dig> taxa and geometric morphometrics, we showed that the coloration groups differed in the non-allometric component of fore- and hindwing shape before correcting for phylogeny  <cit> . moreover, the non-allometric component of hindwing shape remained significant after correcting for the phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . for comparative purposes, we ran a similar approach for the rsm. before correcting for phylogeny, we did not find significant differences in the rsm among the coloration groups for forewings and marginally non-significant differences for hindwings . a phylogenetic anova on the non-allometric component of the rsm for hindwings revealed non-significant differences among the coloration groups .

discussion
our study showed a quadratic relationship between the rsm and wing centroid size, implying that small and large species have lower values of this parameter compared to intermediate-sized species. this result was somewhat surprising since a linear relationship would be expected from aerodynamic theory  <cit> , and in a previous study we found a linear relationship between wing shape  and wing centroid size  <cit> . however, in the previous study  <cit>  one of the largest species  was not included. when we analyzed a larger size range of odonata, we did not find the quadratic term, nor a linear relationship between the rsm and body length. these results suggest that our quadratic relationship is taxa-specific.

when phylogeny was taken into account, the rsm tended to decrease with wing centroid size. the change in this relationship after correcting for phylogenetic effects suggests a phylogenetic signal, i.e., that more closely related species tend to resemble each other more than a randomly chosen species sampled from the phylogeny. in fact, a significant phylogenetic signal of wing shape is present in this family of damselflies  <cit> . we also found that at small size, the values of the rsm were more constrained than at large size. all together, these results suggest that shape changes along the size axis can be only partially related to the aerodynamic demands of flight at different sizes and more comparative studies in other groups are needed to explore if this pattern is general.

the linear negative relationship between the rsm and size was a result from small species showing a higher distribution of the wing area towards the wing apex, whereas large species showed a concentration of the wing area towards the wing base. a tendency to a higher concentration of wing area towards the wing base in the large species not only promotes less-energetically demanding flight  <cit> , it also results in a higher range of available flight speeds  <cit> , which would be beneficial for avoiding predators and/or increasing prey captures  <cit> . the wing shape shown at smaller sizes is expected to be more energetically costly in terms of flight energetics. a possible explanation to this costly design might be the need to display during territorial behaviors. for instance, butterfly batesian mimics were shown to pay important aerodynamic costs for flying slower and with more agility, as distasteful mimics do, improving color signaling to predators  <cit> .

the genus hetaerina had the smallest wing centroid size and was a main driver in the quadratic relationship between the rsm and wing centroid size. hetaerina is the basal genus in the whole calopterygidae family   <cit>   and this is likely to be the reason why after taking into account the phylogenetic relationships the quadratic term was no longer present. hence, hetaerina is probably on a different evolutionary pathway with regard to aerodynamic design. this is supported by the fact that this genus has not evolved a courtship flight, as in more recent genera such as calopteryx <cit> . hetaerina showed long, slender wings with a broad base and a slender tip. this shape was shared with the genus archineura, which showed the largest wing centroid size and is a more recently diverged genus   <cit> . interestingly, both genera share the same wing color pattern. in fact, we only found marginally non-significant differences for the rsm of hindwings  which was driven by coloration group  <dig> . however, after correcting for phylogeny, that marginal difference was no longer present. both genera might show some level of convergence in wing shape driven by a more effective display of the wing patch at the base of the wings. in this situation, a broader wing should provide a stronger signal of the color patch  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that the differences in the rsm among taxa are a consequence of a combination of wing size and wing coloration. however, since our results are correlative, it is still uncertain whether differences in wing shape are due to the presence of certain types of wing coloration or vice versa  <cit> .

the lack of significant differences in the rsm of the hindwings among coloration groups after correcting for phylogeny contrasts with our previous study using geometric morphometrics, where we found significant differences  <cit> . thus, our results emphasize the need for using multivariate analyses of wing shape. in fact, although we showed that the rsm was linearly related to the shape scores, we obtained quite similar values of the rsm for very different wing shapes. for example, similar values of the rsm can be gained in a short and broad wing and a long and slender wing, given that the distribution of wing area is proportionally similar between both. therefore, although the rsm has been broadly used before and its intuitive interpretation is very useful, the use of multivariate methods such as geometric morphometrics is much more precise and should, at least, be combined with other traditional measures of wing shape.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have shown that the relationships between wing shape and size are complex and taxon-specific, even within a group of species with similar flight behavior: territoriality. moreover, the presence of wing coloration, a sexually and naturally selected trait, might influence the optimal wing shape within a trade-off between flight energetics and coloration display. the net selection pressures acting on flight performance, wing size, wing shape and body size probably differ among species, resulting in relationships that differ from the aerodynamic predictions alone. experimental work in a comparative framework is needed to disentangle the role of wing morphology and size on flight performance.

