BACKGROUND
genomic signature techniques were originally developed for identifying organism-specific characterizations  <cit> . genomic signature methods carry the limitation that they were not designed for sub-categorization of sequences from within a single organism. to address this shortcoming, the authors present genomic signature techniques that can be used to identify regulatory signatures, i.e. to classify dna sequences regarding related biological units within an organism, such as particular functions, pathways and tissues.

the term genomic signature was introduced by karlin and burge to refer to a function characterizing genomes based on compositional variation  <cit> . karlin and others showed that a di-nucleotide odds-ratio was an effective genomic signature. in addition to the odds ratio, oligonucleotide frequencies  and machine learning methods have been employed to classify sequences based on their organism of origin  <cit> , and to identify unique features of genomic data sets. such approaches were effectively employed in a more refined focus examining tissue-specific categorization of regulatory sequences in liver or muscle  <cit> .

here, the authors employ a word-based genomic signature method. that is, given a group of related sequences, a set of characteristic subsequences is discovered. each subsequence is called a genomic word. the set of characteristic subsequences and their attributes constitute a word-based genomic signature. it is hypothesized that each functionally related group of sequences has a detectable word-based signature, consisting of multiple genomic words. furthermore, it is hypothesized that the genomic words that constitute a word-based genomic signature are functional genomic elements. unlike most existing types of genomic signatures, a word-based genomic signature provides insights that are directly applicable to the problem of identifying functional dna elements, because the words identify putative transcription factor binding sites.

the authors have identified two primary components of word-based genomic signatures that are useful for characterizing a set of related genomic sequences, rgs. the set of statistically overrepresented words that can be derived from rgs can be regarded as a word-based signature  since it provides information about the complete set of potential control elements regulating the set of rgs. a second signature  provides a set of words  related to the elements of  sig <dig>  the similarity between the sets can be measured based on evolutionary distance metrics, e.g. hamming and edit distance . in addition to sig <dig> and sig <dig> several post-processing steps built upon the two word-based signatures are undertaken to create the final regulatory genomic signature. these post-processing steps include sequence clustering, co-occurrence analysis, biological significance analysis, and a conservation analysis.

dna repair genes represent a large network of genes that respond to dna damage within a cell. discrete pathways for dna repair responses have been identified in the reactome database  <cit> . a discernable feature among genes in these pathways is the promoter architecture. a large percentage of genes with dna repair functions are regulated by bidirectional promoters  <cit> , whereas the rest are regulated by unidirectional promoters. bidirectional promoters fall between the dna repair gene and a partner gene that is transcribed in the opposite direction. the close proximity of the 5' ends of this pair of genes facilitates the initiation of transcription of both genes, creating two transcription forks that advance in opposite directions. dna repair genes rarely share bidirectional promoters with other dna repair genes. rather, they are paired with genes of diverse functions  <cit> .

the formal definition of a bidirectional promoter requires that the initiation sites of the genes are spaced no more than  <dig> bp from one another. using these criteria the authors have comprehensively annotated the human and mouse genomes for the presence of bidirectional promoters, using in silico approaches  <cit> . bidirectional promoters utilized repeatedly in the genome are known to regulate genes of a specific function  <cit>  and serve as prototypes for complete promoter sequences for computational studies- i.e., one can deduce the full intergenic region because exons flank each side. these promoters represent a class of regulatory elements with a common architecture, suggesting a common regulatory mechanism could be employed among them. recent molecular studies confirm that rna polii can dock at promoters while simultaneously facing both directions  <cit> , rather than being restricted to a single direction.

dna repair genes are likely to play a universal role in damage repair, therefore mutations that affect their regulation will become important diagnostic indicators in disease discovery. the authors have previously shown that bidirectional promoters regulate genes with characterized roles in both dna repair and ovarian cancer  <cit> . a more detailed analysis of the regulatory motifs within this subset of promoters will address regulatory mechanisms controlling transcription of this important set of genes. this paper presents word-based genomic regulatory signatures based on statistically overrepresented oligonucleotides  found in unidirectional and bidirectional promoters of genes in dna repair pathways. the results demonstrate the effectiveness of using signatures for classifying biologically related dna sequences. the oligonucleotides that comprise the signatures match known binding motifs from transfac  <cit>  or jaspar  <cit>  databases. furthermore, some examples overlap and agree with experimentally validated regulatory functions.

RESULTS
the effectiveness of genomic regulatory signatures that are based on sig <dig> and sig <dig> was addressed by analyzing promoter sequences for genes in dna repair pathways of humans. the promoters were divided into two classes, the bidirectional promoters and the unidirectional promoters, and distinct genomic signatures were calculated for each class. the human dna repair pathways included  <dig> bidirectional promoters and  <dig> unidirectional promoters. bidirectional promoters had a gc content ranging between  <dig> % and  <dig> % with an average of  <dig> % while unidirectional promoters varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, averaging  <dig> %.

statistically overrepresented words
for each set of promoters, the statistically overrepresented words were identified. the top  <dig> overrepresented 8-mer words for each dataset are presented in tables 1a and 1b, respectively . each word is presented as an observed number or a statistical expectation, respectively, including the number of sequences the word is contained in , the number of overall occurrences of the word , and a score measuring overrepresentation for the word . additional information such as reverse complement words, their relative positions in the list of top words, palindromic words, and p-values assessing the statistical relevance of the appearance of the word are also presented. a comparison of tables 1a and 1b reveals that the characteristic words for the two sets are distinct, with no overlaps. the significance of the selected  <dig> words can be seen by comparing their scores and p-values to the scores and p-values for all words, which are plotted in figures  <dig> and 2).

missing words
the dataset of bidirectional promoters and unidirectional promoters contained  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique words of length  <dig>  respectively, out of  <dig>  unique possibilities. thus, in each set, more than  <dig>  possible words did not occur . the missing words in each set were enumerated, and ranked in descending order by their es values. the top  <dig> missing words are shown in tables 2a and 2b. the scatterplot of the es values for all missing words is shown in figure 3; note the outlier values, which correspond with the words in tables 2a and 2b. the utility of using missing words as regulatory signatures, as reported in the literature  <cit> , was consistent with the observation of no overlapping words between bidirectional and unidirectional promoter sets.

word-based clusters
for the top  <dig> overrepresented words, clusters were created using two different distance metrics, hamming distance and edit distance . each table contains the set of words that clustered around a given 'seed' word. a comparison of the sequence logos for the hamming-distance-based clusters, presented in , shows no overlap between the two promoter sets. similarly, no overlap existed for clusters based on edit-distance .

sequence-based clusters
sequences can be clustered and categorized into different families . the sequence-based clusters presented here are restricted to two promoters per cluster. sequence clustering is a measure of the co-existence of statistically overrepresented words shared between pairs of promoters as shown in tables 7a,b. each cluster contains ids for the sequences that make up the cluster and the number of overrepresented words not shared within the cluster . sequences in each set were grouped into clusters based on the set of statistically overrepresented words. the shared words for the top-scoring sequence cluster of each data set were illustrated using the gbrowse environment  <cit>  . the visualization shows a strong positional correlation between the sequences of the top sequence cluster for the bidirectional promoters  and minor correlation between the sequences for the unidirectional promoters .

word co-occurrence
the promoter sets were characterized further by word co-occurrence analysis, in which word-pairs that appeared together more frequently than expected were identified. interesting pairs of words were selected from the overrepresented words of table  <dig> . each word pair was characterized as the number of observed or expected occurrences for the word combination  and a statistical overrepresentation score . no overlap was found between the bidirectional and the unidirectional set, nevertheless, the word pairs for the bidirectional promoter set achieved a higher number of sequence hits for the pairs.

comparison of word-based properties
the distances between the scores for different word sets  provided a basis for discriminating among bidirectional promoters and unidirectional promoters, , whereas similarities were identified from correlated words . these tables and figures show that word-based genomic regulatory signatures can be used to describe promoter sets based on their uniqueness.

regulatory database lookup
we developed a method  <cit>  to determine if these signatures matched any known motifs from transfac or jaspar . the words from bidirectional promoters matched known motifs in 8/ <dig> cases, with the words from unidirectional promoters matching known motifs in 8/ <dig> cases as well. compared to the consensus sequences of the known motifs, the matches were off by no more than one letter. some of the matches corresponded to nucleotide profiles determined from collections of phylogenetically conserved, cis-acting regulatory elements  <cit> . imperfect matches resulted from bases that flanked the core motifs  . such events decreased the detection score to slightly above the threshold of 85% similarity. overall, the findings in table  <dig> validate that the signatures have biological relevance and suggest that the remaining signatures, which do not match known motifs could represent novel binding sites.

a. jaspar id or transfac id.

b. the consensus is in iupac notation: r = g or a, y = t or c, m = a or c, h = not g, k = g or t, w = a or t, b = not a, s = g or c, v = not t, n = anything.

c. number of occurrences of the matrix that scored greater than 85% in the dataset.

d. average score for the occurrences meeting the 85% threshold.

e. range of scores for the occurrences meeting the 85% threshold.

f. a profile that was extracted from phylogenetically conserved gene upstream elements.

conservation analysis
to address selective constraint in the word sets, sequence conservation was examined for pairs of co-occurring words. the top ten word-pairs from the unidirectional and bidirectional datasets were examined in 28-way sequence alignments using the phastcons  <cit>  dataset in the ucsc human genome browser  <cit> . the results are presented in table  <dig>  the bidirectional promoters revealed 9/ <dig> word sets had a record of sequence conservation in one or both words . the analysis of the unidirectional promoters, presented in table 12b, showed partial conservation in only one of the word-pairs.

biological implications
the words in the list of bidirectional promoters were examined for known biological evidence. for instance, the gene polh has a known binding motif, tcccggga, annotated as a pax- <dig> binding site in the cis-red database . this is the same sequence as the second most common word in the bidirectional promoters. along with sequences that cluster with this word, we found that 19/ <dig> genes in the bidirectional promoter set had a match to this word cluster  within  <dig> kb of their tss, while 15/ <dig> bidirectional promoters had a match to the words of cluster  <dig>  furthermore, this word also represents a stat5a recognition site . the rad <dig> gene, which is known to be regulated by stat5a, showed two examples from this word cluster .

limitations of the approach
the presented approach does not attempt to automate the process of finding a small set of regulatory elements for a limited set of related genomic signatures like meme  <cit>  or alignace  <cit> . the different approach presented here produces more detailed information outside of the limited list by showing a larger  set of words that are ranked based on their statistical significance. additionally, word- and sequence-based clusters, word co-occurrences and functional significance of the words have been computed as a means of adding more detail to the retrieval of putative elements allowing a more informed interpretation of the actual regulatory function of a word.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper presents a word-based genomic signature that characterizes a set of sequences with  statistically overrepresented words,  missing words,  word-based clusters,  sequence-based clusters and  co-occurring words. the word-based signatures of bidirectional and unidirectional promoters of human dna repair pathways showed virtually no overlap, thereby demonstrating the signature's utility.

in addition to providing an effective characterization method for related dna sequences, the signatures elucidate putative regulatory aspects of dna repair pathways. genes in dna repair pathways contribute to diverse functions such as sensing dna damage and transducing the signal, participating in dna repair pathways, cell cycle signalling, and purine and pyrimidine metabolism. the synchronization of these functions implies co-regulatory relationships of the promoters of these genes to ensure the adequate production of all the necessary components in the pathway. we present a subtle, yet detectable signature for bidirectional promoters of dna repair genes. the consensus patterns, detected as words and related clusters of words, provide a dna pattern that is strongly represented in these promoters. although the proteins that bind these sequences must be examined experimentally, the data show that a protein such as stat5a could be involved in regulating many of these promoters. stat5a has biological relevance in dna repair pathways, playing a known role in the regulation of the rad <dig> gene. we propose that this initial study of a network of dna repair genes serve as a model for studies that examine regulatory networks. as the relationships among genes involved in dna repair pathways are elucidated more thoroughly, the analyses of their regulatory relationships will gain more power to detect a larger number of dna words that are shared in common among the network of genes. the results of this analysis are supported by evidence of sequence conservation and overlap between predicted sites and known functional elements.

