BACKGROUND
mercury  is deadly toxic to humans and ecosystems, which is considered as a global pollutant because it is highly mobile and extremely persistent in the environment  <cit> . it is not only a threat to public health  <cit>  but also a growth risk factor to plants  <cit> , as it is readily accumulated by higher plants  <cit> . as a phytotoxic metal, hg has wide-ranging adverse effects on the physiological activities of plants, such as prevention of water and mineral nutrient uptake  <cit>  and inhibition of photosynthesis  <cit> . furthermore, mercuric ions react specifically with sulfhydryl groups of proteins and other biomolecules and induce the fenton reaction, resulting in oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation  <cit> , cell damage and signaling disruption in plants  <cit> . exposure to toxic hg also occurs in some crops cultivated under anoxic conditions, such as rice  <cit> . recent studies have demonstrated that rice intake is the major pathway for human exposure to hg in inland china  <cit> . so, it is of immense importance to elucidate the detoxification and tolerance mechanisms of rice plants to hg and consequently optimize rice performance under hg contaminated paddy soils.

the translationally controlled tumor protein , also variously known as q <dig>  <cit> , p <dig>  <cit> , p <dig>  <cit> , ige-dependent histamine-releasing factor   <cit> , and fortilin  <cit> , is ubiquitously found in all eukaryotes. as implicated in its name, tctp is regulated at both translational and posttranslational levels in response to a wide range of extracellular signals and conditions and exerts diverse functions in various cellular processes such as cell growth, proliferation, cell cycle progression, dna repair, malignant transformation, anti-apoptosis as well as protection against various cellular stresses and other immunological functions  <cit> . in arabidopsis, tctp has been shown to be an important growth regulator and expressed throughout plant tissues and developmental stages with increased expression in meristematic and expanding cells  <cit> . knockdown of attctp by rna interference slows vegetative growth and exhibits severe dwarf phenotype due to a reduction of cell numbers, whereas homologous tctp plants  are embryonic lethal  <cit> . overexpression of attctp enhances drought tolerance with rapid aba-induced stomatal closure  <cit> . moreover, plant tctp protein is also proposed to have a role in long-distance movement of phloem proteins and in regulating the hypersensitive response  <cit> . these published results reveal that tctp not only regulates organismal growth but also asserts plant specific functions.

previously, through a 2-d gel analysis, ostctp was presumed to participate in the hg tolerance of rice at the protein level  <cit> . however, the functional analysis of ostctp in rice is still very scanty, and the molecular and physiological mechanisms of ostctp in rice hg tolerance are still not fully understood. here, we reported the isolation and functional characterization of ostctp , which was induced under hg stress condition in rice  <cit> . the ostctp is shown to be more highly expressed in physiologically active and proliferating tissues as would be expected for a component of the target of rapamycin  pathway. analysis of a t-dna insertion line in the promoter region demonstrated that transcriptional knockdown of ostctp caused compensation in protein abundance due to the translational regulation. overexpression of ostctp potentiated the activities of several antioxidant enzymes, whereas knockdown of ostctp aborted the antioxidant system and increased the hg-induced h2o <dig>  our results suggested that ostctp confers tolerance to hg stress possibly through the regulation of ros and their scavengers.

RESULTS
ostctp is a single-copy gene with two differentially spliced transcripts but only one transcript can be translated
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  with a pair of primers spanning an exon junction of ostctp gene amplified two cdna fragments  from the rice root and shoot rna samples . to determine if these two fragments were derived from alternative splicing of a single gene, southern blot hybridization was performed with a probe covering an identical region of both ostctpa and ostctpb. one strongly hybridizing band was detected in each of the three digestions  of rice genomic dna . genomic pcr with a pair of primers covering the differentiated region also gave rise to a single band . therefore, ostctpa and ostctpb most likely resulted from the alternative splicing of a single ostctp gene in rice plants. sequence alignments showed that ostctpb was 190 bp longer than ostctpa and encoded a putative truncated protein due to an open reading frame shift . interestingly, in both root and shoot tissues, ostctpa was the predominant isoform of ostctp transcripts. this is consistent with the previous report showing that there are usually several different cdnas in many plant species  <cit> .figure  <dig> genomic organization and alternative splicing of ostctp.  rt-pcr analysis using a primer pair covering the differentiated regions of the ostctpa and ostctpb cdnas. the root and shoot mrnas from cv. ‘nipponbare’ were used for rt-pcr.  southern blot analysis of the ostctp gene. total dna from cv. ‘nipponbare’  was digested individually with ecori, hindiii and xhoi and hybridized with a gene-specific probe covering the region from nucleotide  <dig> to the 3’ end of the ostctpa cdna.  genomic pcr analysis using two primers covering the differentiated regions of the ostctpa and ostctpb. the leaf dna from cv. ‘nipponbare’ was used for genomic pcr. m, dna size markers.



to determine if these two transcripts could be translated into mature proteins, cdss of both ostctpa and ostctpb were subcloned into a binary expression vector pcun <dig>  respectively, which were driven by a constructive maize ubiquitin  <dig> promoter . transgenic plants were generated by introducing the constructs into the japonica rice cultivar ‘nippobare’ by agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation  <cit> . thirty-two independent ostctpa-ox transgenic plants and  <dig> independent ostctpb-ox transgenic plants were generated , each containing one to several copies of the transgene, as confirmed by southern blot analysis . we then tested gus expression in ostctpb-ox t <dig> plants and eight of them showed the gus activity . the eight ostctpb-ox t <dig> plants showing gus activity were then subjected to western blot analysis to investigate the accumulation of the ostctp protein. this revealed that no ostctpb protein was detected in neither wild-type  under the control of the native promoter nor the transgenic plants under the control of the constructive promoter . taken together, these results strongly indicated that ostctp is a single-copy gene with two differentially spliced transcripts but only ostctpa transcript can be translated into mature protein. so, in the following text, ostctp refers to the translational product of ostctpa gene.figure  <dig> 
ostctp expression patterns in transgenic rice plants.  structure of constructs for rice transformation. the overexpression constructs  were developed under the control of the ubi <dig> promoter and nopaline synthase  terminator cassette.  gus staining of ostctpb overexpression transgenic rice plants.  western blot analysis of ostctp protein from transgenic plants using an antibody against rice ostctp. equal amounts  were loaded to each lane and confirmed by coomassie brilliant blue  staining of rubisco . the experiments were repeated for three times with similar results.



ostctp is a typical tctp protein
searching of protein databases for sequences similar to well-characterized tctps  reveals tctp homologs in a large number of plant species. protein sequence comparison of plant and non-plant tctps showed amino acid identities in the range of 40% and similarities of ~60% using the point accepted mutation  matrix  <cit> . interproscan  <cit>  analysis showed that ostctp has two typical tctp domains tctp <dig>  and tctp <dig>  . this comparative analysis indicated that ostctp is a tctp protein at the primary structure of protein. in parallel, we used homology modeling to obtain a 3d-structure prediction for the ostctp protein to investigate the possibility that it might have a similar function as tctp in other organisms. this model showed high similarity to the known structure of the human tctp protein with a nearly identical spatial organization of α-helices, β-sheets, and an unstructured loop . furthermore, phylogenetic analysis between ostctp and its  <dig> homologs indicated that ostctp is closely related to the wheat tctp protein . based on the data presented in the phylogenetic tree, the tctp family was divided into two groups. those from plants such as arabidopsis thaliana, maize  and wheat  form one cluster, and those from non-plants form the other cluster. the ostctp is expectedly mapped to the plants cluster. this result indicated that the phylogenetic clustering of tctp sequences is almost consistent with the accepted phylogeny of eukaryotes. from these results, it is clear that the ostctp is a typical tctp at both protein and evolution levels.figure  <dig> sequence comparison, structural modeling and phylogenetic analysis of tctp.  the amino acid sequence alignment was performed using the clustalw <dig> software on representative plant and nonplant sequences. positions with strictly conserved amino acids are highlighted in black, conserved substitutions in dark gray, and blocks of similar residues in light gray. domains identified for nonplant tctps  are indicated by black lines and the tctp signature by a dotted line.  the putative 3d structure of the ostctp. the structure of the ostctp protein was modeled using the known structure of the human tctp  as a template on the swiss-model server . the model obtained for the rice protein  shows high similarity when compared with the structure of the human protein . the conserved domains tctp <dig> and tctp <dig> of tctp proteins are shown as calottes. the conserved helix  is marked by an arrow. helices, β-sheets, and coil regions of the two structures are represented in red, yellow, and green, respectively.  phylogenetic analysis of ostctp and its  <dig> close homologs. the numbers under the branches refer to the bootstrap value of the neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree. the length of the branches is proportional to the amino acid variation rates. the scale bar indicates the number of amino acid substitutions per site.



ostctp gene is regulated at the translational level
it has been shown that tctp genes are regulated at the translational level in animals  <cit> . to determine whether the synthesis of ostctp protein is also regulated at the translational level in rice, we examined the expression patterns of ostctp by mutant analysis. a mutant line of ostctp in the background of dongjin, ostctp, with a t-dna inserted in the promoter region , was obtained from the rice t-dna insertion sequence database   <cit> . after being confirmed for the t-dna insertion site as described previously  <cit> , homozygous and heterozygous mutant plants  were used for further analysis. firstly, we examined the mrna levels in the ostctp by qrt-pcr analysis. notably, compared to the wild-type plants, it was down by approximately 10% to 30% in heterozygous  and homozygous  mutant plants, respectively , indicating that the expression of ostctp was interrupted at the transcriptional level in the mutant plants. and then, we checked the ostctp protein level in wild-type and mutant rice plants using the western blot. however, the data showed that the accumulation of ostctp protein was higher in mutant plants than that in the wild-type rice plants, especially in the homozygous mutant plants . these results indicated that ostctp gene is regulated at translational level in rice.figure  <dig> ostctp expression patterns in ostctp mutant plants.  gene structure of ostctp. gray box is the promoter region; block boxes indicate exons in coding region; lines connecting boxes are introns. triangles are t-dna insertions of ostctp. arrows fp, rp, and rbp are primers used for genotyping ostctp.  pcr analysis of genotyping of mutant ostctp. fp, rp, and rbp are primers used for genotyping ostctp.  qrt-pcr analysis of ostctp mrna level in mutant ostctp. histone h <dig> was used as an internal standard and data are given as means ± sd of three biological replicates. means with different letters are significantly different .  western blot analysis of ostctp protein from mutant ostctp using an antibody against rice ostctp. equal amounts  were loaded to each lane and were confirmed by coomassie brilliant blue  staining of rubisco . the experiments were repeated for three times with similar results. quantitative assessment was processed by quantity one® software .



expression pattern and subcellular localization of ostctp
to gain insight into tctp function in rice plants, we investigated its expression pattern in a range of tissues by qrt-pcr and western blot analyses. qrt-pcr analysis revealed that ostctp was expressed in all analyzed tissues  and predominantly expressed in leaf sheaths, nodes, roots and inflorescences . consistent with the results of qrt-pcr analysis, strong immunoblot signals were observed in leaf sheaths, nodes, roots, and inflorescences , suggesting that ostctp is ubiquitously expressed in all examined plant tissues, especially in actively dividing and differentiating tissue types, such as roots and nodes.figure  <dig> qrt-pcr and western blot analyses of ostctp in wild-type rice plants.  qrt-pcr analysis of ostctp mrna level in wild-type rice plants. histoneh <dig> was used as an internal standard and data are given as means ± sd of three biological replicates. means with different letters are significantly different .  western blot analysis of ostctp protein from wild-type rice plants using an antibody against rice ostctp. equal amounts  were loaded to each lane and β-actin was used as an internal standard. the experiments were repeated for three times with similar results. quantitative assessment was processed by quantity one® software .



to gain insight into further function of ostctp in rice plants, we determined its subcellular localization by translationally fusing full-length ostctp to the n-terminal of the green fluorescent protein  and expressing the chimeric protein under the control of the cam35s promoter. onion  epidermal cells transiently expressing the gfp without ostctp showed signals throughout cells . the fluorescence signal from ostctp-gfp fusion protein was observed both in the cytosol and nucleus , and in the plasmolysed cells, the fluorescence of ostctp-gfp was still observed both in the cytosol and the nucleus . these results suggested that ostctp has dual localization and is consistent with its multi-functions in different biochemical reactions.figure  <dig> subcellular localization of ostctp.  gfp protein localization in onion epidermal cells.  ostctp-gfp fusion protein localization in onion epidermal cells.  plasmolysed cell transformed with ostctp-gfp fusion protein. dic, bright field images; gfp, gfp fluorescence; and merged, merged image. scale bars =100 μm.



induction of ostctp protein accumulation by hg, cu, aba, and h2o <dig> in rice
previous reports have shown that tctps have diverse roles in response to various stresses and some plant hormones  <cit> . to examine the role of ostctp, we investigated its time-dependent accumulation patterns under different stresses by western blot analysis. as shown in figure  <dig>  the ostctp protein accumulated in seedlings within 3 hours following hg, cu, and aba treatments . in contrast, the accumulation of ostctp protein arosed after 12 hours and then increased strongly over 48 hours of h2o <dig> stress treatment . there was no visible accumulation of ostctp protein in seedlings treated with h2o only . the protein level of ostctp was slightly accumulated under the nacl stress and mechanical wound . however, the ostctp accumulation profile was not affected by peg, sa, ja, and naa treatments . these results revealed that ostctp is likely involved in some abiotic stress responses in rice plants.figure  <dig> protein accumulation profiles of ostctp under hg, cu, aba and h2o <dig> treatments. western blot analysis of ostctp accumulation under different stress conditions. hydroponically grown 2-week-old rice plants were transferred to solutions containing 25 μm hg , 50 μm cu , 50 μm aba , 100 mm h2o2
, or water  for the time periods indicated. equal amounts  were loaded to each lane and were confirmed by coomassie brilliant blue  staining of rubisco . numbers under lanes in  indicate relative band intensities that were quantified and normalized the controls  for each panel. quantitative assessment was processed by quantity one® software . the experiments were repeated for three times with similar results.



phenotypic analysis of ostctp-ox and ostctp-rnai transgenic plants
to analyze the function of ostctp in rice, we constitutively increased or suppressed the expression of ostctp in transgenic rice plants. the transgenic lines were generated by introducing the overexpression construct  or the double-stranded rna interference construct  into wild type of cv. ‘nipponbare’. thirty-two independent overexpression lines were generated using the ostctp-ox construct. western blot analysis indicated that  <dig> lines showed high constitutive expression in the ostctp-ox transgenic plants  and  <dig> of them were selected to analyze by southern blot and  <dig> ostctp-ox lines contained a single-copy insertion . based on the above analyses, two lines  were selected for further phenotypic and functional characterization. in addition, twenty-six independent suppression lines were generated using the ostctp-rnai construct. western blot analysis indicated that  <dig> lines showed low expression in the ostctp-rnai transgenic plants  and  <dig> of them were selected to analyze by southern blot and  <dig> ostctp-rnai lines contained a single-copy insertion . the production of endogenous ostctp protein was blocked almost completely and moderately in ostctp-rnai-# <dig> and ostctp-rnai-# <dig>  respectively and they were selected for further functional analysis.

the accumulation of ostctp was obviously induced by hgcl <dig> stress ; therefore, ostctp-ox and ostctp-rnai transgenic plants were evaluated for hg tolerance. when wt , vc , ostctp-rnai  and ostctp-ox  were grown in the absence of hg, their root growth was similar . however, in the presence of  <dig>  μm hg, the root growth was inhibited more in the ostctp-rnai than in the wt, vc or ostctp-ox transgenic plants . for the ostctp-rnai transgenic plants, the root elongation was inhibited by approximately 61%, whereas the inhibition rates were only around 52% and 37% for the control plants  and the ostctp-ox transgenic plants, respectively . synchronously, 6-week-old rice seedlings grown hydroponically were also subjected to hg stress. the ostctp-rnai transgenic plants displayed a severe leaf curl phenotype after being treated with 50 μm hgcl <dig> for 3 days compared with the ostctp-ox transgenic plants and the control plants . these results demonstrated that ostctp positively regulates hg tolerance in rice.figure  <dig> phenotypic analysis of the wild type , vector control , ostctp-ox and ostctp-rnai transgenic rice plants.  hg tolerance of wt , vc , ostctp-rnai  and ostctp-ox . germinated seeds were exposed to  <dig>  mm cacl <dig> solution  containing  <dig> or  <dig>  μm hgcl <dig> for 7 days. scale bar = 2 cm.  root length of wt , vc , ostctp-rnai  and ostctp-ox . root length was measured before and after the treatment.  the inhibition rate was defined as . for  and , data are given as means ± sd . means with different letters are significantly different .



hg and gsh contents in the transgenic and wild-type rice plants under hg treatment
to determine whether the overexpression of ostctp prevents hg absorption or accumulation, we measured the hg content in roots and shoots of the ostctp-rnai and ostctp-ox transgenic rice plants and the control plants . after being treated with 25 μm hgcl <dig> for 3 days, hg residue was significantly increased in both roots and shoots of the transgenic and control rice plants. however, the concentration of hg in neither roots nor shoots of the transgenic lines was different from that in the control rice plants , indicating that the overexpression of ostctp did not prevent hg absorption and transport. furthermore, the glutathione -dependent phytochelatin  synthesis pathway is one of the most important mechanisms contributing to divalent heavy metal detoxification and tolerance  <cit> , so we determined the gsh content in roots of the ostctp-rnai and ostctp-ox transgenic rice plants and the control plants . the level of total gsh in roots was greatly reduced with 25 μm hgcl <dig> for 12 hours, and the decreased level of gsh caused by hg stress in the ostctp-rnai and ostctp-ox transgenic rice plants showed no difference from that in the control plants  , which is consistent with previous report  <cit> . at the transcriptional level, we also tested the expression of relative genes, such as two glutathione synthetase genes , two phytochelatin synthase genes  and an abcc-type transporter  <dig> gene , but none of them had significantly altered transcripts between the transgenic rice plants  and the control plants  under normal and hg treatment . these results indicated that rice probably does not employ the pc synthesis pathway to mediate hg tolerance and the ostctp does not affect hg absorption and accumulation in rice.figure  <dig> mercury concentrations in roots or leaves of the wild type , vector control , ostctp-ox and ostctp-rnai transgenic rice seedlings under 25 μm hgcl <dig> treatment for 3 days. data are given as the mean ± sd of three biological replicates. means with different letters are significantly different .



h2o <dig> level and changes of antioxidant enzyme activity in response to hg stress
a growing number of studies have shown that mercuric ions are able to induce oxidative stress in plants  <cit> . this prompted us to investigate whether ros accumulation differentially occurred in roots of the ostctp-rnai and ostctp-ox transgenic rice plants under hg stress by quantifying the accumulation of h2o <dig>  these results indicated that, under hg stress condition, ostctp-ox transgenic lines showed significantly less accumulation of h2o <dig> compared to the control plants  and the ostctp-rnai transgenic lines , suggesting that ostctp may be involved in ros homeostasis in rice plants in response to hg toxicity. to further elucidate the mechanism of ros detoxifying machinery under hg stress condition, the activities of antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase , catalase , ascorbate peroxidase , and peroxidase  were also analyzed. the activities of sod, cat, apx, and pod increased rapidly in hg stress-treated ostctp-ox transgenic lines compared with the control plants  and the ostctp-rnai transgenic lines , especially, in the case of cat . these results suggested that the antioxidant enzyme system is strongly promoted in the ostctp-ox transgenic rice plants under hg treatment.

discussion
tctps are conserved and play vital roles in eukaryotic organisms
sequence comparison shows that ostctp, like other tctps, contains a series of conserved functional domains for interaction with other proteins, such as the antiapoptotic protein mcl/bcl  <cit> , the cell cycle controlling polo kinase  <cit> , and a na+/k+ atpase  <cit>  . a ca2+ binding domain, a tctp self-interaction domain and a protein transduction domain have also been identified among different tctps  <cit> . furthermore, our structural model for the ostctp shows high similarity to the human tctp protein , also suggesting that tctps from different species are strictly conserved in both amino acids and protein structure. tctps are ubiquitously expressed in all eukaryotic organisms and are related to various stress responses. it has been established that tctp levels are highly regulated in response to a wide range of extracellular and intracellular signals, and various stress conditions such as starvation, heat shock, heavy metals, calcium stress or pro-apoptotic signals  <cit> . in drosophila, disruption of dtctp expression in an organ-specific manner leads to size reduction of the targeted organ due to a reduction in cell numbers and defects in cell growth  <cit> . interestingly, plant tctp can fully rescue cell proliferation defects in drosophila loss of function for dtctp  <cit> , indicating that tctps are functionally conserved between plant and animal species.

ostctp is required for hg tolerance in rice
ostctp is ubiquitously expressed in all tested plant tissues , whose expression is rapidly induced by hg at both mrna level  and protein level . overexpression of ostctp resulted in increased tolerance to hg, while knockdown of ostctp by rna interference led to sensitivity to hg . these results indicate that ostctp is required for hg tolerance in rice. knockdown of ostctp led to a huge increase in hg-induced h2o <dig> in rna interference lines under hg stress condition, whereas overexpression of ostctp had opposite effect . overexpression of ostctp promoted the activities of sod, cat, apx, and pod , and decreased the hg-induced h2o <dig> in overexpression lines under hg stress condition. these results suggested that ostctp functions to enhance tolerance to hg stress through the regulation of ros and their scavengers, although these regulating mechanisms for activities of antioxidant enzymes remain to be molecularly characterized.

ostctp is not an n-glycoprotein
it has been shown that the protein accumulation and potential glycosylation of tctp is regulated by glucose in pancreatic beta cells  <cit> . therefore, we predicted the potential glycosylation sites in ostctp sequence on netnglyc website  and n <dig>  and n <dig>  were forecasted to be the potential n-glycosylation sites . previous reports have demonstrated that the mobility shift will change and result in a small band when the polysaccharide chain is released from the glycoprotein  <cit> . to confirm the n-glycosylation sites of ostctp, we performed site-directed mutagenesis of the two potential n-glycosylation sites by substituting asn with gln . the mutated genes were inserted into the ha-tagged expression vectors and transiently expressed in nicotiana benthamiana leaves as described by sparkes et al.  <cit> . western blot analysis showed that there was no difference in mobility shift of wild-type ostctp and its mutants . altogether, these results suggested that n <dig> and n <dig> are not the potential n-glycosylation sites and ostctp is not an n-glycoprotein.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we molecularly and functionally characterized a rice gene  and our data establish that ostctp plays a critical role in hg tolerance by regulating ros production and scavenging and overexpression of ostctp increases hg resistance, whereas knockdown of ostctp has an opposite effect. in addition, further research is needed to understand how the ostctp regulates the activities of antioxidant enzymes in hg stress signaling.

