BACKGROUND
organisms detect and respond to extracellular nutritional conditions in different ways. streptomyces spp. are some of the most abundant organisms in nature and have developed several mechanisms to survive under conditions of nutrient limitation, such as induction of the production of hydrolytic enzymes to degrade complex animal and plant debris, and antibiotic secretion to kill the closest organisms for their use as a new source of nutrients  <cit> . one of the most general and ubiquitous responses to nutrient limitation is mediated by the nucleotide guanosine 5'-diphosphate 3'-diphosphate , which triggers the onset of antibiotic production and morphological differentiation  <cit> . another important signal involved in antibiotic production, and in general in secondary metabolism, is the level of phosphate present in the medium  <cit> . the production of a broad variety of metabolites responds to low levels of phosphate, a response that is mediated by the two-component system phor-phop  <cit> . one of the operons under the control of this system is the pst operon, which constitutes the high-affinity phosphate transport system induced under phosphate starvation  <cit> . the psts protein is encoded by the first gene of the pst operon  and constitutes the high-affinity phosphate-binding protein. in other organisms, a high expression of the psts protein occurs under stress conditions, including alkali-acid conditions, the addition of subinhibitory concentrations of penicillin, and the response of pathogenic bacteria to the eukaryotic intracellular environment  <cit> . all these observations suggest that psts would be one of the multi-emergency proteins that help cells to adapt to growth in different habitats.

in our previous work with s. lividans and s. coelicolor, we have described the extracellular accumulation of the high-affinity phosphate-binding protein psts when the microorganisms are grown in the presence of high concentrations of certain carbon sources, such as fructose, galactose or mannose, although not with glucose. this accumulation is strikingly increased in a s. lividans polyphosphate kinase null mutant . however, deletion of phop, which encodes the response regulator of the phor-phop two-component regulatory system that controls the pho regulon, impairs its expression  <cit> . these observations clearly point to a phosphate-driven regulation of this system. moreover, sola-landa et al. identified the so-called pho boxes in the psts promoter, and demonstrated that they are the binding sites for the phosphorylated form of phop  <cit> .

here we show that the psts protein accumulated in the supernatant of s. lividans does not participate in the uptake of extracellular phosphate, and that only the psts protein present in the cell is responsible for this process. we demonstrate that the psts gene is also expressed in the presence of glucose but that the accumulation of rna and protein is higher in the presence of fructose than in that of glucose in old cultures. finally, using a multicopy psts promoter-driven xylanase gene as a reporter we describe a functional study of this promoter aimed at elucidating the relevant regulatory regions by the carbon source and by phop.

RESULTS
the extracellular psts protein is not functional
in principle, lipoproteins such as psts are attached to the cell membranes, where they exert their function. however, our previous observations showed that the psts protein was strongly accumulated in the supernatants of s. lividans cultures grown in the presence of certain carbon sources. we therefore decided to study whether this fraction of the protein also had the capacity to bind extracellular phosphate and transfer it to the cell. to address this issue, a construction expressing a -psts fusion protein, which was completely secreted to the supernatant, was obtained . in this construction, the psts promoter drives the expression of an in-frame fusion between the dna fragment of the xysa gene encoding the signal peptide of the xylanase xys <dig> from s. halstedii jm <dig>  <cit>  and the region of the psts gene that encodes the secreted form of the psts protein. this fusion gene was cloned into a streptomyces integrative plasmid to obtain plasmid pintuf <dig> , and this was introduced into the s. lividans psts mutant . as controls, s. lividans wild-type, the psts mutant, and the psts mutant transformed with plasmid pintuf <dig> , which produces the wild-type psts protein, were used. the expression and location of the psts protein were followed by western blot analysis of the supernatants and cellular fractions of the different strains after  <dig> hours of culture. the original psts protein was detected in the supernatants and in the cell extracts of the wild-type strain and in the psts mutant transformed with pintuf <dig>  however, the psts fusion protein, produced from pintuf <dig> in the psts mutant, was only detected in the culture supernatant . this result clearly demonstrates the capacity of the 45-amino acid signal peptide of the xylanase encoded by the xysa gene to secrete other proteins: in this case, psts. the n-terminus of the secreted psts protein obtained from the strain carrying pintuf <dig> was identical to the wild-type psts extracellular protein  <cit> , except that it had two extra amino acids  at its n-terminus in order to keep the signal peptide processing site present in the original xylanase. clearly, the size of the psts protein observed in the cells and in the supernatant of the strains carrying the original psts gene was different . this is due to the fact that the protein released to the supernatant does not have the first  <dig> amino acids  <cit> .

the next step was to study whether the secreted psts protein, generated from pintuf <dig>  had the ability to participate in the uptake of extracellular phosphate. to do so, p32-phosphate incorporation in these four strains grown in the presence of fructose was measured. as demonstrated previously, phosphate incorporation by the psts mutant was very low  in comparison with the wild-type  <cit> . transformation of this mutant with the pintuf <dig> plasmid restored phosphate incorporation to almost wild-type levels. however, the psts mutant containing pintuf <dig>  which produces only the secreted psts, had a similar level of phosphate incorporation to that obtained with the psts mutant . the fact that the psts protein produced by this plasmid was unable to complement the defect in phosphate incorporation of the psts null mutation suggests that the secreted psts did not have the ability to capture extracellular phosphate and transfer it to the cell.

psts is expressed in the presence of glucose or fructose but not in basal medium
up to this point we had focused our studies on the different levels of accumulation of the psts protein in the culture supernatants, but we had not yet studied the amount of this protein bound to the cell under different culture conditions in depth. aware that only the psts protein bound to the cell must be functional, we focused our attention on this fraction.

the first approach was to immunodetect psts in wild-type s. lividans cells grown under different conditions. cultures were performed in basal complex medium  and in this medium supplemented with glucose or fructose, and samples were taken every  <dig> hours. no psts protein was detected in cells obtained at  <dig> hours under any of the conditions used . at  <dig> hours of culture, the protein was absent in cells from the basal medium but was clearly present in cells grown in the presence of glucose or fructose. at this time, the intensity of the psts band was similar in the presence of both carbon sources . later, at  <dig> hours, the psts protein was more abundant in the presence of fructose than in that of glucose and was still absent in cells from basal ye medium . the same result was obtained for cultures of  <dig> and  <dig> hours . as suggested previously, a possible explanation for this induction could be a difference in the rate of phosphate consumption in the presence of the different carbon sources  <cit> . measurements of the residual phosphate levels of the three cultures after  <dig> hours showed that whereas  <dig> μm was detected in ye, only  <dig> μm was detected when the cells were grown in the presence of glucose or fructose. therefore, since the phosphate levels in cultures with both carbon sources  were similar we suggest the existence of other regulators that could account for the higher amount of psts detected in the presence of fructose in 60-h cultures and older, although the possibility of an effect of residual phosphate on psts expression cannot be completely ruled out.

the effect of the carbon source was also studied at transcriptional level using northern blot analysis. total rna was obtained from the same cultures at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours. total rna was separated in an agarose denaturing gel and hybridized with a 32p-labeled probe specific for psts . no hybridization bands were observed for any of the samples at  <dig> h . the transcription of psts was clearly observed  in 48-h and older cultures when supplemented with glucose or with fructose, but not in ye basal medium. the intensity of this  <dig>  kb hybridization band, corresponding to the psts transcript, was similar in the presence of glucose and in the presence of fructose at  <dig> h. however, at  <dig> h the band was much more intense in the presence of fructose than with glucose, indicating a higher induction of psts transcription in the presence of this carbon source in old cultures .

at least three hybridization bands of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  kb were detected in  <dig> h-old cultures in the presence of glucose or fructose. the most prominent band was that of  <dig>  kb, corresponding to monocistronic psts transcript, as indicated previously. the  <dig>  kb band corresponded fairly well to the size of a pstsc transcript , while the size of the  <dig>  kb band corresponded to the full-length pstscab operon transcript  . these results clearly indicate that the complete operon was transcribed in the presence of both carbon sources.

deletion of a repeated sequence in the psts promoter of s. lividans duplicates its activity
we have previously proposed that the sequence actcacccccgc, repeated several times in the s. coelicolor psts promoter and -with some discrepancies- up to eight times in the psts promoter of s. lividans, might be involved in the carbon regulation of the expression of this promoter  <cit> . to study this in more detail, we deleted the portion of the s. lividans psts promoter that contains the eight-times repeated degenerated sequence with the consensus sequence acycasccmnsv. to do so, the -329/- <dig> region of the psts promoter was deleted and the rest of the promoter was used to drive the expression of the orf of the xysa xylanase gene  <cit>  and used as reporter in a multicopy plasmid designated pnuf <dig> . this plasmid , plasmid pnx <dig> , and plasmid pnuf <dig>   were introduced into s. lividans tk <dig> and cultures were grown in ye supplemented with 5% glucose or with 5% fructose in the presence of neomycin  for  <dig> h. the production of xylanase in the culture supernatants was studied by coomassie blue-stained sds-page and by measuring the xylanase activity. the xylanase band obtained in the strain harbouring pnuf <dig> was significantly more intense than that obtained with pnuf <dig> in the presence of both carbon sources . xylanase activity was quantified in all the supernatants, and we observed that no xylanase activity was detected in the cultures of the s. lividans tk <dig> strain transformed with pnx <dig> under both conditions . however, xylanase activity was detected in the strain transformed with pnuf <dig> or with pnuf <dig> . clearly, there was an increase in the xylanase activity detected in the strain carrying the psts truncated promoter  under both culture conditions. this increase was more than two-fold when the strain was grown in the presence of glucose and  <dig> -fold in the case of the cultures performed with fructose . in addition, we observed a higher expression in presence of fructose than in the presence of glucose for both truncated and complete psts promoters. thus, when the s. lividans tk <dig> strain was transformed with pnuf <dig>   <dig> -fold more xylanase was produced with fructose than with glucose. when the plasmid used was pnuf <dig>  the overproduction obtained with fructose was  <dig>  fold, values of  <dig> u/ml of xylanase being attained. these results clearly indicate that the region containing the eight-times repeats may play an important role in controlling the level of expression of the psts promoter in the presence of the different carbon sources.

basal expression of the psts promoter is independent of the phop regulator
in order to study whether psts expression was completely dependent on phop in s. lividans, we obtained total rnas from the wild-type strain and from a phop mutant cultured for  <dig> hours in the presence of fructose. rt-pcr for psts was performed and one amplification band was observed for this gene in both strains. however, while the psts-amplified band was clearly detectable after  <dig> cycles in the wild-type strain,  <dig> amplification cycles were necessary for it to be detected in the phop mutant. as a control, we carried out rt-pcr for the phop itself, observing that the amplification band was clearly obtained in the wild -type, although, as expected, no amplification band was obtained in the mutant . this observation demonstrates that residual psts expression independent of phop- occurs, at least in s. lividans.

an alternative strategy to study this expression was to transform s. lividans tk <dig> and the phop mutant with the plasmids pnx <dig>  and pnuf <dig>  to monitor xylanase production. no protein band corresponding to the xylanase was detected in either strain carrying the control plasmid pnx <dig>  however, a protein band corresponding to the molecular weight of xylanase was readily detected in the parental tk <dig> strain transformed with plasmid pnuf <dig>  and a weaker band -of the same size- was also observed in the phop mutant transformed with the same plasmid . western blot analyses with anti-xylanase antibodies confirmed that this band indeed corresponded to xylanase xys <dig> . enzymatic activity assays confirmed that no xylanase activity was present in either strain transformed with pnx <dig>  values of  <dig> u/ml of xylanase were reached for the wild-type s. lividans transformed with pnuf <dig>  and values of  <dig> u/ml for the phop mutant transformed with the same plasmid. thus, 10% of the activity of the psts promoter must be out of the control of phop.

phop-independent basal expression was also demonstrated by generating a s. lividans psts-modified promoter lacking the two pho boxes described for the s. coelicolor psts promoter  <cit> . to accomplish this, the -141/- <dig> region of the s. lividans psts promoter containing the pho boxes was deleted and this mutant promoter was used to monitor xylanase expression . the plasmid generated, pnuf <dig>  was introduced into both strains – wild-type s. lividans and the phop mutant- and xylanase activity was analyzed in the culture supernatants. a protein band corresponding to the molecular weight of xylanase was observed in sds-page loaded with the supernatant of both strains transformed with pnuf <dig> . quantification of the xylanase activity afforded identical values for both strains . this result again indicates that although the activity of the psts promoter is strongly reduced after deletion of the pho-boxes it remains active, resulting in a basal level of phop-independent psts transcription in s. lividans.

discussion
the normal localization of the psts protein occurs through an extracellular association with the cell membrane by lipid anchorage and the protein participates in the uptake of extracellular phosphate, transferring this to the psta and pstc transporters. an extracellular localization of part of the psts protein has been described previously in other organisms such as b. subtilis  <cit> , but such a high extracellular accumulation as that reported for old cultures of wild-type s. lividans and its ppk mutant have never been reported in other systems  <cit> . recently, it has been found that pseudomonas aeruginosa strains that display high virulence against intestinal epithelial cells accumulate extracellular psts protein in appendage-like structures  <cit> . those authors provided evidence that these appendages were involved in the adherence and disruption of the integrity of intestinal epithelial cells, and consequently in the pathogenicity of this bacterium. to date, no other studies of the functionality of extracellular psts have been reported.

in the present study, we observed that the secreted psts of s. lividans does not play any role in the uptake of extracellular phosphate. a possible explanation for this extracellular accumulation might be that the number of psts molecules able to bind to the cell membrane might be limited. consequently, the overproduction observed in the presence of several carbon sources could lead to a partial release of the protein to the supernatant as debris, this being resistant to proteolytic degradation owing to its configuration. to some extent, this hypothesis is corroborated by the fact that the level of psts bound to the cells was similar in 60-h cultures and in cultures carried out over  <dig> days. however, the amount of protein found in the supernatant was much higher after six days , suggesting that the promoter was still active and that the protein produced was being accumulated in the supernatant.

an interaction among different bacterial regulons involved in metabolism has been described in other organisms such as b. subtilis. in this organism, the phosphorus  regulon is regulated by the carbon control protein-a  through ccpa-responsive elements or cre. however, the mechanism of this control is not fully understood. thus, whereas choi et al. reported that ccpa controls the phopr two-component system in a way independent of the cre sequence located in the phopr promoter  <cit> , puri-taneja et al. described that ccpa represses phop transcription by binding directly to this cre sequence  <cit> . from our rna experiments, it is clear that the s. lividans pst operon is transcriptionally induced by glucose or fructose in cultures that are close to or actually in the stationary phase. under these conditions, the level of residual phosphate is lower than in basal medium, in which this operon is not induced, and this suggests that the phosphate level triggers the expression of the pst operon. however, while the residual phosphate of cultures with glucose and fructose were similar  the expression of psts was higher in the presence of fructose. accordingly, although phosphate starvation seems to be the main signal for psts expression, other regulators must also act in response to the carbon source present in the media. this was corroborated by deletion of the region that contains the eight-times repeated sequence in the psts promoter proposed as the binding site of a carbon-responsive element  <cit> . this deletion resulted in a truncated psts promoter with higher expression than the full-length promoter, suggesting that the sequence contained the binding site of a novel regulator. the identification of this putative regulator is currently under investigation at our laboratory.

to date, all the pst operons studied are members of the pho regulon. in some organisms such as e. coli, the number of pho boxes in the promoter region has been related to inducibility by phosphate  <cit> . in s. lividans and s. coelicolor, the psts promoter contains two 11-bp direct repeat units that constitute two pho boxes in tandem, which are the binding sites for the phosphorylated phop protein  <cit> . as demonstrated here, deletion of these sequences in the s. lividans psts promoter results in constitutive psts expression that is similar in the wild-type and in the phop mutant. from these results it may be concluded that although phop is the main regulator of this promoter, some basal expression of the psts promoter  escapes phop regulation. similarly, it has been demonstrated that the pst operon of corynebacterium glutamicum is partially induced in the phor mutant , suggesting that at least one other additional regulator must be involved in its expression  <cit> . these results differ from those reported recently for s. coelicolor by sola-landa et al.  <cit> . these authors demonstrated that the s. coelicolor psts promoter, controlling a promoterless catechol dioxygenase gene xyle, was not expressed in a s. coelicolor phop mutant. however, the psts promoter from s. lividans is  <dig> bp longer than the corresponding promoter from s. coelicolor  <cit>  and therefore different types of regulation cannot be ruled out. our results also differ from those obtained from bacillus subtilis, where the pst promoter has been used to control β-galactosidase expression  <cit> . those authors reported that no expression was observed in a mutant strain lacking the phop gene, although they did detect a low level of expression in the mutant of the phor sensory kinase gene. thus, it is possible that phop might be phosphorylated inefficiently by other sensory kinases in this strain  <cit> .

our northern blot experiments demonstrated that the s. lividans pst operon is transcribed as a single  <dig>  kb transcript that corresponds to the complete pst operon and that it may be processed at specific points, resulting in smaller rnas; the most abundant one would be that corresponding to psts. a similar expression of the pst operon has been described in e. coli and in b. subtilis  <cit> . both organisms have palindromic sequences in the intergenic region between psts and pstc that show 73% sequence identity and that can prevent ribonuclease activity and consequently stabilize psts rna upstream. in our study, the mfold program  <cit>  predicted a strong stem-loop structure for the rna corresponding to the psts-pstc intergenic region, which possibly functions as a transcriptional terminator. this terminator would start  <dig> bp downstream from the uga stop codon of psts, ending at nucleotide  <dig> downstream from psts, with a Δg  of - <dig>  kcal/mol. another explanation for our northern results is that the transcription machinery might stop at the terminator between psts and pstc, resulting in more psts transcripts relative to the larger multicistronic pst transcripts. this is corroborated by the ratio of intensities of the different bands observed in the samples after  <dig> and  <dig> h. thus, while the  <dig>  kb band was detected at  <dig> hours, the larger  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb bands were detected at  <dig> h. of culture, and their intensities were lower than that of the former band .

CONCLUSIONS
although cultures of s. lividans accumulate high amounts of the psts protein in the supernatant of cultures carried out with certain carbon sources such as fructose, the results of the present work demonstrates that the secreted form of this protein does not have the capacity to bind external phosphate and transfer it to the cells. our study also reveals a novel regulatory system for psts expression in s. lividans. in contrast to other systems described so far, where phop appears to be the only regulator, we detected a basal expression of psts, which escapes the control of the main regulator phop. we have also identified a region of the psts promoter containing eight degenerated repeats that may act as a binding site for as yet unknown repressor. in sum, our work reveals the complexity of the regulatory network in streptomyces and uncovers a connection between phosphate and carbon regulation, which should be further investigated in the future. we are tempted to speculate that these novel regulators would contribute to the integration of the different nutritional signals that allow the organism to survive under adverse environmental conditions.

