BACKGROUND
pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major pathogen associated with chronic and ultimately fatal lung infections in patients with cystic fibrosis . current research suggests that p. aeruginosa live anaerobically in the mucus layer of the cf lung and are rarely found in contact with epithelial cells  <cit> . extracellular proteases are secreted by p. aeruginosa, including las a, elastase, alkaline protease, and protease iv, and these are known contributors to virulence in lung infections  <cit> . like other gram negative bacteria, p. aeruginosa also release spheres of outer membrane known as outer membrane vesicles  <cit> . they consist of entrapped periplasmic components and outer membrane constituents, including lipopolysaccharide , glycerophospholipids, and outer membrane proteins   <cit> . due to their small size, vesicles potentially gain access to host cells more easily than whole bacteria. considering that vesicles are armed with bacterial proteases, toxins, surface adhesins and/or invasins, vesicles present a potentially significant contributor to lung damage caused by p. aeruginosa. since they contain many immunostimulatory compounds, it is not surprising that p. aeruginosa vesicles induce a significant il- <dig> response from cultured human lung cells  <cit> .

vesicles allow bacteria to disperse a complex of soluble and insoluble bacterial products into the surrounding milieu. vesiculation appears to be a conserved process among both pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria and the role of outer membrane vesicles in pathogenesis is a burgeoning area of research  <cit> . many pathogenic bacterial species aside from p. aeruginosa produce vesicles that contain toxins or other virulence factors and, in several cases, vesicles have been proposed to be vehicles for toxin delivery to eukaryotic cells  <cit> . in order to deliver toxic content, vesicles must first bind to host cells. vesicles from shigella flexneri  <cit> , borellia burgdorferi  <cit> , actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans  <cit>  and etec  <cit>  have been observed to bind cultured host cells. vesicles have also been observed interacting with host cells in vivo. in biopsies of infected patients, vesicles from h. pylori were found to bind intestinal cells  <cit> .

p. aeruginosa vesicles have been amongst the most thoroughly studied vesicles to date. they have been shown to contain the virulence factors pro-elastase, hemolysin, phospholipase c, and alkaline phosphatase, as well as the penicillin-degrading enzyme β-lactamase and the pseudomonas quorum sensing signal  and other hydroxyalkylquinolones  <cit> . we recently reported that the secreted aminopeptidase, paap, is enriched in outer membrane vesicles that we purified from each of the tested cf strains of p. aeruginosa  <cit> . interestingly, paap expression was found to increase 21-fold when pao <dig> was grown under microaerobic conditions  <cit> , and 103-fold when it was grown in the presence of primary lung epithelial cells  <cit> . an analogous zinc metalloprotease was discovered to be associated with vesicles produced by a different cf pathogen, burkholderia cepacia, and a strain with a knockout in this gene was less virulent in an animal model  <cit> . such studies have stimulated much interest in determining how vesicles and vesicle components contribute to p. aeruginosa infection and disease in the lungs.

in this study, we use both cultured and primary airway epithelial cells to investigate vesicle-host cell interactions and to assess the contribution of paap to this interaction. we report that p. aeruginosa vesicles are internalized by human lung cells and paap increases vesicle association with lung cells. the results point to physiological roles for p. aeruginosa paap and vesicles during an infection.

RESULTS
p. aeruginosa vesicle association with lung epithelial cells is strain-dependent
we examined whether vesicles from various p. aeruginosa isolates would associate with cultured human respiratory epithelial cells. fluorescently labeled vesicles  from late log-phase cultures were incubated with a <dig> human lung epithelial cells and the amount of vesicles associated with host cells after incubation at 37°c was quantitated using a previously established microtiter plate assay  <cit> . to account for minor variability in the fluorescent labeling of vesicles, the amount of cell-associated vesicles was extrapolated from standard curves relating fluorescence to ng of fitc-vesicles for each of the vesicle preparations. cell-associated fluorescence increased over time for vesicles for each of the p. aeruginosa isolates, however significantly more  vesicles from the cf isolate s <dig> associated with a <dig> cells compared with pao <dig> vesicles . the cell association profile for vesicles from another cf isolate, cf <dig>  was very similar to the one exhibited by s <dig>  and host cell association of vesicles from all isolates was dose-dependent .

to test whether the vesicles would interact similarly with primary cells, we incubated vesicles with human bronchial epithelial  cells from healthy human volunteers . the results for the hbe cells were similar to those with cultured cells, thus cultured cells appeared to be a good model for primary cells in further assays. together, these data indicate that p. aeruginosa vesicles from cf strains associate to a greater extent with epithelial cells than vesicles from a non-cf strain.

when we tested temperature dependence of vesicle-host cell association we found that incubation at 4°c substantially decreased the amount of s <dig> vesicles associated with the lung cells, whereas little-to-no difference was observed for pao <dig> vesicles . these data indicate that a temperature-dependent mechanism was responsible for the differences observed in the association between vesicles from a cf strain and vesicles from a non-cf strain.

pseudomonas aeruginosa vesicles are trafficked into lung epithelial cells
temperature-dependent association of s <dig> vesicles suggested that these vesicles may be internalized by the lung epithelial cells. we used confocal microscopy to analyze vesicle-host cell interactions. cultured a <dig> cells were incubated with fitc-labeled s <dig> vesicles for  <dig> hours at 37°c, and plasma membranes were stained with af633-wheat germ agglutinin  to visualize cell boundaries. at 37°c, vesicle fluorescence appeared to be mostly internal and concentrated in a perinuclear region of the cell . very little vesicle association was observed for incubations maintained at 4°c . thus, both binding and internal localization of s <dig> vesicles was affected at the lower temperature.

to further confirm vesicle internalization, vesicles were labeled using af <dig> instead of fitc to maximize fluorescence and minimize the effects of photobleaching. many vesicle components are labeled by this reagent , indicating that the fluorescent signal would not track merely a single component. after incubating af488-s <dig> vesicles with a <dig> cells for  <dig> h at 37°c, the surface of cell monolayers was labeled with a membrane-impermeable biotin. the biotinylated surface was then detected using af633-streptavidin and cell fluorescence was visualized by confocal microscopy. as a result, surface-exposed vesicles appear white and internalized vesicles appear green in an overlay of streptavidin and vesicle fluorescence. after a  <dig> hour incubation with a <dig> cells, mainly green, perinuclear fluorescence was observed , with only a few white, surface localized vesicles , indicating that s <dig> vesicles are internalized by lung cells.

to investigate the mode of p. aeruginosa vesicle internalization, we treated cells with common inhibitors of endocytic pathways. filipin, chlorpromazine, cytochalasin d, and nicl <dig> did not inhibit uptake . pre-treatment of cells with methyl-β-cyclodextrin , which removes cholesterol from membranes, inhibited vesicle uptake, however, preincubation with methyl-α-cyclodextrin, which typically is used as a negative control for mβcd, inhibited vesicle uptake as well . inhibition of vesicle uptake was also achieved using hypertonic sucrose . in parallel control incubations, we pretreated vesicles with hypertonic sucrose or cyclodextrins instead of pretreating the lung cells. in these controls, vesicles were still readily internalized , indicating that the inhibition of vesicle uptake was due to effects on the lung cells and not on the vesicles themselves.

since we observed the greatest effect on vesicle internalization using hypertonic sucrose and mβcd, which impair clathrin-coated pit formation and invagination, respectively  <cit> , we next investigated whether vesicles would colocalize with clathrin. we observed a few locations where vesicle fluorescence colocalized with clathrin on the cell surface, however vesicle fluorescence did not co-localize with any intracellular clathrin . vesicles did not colocalize with any caveolin, however it should be noted that very little caveolin was visualized in the a <dig> cells, consistent with reports of low levels of caveolin- <dig> expression in these cells  <cit>  . these data suggest that vesicles may be associated with clathrin-coated pits, but only transiently, at an early stage in the active uptake process.

internalized vesicle components colocalize with the endoplasmic reticulum
we repeatedly observed internalized vesicle-associated fluorescence localized to a perinuclear region. we examined whether vesicles were trafficked to the same compartments as transferrin and cholera toxoid . only transferrin and ctb that were perinuclear colocalized with internalized vesicles, whereas the majority of cytosolic compartments containing transferrin and ctb did not . to determine whether this perinuclear region corresponded to the endoplasmic reticulum , we treated cells with the glycoside digitonin, which, at low concentrations, permeabilizes the plasma membrane and releases cytosolic proteins but preserves the er membrane  <cit> . after digitonin treatment, cells that had lost the cytoplasmic marker, β-tubulin, still retained a perinuclear halo of vesicle-associated fluorescence . in these treated cells, vesicle fluorescence clearly colocalized with the integral er membrane protein trapα . these data suggest that internalized vesicle components traffic to the er within  <dig> hour of exposure.

paap promotes vesicle association with human respiratory epithelial cells
we wondered whether host cell association depended on paap, one of the major protein components of vesicles derived from cf isolates . quantitative 2d-dige revealed paap is at least 65-fold enriched in s <dig> vesicles compared with pao <dig> vesicles  <cit> . to test whether paap on vesicles contributed to host cell association, we overexpressed paap in pao <dig>  and constructed a deletion in the aminopeptidase in strain s <dig> . we confirmed that purified pao1/ps <dig> vesicles were enriched in paap compared with pa <dig> vesicles and that s470apko <dig> did not contain detectable amounts of paap . purified pao1/ps <dig> vesicles associated with a <dig> cells more than twice as much as pa <dig> vesicles, whereas s470apko <dig> vesicles associated 40% less with the lung cells than s <dig> vesicles . unfortunately, complementation of s470apko <dig> was not successful since vesicles from s470apko <dig> expressing paap from ps <dig> contained approximately 10-fold less paap and had 10-fold less aminopeptidase activity than s <dig> vesicles . induction of paap expression in s470apko <dig> did not help correct the complementation defect and increase the level of vesicle-bound paap, although the total amount of paap in the supernatant was equivalent to that of s <dig> . as a result, it was not surprising that s470apko5/ps <dig> vesicles associated with host cells to approximately the same extent as those from apko <dig> . collectively, these data support a dose-dependent contribution of paap to the association of vesicles with host cells.

discussion
with these results, we have revealed several facets of interactions between p. aeruginosa vesicles and human lung epithelial cells. we have demonstrated that p. aeruginosa vesicles are internalized by epithelial cells and trafficked intracellularly so that vesicle components accumulate in the er. we have also shown that paap, an enzyme more abundant in vesicles produced by many cf isolates compared with non-clinical isolates, significantly contributes to the interaction of p. aeruginosa vesicles with host cells.

internalization by host cells has been reported to occur for outer membrane vesicles from numerous species. for instance, our lab has shown previously that etec vesicles are internalized in an lt-dependent fashion via ganglioside gm <dig> in caveolin-enriched lipid rafts of epithelial cells  <cit> . additionally, fluorescent beads coated with porphyromonas gingivalis vesicles also colocalized with caveolin and gm <dig> and were internalized by hela cells in a cholesterol and dynamin-dependent manner  <cit> . our observations regarding the temperature-dependent extent and location of vesicle-associated fluorescence in host cells and decreased fluorescence in host cells upon pretreatment with methyl-β-cyclodextrin  suggested that s <dig> vesicles were also internalized.

in contrast to other examples of internalized vesicles, p aeruginosa vesicles appear to enter host cells via multiple pathways. hypertonic media, which impairs clathrin coated pit formation, did significantly decrease vesicle internalization and some surface-bound vesicles were found colocalized with clathrin. however, neither treatment with filipin, which disrupts lipid rafts, nor chlorpromazine, which blocks clathrin-coated pits, decreased vesicle internalization significantly. it should also be considered that p. aeruginosa vesicles could fuse with the epithelial cells and that vesicle membrane components are subsequently internalized by plasma membrane trafficking while lumenal components are liberated into the host cell cytosol. evidence of fusion of vesicles with the plasma membrane has been presented for actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans vesicles  <cit> : confocal microscopy of hl <dig> cells coincubated with these vesicles showed immediate and strong labelling, primarily at the plasma membrane. we did not observe strong perimeter labelling of host cells with p. aeruginosa vesicles . in fact, when we blocked active transport with hypertonic sucrose, we found a significant decrease in vesicle-associated fluorescence, not accumulation of fluorescence at the cell periphery . thus, our data support a model where p. aeruginosa vesicles do not fuse to the plasma membrane, but instead bind and are internalized.

we observed an increase in human lung epithelial cell-associated fluorescence over time. this result is consistent with either vesicle attachment causing receptor upregulation, or continuous vesicle binding, internalization, recycling of vesicle receptors to the cell surface. these characteristics are similar to the behavior of enterotoxigenic e. coli vesicles with intestinal epithelial cells  <cit> . further experiments using different inhibitors, markers, and cell lines, will be necessary to definitively identify the host cell factors critical to p. aeruginosa vesicle entry. in relation to cf-related research, it would be particularly interesting to see whether the interactions depend on functional and properly localized cftr. ceramide-rich rafts containing clusters of the cftr and cd <dig> have been implicated as the means for internalization of whole p. aeruginosa. these rafts are disrupted by mβcd, and thus in light of our mβcd treatment results, they present a potential route for vesicle internalization  <cit> .

once internalized, vesicles may be sequestered, degraded, or their components may be dispersed, with their membranes disrupted and/or fused with the endocytic membrane. in the case of s. flexneri vesicles, for instance, vesicle lumenal content was found in the host cell cytosol after vesicles were phagocytosed to a non-acidified compartment by henle  <dig> epithelial cells  <cit> . we show that p. aeruginosa vesicle-associated intracellular fluorescence is concentrated to bright puncta and do not encounter an acidified compartment, since vesicle-associated fitc fluorescence  is not quenched, even in long incubations . notably, a significant amount of vesicle-associated fluorescence colocalized with the integral er membrane protein trapα, even after a relatively brief incubation time. transferrin and ct eventually route to the er, and indeed, those pools of transferrin and ct that had reached the er colocalized with the vesicle fluorescence. none of the currently identified p. aeruginosa vesicle proteins have an er retention sequence to direct the trafficking of these bacterial factors to the er . since intracellular trafficking of s470apko <dig> vesicles was not noticeably different from s <dig> vesicles , internalized vesicle trafficking appears to be paap-independent. in all, many questions remain regarding the trafficking of p. aeruginosa vesicle membrane and lumenal content after endocytosis, and this area deserves further exploration.

in some cases the factor on bacterial vesicles responsible for host cell binding has been identified as a virulence factor  <cit> . for example, the heat-labile enterotoxin  is bound to the surface of etec vesicles, and vesicle-bound lt mediates vesicle binding to cultured eukaryotic cells via the lt receptor, ganglioside gm <dig>  <cit> . in contrast, leukotoxin transported in a. actinomycetemcomitans vesicles was not responsible for vesicle association with hl <dig> cells  <cit> . we have found that paap also is located on the vesicle surface , and that host cell association correlated with paap levels on the vesicles. strains overexpressing paap or deleted in paap, respectively, produced vesicles that associated to a greater or lesser extent than vesicles from the corresponding isogenic parent strains. a direct correlation between vesicle association and paap levels also held for strains naturally expressing paap at different levels. paap expression is highly regulated and typically does not occur until stationary phase  <cit> . this was true for our cultures of pao <dig>  and as a result paap was nearly absent from pao <dig> vesicles purified from late log-phase cultures . in contrast, strain s <dig> begins to express paap in late log phase, therefore paap was enriched in the late log-phase s <dig> vesicles . correspondingly, pao <dig> vesicles associated 3– <dig> fold less than s <dig> vesicles . thus, the degree of bacterial vesicle-host cell interaction can depend on the growth phase of the parent bacterium. despite the importance of paap, it is not the only factor governing host cell association since association by s470apko <dig> vesicles was only reduced by 40% compared with s <dig> vesicles. the conclusion that p. aeruginosa vesicles can utilize numerous internalization pathways is consistent with our finding that factors other than paap are involved in vesicle-host cell association.

we describe that paap expression in trans failed to complement the paap deletion with regards to the ability to obtain wt levels of vesicle-localized paap, and hence its ability to restore wt levels of vesicle association with host cells. complemented paap was expressed and secreted into the culture supernatant at wt levels, however it was not found in the vesicle-associated fraction . in fact, overexpression of paap in the null mutant resulted in reduced viability . this lack of functional complementation is not unprecedented. two other secreted p. aeruginosa proteases  have knockout phenotypes which could not be complemented by expression of the gene from a plasmid or even from a chromosomal insertion  <cit> . the lack of complementation by the plasmid-expressed paap in the apko <dig> paap knockout strain demonstrates the likelihood of a fine-tuned regulatory process that is critical for optimal paap expression, processing, stability, and/or secretion. indeed, paap has been found to undergo complex post-translational processing .

since vesicle-associated paap has activity as a zinc-dependent protease, paap could act as a proteolytic factor that exposes vesicle receptors on the host cell surface. in an attempt to test this, we constructed a mutant paap which lacked active site residues however it was not secreted . interestingly, this suggests paap must bind zinc for it to fold correctly and folding is critical for export of type  <dig> secretory pathway substrates. as a result, we have not yet been able to test whether paap activity is important in mediating host cell interactions, internalization, or trafficking.

we discovered several characteristics of paap expression relevant to the virulence of p. aeruginosa in the cf lung. first, strains taken from patients with cf express paap abundantly. second, we found that more paap is detectable in vesicles produced by pa <dig> that contain the β-lactamase-resistant vector pmmb66eh than in those produced by pa <dig> . the association of these vesicles with lung cells was consistent with the previously described trend: pao1/pmmb66eh vesicles associated with host cells to a greater extent compared to pa <dig> vesicles . the increase in paap expression in this case appears to be due to the presence of antibiotics in the media, which is particularly relevant considering that bacteria in the cf lungs are frequently exposed to antibiotics. finally, sera from cf patients contained antibodies to several vesicle proteins, and a subset of patients  produced antibodies to paap indicating that paap is expressed and secreted in cf patients . these findings suggest that the conditions present in infected cf lungs promote upregulation of p. aeruginosa paap and production of vesicles that contain paap.

CONCLUSIONS
purified p. aeruginosa vesicles associate with human lung cells and are internalized in a time- and dose-dependent manner. vesicles from a cf isolate exhibit greater association with lung cells than vesicles from a lab strain. vesicle internalization is temperature-dependent and inhibited by hypertonic sucrose and cyclodextrins. vesicles also appear to be very transiently associated with clathrin-coated pits as part of an active uptake process. after internalization, vesicle components were found to colocalize with the er. tested cf isolates of p. aeruginosa abundantly secrete paap, an aminopeptidase which is a major contributor to lung cell association. therefore, our results suggest that p. aeruginosa vesicles can interact with and be internalized by lung epithelial cells and thereby contribute to the inflammatory response during infection.

