BACKGROUND
acquisition of large-scale data sets representing a variety of data modalities has become a crucial aspect of experimental system characterization. this strategy enables the broad capture of biological information in a short time and with a relative small investment of effort, in the hope that valuable biological insights might be gained. however, the amount of information collected can be overwhelming, making interpretation of the data difficult and subsequent detailed biological understanding elusive. reducing the complexity of such data by evaluating it in a relevant biological context is required in order to gain meaningful insight.

high-throughput measurements can be evaluated against literature-curated “cause and effect” relationships extracted from the selventa knowledgebase . as illustrated in figure 1a, a structure called a “hyp”  is used. a hyp is a specific type of network model comprised of a set of causal relationships connecting a particular biological activity  to measurable downstream entities  that it positively or negatively regulates. reverse-causal reasoning  uses the measurable downstream entities of a hyp to deduce information about the activity of the upstream entity of the hyp, based on an appropriate set of measurements   <cit> . using measured downstream effects to deduce the activity of upstream entities is advantageous in that, for gene expression data, it does not depend on the “forward” assumption that mrna expression changes are always directly correlated with protein activity changes  <cit> , an assumption that does not take into account the effects of translational or post-translational regulation on protein activity.

the hyp can describe causal relationships between an upstream biological activity and any type of high-throughput data. however, the work described here focuses on the evaluation of whole-genome mrna expression changes; thus, the hyp is the equivalent of a causal “gene expression signature” for a given entity or process, for example, the activity of a particular kinase. previous work has explored the importance of uncovering a characteristic signature of gene expression changes that results from one or more perturbations to a biological process, and the subsequent scoring of that signature’s presence in additional data sets as a measure of that process’s specific activity amplitude. most work in this field has involved identifying and scoring signatures that are correlated with a disease phenotype  <cit> . these phenotype-derived signatures provide significant classification power, but often lack a mechanistic or causal relationship between a single specific perturbation and the signature. consequently, these signatures may represent multiple distinct unknown perturbations that lead to, or result from, the same disease phenotype.

alternatively, a number of studies have focused on measuring causal signatures based on very specific upstream perturbations, either performed directly in the system of interest  <cit>  or coming from closely-related published data  <cit> . based on the simple, yet powerful premise that modulation of cellular pathways and the components therein is associated with distinct signatures in downstream measurable entities, causally-derived signatures hypothesize that the “cause” of the signature can be identified with high specificity from the measured “effect”  <cit> . these studies have demonstrated the great potential of applying a causal-pathway activity scoring strategy to clinical problems. for example, they have provided prognosis predictions in gastric cancer patients and indications of specific drug efficacy  <cit> .

as a consequence, coupling specific causal hyps captured in the selventa knowledgebase with a measure of perturbed activity would be a means to further realize this clinical potential, as well as the potential to increase basic biological understanding that is harbored within high-throughput data. however, the hyp infrastructure has been previously exclusively employed as an exploratory tool for identifying relevant perturbed biology by drawing qualitative mechanistic inferences based on statistical enrichments  <cit> . therefore, new methods are required to confer an explicit, more quantifiable estimate of the degree of hyp activity for a more quantitative comparative assessment infrastructure. such methods scoring network perturbation amplitudes  would facilitate a high-resolution comparison of biological states, both by virtue of a continuous scale of scores and the breadth of hyps that are immediately available for scoring.

to assess hyp amplitude, four complementary scoring algorithms were developed: strength, geometric perturbation index , measured abundance signal score , and expected perturbation index . npa scoring was then applied to different inflammatory and cell cycle-related hyps using two transcriptomic data sets: a tnfα dose and time series in normal human bronchial epithelial  cells and a cdk inhibitor r <dig> dose and time series in hct <dig> colon cancer cells  <cit> . this study establishes the use of a broad, literature-derived knowledgebase to score the amplitude of various aspects of biology, which can be defined as very specific mechanisms  that are directly proximal to the data, or as a larger network of interest that is composed of a collection of individual mechanisms.

RESULTS
the hyp is the foundation for scoring network models
the hyp represents the relationships between a set of measured data, here gene expression data, and a biological entity that is a known controller of those genes. additionally, these relationships include the sign  of influence between the upstream entity and the differential expression of the downstream genes. the downstream genes of a hyp are drawn from a database of literature-curated causal biological knowledge . the causal relationships of a hyp that link the upstream entity to downstream genes are the substrate for the calculation of process amplitude using the npa scoring algorithms .

a more general causal network model can be constructed from a set of hyps that are themselves causally connected by literature-derived edges . such a network model can be thought of as providing higher-level connections between hyps by linking the upstream controllers of these hyps, based on the pathway’s graph structure. complex biological processes such as cell proliferation or cellular stress can be efficiently described by causal network models  <cit> .

a complex causal network model of biological entities can be transformed into a single hyp by collecting the individual hyps representing entities in the model and regrouping the connections of all the downstream genes to a single upstream process representing the whole complex causal network model; this in essence is a flattening of the underlying graph structure . in this fashion, the activity changes of the biological entities described by the network model can be assessed via the aggregation of its individual hyps, such that the underlying gene expression measurements contribute to the network as a whole .

scoring hyps with four npa methods
npa scoring applies a defined algorithm to an experimental data set consisting in a series of treatment versus control comparisons, where the experimental data is filtered down to a particular scope of biology  by the context of a defined biological network model . specifically, a series of npa metrics were developed to evaluate the activity of the biological entities represented by a hyp. the npa metrics were designed such that positive values mean increased activity of the biological entities represented by the hyp , and negative values mean decreased activity . furthermore a positive or negative relative difference between two npa scores denotes the same relative difference in the magnitude of the activity of the biological entities represented by the hyp.

in this study, gene expression data was used to demonstrate the npa approach using four different scoring methods: strength, gpi, mass, and epi . briefly, strength is the mean treatment-induced differential expressions of the hyp’s downstream genes, adjusted for the sign of their causal connection to the upstream entity of the hyp. gpi is similar to strength, except that the contribution of each gene is additionally weighted by taking into account the statistical significance of its differential expression. mass is the change in absolute downstream quantities in a direction supporting an increase in the upstream entity , divided by an average of a total absolute quantity of the downstreams. finally, epi is a “smoothed” version of gpi, obtained by averaging a slightly modified form of gpi over all possible values of a threshold for statistically significant differential gene expressions. each method has specific yet complementary advantages , having been tailored for a particular measurement technology or having different conceptual assumptions applied . further complementary aspects of these methods will be discussed below .

statistical annotation of npa scores
each npa score, regardless of algorithm, represents an abstracted view of a set of biological measurements in the context of a particular hyp. as such, dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of measurements may be aggregated into a single score. in order to better characterize an npa score and derive value from its use, additional statistics that qualify the score are required. two such statistics, uncertainty and specificity, were developed. uncertainty is a confidence interval for a particular npa score, while specificity tests whether an npa score is specific to the downstream genes represented by a particular hyp, and not due to a general trend of the data .

npa scoring of an nf-κb hyp accurately assesses nf-κb activity
in order to evaluate the npa approach, an nf-κb hyp was scored for a well-understood and controlled experimental system – tnfα-treated nhbe cells. the npa results were then compared with an explicit measure of the nf-κb complex activity provided by its nuclear translocation.

activation of the stress- and immune-response transcription factor nf-κb  has been well-defined as a major mediator of tnfα-induced signaling in a variety of systems  <cit> . nhbe cells were treated with four different doses of tnfα  and total rna was collected for microarray measurement at four different times after treatment  . all treatments were compared to time-matched mock-treated controls to obtain  <dig> contrasts .

each amplitude scoring method was investigated using a hyp created to be a specific measure of nf-κb activation, the nf-κb-direct hyp . this hyp is composed of  <dig> genes  known to be directly regulated by nf-κb . each scoring method showed the same pattern of response to tnfα, having demonstrated a dose-dependent response at all times, and a time-dependent response that generally saturated at later times . however, there were some differences between the score patterns for each scoring method. the closely-related strength and gpi methods produced almost indistinguishable patterns of response, suggesting the contributions from noise were balanced in this experiment . the epi method was qualitatively different from strength and gpi in that epi scores continued to increase from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours, while strength and gpi scores plateaued from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours. also, the epi method produced near-zero scores for  <dig>  ng/ml tnfα. in general, epi scores for other hyps and data sets also appeared to reduce to  <dig>  scores that trended relatively lower by other methods . the mass method qualitatively differed from strength and gpi primarily at the  <dig> and  <dig> hour time points, with strength and gpi scores increasing from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours and plateauing from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours, while mass scores plateaued from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours and increased from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours. strength and gpi scores met the specificity criterion  for all conditions. the lowest dose and earliest time point for mass, and the lowest dose for all but the  <dig> hour time point for the epi method, were found to not be specific to the nf-κb-direct hyp.

next, nf-κb-direct hyp scores were compared to nf-κb nuclear translocation. upon activation, nf-κb is transported into the nucleus where it acts to regulate the expression of many genes  <cit> . a series of feedback loops then lead to the subsequent translocation of nf-κb back to the cytoplasm, and this oscillatory cycle continues several times  <cit> . because nf-κb oscillations occur with slightly different periods in different cells in the population, the first oscillation is the most reliable population-measure of nf-κb activation. although the time of the first oscillation depends on dose,  <dig> minutes after tnfα treatment is a realistic time to measure nf-κb nuclear translocation for the doses used here   <cit> . each scoring method produced a monotonic, and in some cases nearly linear, relationship between score and nuclear translocation, with pearson correlation coefficients between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the different scoring methods . interestingly, this dose-dependent relationship was preserved at different times after tnfα treatment . these findings demonstrate that the hyp-based npa scores can quantify nf-κb transcriptional activity.

npa scoring of additional hyps can quantitatively assess response to tnfα
the effects of hyp size and composition were investigated. first, the effect of hand-selecting a set of measurements that are known to be modulated by nf-κb specifically in a tnfα-dependent manner was assessed. a hyp was constructed from a set of  <dig> genes that were previously measured via rt-pcr to assess nf-κb activity in response to tnfα treatment in 3t <dig> mouse fibroblast cells   <cit> . these genes were measured as perturbed by tnfα in 3t <dig> cells upon dosing with tnfα  over a  <dig> hour time course. this hyp produced a very similar pattern of activation to the nf-κb-direct hyp , suggesting that inclusion of genes whose tnfα-dependent expression has not been directly verified does not have a detrimental effect on the quality of the hyp score.

next, the effects of using hyps derived from upstream biological entities that are less proximal to the measurement were investigated. to do so, two additional hyps were constructed: the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp , which is composed of  <dig> genes  that are known to be modulated by perturbation of proteins in a causal network model of signaling from the iκb kinase  proteins to nf-κb activation ; and the tnf hyp , which is composed of  <dig> genes  that are known to be modulated by treatment of cells with tnfα. the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp was generated by first constructing a causal network model of ikk/nf-κb signaling, and then transforming it into a single hyp by the aggregation procedure illustrated in figure 1b . whereas the nf-κb-direct hyp is composed entirely of genes whose expressions were directly controlled by a single transcription factor , each of these two hyps contains genes whose direct transcriptional controller is not necessarily known. the expression of these genes may be controlled by transcription factors not involved in constructing the hyp. for example, genes in the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp are known to be modulated by perturbation of proteins in the ikk/nf-κb signaling causal network model, but some of these genes could be regulated as secondary effects caused by altered expression of a smaller subset of genes that are directly modulated by nf-κb. also, tnfα is a ligand and therefore does not directly mediate transcription of any genes. treatment of cells with tnfα results in activation of a myriad of transcription factors, any of which may directly or indirectly  alter the expression of each gene in the tnf hyp.

the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp and tnf hyp give insight into the behaviors of hyps at different levels of proximity to the measurements. the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp is primarily composed of genes that are regulated  by nf-κb , and it produced a pattern of response that is very similar to the nf-κb-direct hyp . this similar pattern of response suggests that there is not a large difference between the population-level behavior of genes that are known to be directly regulated by a transcription factor and the behavior of genes where knowledge of direct regulation is unknown. the time- and dose-dependent response that was seen for the nf-κb-direct hyp appears somewhat less robust in the tnf hyp , for example at the  <dig> minute time point, but again the four methods produced very similar responses. thus, although the general pattern of response was well-preserved among the hyps, minor but noticeable differences in response can be observed in hyps that are less proximal to the measurements.

npa scoring detects limited cross-talk between nf-κb and cell cycle signaling
to assess the ability of hyps to respond specifically to relevant tnfα signaling perturbations, a hyp was constructed for a key cell-cycle component, the transcription factor e2f <dig> , with the assumption that e2f <dig> is a less direct effector of tnfα signaling compared to nf-κb. the e2f1-direct hyp is composed of  <dig> genes  known to be directly regulated by e2f <dig> . the e2f1-direct hyp showed a dose-dependent decrease in score for mass at the  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hour time points, and for strength and gpi at the  <dig> hour time point . consistent with this predicted decrease in cell cycle progression, celltiter-glo® measures of cell number found no appreciable increase in cell number after  <dig> hours of tnfα treatment . further verification of these conclusions could be performed, for example, by measuring the cell cycle progression of the sample populations via flow cytometry.

in order to provide a comparison of npa results for biology not directly related to nf-κb signaling, the npa response of the four hyps introduced above  were assessed in response to inhibition of cell cycle progression via a cdk inhibitor. specifically, a publicly available microarray data set was used for treatment of hct <dig> colon cancer cells with three different concentrations of the cdk inhibitor r <dig>   <cit>  . all four npa methods demonstrated dose- and time-dependent decreases in the e2f1-direct hyp score at the  <dig> hour,  <dig> hour, and  <dig> hour time points. the tnf hyp showed a similar pattern of response as the e2f1-direct hyp, however few of the scores passed the specificity criterion. this suggests that some of the genes in this hyp are cell cycle regulated, but are not sufficient in number to pass the specificity criterion. in contrast, the nf-κb-direct and ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp scores did not display this same dose- and time-dependent pattern, indicating that these focused hyps potentially contain few cell cycle regulated genes. however, the scores for the two nf-κb hyps showed significant increases at the  <dig> hour time point  and the  <dig> hour time point , suggesting that nf-κb may perhaps be activated by cell cycle arrest . furthermore, the pattern of scores for the nf-κb-direct and ikk/nf-κb signaling hyps were significantly different for the cdk-inhibition data set, indicating that these hyps will not produce near-identical patterns of scores under circumstances where nf-κb is not activated or is perhaps regulated in a complex manner.

discussion
previous work has demonstrated the utility of exploring the reverse causal interpretation of large scale data sets using hyps as opposed to reasoning downstream from the data  <cit> . the ability to deduce the degree of activity for a broad spectrum of biological processes, afforded by an extensive causal knowledgebase, would provide enormous potential for facilitating biological characterization and yield an even deeper mining of information from large-scale data. this approach offers the potential to quantify responses of biological systems to anything from toxicity and disease processes to therapeutic benefit. this study successfully demonstrated the use of the causal connections provided by an appropriate knowledgebase as the basis for quantifying the activity degree of specific biology from high-throughput data. this quantitative application of hyps, representing possibly complex network models, to experimental data measuring treatment-induced perturbations is called network perturbation amplitude  scoring.

causal directionality is key for the hyp framework
for all npa metrics, the proper scoring of a hyp is dependent upon the directionality  of the causal influences linking the upstream biological entity represented by the hyp to the downstream genes whose expression it regulates. the knowledgebase harbors information about the specific signs  of the regulation exerted by the entity represented by the hyp on the expression of each of the downstream genes. the logic for incorporating differential gene expression measurements into an npa score based on a knowledgebase-specified directional blueprint can be made via arguments against two specific alternative scoring schemes. the case of scoring an activity without taking into account the sign of causal influence in the hyp can make sense if the hyp represents a transcription factor that always activates or represses genes. however, if there are downstream genes in a hyp that are controlled in an opposite manner to the others, the error of an activity score based on an assumption of a single sign becomes apparent: the score contribution of genes that are known to be negatively regulated within a hyp might cancel, instead of add to, the score contribution of genes that are known to be positively regulated within a hyp. an alternative tactic would be to incorporate the absolute values of the differential expression for each gene. this has the problem of always producing positive scores for a hyp as well as artificially inflating scores: genes that change in a manner opposite of how a hyp is known to control a gene would add to a hyp activity score rather than detract from it. standard gene enrichment analyses usually ignore regulation signs when scoring pathways  <cit> , but like some newer gene enrichment methods  <cit> , npa assessment methods integrate both types of causal signed relationships of the biology to the measurements for their output.

hyps can be rapidly constructed from an appropriate knowledgebase
hyps were constructed from the selventa knowledgebase, a database of causal biological knowledge that allows rapid creation of hyps for any biological process, entity, or causally consistent network model that is adequately connected to gene expression changes . the tnf and e2f1-direct hyps were created from this knowledgebase without any additional literature or experimental investigation. for the nf-κb-direct hyp, because the content of the knowledgebase was biologically too limited in this context, additional genes that are directly regulated by nf-κb were mined from the literature and added to the knowledgebase as causal relationships. the additional knowledge concerning the direct effects of nf-κb was necessary to ensure a broadest representation of nf-κb biology. to construct the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp, a network model was built by assembling causal relationships between relevant entities that were represented in the selventa knowledgebase. similarly, hyps and network models can integrate information from other sources besides the selventa knowledgebase, including literature articles and curated databases, as long as this information can be interpreted as signed causal relationships. the boundaries of hyps and network models are defined during their construction . for this study the model boundaries were chosen based on the biology known to be associated with the tnfα treatment of nhbe cells. in a case where the expected biology is unknown, a process of identifying biology is required to determine the most appropriate network models and hyps to score. such an exploratory perspective can be provided by evaluating the resulting hyps using the rcr approach  <cit> , which provides a statistical assessment of whether the activation of a biological entity is consistent with measured data, as previously described  <cit> .

building the ikk/nf-κb signaling network model afforded the ability to aggregate the gene expression measurements that underlie all the individual hyps of a specific nf-κb network and provide a single score for that network. however, in condensing a complex model into a single score, there are caveats to consider. gene expressions that have an ambiguous relationship to the network  must effectively be removed for scoring purposes. these ambiguities affect approximately  <dig> % of the downstream genes of the aggregated ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp, which is similar to the case of single hyps: the nf-κb-direct and the tnf hyps contains approximately  <dig> % and  <dig> % ambiguous downstream genes, respectively. their actual impact on the npa results is expected to remain limited .

additionally, resolution with regard to which individual entities of the network model are being perturbed is also diluted in the overall network score. thus, when generating an aggregated hyp for a network model, key information about the network is not explicitly available, and it is important to keep these features in mind when interpreting npa scores . however, despite these caveats, the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp produced a near-identical pattern of response as the nf-κb-direct hyp, and thus is also correlated with the measured physiological endpoint, nf-κb activation.

this finding that similar npa results were obtained using hyps featuring different characteristics highlights an essential aspect of this work: using the same network model for calculating the npa scores of the various experimental conditions to be compared  provides results that are robust against having exhaustively captured the perturbed biology in the network model used for npa scoring. this aspect is fundamental, especially given the practical impossibility of constructing networks models capturing all of the biological processes potentially perturbed in a given experiment. it is also exploited when constructing network models describing processes that are sufficiently generic, e.g., cell proliferation or cellular stress  <cit> , so that they can be meaningfully applied in a variety of experimental situations.

the robustness of the results also preserves the validity of the npa approach against the possibility of hyps and network models evolving slightly due to the constantly improving understanding of the biological processes they describe. this property was concretely tested with a simple step-back calculation consisting of randomly removing edges to the hyps and comparing the corresponding npa results to the original ones. the results demonstrated a remarkable robustness: typically, after removal of  <dig> % of their downstream genes, the four hyps used in this work returned gpi profiles that correlated extremely well with their original values shown on figure  <dig> . therefore reasonable future additions to the selventa knowledgebase are not expected to significantly impact the npa results presented in the work. as a corollary, these robustness considerations also support the choice of discarding the downstream genes expressions that have an ambiguous relationship to the hyp upstream entity. examination of additional file  <dig>  additional file  <dig>  additional file  <dig>  additional file  <dig> showed that the fraction of ambiguous downstream genes never exceeds  <dig> %, which clearly indicates that this effect does not affect the npa results.

npa scoring methods accurately assess biological activation
four different algorithms were developed to quantify the amplitude of perturbation of a hyp. each method employs a different approach to evaluate the degree of perturbation between two experimental measures for a given hyp . despite their differences, the four methods generally produced similar qualitative results, suggesting that each npa scoring method is able to effectively quantify the changes in activity of the underlying biological processes. this claim is supported by the fact that the npa scores correlated well with nf-κb nuclear translocation, a standard measure of nf-κb activity . this correlation further validates our method of constructing hyps from a database of prior knowledge.

future work will confirm the circumstances in which each method is expected to be the most appropriate. for example, the mass algorithm was developed to use absolute measurement technologies such as an absolute transcript count offered by quantitative next generation sequencing. given more appropriate measurement technology, the mass method may be more applicable in circumstances where small differential expressions in a set of highly expressed genes have a dominant effect over large differential expressions in a set of weakly expressed genes. on the other hand, the gpi algorithm, and to an even larger extent the epi algorithm, down-weight the contributions from genes with poor statistical significance, favoring small sets of strongly differentially expressed genes rather than large sets of weakly differentially expressed ones. from this point of view, the strength algorithm is unbiased since it contains no weighting factors. however, because an npa score represents a condensed view of the biology underlying a hyp, the ability to assess the amplitude of its perturbation with complementary npa methods also highlights which conclusions are robust versus which conclusions may be specific to a particular npa method. for example, the four npa methods supported the same time- and dose- dependent nf-κb activation in response to tnfα , whereas only strength and gpi suggested nf-κb activation in response to cdk inhibition .

there are some important considerations when using npa scoring methods to evaluate hyps. scores are meant to be directly compared between different treatment versus control contrasts when using the identical hyp. scores cannot be quantitatively compared between two different hyps without first verifying that the relationship between a change in the activity of the hyp’s upstream entity and the resulting change in the expression of downstream genes is conserved between the two hyps. in general, this relationship is not expected to be conserved due to differences in the dynamic range of expression of individual genes that compose each hyp. additionally, a hyp with a higher number of downstream gene expressions may be expected to represent broader biology than a smaller hyp, and thus in any given experiment, a smaller fraction of genes in the larger hyp may be perturbed, resulting in a lower score than a smaller hyp. however, additional statistical power is gained in the uncertainty and specificity statistics with increasing number of downstream gene expressions in a hyp, such that the weaker scores of larger hyps can be just as significant and meaningful as higher scores from smaller hyps.

although scores cannot be directly compared between two different hyps, the pattern of scores across a set of contrasts can be qualitatively compared. likewise, the absolute magnitude of the npa scores should not be directly compared between two amplitude scoring methods, but the pattern of scores across npa scoring methods can be qualitatively compared, keeping in mind that the scoring methods may be assessing different aspects of the contrasts.

the npa score represents an abstracted measure of the data represented in the hyp. the score captures the amplitude of the perturbation of a hyp, but does not capture which genes in the hyp most strongly contribute to the score. for example, of the  <dig> genes that contribute most to the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp score upon tnfα treatment , only one is in common with the  <dig> genes that contribute most to the ikk/nf-κb signaling hyp upon cdk inhibition . given that the nf-κb-direct hyp consists of only  <dig> genes, this suggests that there is a significant difference in the biology represented by the nf-κb-direct hyp scores in these two cases.

uncertainty and specificity of npa scores
uncertainty estimates the confidence interval of each npa statistic, and therefore also tests the nullity of the score accounting for the experimental error. the specificity statistic gives a measure of whether the score is dependent on the expression of specific genes in the hyp, or is instead dependent on a particular property  of the ensemble of gene expressions in the hyp. although this definition of specificity is useful, there are some important points to ensure that specificity is interpreted appropriately. first, a weak specificity does not mean that the score fails to accurately characterize the amplitude of the process described by the hyp. rather, it means that many other comparable hyps would obtain a similar score. for example, a very weak score  for a transcriptomic hyp is likely to have a weak specificity because the majority of the genes on a microarray are unchanged under most conditions. thus, any random assortment of genes in a hyp might produce a similarly low score. weak specificity for low scores could therefore be an indication that the genes in the hyp are not sufficiently perturbed. alternatively, a high score with a weak specificity does not indicate that the process measured by the hyp is not perturbed. rather, it indicates that comparable gene expressions are perturbed to a similar extent, suggesting that other processes with comparable hyps are likewise perturbed, and thus the score cannot be attributed with high probability to the process represented in the hyp. for example, the fact that the pattern of strength scores for the tnf hyp in the cdk inhibitor experiment is similar to the pattern of strength scores for the e2f1-direct hyp suggests that the tnf hyp may contain some genes that are cell cycle controlled . however, this number of genes is not sufficient to distinguish this score from the “background” of scores for comparable hyps, as only one of the fifteen tnf hyp strength scores met the specificity criterion. in fact,  <dig> genes are common to the tnf hyp and the e2f1-direct hyp, which constitutes more than a third of the e2f1-direct hyp, but only one fortieth of the tnf hyp. methods such as network component analysis  <cit>  could possibly be adapted to resolve overlaps between hyps by assigning shared gene expressions to the most statistically likely hyp, potentially increasing the precision of each hyp and modulating score specificity appropriately.

together, the uncertainty and specificity statistics enable the identification of non-specific and non-significant scores in hyps when scored against unrelated perturbations. these statistics demonstrate that tnfα treatment of nhbe cells only has a significant effect on cell cycle progression when the dose is above  <dig>  ng/ml, and that this effect takes two-to-four hours to appear. also, these statistics support the conclusion that some nf-κb-regulated genes are upregulated at  <dig> and  <dig> hours after cdk-inhibition in hct <dig> cells, but likely not at  <dig> hours or earlier.

potential applications beyond the comparative assessment of biological impact
the npa approach developed in this work aims at quantifying the treatment-induced perturbations of the biological processes described by causal network models. it enables the comparative assessment of the biological impact from high-throughput data in response to given stimuli. however the npa approach could be also used in more exploratory perspectives. for instance, by applying npa scoring to each hyp in a causal network model, rather than constructing and scoring a single aggregated hyp for the model , differences in activation across a model could be investigated. scoring individual hyps within a model instead of the larger aggregated model hyp presents a tradeoff of increased granularity of information at the expense of statistical robustness, due to the smaller sizes of the hyps being scored. another possibility would be to use the npa scores and their companion statistics to identify which processes are potentially activated in response to a given perturbation, and thus help guide the construction of a hyp or of a causal network model that capture the relevant perturbed biology.

finally, npa scores could be used as a supplementary source of information in studying different types of mathematical models of regulatory networks. the fact that npa scores provide quantitative measurements for the response of entities that are not explicitly measured or measureable can be exploited in the construction, calibration, or evaluation phases of such models. for instance, in the case of tnfα-treated nhbe cells considered in this study, the npa scores provide direct quantitative measurements of the inflammatory response of the system, a quantity that would be difficult to access in the absence of the nf-κb nuclear translocation measurements performed in this work.

CONCLUSIONS
npa is an integrated approach that combines high-throughput experimental data and a knowledge-driven hyp, which provides measurable quantities causally affected by a targeted biological process, to quantify the activity changes of that process relative to a control  state of the system. the utility of the npa method lies in the synergy of on-demand hyp generation from an extensive causal knowledgebase with a continuous measure of its activity change. four npa scoring methods with complementary strengths performed similarly in this study, but individually have the potential to wield distinct advantages for specific circumstances. additionally, qualifying npa statistics enabled effective use of these scoring metrics and can be applied to similar methods developed elsewhere. when applied to tnfα- and cdk inhibitor-treated cell microarray data, npa scores for nf-κb and cell cycle networks correlated with expected dose response relationships and specific measured pathway outputs. npa scoring also suggested possible cross-talk between nf-κb activation and the cell cycle that could be investigated experimentally. with a broad spectrum of biology available to score within the selventa knowledgebase, npa metrics and statistics can be used to assess amplitude of perturbation on many orders, from a single molecule to that of a complex, higher-order causal network model representing complex biological processes. this approach enables a quantitative, systems-wide understanding of the biological mechanisms leading to diseases. this is the first step towards the development of computational tools designed to comparatively measure any perturbation, including exposure to toxic substances, the effects of drug treatment, or patient stratification by individual biology.

