BACKGROUND
the comparative analysis of expression microarray studies can refine conclusions and interpretations from individual studies and can be used to identify previously uncharacterized parallels between studies  <cit> . however, such analyses are hampered by the large influences of biological variation between specimens , and technical differences between the studies  <cit>  on the identified differentially expressed genes. the varying technical factors include: differences in experimental procedures for the collection of the biological material and for rna amplification and labeling  <cit> , differences in sampling times and the dna microarray platform used , and the applied statistical analysis  <cit> .

to overcome this hurdle, it has been suggested that studies should be compared at the level of perturbed biological processes  <cit> . this could be more robust as different genes may hint at the same process. to identify perturbed biological processes, methodologies have been developed in recent years by analysis of the correlated behaviour of groups of genes with a similar biological function  <cit> . a limitation when using these approaches is that to identify which genes share a biological function, we are currently largely dependent on the ontology-based annotation of genes in manually curated databases. due to the labor intensive manual curation effort, these databases are necessarily highly focused and notoriously incomplete . the best known public databases are the gene ontology  annotation project  <cit>  for biological process, molecular function and cellular localization, and kegg  <cit>  for metabolic pathways.

in the present study we introduce an approach to compare expression profiling studies based on perturbed biological processes. instead of using manually curated gene annotation databases we base our approach on gene associations automatically derived from literature. to identify gene associations, concept profiles are generated for all genes  <cit> . a concept profile is a weighted list of biological concepts that characterizes the set of documents associated to a gene. subsequently concept profiles are compared to identify gene associations: pairs of genes strongly associated to the same biological concepts. finally, dna microarray datasets are compared based on the observed number of gene associations between the sets of differentially expressed genes. we call our approach lama .

we evaluate our methodology on a compendium of  <dig> dna microarray studies published in the field of muscle development and disease, and compare it to analyses based on gene overlap and the classical group overrepresentation analysis. the compendium contains a very diverse set of datasets: patient versus control studies for different myopathies; studies in animal disease models and studies in cultured muscle cells. the studies were performed on  <dig> different microarray chip types, and in three different organisms: human, mouse and rat. the considerable influence of the statistical analysis on the identified differentially expressed genes  <cit> , indicates that, ideally, a standardized statistical analysis should precede any comparison between datasets. unfortunately, raw data is required for such an analysis and they are often unavailable . therefore, we relied on the reported lists of differentially expressed genes, which should be useful for initial comparisons of microarray studies  <cit>  and, at least, were judged by the authors to be biologically relevant. in our evaluation, we first take a directed approach: we measured to which extent the approaches could reproduce a manual clustering of a selection of datasets. second, we perform an exploratory clustering of all datasets, and characterize and interpret the identified clusters.

RESULTS
study selection and data retrieval
the  <dig> microarray datasets in the compendium are represented and annotated  and the data underlying the analyses is included . the compendium was extracted from  <dig> publications and  <dig> in-house studies. the datasets include studies on myoblast differentiation as an in vitro model for muscle development and regeneration, studies on gene expression differences between different types of skeletal muscles, skeletal muscle disease , the effect of exercise and ageing and the treatment with drugs, growth factors or lipid infusion. the compendium was limited to studies in human , mouse , and rat , but included one study in monkey performed with a human dna microarray platform. to allow for a direct comparison of datasets from different organisms, homologous genes were mapped to each other according to the ncbi's homologene database  <cit> .

frequency of differential expression per gene
after mapping of species-specific entrez gene ids to homologene,  <dig> unique genes were identified as differentially expressed in at least one microarray study. figure  <dig> displays the distribution of the number of microarray studies in which a gene was found differentially expressed. the majority of genes  was found differentially expressed in only a single study. the distribution implies that the overlap between studies is limited. indeed, 84% of the genes occur in  <dig> or less studies, but they represent 54% of the total number of occurrences. spp <dig> coding for osteopontin was the most frequently identified gene; it was found in  <dig> different studies described in  <dig> different papers coming from  <dig> different laboratories. spp <dig> was upregulated in animal models for muscular dystrophy and in human polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and can be regarded as an early marker for muscle inflammation  <cit> . conversely, it was found downregulated in presymptomatic mdx mice and during atrophy. ankrd <dig> and postn were found in  <dig> different studies. judged from the studies in which ankrd <dig> is differentially expressed, ankrd <dig> could be the most robust marker for muscular dystrophy with ongoing regeneration. postn  was differentially expressed in many of the studies in which spp <dig> was found. a similar co-regulation was found in the heart and vasculature  <cit> , and both factors are involved in tissue remodelling  <cit> .

pair-wise analysis of similarity between dna microarray datasets
first, we compared the dna microarray studies to each other based on gene identity. for every study, the genes interrogated by the dna microarray platform were separated into three categories: upregulated, downregulated and not up- or downregulated. with the kappa statistic  <cit>  we measured the chance-corrected level of agreement in the three categories between two studies. by performing a kappa statistic based test  <cit>  we found that of the  <dig> possible dataset pairs only  <dig>  have an above chance level of agreement . this is in line with our conclusion of limited overlap in the previous section. second, our lama method found significant associations  between  <dig>  pairs of studies, which indicates that considerably more similarities between datasets are identified with our text-derived gene associations than based on gene list overlap.

third, we compared datasets based on over-represented go codes. we tested over-representation of biological processes in the up and down lists of our datasets separately with a cutoff of p <  <dig>  . subsequently, we evaluated the similarity between datasets with the kappa measure: only 18% of the dataset pairs had a significant overlap , whereas 34% of scores was very low . the used go over-representation p-value cutoff is overly permissive, as with the high number of tests, we should correct for multiple testing. but when we corrected for multiple testing , we found not any over-represented go code for  <dig> of the  <dig> studies. with this cut-off, 85% of the kappa scores was  <dig> or lower and only  <dig> dataset pairs  had a significant association at the  <dig>  significance level. the poor overlap between datasets is partly caused by the fact that it is less likely to identify an over-represented go code if the gene list is small.

reproduction of a manual clustering
to evaluate the performance of the methods, we attempted to manually group the studies in the compendium based on similarities in the studied biological phenomena, before the start of the development of any new methodologies, we recognized  <dig> groups for a subset of  <dig> studies: dystrophin-deficiency , dysferlin-deficiency , myositis, regeneration and differentiation, ageing, atrophy, and extraocular muscle -specific expression profiles . a classification experiment was performed to evaluate to which extent the kappa and lama association scores could reproduce  <dig> manually identified clusters, using the area under the roc curve  statistic. results are shown in figure  <dig>  the performance varies from near perfect scores for the ageing group to near random classification performance for the "regeneration and differentiation" and atrophy groups. indeed, the latter groups studied more diverse conditions. the lama method performs better than the kappa for the dysferlinopathy, regeneration and ageing subgroups, though only for the dysferlinopathy group a statistically significant improvement is observed . conversely, the kappa performed better for the myositis and the extraocular subgroups, but these differences are not statistically significant. both methods performed similarly for the dystrophinopathy group.

the dysferlinopathy group has much higher classification rates with lama than in the kappa analysis. the studies in this group were more heterogeneous than the other groups in several aspects: it contained human and mouse studies, different mouse strains and differently aged mice, and four different microarray platforms were used in the six studies contained in this group. the human study that compared limb-girdle muscular dystrophy  type 2b patients to controls  was much better classified to the dysferlinopathy group with the lama based approach than with the kappa based approach . datasets  <dig>  and 75a  have no differentially expressed genes in common. nevertheless, the lama score is the lowest possible score given the number of monte carlo simulations, which indicates there is a highly significant over-representation of gene associations. we identified "macrophage" as the most important shared concept between dysferlin-deficiency in humans and mice. indeed, many of the identified associations are between genes known to be expressed in macrophages and macrophage infiltration is an important feature in both the lgmd patients pathology and the mouse model  <cit> .

the slightly worse performance of the lama method in the classification of the myositis studies was due to strong associations with the group of dystrophinopathy studies. the two groups were found connected through concepts pertaining to inflammatory processes. this is reflective of the pronounced inflammatory component in both dystrophinopathies  <cit>  and myositis patients. for the extraocular group the lower performance for lama is explained by the comparatively poor scores between datasets 4a and both 14a and b, while datasets 4b, 14a and 14b had high pairwise scores. dataset 4a only contains  <dig> genes up-regulated genes, which limits the power for the lama analysis. the list shared only  <dig> genes with 14a and b, but still the kappa score was comparatively high due to the limited overlap overall. classification for the go-based over-representation analysis  showed poor results: performance was considerably worse than based on gene list overlap for  <dig> of the  <dig> groups, a similar score was obtained for the dysferlinopathy group and a slightly better score for the ageing group. these results and a view on the shared go codes indicated the used test condition was too lenient and spurious go codes were assigned. based on these results and the poor results presented in the previous section, we do not discuss the clustering based on the method here, but include the classification results and the clustering as supplementary material .

classification of new studies
to demonstrate the utility of our approach for the interpretation of gene lists from new experiments, we compared to our manual grouping the gene lists from a recent paper on dy/dy mice  <cit> . these mice have a muscular dystrophy as a consequence of a genetic defect in alpha- <dig> laminin. our lama-approach classifies this study with high confidence in the dystrophinopathy group . this is correct given the pathology of these mice and the two genetic deficiencies affecting the same macromolecular protein complex. the shared biological concepts between this dataset and a dataset from mdx mice , were the infiltration of macrophages and differential expression of collagens, metalloproteinases, cathepsins, and hla-antigens.

dataset clustering based on kappa statistic
to get an overall view on the identified connections between studies, a hierarchical clustering of the microarray studies was performed using the kappa value as a similarity score . one big cluster  and several smaller clusters were identified. cluster  <dig> contains comparisons of the gene expression profiles between dystrophic subjects and healthy controls , dysferlin-deficient sjl mice , patients with duchenne muscular dystrophy ), as well as studies in human myositis patients . similar to our note on the lama classification in the previous section, muscular dystrophy and myositis expression profiles have considerable overlap. some muscular dystrophy studies unexpectedly fall outside cluster  <dig> and have only limited overlap to the datasets in cluster  <dig> . we believe this to be at least partly attributable to technical factors. the color bars on the side of figure  <dig> illustrate that studies tend to cluster on microarray platform or laboratory. for example, the similar studies in the mdx mouse by porter et al.  and by haslett et al.  do not cluster in a way that makes sense biologically, that is by age and muscle type-dependent severity of the disease. instead they cluster by laboratory .

apart from the large dystrophy/myositis cluster of studies, there is only very limited overlap between the gene lists from the studies, as expected based on the pair-wise analysis presented above. cluster  <dig> contains two studies investigating the spared eom muscle in dystrophin-deficient mdx mice and the expression profiles of the diaphragm and hind limb muscles of presymptomatic mdx mice. cluster  <dig> contains  <dig> highly overlapping studies  from the same paper on developmental changes in the eom muscle. again, clusters  <dig> and  <dig> contain only studies done by the same group on the same platform.

dataset clustering based on lama
the lama-based hierarchical clustering revealed more clusters and significant associations than the kappa-based clustering . the side bars show that the lama-based clustering is less governed by technical factors like microarray platform and laboratory, and is better able to connect studies investigating the same biological phenomenon in different species or biological systems . cluster  <dig> shows large overlap with cluster  <dig> in the kappa-based clustering, but contains many more studies. this cluster now contains all the studies on affected muscles in symptomatic mdx mice, all mouse models for lgmd, and all studies in human muscular dystrophy, including dmd, lgmd, and facioscapulohumeral dystrophy , and myositis patients. the myositis patient profiles are closely associated with mdx mice of  <dig> days  . we analysed the gene associations between dataset 24a  and dataset 42c and found that the biological concept that contributes most to the associations is "chemokines". indeed, at the analyzed age of  <dig> days the secretion of chemokines in the muscles of the mdx mice is maximal  <cit> .

concepts are shown separately for the down and up regulated gene lists. the column "characteristic" gives a description of the studied phenomena in the cluster.

cluster  <dig> was not found by the kappa-based clustering. analysis of the underlying concept associations revealed similarities between the molecular processes during induced atrophy in cultured myoblasts  and in vivo models for muscular atrophy, i.e. during hind limb suspension or in space-flown rats . amongst others, there is an interesting set of non-overlapping members of the semaphorin family shared between atrophy studies. semaphorins are presumably involved in cell-cell contacts in neuronal cells  <cit>   but also in fusing myoblasts  <cit> . for cluster  <dig> we observe an increase in metabolic activity  and a downregulation of extracellular matrix proteins: these processes seem to be revelant to age-related changes in eom muscle , and diverse myopathies mitochondrial encephelo myopathy , nemaline myopathy , and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy . cluster  <dig> contains all the ageing and sarcopenia studies. interestingly, also a cell model for over-expression of the polyadenylation factor pabpn <dig>  is found in this cluster. in this case, the differences in rna metabolism induced in the cell model aid the interpretation of the molecular phenotype observed in the ageing studies. differences in rna processing and splicing during ageing were also noted by the authors of the ageing studies  <cit> .

discussion
the overlap between the gene lists of the microarray datasets in our compendium was limited, even though the studied phenomena were closely related. in addition, studies performed in the same laboratory or on the same microarray platform were more likely to demonstrate overlap than studies where more heterogeneous technologies and analysis approaches were used. the comparative analysis of the datasets through literature-derived gene associations resulted in the finding of many biologically relevant associations, and was more biology- than technology-driven. both the analysis of the hierarchical clusterings and the reproduction of the manual clustering revealed that the lama method identified useful associations between datasets that were not retrieved by looking at gene overlap. our method found these associations through correctly retrieved shared biological processes between the datasets.

standard exploratory analysis based on an over-representation analysis of go categories was not very powerful for our compendium, as shown by the lack of overlap between studies and the poor classification results. in general, the hypergeometric test will not often identify over-represented go categories when short gene lists are analyzed. yet, our association-based method was still able to find useful associations between datasets, even in cases where not a single shared over-represented go code was found. also, the associations we use cover a much broader range than go. indeed, not all of the concepts in table  <dig> are covered by the go thesaurus . in addition, even if an appropriate go term exists, it may not have been assigned any genes yet .

our broad network of associations increases our sensitivity for identifying interesting associations between datasets. we chose to use associations derived from literature to optimize for serendipity, but the network of associations could be taken from any source, including go. an important feature of this approach is that by modulating the associations that are taken up in the network, the specificity and sensitivity of the found associations between datasets can be controlled.

tomlins et al.  <cit>  performed an over-representation analysis on gene lists representing the different stages of prostate cancer and used identified over-represented gene groups to compare the disease stages. the basis for their analysis was a database of  <dig> groups of genes that share a relevant characteristic, or "molecular concept". they do not report low recall or lack of overlap of over-represented "molecular concepts". the likely explanation is that their meticulous sample preparation and highly standardized data generation and analysis avoided lack of overlap at the gene level and short gene lists. clearly access to the raw data is commendable for exploratory studies, and standardized data generation is extremely useful given the high levels of variance observed with microarray experiments. it should be noted though that, besides the limited availability of raw data, the statistical models for the analysis of the raw data are hard to standardize. the choice for a statistical model depends on the design of the study, e.g. time course experiments or group comparisons, and technical factors, such as whether a one or two color microarray is used. therefore perhaps the strongest point of our approach is that even with a wide range of study designs and statistical evaluations, across various platforms and species, a useful and insightful exploratory study was possible.

the issue of comparability between studies has been addressed for meta-analyses with a different objective than ours; the aggregation of information obtained from different dna microarray studies  <cit> . it has been suggested that dna microarray datasets could well be compared by the use of rankings of genes based on the level of significance of differential expression  <cit> . indeed, also gsea, a current popular method to test whether a set of genes is associated with the experimental variable is based on gene rankings  <cit> . it would be an interesting extension of the current work to use rankings in the dataset comparisons. a rank-based approach could be adapted to incorporate our text-based associations between genes. also in this case, information on the statistical ranks is, however, frequently unavailable.

a limitation of the current lama analysis is that it relies on simulations to derive a measure to compare datasets. simulations are computationally intensive, and have a resolution proportional to and limited by the number of performed iterations. the results presented here can be considered a proof of the utility of our approach, and a logical next step is to derive a model-based approximation as an alternative to our simulation-based measure. this would also avoid the necessity for the setting of a threshold on the gene association score. the currently applied threshold of 1% appears to be optimal . when lowering the threshold, results will be more similar to the kappa method, as identity relations will start to dominate, whereas raising the threshold introduces noise and spurious connections.

CONCLUSIONS
the compendium of studies showed limited overlap on gene ids, and a bias towards higher overlap between studies with technical similarities. the over-representation analysis based on go categories was not very helpful in comparing studies, due to limited sensitivity and the incompleteness of the manually curated gene annotations. compared to these approaches lama provided more biology- than technology-driven results and identified more biologically relevant associations between datasets. as the shared biological processes between studies could also be easily recognized, we believe lama is a powerful approach for the comparative meta-analysis of dna microarray datasets.

