BACKGROUND
trees are sessile organisms with long lifespans that regularly experience climatic fluctuations in their native environment. therefore, survival and reproduction is dependent upon an array of protective mechanisms that involve the activation of a wide range of transcriptional factors, and their products are considered to play a central role in response to extreme physiological conditions. there is evidence that members of the heat shock transcriptional factor  family are important regulators in sensing and signaling of different environmental stresses
 <cit> . similarly to many other transcription factors, the hsfs have a modular structure containing signature domains structurally and functionally conserved throughout the eukaryotic kingdom. a common core structure in the hsfs is composed of an n-terminal dna binding domain , characterized by a central helix-turn-helix motif that specifically binds to the heat shock elements  in the target promoters, and an adjacent bipartite oligomerization domain  composed of hydrophobic heptad repeats
 <cit> . hsf trimerization via the formation of a triple stranded alpha-helical coiled-coil is a prerequisite for high affinity dna binding and, subsequently, for transcriptional activity. other hsf functional modules include clusters of basic amino acids essential for nuclear import , leucine-rich export sequences important for nuclear export , and a less conserved c-terminal activator domain  rich in aromatic, hydrophobic and acidic amino acids, the so-called aha motifs
 <cit> .

in contrast to saccharomyces cerevisiae, caenorhabditis elegans, and drosophila melanogaster, that each possesses only a single hsf gene, plant genomes contain large numbers of hsf genes, up to 52
 <cit> . based on structural characteristics and phylogenetic comparisons, plant hsfs are grouped into classes a, b and c
 <cit> . all class a and c hsfs have an extended hr-a/b region due to the insertion of  <dig>  or seven  amino acid residues between a and b parts of the hr-a/b region. on the contrary, in class b hsfs, the hr-a/b region does not contain insertions. in addition, sequence comparisons and structural analyses indicate that the combination of a aha motif with an adjacent nuclear export signal nes represents a peculiar signature domain for many plant class a hsfs
 <cit> .

after the release of the whole genomic sequences of several plant organisms, including rice , maize , poplar , medicago , tomato , the hsfs family was analyzed extensively, both to place each member in an organized nomenclature system and to provide maps of their expression
 <cit> .

recently, the full genome sequence of the domesticated apple  has been published
 <cit> . this provides a useful genomic tool to study this economically important fruit crop. as transcriptional factors, hsfs are involved in different aspects of plant life including tolerance to biotic/abiotic stresses and developmental processes
 <cit> . therefore, this gene family represents an important group of transcriptional factors to investigate and to characterize. genome scale analyses of the transcriptional response during development and to environmental stimuli require a precise and complete annotation of genes in order to provide reliable and exhaustive data. therefore, the aim of this study was to annotate the full length hsf genes in apple, and to analyze their expression profiles by quantitative real time pcr  in different organs/tissues from plants grown in the field and exposed to natural environmental conditions. the results of this work provide a foundation to better understand the functional structure and genomic organization of the hsf gene family in apple, and will be undoubtedly useful in future gene cloning and functional studies.

RESULTS
identification, classification and duplication of hsf genes in the malus domestica genome
cds sequences corresponding to putative hsf genes from malus domestica  were searched in the apple genome v <dig> 
 <cit> . as a result,  <dig> genes encoding for putative mdhsfs proteins were identified. all candidate mdhsf proteins were surveyed, and incomplete sequences for the dbd domain and for the remaining functional domains were removed. this resulted in the selection of twenty five complete sequences. these mdhsf genes were distributed on  <dig> of the  <dig> apple chromosomes with the largest number, comprised of six hsf genes, detected on chromosome  <dig> . according to the multiple sequence alignment of the dbd and hr-a/b region,  <dig> genes were determined to be class a, seven genes were identified as class b and two were classified as class c.

mw: molecular weight; pi: isoelectric point.

gene duplication events have been indicated as an important mechanism in the evolution of plant genomes
 <cit> . therefore, duplications of mdhsfs were also analyzed. as shown in figure
 <dig>  a total of  <dig> duplicated gene pairs of mdhsfs were identified, including  <dig> segmental duplication events between chromosomes  as well as one tandem duplication event within the same chromosome, e.g. mdhsfa3c and mdhsfa3b. mdhsfa3c was the only hsf involved in both duplication events, as it was duplicated with mdhsfa3b in tandem on chromosome  <dig> and also segmentally duplicated with mdhsfa3a on chromosome  <dig> 

analysis of conserved domains in the apple hsf proteins
prediction of the typical signature domains present in the mdhsfs protein sequences was carried out by comparing the identified apple hsfs to those of homologous, well characterized proteins of model plants such as tomato or arabidopsis
 <cit> . table
 <dig> lists five conserved motifs that were identified by sequence alignment, and their positions in the protein sequences. all the mdhsfs showed the presence of the highly conserved dbd domain in the n-terminal region, consisting of a three-helical bundle  and a four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet. the length of the dbd motif was quite variable with the smaller size observed for mdhsfb1b. the presence of the coiled-coil structure characteristic of leucine-zipper type protein interaction domains, which is a property of the hr-a/b region, was instead predicted in all mdhsfs proteins by using marcoil tool. furthermore, the majority of the mdhsfs showed the presence of nes and nls domains which were described to be essential for shuttling hsfs between nucleus and cytoplasm
 <cit> . additional sequence comparison allowed the identification of aha motifs in the center of the c-terminal activation domains, as it is expected in the a-type hsfs. by contrast, these domains were not identified in the b and c-type mdhsfs.

number in brackets indicates the position of the first amino acid present in the putative nuclear localization signal , nuclear export signal  and activator  motifs in the c-terminal domains. nd, no motifs detectable by sequence similarity searches.

a second approach was used to identify and to verify domain prediction in the mdhsf proteins, by using the meme motif search tool. thirty corresponding consensus motifs were detected . the majority of mdhsfs displayed the presence of the motifs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> which correspond to highly conserved regions including the dbd and hr-a/b region domains. in addition, the inspection of motif distribution revealed that some of them were only present in specific classes of the mdhsf family. for example, motif  <dig> was representative of a-type hsf members such as mdhsfa1a-a1d, mdhsfa4a, mdhsfa8a, and it contained the signature domains corresponding to nes sequence. similarly, motif  <dig> containing the aha sequence was detected in the c-terminal parts of many mdhsf proteins, belonging to the a class. furthermore, eight a-type hsfs members, namely mdhsfa1a-a1d, mdhsfa2a-b, mdhsfa5a-b were characterized by the presence of motif  <dig> which contained the nls domains. interestingly, all b hsfs members exhibited motif  <dig>  while mdhsfc1a and mdhsfc1b contained the motif  <dig> .

numbers in the first column indicate the motifs represented in the figure
 <dig> 

phylogenetic analysis of apple hsf proteins
to investigate the evolution of hsfs an unrooted phylogenetic tree was generated by using the  <dig> malus domestica hsfs,  <dig> populus trichocarpa hsfs  and  <dig> arabidopsis thaliana hsfs . populus and arabidopsis were chosen because their full sequence genome has been released, and hsf members have been well characterized
 <cit> . moreover, the former is a tree. figure
 <dig> shows the result of this analysis. hsfs of malus domestica, arabidopsis thaliana and populus trichocarpa were clearly grouped into three different clades corresponding to the main hsf classes a, b and c. within the a-type clade, nine distinct sub-clades were resolved, seven of which  comprised the apple hsf sequences. the c-type hsfs from the three plant species also constituted one distinct clade which appeared more closely related to the hsf a-group. correspondingly, the b-type hsfs from the three plant species grouped in a separate clade. two of the five sub-clades, b <dig> and b <dig>  were paraphyletic. as expected, the duplicated hsfs of malus domestica clustered all together on the phylogenetic tree.

in silico expression analyses of mdhsf genes
tissue specific expression of mdhsfs was investigated by counting the number of ests per tissue from est libraries
 <cit> . this resulted in the assignment of mdhsfs to nine groups on the basis of the tissue and organ types in which mdhsfs were present .

+: expressed; blank: not expressed.

of the group a <dig>  mdhsfa1a and mdhsfa1d, were the most represented as their expression was detected in leaf, flower, fruit, shoot and phloem. similarly, mdhsfb1a and mdhsfb1b of b class were expressed in several apple tissues. interestingly, mdhsfa9b was the only hsf specific for seed, whereas mdhsfa9a was found in leaf. furthermore, expression restricted to only a single tissue type was observed also for other members of the mdhsf family; all a3-type mdhsfs were expressed in shoot and both members of the class c were found in root. in addition, the analysis of digital data showed that duplicated genes located on different chromosomes had identical expression patterns .

expression analysis of mdhsf genes in apple organs under natural environmental conditions
hsf genes are differentially expressed during flower and fruit development and are induced by abiotic environmental factors
 <cit> . to investigate if mdhsfs are also involved in these processes, a comprehensive analysis of their expression was performed in flowers and fruits from field-grown trees. flowers were harvested at the stages of tight cluster, full pink and anthesis  during spring at average temperatures of 23°c/7°c , while the developing fruits were chosen at the stage of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> mm in diameter  and harvest at average temperatures of 23°c/14°c . quantitative real-time pcr was used as the approach to monitor gene expression changes, and mdhsf transcript abundance in developing flowers/fruits was compared to that of vegetative leaf tissue . the transcriptional patterns could be analyzed only for  <dig> mdhsf genes, since it was not possible to design specific primers discriminating mdhsfa5a-b, mdhsfa8a-b, mdhsfb3a-b, mdhsfb4a-b and mdhsfc1a-b because of high sequence similarity with the corresponding isoform. figure
 <dig> shows the results of this analysis. members of a <dig> subgroups such as mdhsfa1a-d exhibited transcript accumulation in all tissues analyzed, although a higher induction was observed in flowers especially at anthesis. similar to the a1-subgroup, higher messenger rna levels at anthesis were also observed for other members of a class such as mdhsfa2a-b, mdhsfa3b-c, mdhsfa5a-b and mdhsfa9a. interestingly, mdhsfa9b was approximately 4-fold more strongly induced in the youngest flowers than at the later stages. a broad variability of expression patterns in flowers and fruits was instead observed for the mdhsf members belonging to the b class. mdhsfb1a displayed a similar trend as a large part of the a members with higher expression at anthesis. on the contrary, its duplicated gene mdhsfb1b did not show any remarkable transcript changes between the different flower and fruit stages. mdhsfb2a showed strong up-regulation in  <dig> mm fruit where it was 30-fold higher than in leaf tissue. the b4-type gene mdhsfb4a-b exhibited a lower expression in flower/fruit than in leaf. low transcript abundances in fruit as compared to flower or leaf were also observed for mdhsfc1a-b.

to further characterize the expression of hsf family genes in apple, the quantitative real-time pcr analysis was extended to leaf samples harvested from field-grown trees exposed to naturally increased temperatures. leaf samples were taken during the summer period, at two different temperature ranges: at 26°c/12°c  on 30th july  <dig>  which were used as reference, and at high temperature average of 32°c/17°c  on the 21st august  <dig> .

the transcriptional analyses revealed that in leaf most of the mdhsfs genes were responsive to the increased temperatures . twelve of these responsive genes showed transcript accumulation significantly higher than the reference sample, while only mdhsfa9b and mdhsfb4a-b were strongly down-regulated in response to the increased temperatures. a 4-fold or higher increase of expression levels in response to high temperatures was observed for mdhsfa2a-b, mdhsfa3b-c, mdhsfb1a, mdhsfb2a, mdhsfb3a-b and mdhsfc1a-b, and only slightly higher in the stressed leaves than in the reference onces for mdhsfa4a, mdhsfa5a-b and mdhsfa8a-b. furthermore, all subgroup a <dig> members such as mdhsfa1a-d did not show any significant transcriptional changes in response to the high temperatures compared to the reference conditions.

discussion
in plants, members of the hsf family have been described as key regulators in molecular and cellular responses to stress conditions
 <cit> . furthermore, data from tomato and arabidopsis have shown that the hsfs are important components involved in developmental signalling
 <cit> . both size and composition of the hsf family have been analyzed and characterized in different plant species
 <cit> . the present study investigates for the first time this gene family in the economically relevant domesticated apple and shows that its genome contains  <dig> full length hsf genes. this number is similar to that of populus trichocarpa for which  <dig> loci encoding hsf proteins were found
 <cit> . velasco et al.  <cit>  have shown that genome wide duplications had occurred in apple causing the expansion of several gene classes. indeed, it was found that the enlargement of the mdhsf family is in particular originated from segmental duplications between different chromosomes. this situation is similar in maize and in populus, in which segmental hsf gene duplications were more prevalent than those of tandem duplications
 <cit> . gene duplications have an important role not only in the genomic rearrangement and expansion but also in diversification of gene function. in particular, genes encoding for nucleic acid binding proteins, among which transcription factors, originated mostly by segmental duplication. in contrast, membrane proteins and proteins involved in the stress response are encoded by genes mainly duplicated in tandem
 <cit> . therefore, the prevalence of segmental duplication events in mdhsf expansion may be associated to the fact that these genes act as transcriptional regulators.

malus, arabidopsis and populus belong to the rosid lineage and they are grouped in two distinct clades, namely fabids  and malvids 
 <cit> . it was observed in the present study that the majority of the mdhsfs had a closer phylogenetic relationship to the pthsfs than to the athsfs. this may be attributable to the fact that malus and populus belong to the same fabids clade, and as they are both trees may have adapted to prolonged and repeated environmental constraints, unlike arabidopsis.

functional diversification of multifamily duplicated genes has been observed in trees. for example, the family of the glutathione s-transferase in populus has a clear divergence in expression patterns in response to different stress treatments
 <cit> . therefore the presence of many duplicated hsf genes in the apple genome may be related to the fact that a sub-functionalization has taken place especially to cope with prolonged and specific stress conditions.

mdhsf genes were found to be expressed in several apple tissues. in particular, members belonging to the a <dig> and b <dig> subclasses, such as mdhsfa1a, mdhsfa1d, mdhsfb1a, mdhsfb1b, were constitutively expressed in different tissues. a similar situation was found in other plants like arabidopsis where a1-type hsfs were involved in house-keeping processes under normal conditions, being ready for the fast activation of other hsfs genes following stress treatment
 <cit> . furthermore, expression data from flower and fruit tissues indicated that some duplicated gene pairs, e.g. mdhsfa9a and mdhsfa9b, exhibited differences in their expression levels. this suggests that they may be subjected to a different regulation in apple tissue
 <cit> .

in contrast, the expression of mdhsfa2a and mdhsfa2b was mainly detected in full bloom flowers. athsfa <dig> and lehsfa2a  were found expressed in seed and developing pollen grains
 <cit> . it was shown that the presence of these hsfs during plant development is important for heat shock protein activation. this suggests that mdhsfa2a and mdhsfa2b may be important during pollination and fertilization, which occurs at anthesis.

effects of heat stress  on hsf gene expression has been examined in several plant species, but no data are available about hsf expression in trees exposed to naturally increased temperatures. under laboratory settings, it was shown that athsfa1a and athsfa1b regulate the early response to hs in arabidopsis
 <cit> . athsfa <dig> is rapidly induced by hs, and it is involved in enhancing and maintaining of hs-response when plants are exposed to prolonged or repeated cycles of hs
 <cit> . similarly to athsfa <dig>  athsfa <dig> is involved in thermo-tolerance mechanisms
 <cit> . the a1-type mdhsfs were expressed at the same level also in leaves from plants growing in field and exposed to different temperature conditions. mdhsfa2ab, mdhsfa3bc were instead strongly induced. this may suggest that these types of mdhsfs could be involved in maintaining the stress response when apple trees are exposed to prolonged periods of high temperature conditions.

in contrast to class a hsfs, genes assigned to the b and c classes have so far not been fully characterized. members of the b class were shown to act mainly as repressors of the expression of hs inducible genes
 <cit> . some of them form a complex with hsf a-types to maintain housekeeping gene expression during hs regimes
 <cit> . therefore, the strong transcriptional activation in apple may indicate that some of them may have a role in the response to the high temperatures also in this species. for the majority of mdhsfs, increased messenger rna levels were observed under naturally increased temperatures. however, mdhsfa9b and mdhsfb4a-b were the only hsf genes showing low transcript abundance. although proteomic data are not available for all mdhsfs genes, their activation or repression may suggest that these transcripts could have a high hierarchy of molecular events induced by the high temperatures.

CONCLUSIONS
the complexity of the hsf family has been object of many investigations in different plant species. here,  <dig> full length hsfs genes were identified in the apple genome. based on structural characteristics of the proteins and on the comparison with homologues from other species, the  <dig> mdhsfs were grouped in three different classes. segmental and tandem duplications were examined and contributed to the expansion of the hsf family in the apple genome. the expression profiles in flowers/fruits at different developmental stages as well as in leaves exposed to naturally increased temperature indicated that mdhsfs may play a role in different aspects of apple growth/development.

malus domestica represents an economically important woody plant whose genome has been fully sequenced and whose commercial value is due to fruit production in the field. therefore, understanding the role of protective genes as the hsfs during development and under stress conditions is important. the results of this research will be undoubtedly useful for future gene cloning and functional studies and, in turn, for producing apple cultivars with improved genetic traits.

