BACKGROUND
following activation of gq protein-coupled receptors in response to external stimuli, phospholipase c  yields a pair of second messengers, diacylglycerol  and inositol  <dig> ,5-trisphosphate  <cit> . in this system, diacylglycerol kinase  phosphorylates dg to produce another second messenger, phosphatidic acid . one of the best known functional roles of dgk is in the regulation of protein kinase c , for which dg acts as an allosteric activator, and whose activity plays a central role in many different cell types  <cit> . in addition, recent studies have revealed that pa also acts as a messenger to regulate a number of signaling molecules  <cit> . therefore dgk is thought to mediate signal transduction by modulating levels of dg and pa, i.e. the attenuation of dg and the production of pa.

to date, ten dgk isozymes have been identified from mammalian cells  <cit> . of dgks, dgkβ is shown to be expressed abundantly in the striatum, accumbens nucleus, olfactory bulb, and hippocampus, the areas that correspond to dopaminergic projection fields, and its expression level increases in developing brain  <cit> . analysis of human dgkβ gene reveals the existence of a total of  <dig> different splice variants, one of which corresponds to an est annotated in genbank as differentially expressed in bipolar disorder patients  <cit> . this suggests that alteration of the expression, localization, and/or activity of this isozyme might result in synaptic imbalance and altered neuronal excitability in this field, which could lead to mood disorders. at the cellular level, we have recently shown that dgkβ is selectively expressed in medium spiny neurons  of the striatum and enriched in the perisynaptic site at corticostriatal and thalamostriatal synapses  <cit> . in addition, experimental analysis in transfected cells reveals that overexpression of dgkβ causes altered assembly of actin stress fibers while a kinase-dead mutant of dgkβ abolishes its colocalization with stress fibers, suggesting that the enzymatic activity of dgkβ may be involved in actin filament assembly  <cit> . because the actin cytoskeleton is thought to have important roles in regulating morphological changes of dendritic spines  <cit> , it is suggested that dgkβ plays a role in controlling the shape of dendritic spines in neurons. however, it remains elusive how dgkβ is implicated in pathophysiological roles in neurons.

to gain an insight in the functional implication of dgkβ, we examined its detailed localization and the functional properties in hippocampal neurons. in this study, we performed the high-resolution immunohistochemical study together with the transfection of wild-type dgkβ and its kinase-dead mutant into primary cultured hippocampal neurons. here, we show that dgkβ is predominantly localized to perisynaptic membrane of hippocampal neurons and induces dendrite outgrowth and spine maturation in developing neurons through its enzymatic activity.

RESULTS
in previous studies we have shown that gene of dgkβ is highly expressed in the striatum, accumbens nucleus, hippocampus, olfactory tubercle, and olfactory bulb  <cit>  and that in the striatum dgkβ is selectively expressed in msns and highly enriched in the perisynaptic site at corticostriatal and thalamostriatal synapses  <cit> . in the present study, we investigated the expression and subcellular localization of dgkβ in the hippocampus, together with its functional implication using transfected hippocampal neurons.

general distribution in the hippocampus
in the hippocampal region, including the ca <dig>  ca <dig>  and ca <dig> subfields, the stratum oriens and stratum radiatum were generally more strongly immunolabeled with dgkβ antibody, while the dentate gyrus showed somewhat fainter immunolabeling . in each of the labeled regions, immunohistochemical signals for dgkβ were seen as dense tiny puncta occupying the neuropil .

next, subcellular distribution was pursued biochemically by immunoblot with fractionated samples in the hippocampus. dgkβ was highly enriched in a light membrane/microsome-enriched fraction , moderately in a postsynaptic density fraction , and faintly in a cytosolic  and a triton-soluble synaptosomal membrane fraction  . together with the immunohistochemical findings, the immunochemical analyses suggest that dgkβ is characterized by selective targeting to membranous and synaptic compartments.

dgkβ is expressed in projection neurons and interneurons
neurons in the hippocampus are mainly composed of two classes, including interneurons and projection neurons. the former can be distinguished by the expression of gad, and the latter is gad-negative  <cit> . although immunoreactivities for both dgkβ and gad were mainly distributed in the neuropil, the immunostaining successfully delineated somata expressing those proteins. therefore we focused on the pyramidal layer, where cell bodies are located, to examine whether dgkβ is coexpressed in gad-positive interneurons. when compared by double immunofluorescence, dgkβ was detected in both gad-negative projection neurons and gad-positive interneurons in the ca <dig>  ca <dig>  and dentate gyrus subfields . in addition, a putative horizontal cell was labeled for dgkβ in the ca <dig> . these results indicate that dgkβ is expressed not only in projection neurons but also in interneurons within the hippocampus.

dgkβ is targeted preferentially to dendritic surface of neurons in the hippocampus
subcellular localization of dgkβ was examined by double immunofluorescence using several subcellular markers . when compared with somatodendritic neuronal marker map <dig>  dgkβ-positive puncta were distributed along and around map2-positive dendritic shafts . in triple immunofluorescent analysis, these dgkβ-positive puncta were apposed side by side to vglut1-labeled excitatory and vgat-labeled inhibitory terminals, but rarely overlapped with them . in contrast, most of the dgkβ-positive puncta were overlapped with or continued to postsynaptic density protein psd- <dig> . these results suggest that dgkβ is selectively localized to postsynaptic elements. these features of dgkβ in hippocampal neurons were almost similar to those in the striatum  <cit> .

dgkβ is concentrated at perisynaptic sites of asymmetrical synapses
the postsynaptic membrane is a specialized receptive region composed of a dense molecular network, which often hinders antibody penetration and binding in conventional pre-embedding immunohistochemistry. this obstacle can be overcome by using post-embedding immunogold procedure, as has been demonstrated for ionotropic receptors and their scaffolding proteins in the postsynaptic density   <cit>  and also for other signaling molecules, such as phospholipase cβ, and diacylglycerol lipase  <cit> . therefore, we employed post-embedding immunogold technique to see whether dgkβ is particularly concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane and other membrane domains of hippocampal neurons.

in spines forming asymmetrical synapses of the hippocampus, most of the immunogold particles representing dgkβ were distributed close to the cell membrane, especially around the edges of synaptic junctions . by taking the maximal length of immunoglobulins into consideration  <cit> , we defined immunogold particles located less than  <dig> nm from the cell membrane to the center of gold particles as cell membrane-associated distribution. in spines forming asymmetrical synapses,  <dig> % of immunogold particles were classified as cell membrane-associated distribution . we further assessed the tangential distribution of cell membrane-associated gold particles by measuring the distance from the edge of psd to the center of immunogold particles. the quantitative analysis showed that the distribution of gold particles was peaked at 0– <dig> nm bin from the edge of psd . the results from post-embedding immunogold method suggest that dgkβ accumulates on the perisynaptic site of asymmetrical synapses in the hippocampus.

developmental changes in the expression of endogenous dgkβ in cultured hippocampal neurons
it is reported at the organism level that the expression of dgkβ is undetectable at birth or on day  <dig> but rapidly increases between postnatal days  <dig> and  <dig>  a stage of commencement of spinogenesis  <cit> . therefore, we next examined the detailed expression and localization of dgkβ in developing hippocampal neurons in culture. we first ran western blots to detect endogenous dgkβ in homogenized tissue from dissociated hippocampal cultures at 7– <dig> div  and then performed immunocytochemical analysis . neurons in culture at  <dig> div contained few processes and hardly expressed dgkβ, while those at  <dig> div extended numerous processes although dgkβ was faintly expressed and was localized to the perinuclear region, but not in dendrites . on the other hand, dgkβ greatly increased in the expression level in neurons at  <dig> div and was distributed throughout dendrites . together with the previous data at the organism level  <cit> , these results indicate that dgkβ increases in the expression level and is distributed to dendrites at a later stage of dendritic development.

dgkβ is involved in regulation of dendrite outgrowth and spine maturation
relatively late onset of the expression and perisynaptic localization of dgkβ implicated its potential role in dendritic spine morphogenesis. it has been reported that dissociated hippocampal neurons rarely develop dendritic spines until  <dig> div  <cit> . therefore, we next tested whether the overexpression of dgkβ could initiate spinogenesis early in the development. we focused on two stages of cultured neurons for this transfection experiment, i.e.,  <dig> div, an immature stage of rare spine development, and  <dig> div, a stage of commencement of spine formation. at both stages, endogenous expression level of dgkβ was quite low, which was shown in figure  <dig>  in addition, our previous study revealed that dgkβ is targeted to certain, but not all, modalities of actin filaments in transfected cos- <dig> cells and is implicated in actin filament assembly through the enzymatic activity  <cit> . therefore, we also asked if this is true for neurons.

to address this point, we transfected wild-type or kinase-dead mutant of dgkβ into cultured hippocampal neurons at  <dig> and  <dig> div and examined them after  <dig> h incubation. in hippocampal neurons transfected with wild-type dgkβ at  <dig> div, gfp-dgkβ roughly outlined the entire configuration of neurons and appeared as puncta of various sizes in dendrites . it was mostly localized onto the plasma membrane in dendrites as a punctuated pattern. phalloidin-labeled f-actin was also detected as puncta, which largely colocalized with gfp-dgkβ along dendrites , although mature spines were never observed. on the other hand, kinase-dead mutant  and gfp vector alone were observed in dendrites as a diffuse pattern , which is clearly distinct from that of gfp-dgkβ.

neurons at this stage extended numerous cell processes, but spines were rarely recognized. when we measured total length of processes and total dendritic branch tip number  between neurons transfected with wild-type, kd mutant, or vector alone, it was revealed that total length of the cell processes and tdbtn of neurons transfected with wild-type dgkβ were greatly increased compared with those of neurons transfected with kd mutant or vector alone . taken together, the transfection experiment at  <dig> div demonstrates the following:  wild-type dgkβ induces clustering of f-actin along dendrites, although it cannot initiate spinogenesis by overexpression alone at this stage;  wild-type dgkβ promotes dendritic outgrowth and branching;  the enzymatic activity of dgkβ has some effects on its own subcellular localization.

on the other hand, hippocampal neurons at  <dig> div contained more and longer processes compared with those at  <dig> div . in addition, numerous immature spines with long and thin stalk  were recognized in untransfected neurons, although mature spines of mushroom type were very rarely observed. there were no changes in the number of dendritic protrusion between neurons transfected with wild-type, kd mutant, or vector alone . however, we found a significant increase in the number of mature spines of the mushroom-type in neurons transfected wild-type dgkβ , while mature spines were hardly observed in neurons transfected with kd mutant or vector alone . these data suggest that dgkβ promotes spine maturation through the enzymatic activity in dendritic spine morphogenesis.

discussion
dgkβ was first identified as an isozyme expressed in neuronal population in the brain  <cit> . the characteristic gene expression in the brain, i.e., predominant expression in the striatum, provoked us to perform a detailed investigation of its localization, which reveals that dgkβ is expressed in medium spiny neurons constituting the striatonigral and striatopallidal pathways and exhibits dense accumulation at perisynaptic sites on dendritic spines forming asymmetrical synapses  <cit> . in the present study, we investigated the functional implications of dgkβ using cultured hippocampal neurons transfected with wild-type and kinase-dead mutant of dgkβ. we found that dgkβ shows similar characteristics in its subcellular localization in hippocampal neurons, i.e., predominant localization on perisynaptic membrane, and that dgkβ promotes dendritic outgrowth and spine maturation in transfected neurons through the enzymatic activity.

how does the enzymatic activity of dgkβ regulate the dendrite outgrowth and spine maturation in developing neurons? although we are short of experimental evidence, it is speculated that the substrate and/or product of dgk, i.e. dg and pa, might play key roles in these phenomena. it has been shown that the metabolism of pi including pa is implicated in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton assembly  <cit> . one possibility is that pa, produced by dgkβ at the perisynaptic membrane, may regulate the remodeling system via actin filaments. dendritic spines show remarkable morphological diversity and plasticity, presumably due to dynamic alterations of the underlying actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . dendritic spines are mushroom-like, membranous protrusions from dendrites and are important in normal cognitive function and neuronal development  <cit> . the morphology of spines is a strong determinant of their function, and the actin cytoskeleton is believed to be the basic structural foundation that is responsible for the shape  <cit> .

the rhogtpase family, including rhoa, cdc <dig>  and rac <dig>  modulates the actin cytoskeleton in fibroblasts, budding yeast, and neurons and is thought to be the major regulators of spine morphogenesis  <cit> . previous study has shown that rac <dig> can initiate spinogenesis by overexpression alone in cultured neurons  <cit> . rac <dig> induces the formation of dendritic spines in neurons as young as  <dig> div and clusters in the heads of dendritic spines. furthermore, rac <dig> increases the size of preexisting spines in mature neurons  within  <dig> h after transfection. rac <dig> is also shown to regulate actin polymerization  <cit> , and actin is essential for the anchoring of postsynaptic receptors such as nmda, ampa, and gaba receptors in mature spines  <cit> . these studies suggest that rac <dig> is deeply involved in spinogenesis through the control of actin polymerization. taken the present and previous data together, dgkβ cannot initiate spinogenesis at  <dig> div by the overexpression alone even though it can induce clustering of f-actin along dendrites , while rac  <dig> can initiate spinogenesis at this stage. we hypothesize that dgkβ plays a role in clustering of f-actin and represents an upstream effector of rac  <dig> in spinogenesis. based on this hypothesis, inability of spinogenesis by dgkβ alone at  <dig> div may be explained by lack of a putative downstream effector rac  <dig> expression at this stage. this is the major issue to be addressed in our future study.

with regard to the molecular mechanism, it is shown that the c-terminus of rac <dig> is associated specifically with type i pip5-kinase  <cit> . intriguingly, rac is also shown to be associated with dgk and rhogdi, although it remains to be determined which dgk isozyme is responsible for the association with rac. in this signaling complex it may be that dgk generates pa, which acts as a strong activator of pip5-kinase  <cit> , thus increasing production of pip <dig>  therefore, it seems that rac brings pip5-kinase and pa into close proximity, thus increasing the production of pip <dig>  which binds to, and regulates, several actin regulatory proteins, including gelsolin, profilin, α-actinin, and capz  <cit> . what is the functional role of rhogdi in this complex? it is hypothesized that once released from rhogdi the rac-lipid kinase complex is stabilized by phospholipids, such as pip <dig> and pa, at the membrane, suggesting that rhogdi might control the subcellular localization of this complex. inability of kinase dead dgkβ to localize to the correct sites, but staying in the cytoplasm, as shown in figure 5b, may be due to the decreased production of pa, which leads to the reduced level of pip <dig> and subsequent lowered stabilization of the complex to the membrane.

it is reported that the human dgkβ gene can generate several enzyme isoforms  <cit> . in that study, the wild type and the splice variant lacking  <dig> amino acid c-terminal region  show different subcellular localization in cdna-transfected hek <dig> cells, although they exhibit similar catalytic activity  <cit> . this raises the additional possibility that c-terminal region, as well as the catalytic activity, might also influence subcellular localization of dgkβ. in terms of pathophysiological implication, it is noteworthy that sv3'dgkβ is annotated in genbank as being differentially expressed in bipolar disorder patients  <cit> . considering that dgkβ is abundantly expressed in the striatum, accumbens nucleus, and hippocampus  <cit> , changes in the activity and/or subcellular localization of dgkβ should influence the signaling cascade in these regions that are known to be involved in the control of emotional and cognitive behavior.

dendritic spine dysgenesis may also be related to psychiatric diseases, such as mood disorders  and depressive conditions  <cit> . people affected by these disorders and conditions show a variety of symptoms, which may be ascribed to the brain areas afflicted by signal dysfunction. considering these, the impairment of spine formation due to dgkβ dysfunction predominantly in the striatum could lead to the impaired signaling in neurons of this area. increased or decreased expression of dgkβ and its splice variants and/or altered subcellular localization could impair a remodeling process of spines. as dgkβ seems to be involved in actin-based cytoskeletal process, dysfunction of dgkβ due to the alteration of catalytic activity and subcellular localization may disturb actin filament system in the process of spine formation. our previous study supports this possibility because overexpression of dgkβ causes altered assembly of actin stress fibers in transfected cos- <dig> cells  <cit> . in addition, the kinase-dead mutant localizes diffusely to the cytoplasm, suggesting that the catalytic activity of dgkβ affects its own localization. the phenomena observed in transfected cos- <dig> cells are now reproduced in neurons in a similar, but not identical, fashion. it is unclear whether the colocalization of dgkβ with f-actin depends on their direct/indirect association. in this respect, our previous study revealed in transfected cos- <dig> cells that dgkβ is colocalized with actin stress fibers, but not with actin bundles in pseudopodia at the periphery  <cit> . these data suggest the possibility that dgkβ is not bound to actin fibers directly but through actin-binding protein.

it remains elusive why dgkβ shows distinct expression patterns between the hippocampus and striatum. dgkβ is expressed not only in projection neurons but also in interneurons in the hippocampus, while it is solely expressed in projection neurons in the striatum  <cit> . in this regard, previous studies have shown that distinct subtypes of the mglur family are expressed in different subsets of neurons, i.e., mglur <dig> is abundantly expressed in projection neurons, while mglur1α is dominant in interneurons in the striatum  <cit> . in the hippocampus, on the other hand, mglur <dig> is highly expressed in pyramidal neurons including projection neurons  <cit>  and parvalbumin-positive interneurons  <cit> . these features of the mglur <dig> expression pattern in the striatum and hippocampus seem to be similar to that of dgkβ, suggesting that dgkβ and mglur <dig> work cooperatively in the same complex for signal transduction machinery.

in furure studies, we need to address several points discussed above and to ask whether roles played by dgkβ and other dgks, including dgkγ, -ε, -ζ, and -ι, are equivalent or distinct in neurons. detailed investigation of the relationship between dgks and the related molecules in spinogenesis is currently underway.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we found that dgkβ exists not only in projection neurons but also in interneurons in the hippocampus and is abundant at perisynaptic sites. in addition, we show for the first time that overexpression of wild-type dgkβ induces dendrite outgrowth and spine maturation in developing hippocampal neurons through its enzymatic activity, suggesting that dgkβ is involved in these molecular machineries. these findings would help understand the pathophysiological mechanisms of spinogenesis and synaptic plasticity.

