BACKGROUND
peste des petits ruminants  is an acute, highly contagious viral disease of small ruminants that is considered one of the major constraints for efficient small ruminant production in the developing countries. it is a notifiable, list-a disease to the oie caused by peste des petits ruminants virus   <cit> . since its emergence in west africa in the 1940s, ppr has spread across vast regions of the africa, middle east, arabian peninsula, and southern asia  <cit> . ppr is endemic in pakistan where approximately half  of its small ruminant population is seropositive  <cit> . the disease mainly exists in three pathogenic, per-acute, acute and sub-acute, forms. however, acute form is the most common form that causes 80–90% mortality in individual flocks  <cit> . once the host is infected with pprv, general viraemia develops within 4– <dig> days followed by high fever , marked salivation, shallow erosions in the oral mucosa, serous to purulent oculonasal discharge, dyspnea, coughing, pneumonia and diarrhea  <cit> . in the later stages, a sub-normal temperature of 101–102 °f and dehydration due to diarrhea can lead to hypovolumic shock and death of the affected animals  <cit> .

pprv; the causative agent of the disease, is a member of the genus morbillivirus, in the family “paramyxoviridea”. it is a negative-sense, single-stranded rna virus. the genome of pprv, viz. 3’-n-p-m-f-h-l-5’ encodes six structural proteins namely nucleocapsid, phosphoprotein, matrix, fusion, haemagglutinin and large polymerase . among these, nucleocapsid  protein gene is the most abundantly transcribed gene in the host cells and is therefore preferred target site for genomic detection of pprv  <cit> . conventionally, diagnosis of pprv relied on serological techniques and virus isolation from clinical samples through its propagation in adaptable cell lines . however, these techniques are labor-intensive and insensitive for pprv detection especially during latent phase of the infection  <cit> . in contrast, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  is considered as standard diagnostic test for ppr worldwide  <cit> . however, limitations associated with rt-pcr including its high cost and pre-requisite for scientific manpower render it unsuitable for low or middle-income country settings  <cit> . accordingly, the world health organization  recommends that an ideal diagnostic test for such countries should meet the assured  guidelines  <cit> . the invention of isothermal technologies, like loop mediated isothermal amplification  assay, for dna amplification is a step-forward towards the development of assured diagnostic tests  <cit> . lamp based amplification of target nucleic acid is based on isothermal amplification of template dna utilizing the strand displacement activity of bst or bsm dna polymerase enzyme originated from bacillus stearothermophilus or bacillus smithii, respectively  <cit> . the stem-loop structures generated, at an initial phase, during lamp initiate exponential amplification process that results in rapid accumulation of dna amplicons of varying lengths  <cit> . the lamp products can simply be visualized with naked eye after the addition of fluorescent dna-intercalating dyes such as sybr green i, propidium iodide and calcein to the reaction mixture. in addition, the generation of lamp products can also be monitored on a real-time basis by measuring the change in fluorescence over a specified interval with an ese-quant tube scanner  <cit> . here, we report the development of a one-step, single tube, n gene based rt-lamp assay for direct detection of pprv in clinical samples , cell culture supernatants, obviating the need for rna extraction and cdna synthesis step that can potentially make it a suitable diagnostic test for on-site detection of pprv particularly during eradication campaign in low income country settings.

RESULTS
optimization of rt-lamp assay for the detection of pprv in culture supernatants
the success of an rt-lamp assay mainly depends on three factors including primer concentration, optimal reaction temperature and template amount. optimal primer concentration was found to be  <dig>  μm for each of the outer primers  and  <dig>  μm for each of the inner primers  to achieve threshold increase of >30 mv for three consecutive readings. once the primer concentration was reduced to half of the above-mentioned values, it compromised the efficiency of the reaction thus resulting in the drop in signal below the threshold value . the optimal reaction temperature for each primer pair was determined using a gradient pcr  prior to its use in rt-lamp assay. accordingly, the assay was carried out at an increasing gradient of temperature that ranged from 50 °c to 62 °c. gel electrophoresis of reaction products revealed amplification at three different temperatures including 53 °c, 55 °c and 58 °c. among these, best amplification curve with high specificity was achieved at 58 °c . optimal template concentration for rt-lamp assay was determined using a standard curve method. for this, tenfold serial dilutions of pprv cell culture supernatant were prepared and subsequently subjected to rt-lamp assay along with positive and no template controls . the amplification curves for the positive control and the dilution factors viz; 10− <dig> to 10− <dig> showed typical four phases of amplification including the baseline, exponential phase, linear phase and a plateau within 60 min from the start of the assay. amplification curve for 5th dilution crossed threshold limit  after 65 min  while ntc did not show any amplification. a standard curve was plotted with the log template concentration as the x value and the time of positivity  as the y value. the y-intercept value  calculated using the least square method of linear regression was found to be  <dig>  min. accordingly, a maximum time limit of 60 min was set for the test to decide for positivity of the tested sample to ensure specific detection and rule out false positives. the detection limit of the assay  was  <dig> fold higher as compared with conventional rt-pcr . subsequent to the optimization of primer concentration, reaction temperature and template amount, culture soups of  <dig> pprvs isolates, grown in chs- <dig> cells, were detected by rt-lamp. these cultures yielded amplification curves that climbed maximally up to 60-75 mv/min well above the 30 mv/min threshold during the lamp reaction, indicating positive detection of pprvs with a td value of  <dig> or less than 30 min .fig.  <dig> optimization of primer concentration for n-gene based rt-lamp assay. curve a indicate amplification at optimized primers concentration while b indicate amplification efficiency at half of that primer concentration at which the increase in amplification signal per minute did not exceed threshold value of  <dig> mvolt/min. negative control is indicated by a magenta colored line labeled as c


fig.  <dig> gradient of incubation temperatures for n-gene based rt-lamp assay. lane 1: 50 °c; lane 2: 53 °c; lane 3: 55 °c; lane 4: 58 °c; lane 5: 60 °c; lane 6: 62 °c. precise amplification intensity was achieved at 58 °c


fig.  <dig> sensitivity of n-gene based rt-lamp assay. fluorimetric curves in rt-lamp assay were obtained from 10-fold serial dilutions of fluid supernatant taken from cultured pprv in chs- <dig> cells harvested at appearance of 80% cytopathic effects. the test was able to detect dilution up to 10− <dig> within 60 min. dilution 10− <dig> was detectable only after one hour


fig.  <dig> sensitivity of n-gene based rt-lamp assay in terms of tcid50/ml. fluorimetric curves in rt-lamp assay were obtained from 10-fold serial dilutions of pprv with starting concentration of 10tcid50/ml; panel a. shows amplification curves generated from these dilutions within 60-min. panel b shows the detection of these dilutions by rt-pcr recommended by oie amplifying 351 bp of n gene  <cit> . the rt-lamp was able to detect up to 10−4tcid50/ml within 60 min as compared to 10−3tcid50/ml in case of rt-pcr


+, each isolate name includes sample id, acronym of the district of sampling and year, dgk dg khan, mnw mianwali, chk chakwal, sah sahiwal. nd not determined. a
ns nasal swab


fig.  <dig> threshold validation of positive reaction in rt-lamp assay. the amplification curves shown in the figure were produced in the assay from culture supernatants of pprvs. the curves were generated in response to change in fluorescence signal per minute during rt-lamp assay by ese quant tube scanner software. according to threshold validation, amplification curves in positive reactions increased above threshold value of 30 mv per minute 




colorimetric and fluorimetric detection of rt-lamp products
sybr green staining of rt-lamp products resulted in a colour change, observable by naked eye, from orange to light green in case of positive reaction mixtures while the negative reaction mixture remains orange . upon uv light excitation, positive reaction products produced strong bright green fluorescence while negative control depicted slight background fluorescence . these observations were in accordance with those of the gel electrophoresis as a ladder-like pattern of amplified dna product was visualized in case of positive reactions while it was absent in case of negative control reactions .fig.  <dig> visualization of rt-lamp assay in normal light, ultra violet  light and analysis by gel electrophoresis. normal light:  <dig>  positive reaction ;  <dig>  negative reaction ; uv light:  <dig>  positive reaction ;  <dig>  negative reaction . gel electrophoresis:  <dig>  positive reaction ;  <dig>  negative reaction .  <dig> to  <dig> are positive clinical samples 




robustness and specificity of rt-lamp assay for detection of pprv in experimentally inoculated animals
an equivalent of each swab extract collected, from experimentally inoculated goat and sheep, at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  14 day post-inoculation  was analyzed with rt-lamp and rt-pcr to determine the relative robustness and sensitivity of rt-lamp assay. during the course of experimental infection, rt-lamp detected pprv genome in the nasal secretions of goat from 2-dpi to 14-dpi . it was, however, detected only on day- <dig> and  <dig> post-inoculation in sheep. the remaining samples did not produce amplification curves reaching beyond threshold limit of >30 mv increase in signal strength per minute and therefore, were considered as negative. in comparison to rt-lamp, rt-pcr detected pprv in the nasal discharges on 4-dpi to 14-dpi in the goat, whilst only on 10-dpi in sheep . depending on the viral load, it was observed that rt-lamp assay was able to detect the virus in the secretions of goat with td value of  <dig> to 40 min which were equivalent to range of ct value of  <dig> - <dig>  as observed in rt-qpcr . however, the pre-requisites of rna extraction and cdna synthesis in case of real-time rt-pcr made it take  <dig> - <dig>  min for the detection of these samples . rt-lamp was found to be more robust than rt-qpcr by taking at least forty fewer minutes for detecting pprv in these samples.table  <dig> comparison of conventional rt-pcr and rt-lamp in terms of detection of pprv in nasal secretions


athese samples were also confirmed by rt-pcr mentioned in oie terrestrial manual  <cit> 



atotal time includes rna extraction + cdna synthesis  + time to reach ct value in real-time pcr steps 




detection of pprv in the animals affected in suspected outbreaks
a total of  <dig> nasal swabs collected from goats in field outbreaks at three districts of punjab were subjected to the optimized rt-lamp protocol along with positive and negative controls . for threshold validation, only those samples were considered positive that produced amplification curve beyond 30 mv detection limit. among the clinical samples, nineteen yielded an amplification curve with a td value of 25- <dig> min . however, thirteen clinical samples along with negative controls that consisted of measles and canine distemper viruses did not yield any amplification signal or a signal below threshold limit. in order to evaluate the sensitivity and robustness of rt-lamp assay, equivalent set of the swabs was subjected to the conventional rt-pcr using n protein gene specific primers that generated a pcr fragment of ~450 bp in case of positive samples. conventional rt-pcr detected pprv in seventeen samples. these results indicated that rt-lamp assay is somewhat as specific as the conventional rt-pcr assay; however, rt-lamp detected pprv in two more samples than rt-pcr. comparatively, rt-lamp was more robust in nature as it allowed quick detection of pprv infection within 60 min as compared to 4– <dig> h in case of conventional rt-pcr that requires separate rna extraction, cdna synthesis, pcr and gel electrophoresis steps. rt-qpcr detected pprv in n =  <dig> clinical samples by with ct values of  <dig>  to  <dig>  . as all the samples that were positive in rt-qpcr were also positive in rt-lamp, both tests were equally sensitive in the detection of pprv.table  <dig> pprv detection by rt-lamp in clinical samples collected in outbreaks


fig.  <dig> limit of detection of rt-qpcr and its application for the detection of pprv in clinical samples; panel a. in the figure are shown amplification curves generated by serial dilution of cloned standard of pprv n gene ; panel b. for the estimation of limit of detection, threshold cycle  values of standard dilutions from  <dig>  ×  <dig> to  <dig>  ×  <dig> were drawn against log values of copy number. limit of detection was estimated to be ≈  <dig> copies at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cycle although ct value of 40th cycle was also detectable; panel c. detection limit of rt-pcr used in this study was up to  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies of the plasmid; panel d. the threshold cycle  values obtained by amplification of pprv in clinical samples along with standard




discussion
the overall aim of this research was to develop a reliable and cost-effective diagnostic test for on-site detection of peste des petits ruminants virus  infection in sheep and goats based on lamp technology that might serve as a foundation for the development of point of care diagnostic tests for different infectious diseases of livestock prevalent in pakistan. we selected ppr disease to start with on the basis of two reasons viz. i) economic significance, ii) close relevance to its prototype, riderpest  that has been effectively eradicated from the face of the earth. current diagnostic tests for ppr involve the use of immunoassays to detect the antibodies against pprv, virus isolation using adaptable cell lines and pprv genome detection using rt-pcr or real time rt-pcr . however, these techniques require costly equipment and highly trained manpower that render these tests unsuitable for on-site application.

recently, lamp based diagnostic tests have been developed for various viral diseases  . although, these tests are relatively inexpensive and robust in nature yet challenges associated with lamp technology including template preparation protocols  need consideration to take it to the point of care diagnostics. our protocol involves the use of a sample buffer that can precipitate out virus envelope and capsid proteins through ammonium sulphate precipitation and exposes viral rna, present in the clinical sample, for its subsequent amplification through lamp reaction. hitherto, n gene mrnas are preferred target for molecular detection of pprv because it is the most abundantly transcribed viral gene in all morbilliviruses  <cit> . hence, in this test, highly conserved region at the 5′ end of nucleocapsid gene specific to pprv was targeted for primer designing to ensure specificity and sensitivity . for an unknown reason, we found this protocol more effective for pprv detection in fresh samples  as compared to previously stored samples that had undergone many freeze-thaw cycles.fig.  <dig> locations of rt-lamp primers along the nucleoprotein gene sequence of pprv. primers are indicated by solid boxes and solid line arrows in the right  and left orientation  indicate forward  and reverse primers , respectively. the length of product was  <dig> as limited by forward  and backward outer  primers




the monitoring system of ese quant tube scanner provided the ease of spatio-temporal curve analysis during the rt-lamp reaction. accordingly, the test can be used even in worse field conditions where electricity is not available and transportation facilities are inadequate. to ensure specificity while maintaining high sensitivity, an algorithm is incorporated into the tube scanner software that allows threshold validation of the amplification curve to consider it as positive only if the increase of signal  above the mean of the baseline is > 30 mv for at least  <dig> consecutive measurements. this method of curve validation adds to the confidence of rt-lamp result and, therefore, is more reliable than gel-electrophoresis and colorimetric analysis. by doing so, all seven samples of experimentally infected goat and only two out of total of seven samples of sheep, collected on alternative days for a period of two weeks, were considered as positive. because all the samples that were positive by rt-pcr was also positive in rt-lamp, rt-lamp was rather as specific as conventional rt-pcr. nonetheless, rt-lamp detected pprv in these samples 4– <dig> h earlier than rt-pcr. comparative sensitivity  of the rt-lamp with rt-qpcr was assured by the fact that both detected nineteen clinical samples, collected in field outbreaks; while conventional rt-pcr  could not detect pprv in two samples that were positive both in rt-lamp and rt-qpcr. the specific detection of rt-lamp can be attributed to its intrinsic stringency by single small fragment  simultaneously by utilizing six primers, while the large amount of dna produced during the reaction ensures high sensitivity . lamp can multiply the target dna  <dig> to  <dig> times the starting amount and detect  <dig>  to  <dig> plaque-forming units  of viral particles  <cit> . the sensitivity of the rt-lamp developed in this study is comparable to previously reported lamp assays targeting either m or n gene for the detection of pprv  <cit> . in our study, rt-lamp assay was10-fold more sensitive  and 3– <dig> times more robust than conventional-rt-pcr with a detection limit of  <dig> tcid50/ml as reported by couacy-hymann et al.  <cit> . previous protocols of lamp, however, have used extracted rna for subsequent synthesis of cdna prior to its amplification by lamp. the essential steps of rna extraction and its reverse transcription require a sophisticated laboratory environment and increase the time of detection. the leading benefit of the rt-lamp developed in this study for the detection of genome of pprv directly by using the virus culture supernatant or clinical samples as such without a need for separate rna extraction and/or cdna synthesis ensure its application in the field. due to the added benefits of higher sensitivity, robustness and simplicity, n gene based rt-lamp can be a proficient alternative to the conventional rt-pcr especially in open field conditions where cold chain of sample transportation and highly equipped laboratories are not available.

under uv light, a bright green fluorescence is observed in case of positive reaction . this ability of the rt-lamp assay to differentiate between positive and negative samples can be very useful especially in the field conditions even if the tube scanner is not available. due to the high sensitivity of the test, it can be assumed that if a test is negative by threshold validation, colorimetric analysis and gel-electrophoresis, it would be essentially negative . for that reason, rt-lamp can be used for the detection of pprv antigen in eradication campaigns to confirm the absence of disease.

the world population is experiencing continuous growth at an annual rate of  <dig> % and estimated to reach  <dig>  billion by  <dig>  <cit> . keeping it in the view, the food and agriculture organization  of the united nations estimates that the overall food production will need to increase by 70% in order to feed this projected world population thereby increasing pressure on the livestock sector to meet the growing demand for high value animal protein. along with developed countries, where maximum livestock potential is already being utilized, developing countries like pakistan, which have a lot of unexplored potential for livestock, need to contribute towards global food security. in these countries, there are certain challenges faced by livestock sector to cope up with these needs, among those, infectious diseases remain a key constraint and must be controlled for efficient livestock production. accordingly, successful disease control or eradication program should be launched that would mainly rely on the prophylactic measures, surveillance & monitoring methods as well as the efficacy & robustness of the diagnostic tests. lamp based diagnostic methods have taken the lead over other costly ones for being robust, economic and sensitive. rt-lamp, developed in this study, for robust, specific on-site diagnosis of pprv nucleic acid under field conditions is very practicable in the disease diagnosis during eradication of ppr. it offers a unique utility in the “global ppr eradication campaign” launched recently, in the year  <dig>  by the fao and oie  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
these laboratory, experimental and field evaluation of the lamp method developed in this study for the on-site diagnosis of ppr showed that it is sensitive, robust, and easy diagnostic method and can prove to be very useful to the field practitioners. these features make it an inimitably advantageous nucleic acid detection system for the confirmation of pprv infection under the field conditions. it is a sensitive as well as stringent assay of choice for quick detection of the virus in epidemics or during regular abattoir inspections or screening programs targeting pprv eradication.

