BACKGROUND
genes encoding histones are one of the best studied examples of cell cycle regulated genes in eukaryotic organisms. multiple levels of control operate in the cell in order to restrict the synthesis of histones to the s phase of the cell cycle. in mammalian cells, cell-cycle dependent histone genes are regulated at the level of transcription, pre-mrna processing and mrna stability  <cit> . processing and stability are controlled by the interaction between a stem loop binding protein  and a conserved stem-loop element present in the 3' utrs of the histone transcripts, that are not polyadenylated  <cit> . also, slbp stimulates translation of histone mrnas during the s phase of the cell cycle  <cit> . in yeast and other lower eukaryotes histone mrnas are polyadenylated and do not terminate with these stem-loop structures. in these organisms the s phase dependent expression of histone genes is controlled mainly at the transcription level, but also post-transcriptional regulation results in the preferential degradation of histone mrnas outside of the s phase in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> .

as it occurs in lower eukaryotes the trypanosomatid histone mrnas are polyadenylated  but histone gene transcription appears to be constitutive as it is the case for most genes, in correlation to the lack of regulated rna polymerase ii promoters described for these organisms  <cit> . although histone gene transcription is not coordinated with dna replication, in trypanosoma cruzi  <cit>  and leishmania infantum  <cit>  the core histone biosynthesis is tightly coupled with dna synthesis during the cell cycle. the molecular mechanism controlling the cell-cycle regulated expression of histone genes differs among trypanosomatids. in trypanosoma sp. mrna stability plays a major role in histone expression . in t. cruzi the use of inhibitors of dna synthesis has shown that the histone mrna levels are coupled to the rate of dna synthesis  <cit>  and that the histone mrna levels peak during the s phase of the cell cycle  <cit> . similarly, in trypanosoma brucei the abundance of histone h2b mrnas decreased after growing parasites in the presence of the dna synthesis inhibitor hydroxyurea   <cit>  making histone mrnas undetectable out of the s phase by in situ hybridization analysis  <cit> .

contrary to the situation in trypanosoma sp., the histone mrna levels in leishmania do not decrease after treatments with dna synthesis inhibitors  <cit> . histone biosynthesis is regulated by a mechanism involving a translational control that is exerted on histone mrnas in the absence of dna synthesis  <cit> . even though there are no significant variations in the steady-state levels of leishmania histone mrnas along the cell cycle, drastic changes in the polysome profiles of histone mrnas were observed during the progression from the g <dig> to the s phase. thus, in the g <dig> phase the association of the histone transcripts with ribosomes was impaired and in the s phase histone mrnas are present in polyribosome fractions  <cit> . a regulatory model in which the cell cycle synthesis of histones in leishmania is controlled through reversible interactions of protein factors that modulate translation of histone mrnas has been proposed  <cit> . this mechanism would involve the existence of cis-regulatory signals in the histone mrnas where specific rna binding proteins are bound.

in all trypanosomatids protein coding genes are organized as large clusters on the same dna strand and transcribed from undefined promoters as large polycistronic precursor rnas. polycistronic transcripts mature by trans-splicing which results in the addition of a short capped leader  to the 5' end of mrnas and by 3' processing that includes cleavage and polyadenylation  <cit> . trans-splicing and polyadenylation are coupled mechanistically and the poly site selection seems to be specified by the position of the downstream splice acceptor site  <cit> . given that regulated gene expression in leishmania has been related with post-transcriptional events mainly involving sequences present in the 5' and 3' utrs  <cit> , in the present work we have analyzed the involvement of these regions in the cell cycle dependent expression of the l. infantum h2a genes. for that purpose the expression of a reporter gene was analyzed in parasite cell lines stably transfected with different plasmid constructs containing combinations of the leishmania h2a 5' and 3' utrs.

RESULTS
the 5' and 3' utr of the l. infantum h2a genes confer cell cycle regulated expression to the cat reporter gene
two h2a loci are present in the l. infantum genome each one located in a different chromosome  . the three gene copies located in each locus although highly conserved in the coding region present major sequence differences in the 5' utrs and in the 3' utrs. there are four types of 5' utrs, named 5' utr-i to -iv, with remarkable sequence conservation between the 5' utr-i and 5' utr-ii and between the 5' utr-iii and 5' utr-iv, respectively  <cit> . on the other hand, in the h2a loci there are three types of 3' utr that are completely divergent in their nucleotide sequence . an analysis of the relative steady-state levels of the different l. infantum h2a mrnas revealed that transcripts containing the 3' utr-i and 3' utr-iii account for the majority of the h2a transcripts in logarithmic-phase growing promastigotes. in addition, the 3' utr-i containing transcripts are approximately 7-fold more abundant than those containing the 3' utr-iii. very low steady-state levels were found for transcripts that contain the 3' utr-ii  <cit> . for that reason 3'utr-ii has been excluded in our analysis.

constructs containing each one of the two expressed 3' utr  combined with each one of the 5' utr types  were cloned downstream and upstream to the cat reporter gene, respectively. all the constructs were subcloned into the trypanosomatid expression vector px63neo in opposite direction with respect to the neo gene that is controlled by the regulatory regions of the dhfr-ts gene . thus, the reporter gene may be expressed independently of the regulatory regions included in the px63neo plasmid  <cit> . a schematic representation of the different constructs containing the cat reporter is shown in fig. 1c. sequences located upstream of the 5' utr and downstream of the 3' utr were included for correct trans-splicing and polyadenylation of the cat transcripts . northern blot analysis of stably transfected cell lines containing plasmids pxcat5'iii/3'i , pxcat5'ii/3'iii  and plasmids pxcat5'iii/3'iii and pxcat5'ii/3'i  gave rise to a single cat transcript of approximately  <dig> kb . this size is in accordance with a correct rna processing as expected from the length of the different h2a mrnas  <cit> . the boundaries of the 5' utrs and 3' utrs of the different cat transcripts were defined by an rt-pcr approach . the presence of the h2a 3' utrs seems to confer higher stability to the reporter transcripts since the steady-state level of cat rnas in the pxcat5'h2a cell line was lower when compared to the other ones. in this cell line a single band of approximately  <dig>  kb was observed, in accordance with the boundaries of the 5' utr of gene h2a <dig> and 3' utr of gene hsp <dig> included in the construct determined by rt-pcr . a cell line stably transfected with plasmid pxcathsp <dig>  used as control, gave rise to single band of approximately  <dig>  kb , as expected after the processing of hsp <dig> utrs  <cit>  .

fig.  <dig> summarizes the studies on the effect of the flanking sequences of h2a genes on the cell cycle dependent expression of the cat gene. for that purpose the different transfected promastigote cell lines were treated for  <dig> h with hydroxyurea  and after drug removal cells were collected at different time periods and stained with propidium iodide to determine the percentage of cells in the different cell-cycle phases. hu removal resulted in a semi-synchronous entry into the cell cycle in l. infantum promastigotes, in line with previous reports  <cit> . at the same time the rate of the de novo synthesis of cat was determined by immunoprecipitation with an anti-cat polyclonal antibody on protein extracts labelled with methionine. the autoradiograph exposure of the blot showed that 35s-labelling of cat reached a maximum at  <dig> h and then decreased to initial levels  <dig> h after hu removal for all the cell lines containing the regulatory regions of the different h2a genes . densitometric analysis of the results showed a 3- to 4-fold increase at the  <dig> h point, correlating to the maximum percentage of cells in the s phase determined by flow cytometry. on the other hand, the amount of radioactivity bound to the immunoprecipitated cat in the cell line transfected with pxcathsp <dig> plasmid did not show the cell cycle specific expression profile observed for the other constructs . since in the context of these experiments variations were observed in the percentage of cells in the s phase  three independent experiments were performed with all the cell lines showed in fig.  <dig>  and the ratio between the de novo synthesis  and cells in the s phase  was determined. a significant increase was observed in this ratio when comparing the transfectants bearing the different h2a gene regulatory regions to the transfectant with the hsp <dig> gene utrs . in fig.  <dig> it is also shown that transfectants bearing the 3' utr-iii, independently of the 5' utr, have a moderately higher ratio which is indicative of a higher translational potential.

thus, it can be concluded that the presence of the h2a regulatory regions confers a cell cycle dependent expression of cat as it has previously been reported for leishmania histone synthesis  <cit> .

cell cycle dependent expression of cat is regulated at the translational level
in order to analyze where the control of cat gene expression is exerted, two different assays using promastigotes stably transfected with pxcat5'iii/3'i construct  were performed. firstly, a northern blot of rna isolated at various time points after hu release was hybridized with a cat probe . quantification of the obtained radioactive signals normalized to all ribosomal rrna bands indicated that cat mrna levels remain constant throughout the cell cycle . secondly, we analyzed the distribution of cat mrnas on polyribosomes during the progression from g <dig> and s phase. for that purpose the polysomal profile of the cat transcripts in promastigotes at phase g <dig>  and mid-s phase  was studied by sucrose gradient centrifugation of cytosolic extracts and northern blotting. according to the rrna species distribution on the gradients deduced from the ethidium bromide staining, fractions 1– <dig> should be considered to be free of functional ribosomes, since they either do not contain rrnas or the rrnas are not in equimolecular amounts. equimolarity of the three larger  <dig> s,  <dig> s-α and  <dig> s-β rrnas composing the l. infantum ribosome  <cit>  was observed between aliquots 6– <dig> that correspond with the polyribosomal fractions . the distribution of the cat mrnas along the sucrose gradient fractions is shown in fig 4d. during the g <dig> phase, cat transcripts concentrate on the top of the gradient showing a peak out of the polysome fractions. on the contrary, when 50% of the cells were in the s phase cat mrna was detected in the bottom fractions. in particular, a secondary peak containing 57% of the cat mrnas was observed in the polyribosomal fractions. a similar pattern was obtained when blots were re-hybridized with a h <dig> probe although the percentage of h <dig> mrnas in the polyribosome fractions was lower  and the secondary peak was located in the central fractions of the sucrose gradient. the same results showed for h <dig> were obtained when a h2a coding region probe was tested in these blots . differences in the translational degree observed in the cat mrnas polysome profiles in the s phase relative to the endogenous h <dig> or h2a could be related to the influence of the cat coding region on the secondary structure of the mrnas since it has been recently described that the coding regions of different reporter genes may affect the translational efficiency in kinetoplastids  <cit> . together, these results demonstrate that the cell-cycle related expression of cat is controlled in the transfected parasites by the same regulatory events that control the expression of the histone genes.

histone h2a 3' utr is involved in s phase translational regulation
to examine the role of the histone 3' utr regions in the control of mrna translation we made a new construct, pxcat3'h2a, in which the cat reporter coding region was located between the 5' regulatory regions of hsp <dig> gene and the 3' regulatory regions of h2a <dig> gene . northern blot analysis of stably transfected cells lines containing this construct gave rise to a single cat transcript of approximately  <dig>  kb as expected after correct 5' and 3' processing or the mrna . the steady state level of these transcripts remained constant throughout the cell cycle  and had similar levels to what was observed for the cell line transfected with the plasmid containing both h2a <dig> gene regulatory regions  .

on the other hand, a good correlation was observed between the percentage of cells in the s phase of the cell cycle and the 35s-labelling of cat  indicating a cell cycle dependent accumulation of de novo synthesized cat in promastigotes transfected with pxcat3'h2a. quantification of the radioactive signal revealed a 2-fold increase in the s phase . interestingly, the ratio between the de novo synthesis and number of cells in the s phase is similar to that obtained for the pxcat5'iii/3'i transfectants . these results are in agreement with the cat mrnas polysome profiles showed in fig. 5c. most cat mrnas were not bound to functional ribosomes in the g <dig> phase , but shifted to polyribosome fractions during the s phase . remarkably, the position of the secondary peak in the central fractions in s phase blot , was similar to that obtained for the h <dig> transcripts and to that described for the endogenous h2a transcripts  <cit> .

thus, it can be concluded that a sequence segment located in the 3' utr region of the h2a <dig> gene contains the cis-sequence element responsible for the cell cycle regulated translation reported for the leishmania histone genes.

analysis of the implication of the 5' utr in the cell cycle regulated translation
to elucidate the role of the histone h2a 5' utr in the s phase dependent translation of the cat gene we made a new construct in which the cat reporter gene was placed between the 5' regulatory regions of h2a <dig> gene and the 3' regulatory regions of hsp <dig> gene. the construct, named pxcat5'h2a , gave rise to a single cat transcript of approximately  <dig>  kb in a northern blot performed with total rna from stably transfected cells lines containing this construct . remarkably, the steady state level of cat transcripts obtained from this cell line were lower to that observed in cell lines transfected with plasmids bearing both h2a regulatory regions  or the 3'utr alone  .

immunoprecipitation experiments with promastigotes transfected with the pxcat5'h2a plasmid showed an increase in the metabolic labelling of cat at  <dig> h after hu release . densitometric analysis showed a 2-fold increase in the labelling of cat when cells enter into the s phase . however, analysis of the polysomal profiles of cells transfected with pxcat5'h2a revealed that cat transcripts were actively translated at the g <dig> phase since they were associated with polyribosomal fractions  at time  <dig> h after hu release . it was also observed that a higher percentage of transcripts were located in the polyribosomal fractions  when cells progress into the s phase. in addition, the location of the reporter mrnas in the bottom fractions of the sucrose gradient indicates a high translation rate for transcripts bearing the combination of the h2a 5' utr and the cat coding region in both cell cycle g <dig> and s phase. subsequently, we analyzed the polysome profiles of the cat transcripts in parasites transfected with the pxcathsp <dig>  a cell line that did not show cell cycle regulated expression of cat. the results indicate that similar percentages of these transcripts were located into polysomes in the g <dig>  and in the s phase  . contrary to cat transcripts from the pxcat5'h2a cell line, cat transcripts from parasite transfected with pxcathsp <dig> were in a similar active translational status along the cell cycle. thus, it can be concluded that when the 5' utr region of the h2a <dig> gene is located upstream of the reporter gene the translation level of cat transcripts is increased in the s phase.

taking into account the variations observed in the percentages of cells in the s-phase between experiments, three independent assays were performed with the cell lines transfected with pxcathsp <dig>  pxcat5'iii/3'i, pxcat5'h2a and pxcat3'h2a constructs. the ratio between the de novo synthesis of cat  and the amount of cells in the s phase in the different transfected cell lines was determined . an increase was observed in this ratio in both the pxcat5'h2a and pxcat3'h2a cell lines compared with pxcathsp <dig> cell line. in addition, the ratio obtained with the parasites transfected with pxcat3'h2a was higher than that observed for parasites transfected with pxcat5'h2a. this ratio closely resembles the de novo synthesis ratio observed in the parasites transfected with the construct containing the two h2a regulatory regions . in the same cell lines the percentage of cat mrna on polysomes was also analyzed . the distribution of the cat transcripts on polysomes in parasites transfected with pxcat3'h2a and pxcat5'iii/3'i constructs showed similar profiles, whereas a higher percentage of cat transcripts was found on polysomes in the g <dig> phase in the pxcat5'h2a transfected cell line. altogether, these data indicate that although the 5' utr and 3' utr regions of the h2a gene are implicated in protein synthesis regulation, the 3' utr plays the major role in the observed cell cycle dependent translation.

whereas the expression of cat is regulated in a similar form to that observed for the endogenous h <dig> histone in the cell line transfected with pxcat3'h2a construct, in the pxcat5'h2a cell line cat transcripts are translated in the g <dig> phase although an increased translation was observed in the s phase of the cell cycle. taking into account that the coding region of different reporter genes may affect the translational efficiency in kinetoplastids  <cit>  we decided to study the regulatory role of the h2a 5' utr with an his-tagged h2a as reporter gene, instead of cat. therefore, we created a new construct named pxhish2a5'h2a in which the sequence coding for six histidine residues, followed by the h2a <dig> coding region was flanked by the 5' regions derived from gene h2a <dig> and 3' regions derived from hsp <dig> gene . the de novo synthesis of his-h2a was determined by immunoprecipitation using an anti-his monoclonal antibody. this was performed on nuclear protein extracts obtained from cells progressing along the cell cycle and labelled with methionine. in fig. 8b–c, the autoradiograph exposure of the blot and the densitometric analysis obtained in one of the two independent experiments are shown. an accumulation of the de novo synthesized his-h2a at the s phase was observed. the ratio between the de novo synthesis of the his-h2a protein and number of cells in the s phase  is similar to that obtained for cat protein in cell line transfected with pxcat5'h2a . however, it was also shown that the de novo synthesis of his-h2a was maintained when cells progressed into the g2/m phase. the polysomal profiles of the his-h2a transcripts have been determined in cells transfected with the pxhish2a5'h2a construct in the g <dig> and the s phase . the results of two independent assays revealed an active translation of these transcripts during the g <dig> phase  with an increase in the percentage of transcripts located in the secondary peak  <dig> h after hu release  . on the other hand, and as a consequence of the replacement of cat to his-h2a we observed that the position of the his-h2a mrnas secondary peak on the sucrose gradient was similar to that observed for the h <dig> transcripts used as control of the endogenous expression .

these results reinforce the implication of the h2a 5' utr, in addition to that of the 3' utr, in the translation of the histone transcripts during the s phase of the cell cycle since for both reporters a slight increase was observed in the de novo synthesis and in the percentage of mrnas located into the polysome fractions. the role of this region in the cell cycle expression of histone genes is related with an enhancement of translation initiation of h2a transcripts when these have access to the translational machinery.

CONCLUSIONS
changes in the steady-state levels of leishmania regulated transcripts in response to different stimuli have been associated with post-transcriptional events controlling mrna stability. this kind of regulation involves sequences present mainly in the divergent 3' utrs, although sequences located at the 5' utrs and in some cases on intergenic regions  have also been implicated  <cit> . the presence of divergent sequences in the 3' utr of genes coding for nearly identical proteins has been correlated with a differential pattern of expression of these genes during the parasite life cycle stages as this occurs for example with the promastigote major surface protease gp <dig>  <cit>  or during heat shock as occurs in the l. infantum hsp <dig> gene family  <cit> . l. infantum histone h2a coding genes are organized in tandem as two independent clusters, and like many housekeeping genes they possess a high sequence conservation in the coding regions and high divergence in the 5' and 3' utrs  <cit> . the data presented in this paper indicate that contrary to what has been shown for other gene families, the sequence differences in the 5' and 3' utrs of h2a gene copies are not implicated in a differential expression of this gene. in fact, a similar s phase dependent, de novo synthesized cat protein was detected in parasite cell lines stably transfected with different constructs containing distinct combinations of the histone h2a 5' and 3' utr regions.

in the last few years an increasing number of reports show that sequences located at the 3' utr of different leishmania genes are implicated in the regulation of mrna translation . it has been shown that a 450-nt long region within the amastin 3' utr confers amastigote-specific gene expression by a mechanism that leads to an increase in mrna translation  <cit> . this sequence is also present in the 3' utrs of many protein coding genes that are specifically expressed in the amastigote stage of the parasite. during heat shock, the hsp <dig> 3' utr has been involved in the preferential translation of the hsp <dig> genes in l. amazonensis and l. infantum  <cit> . the data presented in this work show that in parasites transfected with the pxcat5'iii/3'i construct  cat expression is regulated mainly at the translational level in a cell cycle dependent manner similarly to the endogenous leishmania histones  <cit> . in fact, in the transfected parasites there were not significant variations in the steady-state levels of cat mrnas along the cell cycle whereas drastic changes in the polysome profiles of histone mrnas were observed during the progression from the g <dig> to the s phase, concomitant with an increase in the de novo synthesis of cat in the s phase of the cell cycle. furthermore, our data show that the h2a 3' utr is implicated in the cell cycle dependent translational control of cat. the presence of the h2a 3'utr in the cat transcripts was associated with the accumulation of the mrnas in a translational incompetent state in the g <dig> phase. a similar accumulation of untranslated transcripts has been described for some leishmania hsp <dig> bearing specific 3'utr regions  <cit> . most likely, these parasites accumulate untranslated transcripts in order to mount rapid responses to environmental changes. the characterization of the regulatory protein that interact with the h2a 3' utr requires the definition of the mrna signals involved in the interactions. in leishmania only a few post-transcriptional regulatory cis-regulatory elements have been described , and many of them involve large regions on the 3' utrs of the mrnas. interestingly, the existence of a defined conserved cis element in the 3' utr of almost all leishmania histone genes  has been described  <cit> . the presence of the cataga box in the 5' and 3' utrs of some genes implicated with leishmania dna metabolism has been correlated with the accumulation of their mrnas in the s phase of the cell cycle  <cit> . whether or not this element plays a role in the translational control of the expression of the leishmania histone proteins along the cell cycle requires further elucidation. definition of the critical regulatory sequences located in the 3' utr of the h2a genes will allow the characterization of the control mechanism operating in these transcripts .

little is known about the implication of 5' utr regions in mrna translation in leishmania. the leishmania hsp <dig> 5' utr was described to play a role in the preferential translation of parasite hsp <dig> during heat shock, that depends on the presence of the hsp <dig> 3'utr in the same transcripts  <cit> . our data show that the h2a 5' utr has a minor contribution in the cell cycle dependent expression of histone h2a. both, cat and his-h2a transcripts bearing histone h2a 5' utr were translated at the g <dig> phase although they were more efficiently translated in the s phase. it has been reported that the translational efficiency in kinetoplastids can be affected by the reporter employed  <cit> . in our experiments, by changing the reporters differences were only observed when cells reached the g2/m phase. this indicates that further analysis should be done in order to clarify the role of this region in the cell cycle regulation of leishmania histone genes. in higher eukaryotes sequence elements located in the 5' utrs are usually involved in the interactions of factor that down-regulate the level of translation . on the other hand, 5' utrs cis elements that allow the interaction of translational enhancers have also been described  <cit> . the mechanism underlying the 5' utr mediated translation regulation of histone h2a 5' utr is still unclear. both, translational activators interacting in the s phase or translational repressors interacting out of the s phase could be responsible for the observed effects.

