BACKGROUND
high complexity is considered a defining feature setting living systems apart from non-living matter. thus, investigating the emergence, maintenance, and functional significance of complexity has been a central research theme in all of biological sciences throughout history including the analysis of the complexity of cellular systems at the molecular level  <cit>  and culminating in the emergence of systems biology that aims to develop an holistic understanding of the complex behavior of molecular and cellular systems  <cit> . in the context of molecular interaction networks, for example, it was observed that eukaryotic evolution was accompanied by changes of the complexity and a fast - on an evolutionary time scale - rewiring of interactions between proteins  <cit> . however, in the temporal domain, the complexity of molecular processes has not been adequately investigated yet. dynamic phenomena such as the temporal gene expression response to external perturbations as measured in time course genome-scale microarray measurements, while constituting a major research topic, have been analyzed primarily to unravel structural relationships between different groups of genes with the aim to identify important gene sets - for example, for diagnostic purposes - via clustering  <cit>  or principal component analysis   <cit> , or to deduce regulatory transcriptional networks and modules  <cit> , infer relationships between metabolic genes  <cit>  as well as to provide a basis for network modeling  <cit> . along with increasing numbers of experiments involving expression time series, approaches to identify dominating temporal patterns have been developed. introduced approaches ranged from applying unbiased singular value decomposition , utilizing the notion of patterns  <cit>  and extracting gene sets that are consistent with simple up/down/unchanged patterns and successions thereof as a means to guided profile clustering  <cit> , and to converting continuous level values into discrete ranks to determine the degree of randomness with regard to rank permutations  <cit> .

the paucity of systematic studies of temporal gene expression complexity may in part be explained by the lack of a suitable metric that is applicable to the typically very short gene expression time series with only few time points per gene available.

the investigation of complexity has attracted considerable interest in the physical sciences and various other fields. a quantitative understanding of complexity emerging in dynamical systems is often obtained by the notion of entropy, lyapunov exponents, or fractal dimensions  <cit> . the former two quantities measure the predictability of a system by showing how sensitively it depends on the initial conditions, while fractal dimension characterizes the complex geometric property in phase space.

it is rather challenging to apply the physical concepts of complexity  to address biological complexity, especially in the context of temporal gene expression data. specifically, the encountered obstacles include:  very short time series. for example, entropy as a complexity measure is formally defined only in the asymptotic limit; i.e., very long time series data at arbitrary accuracy are needed. finite time records require a suitable modification, e.g. ε-entropy  <cit> . still, even this modified entropy definition is not properly applicable to typical biological datasets, especially microarray measurements. most microarray experiments include a very limited number of temporal measurements, typically no more than  <dig> or so, oftentimes simply because of the cost considerations.  non-stationarity. most microarray measurements are intentionally non-stationary as they are being conducted specifically to measure the system's response to an external perturbation. note that here only a weak non-stationary criterion is considered, where the mean and the variance might vary over time.  non-equidistant time scale. microarray sampling schedules are intentionally designed with denser coverage at early time intervals of the process as the initial phases are, first, most interesting, and secondly, as the new steady state is reached, the rate of molecular adaptation can be expected to slow down.

in an attempt to capture complexity of temporal profiles understood as algorithmic compressibility and to identify profiles that are highly non-random, ahnert and co-workers introduced a rank permutation-based approach  <cit> . in this approach, a particular series of level data is converted to ranks and by virtue of various mapping functions that associate patterns with a single number, its likelihood of resulting from a random as opposed to a biological process can be assessed in an unbiased fashion. this method was shown to correctly identify cell cycle genes in yeast without the need to introduce any pre-conceptions on the data.

here, we propose to use permutation entropy  to analyze temporal profile data. pe was initially introduced as a measure to assess the complexity for time series based only on the ranks of the data, instead of a particular distance metric  <cit> . pe decomposes data series  into elementary motifs  and associates high complexity with high and low complexity with low numbers of different motifs observed in a given temporal profile. so far, it has been applied mainly to detect dynamical transitions in both modeled and experimental data; i.e., electroencephalography  and magneto-cardiography records  <cit> . compared to the approach reported in  <cit> , it has the advantage of only using a single pattern-to-value mapping function. furthermore, we introduced the 'unchanged' pattern; i.e., differentiate between significant expression changes and those that are purely attributable to noise.

we applied the concept of pe to gene expression time series data obtained in arabidopsis thaliana, an important model plant  <cit> , exposed to different abiotic stress conditions to investigate specifically, how the complexity of temporal gene expression patterns changes upon stress exposure and whether different functional groups of genes as well as different experimental conditions are characterized by different pe properties. secondly, we explore whether and to what degree gene-specific expression complexity is encoded in the arabidopsis genome by examining associated gene promoter regions. whether complexity is increasing during the course of evolution is an intriguing and much debated question  <cit> . here, we compare the obtained pe complexity measure for well-conserved  - and thus supposedly ancient - genes to those associated with arabidopsis-specific, presumably young genes. finally, we examine the introduced pe complexity measure in relation to gene expression correlation networks. correlation networks allow studying gene expression data sets with regard to the structure of the underlying pairwise relationships with particular focus on genes involved in many interactions, so-called hub genes with a high degree of network connectivity  <cit> . we find that high-degree genes are associated with increased pe indicative of the global stress induced restructuring of gene expression that has been observed similarly in yeast  <cit> .

we demonstrate that pe is a simple, yet powerful novel concept to study the dynamics of temporal gene expression profiles and equally applicable to other types of molecular profile data.

RESULTS
we applied the concept of permutation entropy  as a metric to assess the complexity of temporal gene expression profiles obtained from abiotic stress time series microarray experiments performed in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . the dataset comprised nine abiotic stress  and one common control condition. for every stress and the control condition,  <dig> time points were consistently available across all conditions corresponding to  <dig> h,  <dig>  h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h, and  <dig> h after stress exposure.

elementary three-point pattern distribution
the approach to measure complexity of temporal gene expression profiles by means of permutation entropy  relies on converting continues expression level data into a succession of discrete order patterns of - in our case - three consecutive time points. allowing for the no-change pattern ,  <dig> different three-point patterns are possible . the most frequent pattern observed under control conditions and across all gene transcripts is pattern  <dig>  the no-change pattern , followed by partially unchanged patterns  and monotonic profile patterns . least frequent are patterns corresponding to three distinct expression values . notwithstanding the fact that the no-change pattern assignment depends on the set expression difference threshold between consecutive time points , a clear tendency to steady or gradually rather than abruptly changing elementary expression patterns is evident from the data.

the permutation entropy  distribution of the arabidopsis transcriptome under control and stress conditions
applying our modified pe metric to all atgenexpress abiotic stress time series datasets, the entropy values for all considered  <dig>   genes under all  <dig> different conditions  were calculated. as an illustration, we selected the control dataset to show the general distribution of pe values across all gene transcripts . as only seven discrete pe values are possible given our definitions  represented by the seven frequency bars in figure  <dig>  the distribution is not normal, and hence, all significance tests were performed applying the mann-whitney-u test . the smallest pe value  corresponds to genes with only small fluctuation across all the time points such that gene expression levels do not change above the de threshold  as illustrated for an exemplary profile surrounding the histogram or to strictly monotonic up or downward changes across all time points as such a profile also yields pe =  <dig>  as evident from the example profiles, with increasing pe values, the associated temporal patterns become more complex; i.e., more and different patterns occur with the maximal possible pe value of  <dig> . zero is the most frequent pe value obtained for approximately half of all gene transcripts; i.e., most genes have a low expression complexity under control conditions. the maximal pe value was obtained for only about  <dig> percent of all transcripts. the least frequent profiles are the strictly periodic signals .

relative to control conditions, the median pe of all 22k gene transcripts monitored by the microarray increases significantly upon exposure to stress conditions . the most dramatic increase of pe was observed under heat and uv-b light stress conditions, and smallest changes, but nonetheless leading to significantly increased pe, under cold and oxidative stress situations. thus, when challenged by unfavorable environmental conditions, the complexity of gene expression programs in arabidopsis increases, whereas the control condition appears to correspond to the ground state of minimal pe complexity.

differences between the median pe-value of all transcripts under stress compared to median pe under control conditions. p-values correspond to the wilcoxon rank sum test.

functional association analysis of high and low pe genes
we examined what biological processes and molecular functions are associated with genes of high or low pe, respectively. moreover, we asked whether the association of particular processes and functions to high or low pe changes under different stress conditions or whether there are particular functional gene classes universally associated with either high or low pe. all gene transcripts were classified into  <dig> biological processes and  <dig> molecular function groups according to go-slim terms  followed by computing the mean pe value per condition for each go gene set and applying biclustering .

across all conditions , genes involved in the general and abiotic stress response  and regulatory processes ) are universally and significantly  associated with high pe  indicating their sensitivity towards stress conditions, while genes of yet unidentified functions and process involvement and house-keeping functions such as dna and rna metabolism  as well as general transcription processes and functions  were found to represent a low pe cluster. thus, their gene expression is less complex even when exposed to stress conditions. surprisingly, even under control conditions, response to stress and transcription factor activity are significantly enriched in the high pe gene set suggesting that genes involved in these functions exhibit greater temporal gene expression complexity even under normal reference conditions . nonetheless, the reference, control condition was associated with relatively low pe values across most go terms, while heat and uv-b light stress clearly stand out as being associated with high pe across all go categories . interestingly, cold and heat stress exposure appear to fall on opposite ends of the pe spectrum with cold stress being similar to control conditions. thus, temperature appears to either "freeze" = cold or "stir" up = heat the system reflected by pe. the conditions "salt" and "drought" stress - both water stress related - were found to cluster together based on mean pe values for the different go terms as well as "oxidative" and "genotoxic" stress, albeit less tightly.

go-slim process and function annotation terms enriched in genes with maximal pe under control and treatment conditions. fdr  p-values obtained from fisher exact tests  correspond to the benjamini-hochberg-corrected raw p-values  <cit> . only fdr values smaller than  <dig>  are listed.

when investigating pe values for temporal expression profiles expressed relative to control values , we noted that with regard to biological process, "response to stress", "response to abiotic or biotic stimulus" and "other biological process" were consistently enriched among genes associated with the highest possible pe value  compared to all other genes with lower pe , however, with regard to molecular function - an ontology that aims more at the precise molecular functionality rather than overall process, no individual function or activity is universally detected as being associated with high pe values upon stress exposures . thus, while the overall strategic response is similar across all conditions , the concrete realization as to which functions are modified by increasing gene expression complexity is condition specific.

pe and expression level
evidently, genes with very low or even no appreciable expression levels across all conditions and at all time points will have low  pe values as there is no significant change either. among those genes, genes with currently no annotated function or process involvement as judged by their go annotation are clearly overrepresented . it is possible that those genes may be predicted incorrectly in the genome or may even not be true genes at all as frequently gene structure annotations have been generated by in silico gene predictions. thus, including genes with very low expression level bears the risk of associating low pe values simply with genes of questionable gene structure. therefore, in all subsequent analyses that rely on genes with correctly assigned gene structure and detectable gene expression, we discarded the  <dig>  genes expressed at low levels under control conditions  and focused on the remaining  <dig>  genes with appreciable expression levels only.

increased pe correlates with an increased upstream intergenic space and increased number of cis-elements
high pe-values resulting from an increased number of order patterns indicate that a gene's expression has truly changed significantly  over the course of the experiment. and not only has the expression level changed, but it has changed in different directions  as purely monotonic increases/decreases, despite being above the threshold de, will not contribute towards increased pe values. thus, genes with high pe have undergone differential regulation with opposing outcomes in response to the external stimulus. naturally, this behavior provokes the question as to how this complex regulation is induced and regulated.

high entropy genes may be under a more complex cis-regulatory control, and thus should harbor more cis-regulatory motifs in their upstream promoter regions. they may also require larger upstream space to accommodate a more complex regulatory apparatus, which would be measurable as the distance to the next upstream gene. indeed, high pe genes were observed to be associated with significantly longer upstream regions compared to low pe genes. when sorting all genes in ascending order of pe summed up over all conditions , the average upstream-gene-distance for the top  <dig>  pe genes was  <dig>  +/-  <dig>   compared to only  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  , pmwu =  <dig> e- <dig> for the bottom  <dig>  pe genes. this held also true when considering only control conditions ,  <dig>  low-pe genes:  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  , pmwu =  <dig> e-51). as shown in figure 5a, while the scatter based on per-gene data is appreciable, the average upstream distance shows a consistent upward trend with increasing values of pe_sum .

we then examined the number of cis-elements annotated within the  <dig> nucleotides upstream of a gene's transcription start site. high-pe genes were found to be associated with a significantly increased number of cis-elements, albeit the absolute difference was small . the  <dig>  highest pe genes possess, on average,  <dig>  +/-  <dig>   cis-elements compared to  <dig>  +/-  <dig>   found in the  <dig>  lowest-pe genes, pmwu =  <dig> e- <dig>  figure 5b shows the relationship of motif counts and pe_sum as a scatter plot. as for upstream distances , the per-gene data vary substantially, but a consistent upward trend of motif counts with increasing pe_sum values is clearly discernable . the trend of increased cis-element motif counts with increased pe was observed similarly for unique motif counts; i.e., repeated occurrences of the same motif were not counted towards the total number of motifs.

cis-regulatory elements associated with high and low pe genes
we determined if and which motifs are overrepresented in high- or low-pe genes. significantly increased motif counts for particular motifs were found for both high and low pe genes . well known stress-response cis-regulatory motifs such as the abre-like and abf binding site motifs  <cit>  were found overrepresented in upstream regions of high-pe genes, while in upstream regions of low-pe genes, the telo-box motif known to control genes involved in house-keeping functions  <cit>  was identified as the most significantly overrepresented motif.

cis-regulatory motifs found overrepresented with benjamini-hochberg corrected p-values  <cit> pfdr <  <dig>  in the  <dig> nucleotides upstream of the  <dig>  high and low pe genes, respectively.

genes with high connectivity degree in correlation networks have increased pe
the pe measure characterizes the temporal expression profiles of single genes. next, we explored the pe of genes in relation to their respective network properties by way of comparing high to low degree genes, where degree measures the number of connections in correlation networks , thus embedding single pe values in the context of other genes. across all conditions, we found that highly connected genes exhibit increased pe values relative to genes with low degree . thus, while simple expression profiles dominate - about half of all genes show the lowest pe value under control conditions , with regard to similarity of temporal profiles as judged by correlation, more complex patterns seem to be adopted synchronously by larger numbers of genes.

conserved genes have lower pe compared to new, arabidopsis-specific genes
for the set of  <dig>  high expression level arabidopsis gene probes , we identified those genes that have been conserved over long evolutionary times - and thus can be assumed to be evolutionarily old - by comparing all arabidopsis gene-encoded protein sequences to all annotated protein sequences in physcomitrella patens, a moss, and chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular algae. the  <dig>  arabidopsis genes also contained in physcomitrella were found to have significantly lower mean pe when summed up over all conditions , median =  <dig> ) compared to  <dig>  genes only present in arabidopsis, and thus presumably evolutionarily young genes , pmwu =  <dig> e- <dig>  similarly, the  <dig>  gene found both in arabidopsis and chlamydomonas are also associated with decreased pe <pesum > =  <dig>  +/-  <dig> , median =  <dig>  versus <pesum > =  <dig>  +/-  <dig> , median =  <dig>  for  <dig>  arabidopsis-specific genes, pmwu =  <dig> e- <dig> 

discussion
typically, the notion of complexity is used in the context of entire systems, for example protein-protein interaction networks  <cit> . we introduced the concept of permutation entropy  to capture the complexity of a singular temporal expression profile. here, complexity may be understood in the kolmogorov complexity  <cit>  sense, namely as the quality of a profile of being simple  as opposed to more complex  to that of highest complexity . specifically, we applied the pe metric to the analysis of temporal gene expression profile data. it relies on decomposing sequential expression patterns into elementary motifs  and associates high complexity with high and low complexity with low numbers of different motifs. investigations of time series data have focused primarily on discerning differential gene expression; i.e., the discovery of genes whose expression is significantly altered in response to a perturbation by applying appropriate thresholds. as implemented here, pe also identifies patterns of differential expression - or absence thereof , but in addition, examines whether the response is 'simple'  or whether a succession of different motifs indicates more complex transcriptional changes. thus, pe allows to easily identify those transcripts that exhibit intricate expression profiles as candidates for complex regulatory actions.

the issue of complexity of individual series of level data has been addressed before, most notably by ahnert and co-workers, who also used a pattern-based approach associated with rank permutations  <cit> . in the pe formulation of the problem applied here, a single mapping function  to map series of rank numbers to single values is used and thus to associate a single quantity with each temporal profile rather than several possible mapping functions listed in  <cit> . furthermore, by introducing the no-change pattern that is supposed to capture level differences below the noise level, we specifically aimed to associate those profiles to high complexity that are characterized by an occurrence of many different up/down/unchanged patterns, whereas in  <cit> , no such cutoff was introduced, such that seemingly erratic up/down patterns would be identified as random, and thus of lesser biological significance. by applying a sensible noise cutoff, we intended to identify those profiles as highly complex that are likely to have resulted from many and significant changes of the transcriptional program acting on those transcript. by contrast, the approach used in  <cit>  primarily aims to identify profiles that are most non-random  and thus those profiles that are associated with a particular biological process. for example, in our pe approach cyclical patterns obtained for cell cycle series would be ranked as medium pe complexity as repetitive patterns have less than maximal pe, but as most highly non-random by the approach introduced in  <cit> . in that regard, our pe formalism detects complex profiles as those with many significant changes and - to some extend - independent of the actual experiment.

as a metric, pe copes with the three problems typically encountered by other complexity measures . it is applicable to short, non-stationary, and non-equidistant time series data. evidently, longer time series will, however, yield statistically more robust results on a per gene basis.

as all studies on dynamic processes, the sampling rate at which data points are taken critically influences the results and their interpretation. ideally, the sampling rate matches the characteristic time scale of the process under investigation. the data used in this study were spaced in the minutes and hours time interval range, a scale that was found appropriate for transcriptional responses. it is clear that, had the sampling frequency been much higher or lower, the absolute pe values may not be directly comparable across different sampling frequencies. for example, at much higher rates, the unchanged pattern will be observed much more frequently. however, in relative terms, i.e. a comparison of pes associated for a number of genes at a given sampling scheme, the ordering of genes with regard to pe can be expected to hold. furthermore, the data used here were spaced evenly on a logarithmic time scale. by applying interpolation using cubical splines, we simulated even linear time spacing and found very similar results with regard to the overall distribution of pe values  and qualitative results with regard to go functional annotations . thus, the pe metric proved robust with regard to sampling scheme details.

permutation entropy and noise
high complexity measured by high pe indicates low predictability of future expression values based on past values of a gene expression time series. noisy or very erratic gene expression profiles would also qualify as highly entropic and, thus, not predictable. by imposing a threshold between consecutive time points based on the observed technical and biological variation, we largely eliminated purely noise-induced expression changes and identified significant change patterns. thus, high pe values can be assumed to be the result of significantly altered transcription programs and not by technical or biological noise. however, the appreciation of a biological role of noise in generating physiological responses is only now emerging. recently, it was shown that noise may produce bistable positive transcriptional feedback loops  <cit>  and that furthermore noisy genes have conserved coding sequences and exhibit characteristic protein-protein interaction network properties  <cit> . the concept of pe may thus be a suitable metric to be used in such studies as well.

mechanisms of gene expression complexity
as we implemented the pe concept to specifically identify patterns of significant change, the question arises as to how successions of multiple up/down/unchanged patterns for a single gene in response to a single stimulus are regulated. we found evidence that high pe genes are characterized by an increased length of their 5'-intergenic region as well as an increased density of cis-regulatory motifs. thus, increased pe may in part be originating from larger and more complex promoter regions. this has been shown similarly in the context of multi-stress response genes signified by differential expression across different external perturbations contained in the atgenexpress abiotic stress experiment series that was also used here  <cit> . however, we took a different view by examining the complexity of temporal profiles of individual genes in a single stress experiment. as we find similar trends, cross-experiment complexity and temporal single-experiment complexity may have similar sources based on genomic, architectural properties, and cis-regulatory motifs. the role of other conceivable processes and factors involved in causing highly complex temporal expression profiles such as mirna, epigenetic, chromosome structurally mediated regulations  <cit>  remains to be established.

complexity and evolution
including only genes with appreciable expression levels under control conditions, we found that arabidopsis genes that are conserved over long evolutionary distances, which can be assumed ancient, have lower pe than arabidopsis specific genes. while the absolute difference was small , it was statistically very significant. it appears reasonable to conclude that conserved genes serve functions that are universally needed. indeed, among the conserved genes . of course, it is difficult to decide what actually constitutes a stress condition. also the reference, control condition is one particular set of environmental parameters the plant has to cope with. growth processes and circadian as well as diurnal rhythms persist requiring dynamic changes of the underlying transcriptional program of those genes. alternatively, it could be speculated whether those genes are naturally fluctuating more, such that they are active and not in a dormant state, ready to produce the necessary response when challenged.

we found that the overall strategy of stress response may be the same across different abiotic stresses - to cope with the stress condition , the concrete tactics as to how to accomplish the stress response and which particular functional program to change, may very much be stress specific .

our analysis furthermore highlights the importance of time-resolved studies of stress response dynamics. approached naively, a stress condition should induce or repress a gene's expression and lead to a one-time or steady response pattern. correspondingly, previous analyses on the abiotic stress response in arabidopsis thaliana using the same dataset as analyzed here were based on detecting differential expression at a selected, single time point  <cit> . here, we show that oftentimes stress response is signified by a complex pattern of up- and downregulation instead. thus, when aiming to investigate stress response, single or few measurement time points may fall short of unraveling the true stress response dynamics. in addition, simple fold change considerations may be augmented by metrics that capture the complexity of response as well, as the one introduced here, the permutation entropy.

although the focus here has been on the characterization of single profiles, the reduction of continuous level data to patterns or symbols has also been explored in the context of modeling dynamical systems including interactions between many interacting network constituents  <cit> . the applicability of the pe metric to capture interactions may thus offer a fruitful avenue for further research.

CONCLUSIONS
permutation entropy provides a simple, yet powerful metric to capture complexity in patterns found in temporal profile data of single entities such as gene transcripts or individual metabolites. while longer time series data are preferable, even for relatively short time series with only few data points, meaningful results can be obtained. evidently, the concept of pe lends itself to the analysis of any time series data. as generating time series is becoming increasingly common, pe may emerge as a standard quantitative approach for their analyses.

