BACKGROUND
salicylic acid  is an important defensive signal in plants that is required for elicitor-triggered immunity and the establishment of systemic acquired resistance  <cit> . plants exhibiting sar possess an enhanced state of protection against a broad spectrum of pathogens, including viruses, oomycetes, fungi and bacteria  <cit> . sa inhibits various phases of the viral life cycle including replication, cell-to-cell movement and systemic movement. however, the precise effects of sa can differ between various host-virus combinations  <cit> .

rna silencing  is thought likely to contribute to sa-induced virus resistance although it is unlikely to be the only mechanism involved  <cit> . rna silencing is a sequence-specific mechanism regulating the synthesis, stability, and translatability of mrna molecules that is guided by small rna molecules in the size range 21- <dig> nt . the involvement of rna silencing in sa-induced virus resistance was first suggested by the discovery that sa can induce expression of a component of the rna silencing machinery, rna-directed rna polymerase  <dig>   <cit> . rdr <dig> may also contribute to defense through regulation of host mrnas encoding other defensive factors, for example those involved in jasmonic acid-induced defenses  <cit> . additional evidence for a role for rna silencing in sa-mediated defense arose from studies showing that viral silencing suppressor proteins, for example the cucumber mosaic virus  2b protein or hc-pro encoded by potyviruses, interfere with sa-mediated signaling and sa biosynthesis  <cit> .

there is evidence that mitochondrial signaling processes regulate some aspects of sa-induced virus resistance . reactive oxygen species  are constantly generated within mitochondria as by-products of respiratory electron transport chain activity  <cit> . perturbation in this ros pool or in mitochondrial redox can function in intracellular signal transduction and, through the poorly understood process of mitochondrial retrograde regulation, affect the pattern of nuclear gene expression  <cit> . this form of signaling is influenced by the alternative oxidase . aox is a mitochondrial enzyme that is the sole component of the alternative respiratory pathway. the functions of the alternative respiratory pathway include negative regulation of mitochondrial ros production and maintenance of primary metabolism under stress conditions  <cit> .

evidence supporting an additional role for mitochondrial signaling and aox in virus resistance includes observations that non-toxic levels of respiratory inhibitors such as antimycin a or cyanide induce resistance against several plant viruses  <cit> , and that sa, which is a weak cytochrome pathway inhibitor, induces aox1a gene expression  <cit> . murphy and associates  <cit>  found that expression of an aox coding sequence by a tmv-derived expression vector enhanced its spread in n. benthamiana plants. gilliland and colleagues  <cit>  found that in directly inoculated leaves, sa- and antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv was transiently enhanced in transgenic plants that had decreased alternative respiratory pathway capacities. however, in transformed tobacco plants that had increased alternative respiratory pathway capacities due to constitutive expression of an aox1a transgene, the induction of resistance to tmv by antimycin a was inhibited, while sa-induced resistance was not  <cit> .

to explain these results, it was proposed that sa and antimycin a both stimulate a signaling pathway that is negatively-regulated by aox. however, rdr <dig>  a factor in resistance to tmv  <cit> , is also inducible by sa but not by antimycin a  <cit> . since rdr <dig> gene expression is not affected by aox, it was suggested that this is why an increase in alternative respiratory pathway capacity inhibits antimycin a-induced resistance but does not completely inhibit sa-induced resistance to tmv  <cit> . to further investigate the aox-regulated mechanism of resistance to viruses we have used the experimental host plant n. benthamiana. this is highly susceptible to a wide range of viruses, which is explained to some extent by the fact that its rdr <dig> ortholog, nbrdr1m, encodes an inactive enzyme  <cit> . thus, n. benthamiana provides a natural mutant background for exploring the effect of aox on plant responses to virus infection without the potentially confounding presence of active rdr <dig> 

RESULTS
construction and characterization of stably transformed n. benthamiana plants with modified alternative respiratory pathway capacity
to increase or decrease alternative respiratory pathway capacity, n. benthamiana plants  were transformed with, respectively, either a wild-type tobacco aox1a cdna, or a mutant sequence, aox-e  <cit> . aox-e encodes an inactive version of aox  to act as a dominant negative mutant  <cit> . transgenes were fused to an enhanced cauliflower mosaic virus 35s promoter to drive constitutive high-level expression . transgene expression and the respiratory characteristics of transgenic plant lines were examined  <cit>  and lines with up- or down-regulated alternative respiratory capacity were selected for subsequent experiments .

notes.

1leaf cells isolated from non-transgenic  nicotiana benthamiana plants, transgenic plants expressing aox1a or aox-e sequences under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35s promoter, plants harboring a 35s:mtrdr <dig> transgene super-transformed with the 35s:aox1a transgene, or from plants transformed with an 'empty' transformation vector were placed in an oxygen electrode. the number  of independent oxygen electrode experiments  carried out for each plant line is indicated.

2oxygen consumption rates  were measured in the absence  or presence of  <dig> μm antimycin a  or  <dig> μm antimycin a plus  <dig> mm salicylhydroxamic acid . rates determined when both inhibitors were present, gave a measure of residual, i.e. non-respiratory, oxygen consumption.

3last two columns: residual values were used to derive corrected values for the control oxygen consumption rates, and oxygen consumption rates in the presence of antimycin a, which gives the alternative respiratory pathway  capacity for each line.

4ap capacity in plant cells expressing the aox or aox-e transgenes were significantly different from that observed in cells from non-transgenic plants .

altering alternative respiratory pathway capacity affected basal resistance to potato virus x
modifying alternative respiratory capacity had dramatic effects on disease symptoms in pvx-infected plants  and on virus accumulation in directly-inoculated and systemically infected leaves . pvx caused mild symptoms in non-transgenic n. benthamiana plants but caused stunting and leaf curling symptoms in aox-transgenic plants with increased alternative pathway capacities . accumulation of pvx coat protein was higher in aox-transgenic plants with than in non-transgenic plants . decreasing the alternative pathway capacity by expression of aox-e did not appear to affect symptom development following infection with pvx . at  <dig> days post-inoculation significantly lower levels of virus had accumulated in plants expressing aox-e than those expressing aox . although at  <dig> days post-inoculation less virus accumulated in plants expressing aox-e than in non-transgenic plants these differences were not statistically significant   and were not observed consistently at later time points . these data show that modulating alternative respiratory capacity affects pvx accumulation.

salicylic acid-induced resistance to pvx is modified in plants with increased and decreased alternative respiratory pathway capacity
following treatment with sa, pvx coat protein accumulation was monitored in transgenic plants from lines with increased or decreased alternative respiratory capacities at  <dig> days post-inoculation. treatment with sa induced resistance to pvx in non-transgenic n. benthamiana but the treatment did not induce resistance to the virus in aox-transgenic plants . however, as an inducer of resistance to pvx, sa was markedly more effective in these plants than in non-transgenic or aox-transgenic plants, with virus accumulation decreased to barely detectable levels . these data show that in n. benthamiana plants, suppression of alternative respiratory pathway capacity combined with sa treatment led to greater pvx resistance and that sa-induced resistance to pvx was compromised by enhancement of alternative respiratory pathway capacity. thus, for pvx, aox-modulated defensive signalling is the predominant factor in the regulation of sa-induced resistance.

altering alternative respiratory pathway capacity affects chemical induction of resistance to tobacco mosaic virus in n. benthamiana
pre-treatment of non-transgenic n. benthamiana plants with sa inhibited tmv-induced symptom development in systemically infected tissues. however, modifying alternative respiratory pathway capacity in transgenic plants did not affect the timing or appearance of systemic disease symptoms induced by tmv regardless of whether or not the transgenic plants had been treated with sa , similar to results in tobacco  <cit> .

in contrast, modifying the alternative respiratory capacity of n. benthamiana plants did affect the induction of resistance by antimycin a and sa to tmv accumulation in directly inoculated leaf tissue . leaves were infiltrated with a control solution or solutions of antimycin a or sa before inoculation with tmv. viral coat protein accumulation in these leaves was detected by immunoblot analysis . in aox-transgenic lines with increased alternative respiratory pathway capacities, antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv was inhibited . however, sa-induced resistance to tmv was not inhibited in these plants . the concentration of sa  required to induce resistance to tmv in non-transgenic n. benthamiana was markedly higher than the  <dig>  mm concentration that is sufficient to induce resistance to tmv in tobacco  <cit>  . this may reflect the greater susceptibility to virus infection that is characteristic of n. benthamiana  <cit> , or that inactivation of sa by conversion to its glucoside occurs more effectively in this plant  <cit> . however, in transgenic plants expressing aox-e, that have a decreased capacity for alternative respiration,  <dig>  mm sa was adequate to induce resistance to tmv infection even though it did not induce resistance to tmv in non-transgenic n. benthamiana leaves . this was also seen in three other transgenic lines expressing the aox-e mutant protein . thus, as was found to be the case in tobacco  <cit> , in n. benthamiana aox activity can negatively regulate the induction by sa and antimycin a of resistance against tmv. however, the effects of altering aox gene expression on tmv infection overall were markedly less striking than the effects these alterations had on pvx infection.

the effects of altering aox and rdr <dig> gene expression on chemical induction of resistance to tobacco mosaic virus in n. benthamiana
previously, we hypothesized that the reason that antimycin a-induced tmv resistance, but not sa-induced resistance, is inhibited in aox-transgenic transgenic plants is because sa triggers increased expression of the antiviral enzyme rdr <dig>  while antimycin a does not induce rdr <dig>  <cit> . we investigated the effect of constitutive rdr <dig> expression on chemically-induced resistance to tmv using plants doubly transformed with aox-derived transgenes and a transgene expressing the m. truncatula rdr <dig> sequence . mtrdr1-transgenic plants are more resistant to tmv-induced disease and so, in contrast to transgenic control and non-transgenic plants, were not killed by systemic infection with tmv . however, the expression of mtrdr <dig> did not result in any marked effect on tmv accumulation in the directly inoculated leaves , suggesting that the major effect of rdr <dig> is to protect plants from systemic infection. constitutive expression of mtrdr <dig> did not prolong the inhibitory effect of sa on tmv accumulation , nor did it affect the characteristics of antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv. although the suppression of antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv was slightly stronger in line  <dig> than in line  <dig>  in neither of these aox-expressing lines did the constitutive expression of mtrdr <dig> rescue chemically-induced resistance to the virus .

discussion
in line with a model proposed by singh and colleagues  <cit> , modifying alternative respiration by constitutive expression of aox or the dominant-negative mutant aox-e affected the outcome of infection by viruses. for pvx, our data indicates that sa-induced resistance is regulated strongly by aox and, unexpectedly, that this enzyme also plays a role in maintaining basal resistance to this virus. the interactions of these transgenic n. benthamiana plants with tmv are similar to those observed previously in tobacco plants transformed with aox-derived transgenes  <cit> . thus, as in tobacco, sa-induced resistance to tmv was enhanced in n. benthamiana plants with diminished alternative respiratory pathway capacity but apparently unaffected in plants with an enhanced respiratory capacity. antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv was, respectively, enhanced or inhibited in transgenic plants in which alternative respiratory pathway capacity had been diminished or increased. however, basal resistance to tmv in n. benthamiana was not affected by modification of alternative respiratory capacity.

previous studies showed that in tobacco, ntrdr <dig> activity contributes to the maintenance of basal resistance to pvx whilst in n. benthamiana it is nbrdr <dig>  not nbrdr <dig>  which is a major determinant of basal resistance against this virus  <cit> . our data suggests that in n. benthamiana the defensive signal transduction pathway regulated by aox also plays an important role in basal resistance to pvx. this result was unexpected since evidence from gilliland and colleagues  <cit>  had indicated that aox-regulated defensive signaling plays no discernable role in basal resistance to tmv.

the result was further surprising since pvx, like tmv, is a positive-strand rna virus  <cit> . thus, these viruses replicate in a similar fashion, although they have differing strategies for gene expression and cell-to-cell movement . it may be that tmv is more effective than pvx at subverting or inhibiting the antiviral mechanisms that are regulated by aox. tmv, for example, appears to be able to interfere with a wide range of sa-mediated responses through interaction between its replicase proteins and a transcription factor that regulates basal defense  <cit> . alternatively, it may be that pvx is able to evade some of the sa-induced resistance mechanisms that inhibit tmv infection. for instance, although the accumulation of tmv and pvx was inhibited by ntrdr <dig>  the rdr <dig> of medicago truncatula inhibited tmv accumulation but pvx appears to be unaffected by this rdr <dig> ortholog  <cit> .

another possibility is that pvx, but not tmv, elicits a reaction similar or analogous to pamp-triggered immunity. pamps or pathogen-associated molecular patterns are chemical signatures produced by cellular pathogens  that are perceived by receptor-like kinases, resulting in the triggering of localized defense responses including the generation of ros  <cit> . these localized defense responses can underlie non-host resistance  or provide some minimal level of resistance to infection  in susceptible plants. typically, pamps are quite generic in their nature and for bacterial pathogens include fragments of flagellin or translation factors  <cit> . baurès and colleagues  <cit>  have theorized that in pvx and other potexviruses a highly conserved amino acid sequence or folded structure in the coat protein might function as a pamp. it is also known that the pvx coat protein interacts with a factor, the rangap <dig> protein, which may act as a target or decoy for the pvx coat protein and  may participate in triggering resistance  <cit> . it is possible that interactions of the pvx coat protein with an unknown receptor, or with rangap <dig> in susceptible plants , result in induction of basal resistance mechanisms via the production of ros. maxwell and colleagues  <cit>  showed that aox can affect ros levels throughout the cell, so it could be that this signaling mechanism is affected in plants with modified alternative respiration. possibly consistent with this idea are observations showing that potexvirus infections are associated with complex changes in ros and in the activity of anti-oxidant enzymes  <cit> .

our rationale for using n. benthamiana in this study was that the nbrdr1m gene encodes a protein that lacks rdr activity  <cit> . thus, it was envisaged that we would be able to observe the effects of modifying alternative respiratory capacity on the effectiveness of sa-induced resistance to tmv without interference from rdr <dig> activity. however, we found that although antimycin a-induced resistance to tmv was affected in plants with either increased, or decreased, alternative respiratory capacity, sa-induced resistance to this virus was only affected  in plants with a decreased capacity. the results are similar to those seen in transgenic tobacco plants with increased alternative pathway capacities  <cit> . performing experiments with plants expressing mtrdr <dig> constitutively showed that although these plants are more resistant to systemic tmv-induced disease, the expression of this enzyme has no detectable effects on tmv accumulation in the directly-inoculated leaves or on chemically induced resistance in these tissues. thus, our hypothesis that sa-induced resistance to tmv in tobacco could be a result of the combined action of aox-regulated mechanisms and rdr1-mediated viral rna turnover was overly simplistic. our results with n. benthamiana do not rule out a role for rdr <dig> activity in sa-induced resistance to this virus, or a role for aox as a regulator of this resistance. but the results indicate that additional, unknown factors also participate in sa-induced tmv resistance .

CONCLUSIONS
the study revealed that for pvx, sa-induced resistance is much simpler in its execution than sa-induced resistance to tmv. for pvx, aox-modulated defensive signaling is the predominant factor in controlling sa-induced resistance. in conclusion, the results of this study show that aox-regulated signaling constitutes an important part of plant antiviral resistance. however, it is also clear that the phenomena of sa-induced resistance and basal resistance to viruses both result from the operation of multiple antiviral mechanisms that do not inhibit all viruses to an equal extent.

