BACKGROUND
squaliform sharks constitute a group of highly specialized species with a predominantly deep-dwelling lifestyle. they represent a substantial part of extant shark diversity  comprising  <dig> genera and more than  <dig> described species  <cit> . many squaliform species are bioluminescent, a feature which appears to be exclusive within the chondrichthyes. currently, the families echinorhinidae , squalidae , centrophoridae , somniosidae , oxynotidae , dalatiidae , and etmopteridae  are discussed to form the squaliformes. however, some previous morphological studies have suggested alternative intergeneric and interfamilial arrangements for the group .

the phylogenetic placement of echinorhinidae has remained ambiguous in both morphological and molecular studies, either being included within squaliformes, considered sister to squaliformes, or placed in a separate group with saw sharks  or angel sharks . further, recent molecular studies have recovered squalidae, centrophoridae, dalatiidae, and etmopteridae as monophyletic lineages within the squaliformes, however, their interfamiliar relationships remain partially unresolved while the family somniosidae appeared paraphyletic as oxynotidae cluster within somniosidae .

all of the molecular data sets examined to date have been based on the analysis of a single or few genes and none have recovered substantial support for branching events at the family level, likely due to limited phylogenetic signal supporting deeper nodes. phylogenetic analyses based on morphological characters have not yielded consistent results either, e.g.  <cit> .

a dataset with strong phylogenetic signal is prerequisite for analyses of the evolution of taxa through time. so far, molecular clock analyses have delivered conflicting results concerning the origin and radiation ages of squaliform sharks in general and the rise of families in particular  <cit> . molecular clocks are best calibrated using information from fossils or from vicariant biogeographic events. squaliformes are well documented in the fossil record for sharks, which is largely comprised of teeth. most squaliform sharks display diagnostic clade specific dentitions pointing to high levels of trophic specialization and conservatism. a number of fossils can therefore be readily assigned to extant lineages such as the gulper shark genus centrophorus  <cit>  or the viper dogfish trigonognathus  <cit> , without the need to erect distinct genera for extinct forms whose phylogenetic affinities are unclear. according to  <cit> , the fossil record of squalidae extends back to the upper jurassic, while families centrophoridae, etmopteridae, somniosidae, oxynotidae, and dalatiidae appeared rather instantaneously at the beginning of the upper cretaceous, which has been suggested to be a period of adaptive evolution in response to new ecological opportunities  <cit> . the oldest echinorhinid fossils are recorded from the lower cretaceous  <cit>  the evolution of bioluminescence in kitefin  and lantern sharks  appears to be correlated with the diversification of squaliform sharks in the deep-sea  <cit> . surprisingly, it has not been clear at which point in their evolutionary trajectory, squaliform sharks first acquired photophores. despite the fact that shirai  <cit>  had noted that all squaloid sharks except echinorhinus, centrophorus, cirrhigaleus, deania, somniosus, and squalus bear luminous organs, several recent studies suggested that photophores are only present in etmopteridae and dalatiidae  <cit> .

in this study, we estimate the phylogenetic interrelationships of squaliform sharks by applying a gene capture approach that targets a large number of single-copy nuclear exons  <cit>  to a generic level sampling of “squaloid” sharks and closely related taxa  <cit> . we have used these data in conjunction with fossil calibration data, to estimate times of divergence and diversification rates among the extant lineages examined. we have also explored the potential role that bioluminescence may have had in promoting diversification in these animals, by reconstructing ancestral character states based on the inferred tree and the presence of photophores in extant forms.

RESULTS
molecular phylogeny of squaliformes
on average,  <dig>  of  <dig>  possible basepairs, were sequenced per specimen . characteristics of the raw dataset are given in additional file 1: table s <dig>  missing data were randomly distributed among specimens resulting in a large amount of incomplete sequences per captured locus and specimen.

mare  <cit>  detected  <dig> phylogenetically informative loci in the raw dataset . re-blasting the full genome of c. milii against the  <dig> phylogenetically informative loci resulted in two potentially paraloguous loci  and cds  <dig> ). excluding these two loci and repeating the maximum likelihood analysis as described above did not affect the inferred tree topology.

phylogenetic estimates presented herein provide a fully resolved and well-supported molecular hypothesis for the phylogeny of squaliform sharks. the maximum likelihood trees as well as the bayesian inferences resulting from different types of analyses carried out using raxml  <cit>  and phylobayes  <dig> f  <cit>  were broadly congruent in topology except for the phylogenetic placement of oxynotus. this taxon appears as sister taxon to all somniosid genera except for somniosus in an analysis of all  <dig> loci, but is nested among somniosid genera except for somniosus in the analyses of the reduced dataset comprising  <dig> and  <dig> loci, respectively. the topology used for further analysis is summarized in fig.  <dig>  and is based on the  <dig> concatenated nucleotide loci that were selected through the mare matrix reduction process and re-blasting analysis. the concatenated and aligned  <dig> nucleotide loci are deposited in the dryad data repository  <cit>  .fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood phylogenetic estimate of squalomorph sharks based on gene capture data of  <dig> nucleotide loci under a gtr + gamma model using raxml  <cit>  partitioned into two sets, 1st and 2nd codon position as well as 3rd codon only. analyzed specimens are listed in additional file 1: table s <dig>  nodes marked with black dots indicate 100 % bootstrap support and a posterior probability of  <dig> assessed in the bayesian inference from the phylobayes  <dig> analysis applying the cat model  <cit> . tree rooted midpoint, no outgroup defined.



this phylogenetic estimate reveals two major clades: the squaliformes excluding echinorhinidae and a clade containing squatina, pristiophoriformes, and echinorhinus . within this clade, echinorhinus is sister to squatina and pristiophoriformes. results suggest that echinorhinidae are not squaliform sharks, but are the sister group to angel-  and saw sharks , as previously suggested by the analysis of mitochondrial data  <cit> . therefore, squaliformes form a monophyletic group only, if echinorhinus is excluded. this study does not support results from  <cit> , suggesting echinorhinus being the sistergroup to the remaining squaliform lineages. the node time estimation for the echinorhinus lineage suggests an upper jurassic splitting of the extant echinorhinus lineage and the squatina plus pristiophoriformes clade. this dates the echinorhinus lineage older than anticipated from the fossil record, which reports the oldest echinorhinid fossil from the early cretaceous  of southeastern france  <cit> , while the oldest squatinids already appear in the upper jurassic  <cit> .

within the squaliform clade, the first split separates squalidae from the remaining families centrophoridae, etmopteridae, dalatiidae, somniosidae, and oxynotidae. the genera squalus and cirrhigaleus appear as sister taxa. centrophoridae split from etmopteridae, dalatiidae, somniosidae, and oxynotidae, where genera deania and centrophorus are sister. dalatiidae are sister to a clade comprising etmopteridae, somniosidae, and oxynotidae. there are two clades within the dalatiids, one comprising the isistius and dalatias lineages, the other squaliolus and euprotomicrus. as shown in fig.  <dig>  somniosidae sensu stricto form two clearly distinct lineages that are sister to each other, one containing the genus somniosus , the other lineage contains all other remaining somniosid genera. oxynotidae cluster within somniosidae . within etmopteridae, trigonognathus is sister to a clade comprising aculeola and centroscyllium. etmopterus is sister to this previously described clade forming four distinct lineages representing the subclades described in  <cit> .

oxynotus is inferred to be nested within somniosidae, rendering the family somniosidae paraphyletic  in the current study. this result is repeatedly recovered in phylogenetic estimates based on dna sequence data  . given the consistency of the inferences from molecular data, it would be interesting to see if any anatomical features also support the link between oxynotidae and somniosidae. oxynotus clusters with a group of otherwise morphologically similar species of somniosids, i.e. along with zameus, centroselachus, scymnodon, and centroscymnus. our molecular results show that all five genera are closely related . this is especially evident when comparing intergeneric diversity within somniosidae with the large intrageneric sequence differences evident within the genus etmopterus . moreover, there are limited morphological characters that can be used to differentiate some of these taxa  <cit> . together these results imply that assigning separate generic status to some species within somniosidae may be an overrepresentation of the true diversity within the family.

occurrence and significance of bioluminescence in squaliform sharks
the bayesian inference estimated with beast  <cit>  is widely congruent with the maximum likelihood phylogeny .

results from node time estimates based on  <dig> loci support a squaliform shark radiation beginning in the lower cretaceous and continuing through to the upper cretaceous . a sister-group relationship of non-luminous squalidae with a clade comprising all other squaliformes is strongly supported as the most ancient split of extant squaliformes  and is consistent with the fossil record  <cit> . centrophoridae rise in the lower cretaceous, followed by the splitting of dalatiidae, somniosidae, oxynotidae and etmopteridae, which also aligns with the sequence of appearance of these taxa in the fossil record. however, 95 % confidence intervals are large, preventing exact estimates . a second radiation occurred within etmopteridae and somniosidae in the upper cretaceous and the beginning of the palaeocene , again, a time period characterized by profound changes in the marine environment including the deep-sea. as discussed in  <cit> , the eocene recovery phase and the admixing of the deep-sea by the establishment of the circum-antarctic current at the beginning of the oligocene, may have set the stage for this second radiation.table  <dig> node time estimates for major splitting events



novel ecological opportunities after oceanic anoxic events have been hypothesized to trigger adaptive radiation of sharks in deep-water environments in the lower cretaceous  <cit> . results from the medusa  <cit>  analysis indicate a background diversification rate r =  <dig> . an elevated diversification rate was detected for families etmopteridae, dalatiidae, oxynotidae and somniosidae,  and the radiation of the species-rich genus squalus .fig.  <dig> chronogram resulting from the beast  <cit>  analysis with estimated shift in the diversification rate. background rate r =  <dig> . the black stars indicate significant increase in the diversification rate to r =  <dig>   and r =  <dig>   estimated with medusa  <cit> . scale bar in millions of years. numbers at branches refer to node numbers given in table  <dig>  pie charts indicate the probability that ancestral taxa are luminescent  or not . families etmopteridae and dalatiidae were coded as luminous as well as the genus zameus within somniosidae. * = node calibrated with information from the fossil record 



we reconstructed ancestral character states in order to test the hypothesis that bioluminescence evolved in conjunction with the diversification of the dalatiidae, etmopteridae, oxynotidae and somniosidae. in the first analysis, we coded dalatiidae and etmopteridae as luminescent. results from this analysis indicated that the common ancestor of families dalatiidae, etmopteridae, oxynotidae, and somniosidae was already likely carrying luminous organs. interestingly, somniosidae have been widely accepted as non-luminous  <cit> . however, shirai  <cit>  suggested that all somniosidae are luminescent except for the genus somniosus, which may have secondarily lost the ability to produce light.

we reviewed the presence of photophores in somniosidae and oxynotidae, by inspecting the ventral surface area of several specimens housed in zoological collections. the inspection of skin samples from zameus squamulosus revealed clear presence of epidermal photophores  in this taxon . the majority of these organs appeared to be ring-shaped and covered with translucent dermal denticles. zameus photophores are visible as open dark circular plaques, typical of functional photophores that are capable of producing light. indeed, this morphology is typically adopted by dalatiid and etmopterid photophores while glowing ; the translucent nature of z. squamulosus scales would allow efficient transmission of underlying photophore light, similar to the observation of light transmission through the ventral scales of opisthoproctid fishes  <cit>  or through the dorsal finspines of the velvet belly lanternshark, etmopterus spinax  <cit> .fig.  <dig> microscopic photograph of an excised ventral skin patch of zameus squamulosus . arrows indicate photophores in open state. scale bar indicates 200 μm



morphological data presented herein provide clear evidence that functional photophores are present within somniosidae, at least within the genus zameus . all other inspected specimens showed no evidence of epidermal photophores. in light of this, the ancestral character state reconstruction was repeated incorporating results from the inspection of skin samples, i.e. coding the genus zameus in addition to etmopteridae and dalatiidae as luminescent. results from this analysis further increased the likelihood that the common ancestor of dalatiidae, etmopteridae and somniosidae was luminescent . the common ancestor of centrophoridae, etmopteridae, dalatiidae, oxynotidae, and somniosidae is also implied to have been luminescent, but the likelihood is less compelling. a further analysis following  <cit>  coding somniosid genera centroselachus, centroscymnus, scymnodon, and zameus as luminous further increases the likelihood so that the common ancestor of all squaliformes except squalidae may already have been luminescent . this indicates that extant centrophoridae may have secondarily lost their ability to emit light, i.e. that luminous organs may have already been present at the branching event giving rise to families centrophoridae, dalatiidae, etmopteridae, somniosidae, and oxynotidae . this suggests that luminescence evolved along and facilitated the squaliform deep-sea radiation – a scenario that would be consistent with the elevated diversification rate detected for etmopteridae, somniosidae, and oxynotidae. . we speculate that the common ancestor of families dalatiidae, etmopteridae, oxynotidae, and somniosidae was luminescent and used this to enhance camouflage by counterillumination as this is assumed to be the most basal function of shark bioluminescence  <cit> .

the occurrence of bioluminescence within the family somniosidae is not surprising as especially the smaller sized genera  occur in sympatry with other luminous sharks such as etmopterids and dalatiids as well as a number of other luminescent deep-sea taxa including myctophid fishes which interestingly were estimated to have radiated in a similar time window  <cit> . results presented here lend further support to the hypothesis that bioluminescence in sharks evolved only once  <cit> . work in progress will allow identifying all luminous taxa within the family somniosidae.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide insights into the phylogeny of squaliform sharks as well as the evolution of bioluminescence in the group. the radiation is estimated to have started in the lower cretaceous and continued through to the upper cretaceous. the initial elevated diversification rate is correlated with the likely first occurrence of luminous organs in sharks. the presence of photophores was confirmed for the genus zameus in the family somniosidae, implying that bioluminescence in sharks is not restricted to families etmopteridae and dalatiidae as is widely believed.

