BACKGROUND
the microarray technology provides a way of simultaneously measuring transcript abundances of  <dig> –  <dig> genes from one or more cell or tissue samples. a microarray, also known as a gene chip, has well defined regions that each consists of immobilized sequences of dna, which each is unique to a specific gene. these regions are referred to as probes  <cit> . when fluorophore labeled cdna, referred to as targets, obtained by reverse transcription of mrna extracted from the samples of interest is let to hybridize to the probes for a few hours, each region on the microarray will specifically bind a certain amount of hybridized dna unique to the corresponding gene. depending on if a two-channel or single-channel microarray platform is used, either several and differentially labeled targets are hybridized to the same array, or different targets are each hybridized to separate arrays using identical labels. next, the array is scanned at different wavelengths to excite the fluorescent molecules using a light source, for instance a laser. shortly after the fluorophores have been excited they emit photons, which are registered and quantified in each position by the scanner, which results in a high-resolution digitized image for each channel. using image analysis methods, the pixels that belong to the regions that contain the probes are identified and averaged, and an estimate of the transcript abundance for each gene is obtained.

since these estimates are obtained from a complex measurement process of several steps, it is likely that the observed signals contain not only measurement noise, but also systematic variations of different kinds  <cit> .

in this report, we show the existence of a channel-specific bias introduced by the scanner and most likely its detector parts. our results indicate that the image analysis may also contribute with a small bias. the effects channel-specific biases have on the downstream microarray analysis are many  <cit> . we suggest a scan protocol and a model that will allow us to estimate the biases and calibrate the observed signals accordingly. the result will be that the intensity dependent effects are removed, but also that the effective dynamical range of the scanner is increased several times.

model
general model
consider a microarray experiment involving genes i =  <dig> ,..., i from rna extracts c =  <dig> ,..., c. in single-channel microarrays each array measures the gene expression levels in one rna extract, whereas in two-color microarrays each array measures two rna extracts, one in each channel. we will refer to each set of signals from each rna extract as channels. let μc,i be the true gene expression  level of gene i in channel c. ideally, statistical analysis can then be done on these quantities. for instance, by comparing the relative abundances in two channels, that is ri = μ <dig> i/μ <dig> i for all genes i, it is possible to identify genes that are significantly differentially expressed . however, in reality we do not observe the true expression levels, but only the quantified spot intensities yc,i. the general relation between the observed and the true expression levels can be written as

yc,i = fc + εc,i,     

where fc is an unknown channel-specific function, which we refer to as the measurement function, that includes all steps in the microarray process. moreover, we assume independent intensity dependent error terms εc,i such that e =  <dig>  because we want to do inference based on μc,i, it must be possible to find the inverse of fc, which  is possible if it is strictly increasing.

to be able to find the form of fc, high quality calibration data from several stages along the microarray process is required. here we will consider a simpler case. split the overall measurement function into two parts. the first part xc,i = gc models, in channel c, the amount of light from spot i that enters the photomultiplier tube   <cit>  as a function of the transcription level of clone i. the second part, which is studied in this report, is yc,i = hc and models the observed signal as a function of the amount of photons in channel c and spot i that enters the pmt. that is, it captures the characteristics of the scanner's light detector, but also of the image analysis methods. we want to emphasize that the light from one spot does not necessarily originate solely from the fluorescent molecules that are attached to the hybridized target dna. light from other sources such as cross-hybridized target, intrinsic fluorescence from spot buffer, and scatter light may also contribute with photons of similar wavelengths.

next we will show that hc is almost perfectly affine. this measurement function also depends on the scanner settings, especially the scanner sensitivity, which is indicated below with the super index . in other words,



where for each fix scanner setting k,  and  are channel-specific bias and scale parameters, respectively. assume that xc,i is fix for all pmt voltages.

note that the above relationship is not necessarily linear. here we refer to linear in the strict sense where ac =  <dig> so that the output is proportional to the input. lack of linearity has important implications on downstream analysis. for instance, when spotted as well as in-situ synthesized microarrays are used it is common to do statistical analysis on the log-ratios mi = log <dig> and the log-intensities  for all genes i  <cit> , where we for convenience have denoted the two channels to be compared by r and g although such comparisons are not limited to within-array measurements. one of the rationales for this bijective transform is that under ideal conditions the main measure of interest, the fold change, is contained in one variable only. however, a channel specific bias introduced by fc will introduce a so called intensity dependent bias in the observed log-ratios. commonly observed intensity dependent effects in the log-ratios  <cit>  can partly be explained by the fact that the logarithm is taken on affinely transformed signals  <cit> .

constrained model
the model in equation  is not identifiable. we address this problem as follows. consider the case where the same array has been scanned at k different pmt settings. let  be the vector of the k quantified signals for gene i and channel c. in the noise-free case it follows from  that  lies on the line l in k, which has direction  and goes through the point . the 2k parameters of ac and bc are not identifiable, since l has only 2k -  <dig> degrees of freedom. in fact, any transformation bc ← k·bc and ac ← ac + l·bc, where k and l are scalars, will leave l intact. in this paper, we make ac and bc identifiable by choosing k and l so that  =  <dig> and ac is the point on l closest to the  line l' = {ec; ec∈ }. the choice of ac can be motivated by looking at observed data. by inspection, we observe that the bias  in model  is not varying much when the pmt gain is changed. to demonstrate this,  have been plotted for each of the six possible pmt pairs in figure  <dig>  first, the close fit of the lines to data is evidence that the scanner is linear in its dynamical range. second, all lines go through approximately the same point, lets call it , suggesting that there is a common pmt-independent bias ec. more precisely, we split the bias term into two parts, one dependent and one independent on the pmt gain according to



and define  ∈ k. for this split, data indicates that ||dc|| ≈  <dig>  where ||·|| is the norm in, say, l <dig> . let d = y - e where y ∈ l and e ∈ . the constraint that ac is the point of l closest to l' can then be formulated as



where the minimization is with respect to y and e. equivalently, this means that dc is orthogonal to bc and . the above can be interpreted geometrically as follows. by definition, ac is a point on the line l. similarly, ec = ec is a point on the diagonal line that goes through  and  in k, i.e. l'. minimizing dc according to  is the same as finding the shortest distance between the line l and the diagonal line, which is also the distance between the two points ac and ec. from this geometrical interpretation it is also clear that in order for the parameters to be uniquely identifiable the line l must not be parallel to the diagonal line, that is,  must be different from  for some k.

a robust estimate of l was proposed in  <cit> , using iteratively re-weighted principal component analysis . this estimate of l, together with the above parametrization of ac and bc, give us estimates  and  of all 2k -  <dig> parameters of ac and bc, as well as an estimate  of ec.

let us illustrate the parametrization and estimation procedure for k =  <dig>  since two  lines will always intersect, constraint  degenerates to the assumption that dc =  <dig> or, equivalently, that  = ec in the noise-free case the line l is described by



where  and . by setting  in  and applying the constraint , we get that ac =  and bc =  where ec = αc/. to further illustrate the stability of the pmt independency, the parameters  have been estimated for each of the six pmt pairs independently based on data from array a scanned by the axon scanner and quantified by genepix. the various estimates for both channels are listed in table  <dig>  the average estimate of the bias across all pmt pairs in the red channel was  =  <dig>  . for the green channel the average bias estimate was  =  <dig>  . the small standard deviations confirm that dc is indeed small.

RESULTS
this analysis was done with eight arrays  that were scanned on two different scanners at four different pmt settings. two different image analysis applications were used. see methods for details.

parameter estimates
for every combination of array, scanner and signal quantification method , we estimated the parameters ac , and bc in model - for both channels . to get a better understanding of the properties of the estimates, we used a non-parametric bootstrap approach to obtain not only bias corrected estimates, but also their standard deviations. data was resampled over gene index in a way such that the same bootstrap data sets were used whenever pairwise comparison was done, e.g. when comparing bias estimates in red and green channels. for genepix and spot quantified signals a bootstrap sample of size  <dig> was used.

for the estimates based on the raw pixel intensities a different approach was taken. because the number of pixels for one scan is about  <dig>  and we had four scans, our computer system limited us to estimate the model based on a subset of  <dig> pixel intensities. this was done for  <dig> random subsets and the mean and standard deviation of the parameter estimates were calculated, much like the bootstrap method above. the mean and the standard deviation of  and  for all possible setups are listed in tables  <dig> & <dig>  the mean and standard deviation of  over all arrays are shown in table  <dig> 

comparison of arrays
the bias estimates for all bootstrap replicates in tables  <dig> & <dig> have been depicted as box plots in figure  <dig>  considered that the signals are in  <cit> , the bias estimates are very stable between different arrays. the biases span  <dig>  units  in the red channel and  <dig>  units  in the green channel.

comparison of scanners
for the two scanners, we found that the estimated bias based on signals obtained by the agilent scanner are consequently higher than the estimates from the axon scanner. the box plots of their differences in the common bias ec  between the agilent and the axon scanner in figure  <dig> confirm this divergence. see also table  <dig>  this significant difference could be an effect of scan order, that is, all arrays were first scanned on the agilent scanner and then on the axon scanner. the arrays in hand were part of a much bigger project based solely on agilent scanned data. to keep a consistent scan protocol and to minimize bleaching, we could not balance the experimental design by letting some arrays be scanned in the reverse order. instead, to test for scan order trends we scanned one array first on agilent , then on axon  and then again on agilent . no apparent trend was found.

comparison of image analysis methods
estimates of the common bias ec based on genepix quantified signals are consistently greater than the corresponding ones based on spot signals, cf. tables  <dig> , <dig>  the box plots in figure  <dig> show differences in estimates of the common bias  between genepix and spot. the difference may be explained by the fact that the two applications use different spot segmentation algorithms  <cit> . because the concentration of fluorophores is not homogeneous across a spot, the result is that the distribution of pixel intensities will vary with the segmentation method. this effect can be more profound for spots with strong donut effects. robust estimates such as the median pixel value will to some extent protect against this variance, but not completely. it has been suggested  <cit>  that the median of  ratios is a better estimate of the ratio of hybridized cdna than the ratio of median . however, the former requires that the images are perfectly aligned with respect to shift, rotation, shear and so on. also, it applies exclusively to two sample comparisons. because of this, we do not believe that pixel-ratio signals are useful in practice.

pixel-based estimates
to better understand the underlying reasons for the observed channel biases, the proposed affine model was also applied to pixel intensities . the estimated biases for the two channels for different arrays using iwpca based on pixel values are shown in tables  <dig> & <dig>  except for the green channel in the second scan round of array h, the pixel-based estimates are consistently higher than the estimates based on genepix and the spot foreground signals. as noted above, pixel-based estimates are very sensitive to image distortions. this is especially a concern for the agilent scanner since it reloads the arrays between subsequent scans. to investigate the effect of image distortion, we did a test where a person with experience in microarray analysis was asked to subjectively rank how badly aligned the four images in the red channel with different pmt gains from the agilent scanner were for each of the  nine arrays. the person rated the images from arrays a, b, d, and h- <dig> to be "extremely" misaligned. the images from array e were considered to be "quite" misaligned, and the images from array c to be "slightly" misaligned. for the rest of the arrays the images were considered to be aligned . this is perfectly in line with the discrepancies in table  <dig>  which confirms our hypothesis. another disadvantages with pixel-based methods is that they are extremely memory and time consuming. for instance, estimation with  <dig> pixels is approximately  <dig> times slower than with  <dig>  signals.

comparison of channels
as figure  <dig> shows, the common bias ec is greater in the green channel than in the red channel, especially for genepix quantified signals, when estimated based on data from the axon scanner. for the agilent scanner this trend is less clear although the spot quantified signals seem to give higher bias in the green channel than in the red channel. furthermore, the biases in the red and the green channels are stable between arrays, which give further evidence to our hypothesis that the bias originates from the scanner .

deviation in bias estimates between pmt gains
in figure  <dig> the distribution of the "bias residuals"  are depicted for different scans k and channels c, for each separate array, but also for all arrays together, and for both scanners and both image analysis methods. most apparent is that the estimates based on signals from the axon scanner and especially those quantified by the spot software are greater than for the others, cf. tables  <dig> & <dig>  the reason for this difference is not clear to us. for some arrays the estimates from the red and the green channels are strongly correlated, but it is not clear to us when this occurs. although not in general, for some combinations of scanner and image analysis method, there is a trend in the pmt order . again, we do not know why. to summarize, we have by means of exploratory data analysis  tried to understand what sometimes looks like patterns in the  :s, but we found no apparent relationships. however, systematic effects indicate that  may be modeled further.

calibration
when data was calibrated according to the backward transformation in - estimates  of all xc,i:s were obtained. since we do not know the true values we can not verify the estimates directly. however, partly we can do it indirectly by looking for remaining systematic effects in the log-ratios, but also by comparing the empirical densities of the calibrated scans. for a detailed study on systematic effects introduced by affine transformations, see  <cit> . for instance, the amount of intensity-dependent curvature in the log-ratios is related to the bias and the relative scale factor via the product  assuming ||dc|| =  <dig>  to demonstrate this relationship, we have for different pmt pairs compared the within-channel log-ratios and log-intensities





respectively, with the corresponding ones for the backward transformed data, which we denote by  and . the log-ratios versus the log-intensities for the raw signals of all six pmt pairs are shown in the left scatter plot in figure  <dig>  the corresponding plot for the backward transformed signals is shown to the very right. for each of the six data clouds, the curvature, but also the overall bias, in the log-ratios is removed. to further underline the effect that a channel-specific bias has, we have calculated the log-ratios for the bias-subtracted signals , which makes model  linear. as seen in the middle scatter plot, the curvature introduced by the bias and the logarithm is removed. the overall bias in the log-ratios which remains is  and is removed when the signals are rescaled. it is not correct to shift only the log-ratios towards zero, because then the log-intensities will be incorrect.

the various m versus a plots become very similar and so do the four empirical density functions of the signals as seen in figure  <dig>  the small bumps at high intensities are due to the saturated signals, cf. figure  <dig> 

extended dynamical range
for the agilent scanner the effective scale parameters / were estimated to be in the order of approximately  <dig> :  <dig> . for the axon scanner they were in the order of approximately  <dig> :  <dig>  cf. table  <dig>  thus, the calibration method extends the effective dynamical range, with preserving linearity, by a factor of  <dig>  for signals from the agilent scanner and a factor of  <dig> for signals from the axon scanner.

discussion
sources of the bias
because bias introduced before the pmt would be amplified differently at different gains, we suspect that the observed bias is due to the scanner and most likely its detector parts such as the analogue-to-digital converter  after the pmt, but possibly also due to the image analysis method. the observed differences between the channels can be explained by the fact that there is one pmt and one adc per channel, which may have slightly different properties. although there are differences in bias between the two scanners, they are still of the same order, which we find remarkable. another lab with a genepix scanner reported biases also around 15– <dig> . a possible reason for this is that the scanners consist of similar parts.

other estimates
to rule out the obvious situation where all pixel intensities are biased we compared the above estimates with the minimum pixel intensities. for example, for array a , the minimum pixel intensities in the red channel were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> for pmt  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> volts, respectively. in the green channel the minimum pixel intensity is  <dig> for all scans. it is not useful to use the minimum spot signals, , either. for example, for the above scan the average minimum signal across all scans in the red channel is  <dig>  , but in the green channel it is  <dig>  , cf. table  <dig> 

on background subtraction
if the scanner is the main source for the observed bias, then the background estimates should be affected by this bias as well and subtracting the background from the foreground estimates will therefore not only correct for physical background noise from the array itself, but also for the scanner bias. the strong intensity dependent effects of the log-ratios that are due to the bias, are much less apparent if we apply background subtraction , giving more evidence to our hypothesis that the observed systematic effects originate from the scanner. thus doing background correction might correct for the bias, but it will also introduce more noise at any given intensity. also, for the data set in hand background subtraction results in  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  negative values , respectively, whereas bias subtraction results in no negative values. if we assume that the noise is additive such that the background is added to the foreground signals, then for probes with few or no fluorescent molecules the true foreground signal should be close or identical to the true background signal. as both are estimates, approximately half of the foreground signals for non-signal spots are less or equal to the corresponding background signals. thus, about half of such spots results in negative signals. however, the different numbers of negative signals for different pmt voltages suggest that this can not be the full explanation. one reason could be that the background estimates are likely to be biased  <cit> . an error model that incorporates different noise sources, but also different scan parameters, might give some answers to this problem. some models in this context have already been suggested  <cit> , as well as models based on empirical bayesian methods  <cit> . another way to put it is that the background estimate is local and based on individual spots/pixels whereas the bias estimate is global, that is, there is one estimate for the whole array . therefore, the background subtracted intensity estimates are noisier, resulting in more negative estimates for low intensity spots.

the problem of non-positive estimates, but also high variance close to zero, are limitations of the logarithmic transform and alternatives such as the generalized logarithmic transform etc. have been suggested  <cit> .

photo bleaching
we estimated the red dye  to bleach about 2% and the green dye  about 1% in a typical microarray experiment . because the amount of bleaching is relatively small, but also because it is a very complex phenomenon, we decided to not try to incorporate it in the above model. some of the systematic variation seen in the bias estimates for the different pmt settings may be due to bleaching.

signal density normalization
as the results show, the empirical distributions of signals match each other remarkably well after calibration. it is interesting to compare this method with the quantile normalization methods proposed by  <cit> . the latter is based on the "statistical" assumption that the signals in all channels  should be equal whereas the former is based on a "physical" assumption that the signals should be linear in the dynamical range. for a further discussion on this see  <cit> .

incremental robust estimates
it turned out to be infeasible to estimate the model parameters based on all pixel intensities, which limited us to use only on a 10% subset of data. as argued above, pixel-based estimates are not reliable and therefore not of interest. however, for spot-based estimates the same limitations may apply as larger data sets are made available. we wish to overcome such memory constraints. for this reason, we investigate the possibility to use  incremental re-weighted pca methods  <cit> .

related work
another method that combines multiple scans is the masliner  algorithm  <cit> . it works by combining one low-pmt scan and one high-pmt scan into a new virtual scan. if a signal in the high-pmt scan is within a specified linear range its value is used, otherwise the corresponding signal from the low-intensity range is used after being transformed affinely to fit the high-pmt scan. to combine three or more scans, the new virtual scan can be combined with another pmt scan and so on. the result is that the effective dynamical range is extended. however, there are several unnecessary drawbacks. first, although several observations of the same spot concentration exist, which all may be within the dynamical range of the scanner, only one observation is used. statistically, the average  scan would be a more precise estimate. second, since the scans are combined pairwise the estimate of the affine relationship between the scans is less robust. third, although a sensitivity discussion is carried out in the supplementary materials, masliner fits the affine models in a non-robust fashion . also, classical linear regression is used, which assumes no error in the explanatory variable. since masliner makes the signals from different pmt settings proportional to each other it will indeed remove for instance curvature in within-channel m versus a scatter plots. however, masliner does not model the possibility of a pmt-independent bias and will therefore not correct for it. we believe this is the reason why the authors observe a "curvilinear effect" . for these reasons, we believe that the robust multiscan calibration method presented in this paper is superior to the masliner algorithm and should be used instead.

CONCLUSIONS
by scanning the same microarray at various pmt settings we have shown that there exists a bias in the measurement of the concentration of fluorescent molecules in the spots on the microarray. our analysis indicates that this bias is mainly due to the scanner, but also due to the image analysis methods. by using a constrained affine model for the relationship between the obtained fluorescent intensities and fluorophore concentrations in the spots, we have been able to estimate the aforementioned bias. with estimates of the bias and scale parameters in each channel back transformation gave estimates of the amount  of photons from each spot that enters the pmt. although not all photons originate solely from fluorophores in the target dna, this is still a far better estimate of the amount of hybridized target dna in each spot than the corresponding signal quantified by the scanner and the image analysis.

before calibration, our data show a strong intensity dependent effect in the log-ratios, whereas after calibration there is no apparent intensity dependent trend. furthermore, the distributions of signals from subsequent pmt scans are almost identical after calibration. in addition, the signal-to-noise ratio is increased with multiple scans. finally, scanning at both low and high pmt settings extends the dynamical range of data, which gives higher resolution at low intensities without having to pay the price of saturated signals.

the proposed method can be applied to other microarray technologies such as single-channel oligonucleotide arrays or nylon arrays, and possibly to other gene expression technologies such as quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction .

to conclude, we suggest that hybridized microarrays are scanned at two  pmt gain levels to identify channel dependent bias terms. knowing the exact pmt settings is not important, but the larger the differences are, the more precise the estimates will be. we recommend that the scans are done in decreasing pmt-gain order . given estimates, data can then be calibrated easily. for practical reasons it might, however, be sufficient to estimate bias terms for a specific scanner once and then use estimates for calibration of subsequent microarrays. the small inter-array variation observed for channel specific bias in our data suggests that this would be possible. on the other hand, without multiple scans, afore mentioned increase in signal-to-noise and dynamical range will be lost. also, not investigated within the scope of this study, bias terms for a specific scanner might change over time. for these reasons, we suggest that microarrays are scanned multiple times.

for two-channel microarrays, after calibrating each channel separately, a similar strategy can be applied once more to bring differently labeled channels to the same scale as suggested in  <cit> . this would rely on the assumption that the amounts of hybridized dna in all channels are approximately equal for the majority of the spots, which in turn is based on the commonly used assumption that most genes are non-differentially expressed. this also applies to normalization between arrays.

all necessary methods are made available in a free r package named aroma  <cit> . a typical usage is calibratemultiscan where rg is the object containing the red and green signals. in addition, we are currently implementing the methods as a plug-in module for the base system  <cit> .

