BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium is an enteroinvasive bacterial pathogen typically encountered by ingesting contaminated food or water. s. typhimurium causes self-limiting gastroenteritis in humans and typhoid-like fever in mice
 <cit> . greater than 99% of the bacteria in murine salmonellosis are killed in the stomach or passed out of the gut
 <cit> , but s. typhimurium that survive passage through the acidic stomach environment enter into the small intestine, where upon they transverse the intestinal epithelial barrier. the bacteria are then phagocytosed by macrophages or they can actively invade both phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells using a type iii secretion system
 <cit> . following invasion, salmonella disseminates throughout the body leading to a systemic typhoid-like infection
 <cit> .

salmonella forms biofilms on abiotic surfaces such as plastic and egg conveyer belts, which may have a role in environmental survival of this organism
 <cit> . biofilm formation and aggregation in s. enterica serovar typhimurium is exemplified by the rdar colony morphology, where colonies grown on media containing congo red are red, dry, and rough
 <cit> . this morphology requires the production of curli fimbriae and multiple exopolysaccharides
 <cit> . s. typhimurium also grows enmeshed in eps rich biofilms on the surface of gallstones, which may contribute to inefficient antibiotic treatment and facilitates typhoid carriage
 <cit> . biofilm shedding from colonized gallstones is likely a source of recurring infections
 <cit> .

the phopq two-component system is important for intracellular survival within macrophages. limiting mg2+, low ph and the presence of antimicrobial peptides are phopq-activating signals in culture
 <cit>  but low ph and antimicrobial peptides are important activating signals during intracellular macrophage growth
 <cit> . the pmrab two component system responds to fe3+ and low ph, and is activated under mg2+ limiting conditions by a post-translational mechanism involving pmrd, a phopq-regulated protein. pmrd prevents the dephosphorylation of pmra by pmrb, thus activating the expression of pmra-regulated genes
 <cit> . the pmrhfijklm operon is directly regulated by pmrab, is induced during phagocytosis and is required for survival from host antimicrobial peptide production
 <cit> . the pmr operon encodes an lps modification system that is responsible for aminoarabinose modification of the lipid a moiety of lps. reducing the negative charge of the bacterial surface with aminoarabinose is critical for reducing the membrane damaging effects of cationic antimicrobial peptides.

we recently demonstrated that dna is a cation chelator that induces expression of the pseudomonas aeruginosa arnbcadtef-ugd  operon in dna-enriched planktonic cultures and biofilms
 <cit> . dna sequesters cations and creates a condition that resembles a mg2+-limited environment, similar to known chelators like edta. expression of this operon was required for very high levels of biofilm resistance to antimicrobial peptides and partially contributed to aminoglycoside resistance
 <cit> . during mg2+ limiting growth conditions, the p. aeruginosa phopq and pmrab systems are both required for expression of the arn operon
 <cit> . both the phopq and pmrab systems respond to mg2+ limitation in p. aeruginosa, and there is no pmrd ortholog to connect the two pathways. in addition, the p. aeruginosa phoq sensor does not directly detect antimicrobial peptides, and the pmrb sensor does not respond to trivalent metals
 <cit> . extracellular dna also induces the expression of pmrab-regulated spermidine synthesis genes, which results in the production of the polycation spermidine on the surface and protection of the outer membrane from antimicrobial peptide treatment
 <cit> . both the arn and spermidine synthesis  clusters were induced in biofilms formed by a bfmr mutant of p. aeruginosa that accumulated more edna than wild-type biofilms
 <cit> . when sufficient dna accumulates in p. aeruginosa biofilms, or in the cystic fibrosis  lung where the concentration of dna is very high and leads to viscous sputum production in cf patients
 <cit> , the expression of these dna-induced surface modifications likely protect from host antimicrobial peptide killing. therefore, we wanted to determine if extracellular dna plays a general role in antimicrobial peptide resistance by imposing a cation limitation on s. typhimurium biofilms and activating the phopq/pmrab systems, similar to p. aeruginosa.

RESULTS
extracellular dna induces expression of the salmonella pmr operon
a low copy, plasmid-encoded transcriptional lux fusion to the pmrh promoter
 <cit>  was expressed in salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium  <dig> under various planktonic growth conditions. at ph  <dig> , the pmrh-lux reporter was repressed at 1 mm mg2+ but was induced 13-fold in a stepwise fashion as the mg2+ concentration was decreased to  <dig>  mm . the pmrh-lux fusion was most highly expressed under low ph  , even with the addition of up to 50 mm mg2+ . these observations were consistent with previous reports of pmr expression conditions
 <cit> . a fixed concentration of dna  was added to cultures grown in a range of mg2+ concentrations between 1 mm and  <dig>  mm. in each mg2+ concentration, the addition of  <dig> % dna caused a strong induction of pmrh-lux expression  . to confirm that dna induced pmrh-lux expression via cation chelation, we added exogenous 5 mm mg2+, which was sufficient to prevent dna-mediated induction of pmrh-lux . taken together, these observations indicate that dna chelates and sequesters mg2+ and the cation chelating activity can be blocked with excess mg2+.

next, we monitored pmrh-lux expression in wild type, phopq, Δpmrab and phopq/Δpmrab mutant backgrounds. dna-induced expression did not occur in Δpmrab or phopq/Δpmrab double mutants, indicating an absolute requirement for pmrab in responding to extracellular dna . a phopq mutant was still able to partially respond to extracellular dna, which was likely due to the presence of pmrab . in summary, extracellular dna imposes a cation limitation on s. typhimurium, leading to induction of the pmrh promoter in a phop and pmra-dependent manner.

extracellular dna is a matrix component s. typhimurium biofilms
while radar colony biofilms and biofilms on gallstones produce an extracellular matrix composed of multiple eps species, the presence of extracellular dna has not been well reported
 <cit> . here we cultivated flow chamber biofilms of s. enterica serovar typhimurium at 37°c for 48 hours. to determine if dna accumulates in the matrix of s. typhimurium biofilms, we stained for the presence of extracellular dna with toto- <dig>  large aggregates formed within 2 days that were 20–30 μm in height and stained positive for extracellular dna , illustrating that edna accumulates in salmonella flow chamber biofilms. biofilms were also cultivated on glass cover slips immersed in growth media and stained with propidium iodide, which showed the accumulation of edna fibers extending from an aggregate .

dna-enriched planktonic cultures show increased antibiotic resistance
the presence of extracellular dna may lead to increased s. typhimurium pmr expression, increased ap resistance and thus help to explain the antibiotic resistance phenotype that is characteristic of biofilms. to determine the influence of dna on antibiotic resistance, we tested the antibiotic susceptibility of s. typhimurium  <dig> planktonic cultures in the presence and absence of exogenous dna . the addition of  <dig> % dna  led to a 16-fold increased resistance to polymyxin b and colistin, a 4-fold increased resistance to gentamicin and a > <dig> fold increase in resistance to ciprofloxacin . both phopq and pmrab mutants did not demonstrate dna-induced resistance to polymyxin b and colistin. however, both mutants had parental levels of dna-induced resistance to gentamicin and ciprofloxacin, indicating that resistance to these antibiotics was independent of the phopq and pmrab systems . extracellular dna is known to bind to aminoglycosides through electrostatic interactions
 <cit> , and it was recently shown that exogenous dna shields p. aeruginosa from aminoglycoside killing, independent of the pmr resistance mechanism
 <cit> .
s. 
typhimurium

a
a
a
a
a the minimal inhibitory concentration  values were determined in nm <dig> medium containing 1 mm mg2+  with or without the addition of  <dig> % fish sperm dna-sodium salt .

the observation that phopq and pmrab mutants showed an increased susceptibility to colistin and polymyxin b, in the presence of edna, indicated a role for phopq/pmrab-regulated phenotypes in resistance to membrane acting antimicrobial peptides, likely through the aminoarabinose modification of lps via the pmr operon.

the pmr operon is highly expressed in biofilms
we wanted to determine if pmrh is expressed in biofilms due to the natural accumulation of edna released from lysed cells. flow chamber biofilms were cultivated and monitored for the expression of a pmrh-gfp transcriptional fusion. as a positive control, biofilms were cultivated in nm <dig> containing  <dig>  mm mg2+, which we previously had shown was an inducing condition . as expected, pmrh-gfp was expressed throughout the biofilm, which also stained positively for extracellular dna with a second dna stain sytox red, and stained positively for calcofluor white, which binds cellulose and other exopolysaccharides with β- <dig>  linkages . we next cultivated biofilms in nm <dig> containing  <dig>  mm mg2+ for 28 hours and then introduced an extra 10 mm mg2+ into the media for the next 16 hours of biofilm cultivation. we expected the exogenous addition of 10 mm mg2+ to repress pmrh expression since 5 mm mg2+ could completely repress expression in planktonic cultures in the presence of exogenous dna . however, pmrh-gfp was strongly expressed in biofilms grown in media despite repressing levels of mg2+ . extracellular dna was visualized in large microcolonies with sytox red staining and appeared to generally colocalize with pmrh-gfp expression. this observation suggests that the exogenous addition of excess mg2+ to pre-formed biofilms could not gain access or was not in sufficient concentration to neutralize the cation chelating properties of endogenous matrix edna. alternatively, the long half-life of gfp may also contribute to the fluorescence signal detected after 46 hours of growth.

to overcome the potential issue with stable gfp reporters, we measured gene expression in 96-well format peg-adhered biofilms using the pmrh-lux reporter. in figure 
4a, biofilms cultivated in limiting mg2+  showed the highest expression levels, and expression decreased if biofilms were cultivated in excess mg2+ conditions . biofilms that were cultivated overnight in limiting mg2+ conditions but were treated with 10 mm mg2+ for 4 hours, showed a partial repression . this result confirms that the residual pmrh-gfp expression after the addition of excess mg2+ for 16 hours  is due to stable gfp expression, as the pmrh-lux reporter was responsive to the addition of excess mg2+.

we measured pmrh-lux expression in conditions with repressing levels of mg2+ , and showed that pmrh expression was dependent on both phopq and pmrab in biofilms . lastly, we calculated the fold induction values of pmrh between inducing  and repressing mg2+ levels , simultaneously for both peg-adhered biofilms and the planktonic cultures that served as the inoculum for the biofilms. interestingly, pmrh was more highly expressed in biofilms when compared to planktonic cultures , and expression under all conditions required phopq and pmrab . we propose that the higher pmrh expression levels in biofilms may be due to the accumulation of edna, which increases pmrh expression in biofilms but not planktonic cultures.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed evidence that extracellular dna is a component of the s. typhimurium extracellular matrix when grown in biofilms. when added to planktonic cultures, edna chelates cations resulting in a mg2+ limited environment and increased expression of the pmr operon. the pmr operon was more highly expressed in biofilms, when compared to planktonic cultures. expression of pmr in biofilms and dna-induced expression in planktonic conditions is dependent on the phopq/pmrab systems. the addition of edna to planktonic cultures also led to increased antimicrobial peptide resistance in a phopq/pmrab-dependent manner. combined with our previous observations of dna-induced antibiotic resistance mechanisms in p. aeruginosa <cit> , we propose that extracellular dna has a general role as a cation chelator that induces antimicrobial peptide resistance in biofilms. dna-induced resistance to antibiotics and antimicrobial peptides from the innate immune system may promote long-term survival of s. typhimurium biofilms in the environment, on the surface of gallstones, or possibly in the extracellular phases of growth during intestinal infection.

