BACKGROUND
the male germ cell, sperm is responsible for delivering paternal genome to the female counterpart, the oocyte during fertilization. spermatogenesis, the process of development of sperm from undifferentiated germ cells is accomplished through a series of cellular differentiation processes, which require a fine-tuned milieu that regulates the expression of genes and proteins  <cit> . paternal genome is transferred to the egg cell, during the fertilization, a process mediated by the acrosome reaction. the acrosome is a lysosome-like membrane-bound organelle covering the head of spermatozoon. acrosome formation is a crucial step in spermatogenesis. in mammals, acrosome biogenesis begins in the late spermatocyte and continues throughout the first half of spermiogenesis. in addition to well-known proteins involved in fertilization, enzymes , antigens, and various zp-binding proteins  <cit> , acrosome contains some less-characterized proteins grouped as sperm acrosome associated  family proteins. this family has been created based on the cellular localization of its members, but the functions of some of these proteins are still not known  <cit> .

as the development of sperm specialized for fertilization is a unique process that occurs only in testis, gaining an understanding of spermatogenesis and fertilization requires identification and characterization of proteins expressed in testicular germ cells. although protein profiles of spermatogonia, sperm, and different developmental stages of the testes have been studied in different mammalian species, the proteins involved in spermiogenesis are still not fully characterized.

approximately  <dig> genes  are transcribed only in male germ cells  <cit> . many of these genes encode proteins involved in acrosome formation, sperm–egg interactions, and fertilization; yet a large fraction of them remains uncharacterized. the advent of 2d page and mass spectrometry has provided the benefit of high throughput analysis of spermatozoa at the molecular level  <cit> . in  <dig>  naaby-hansen and colleagues  <cit>  established a database of  <dig> protein spots from human sperm. in  <dig>  li et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> different protein spots from a high-resolution 2d page map from human spermatozoa.

a novel protein spaca <dig> that localizes to the acrosome was described in  <dig> by korfanty and colleagues  <cit> . thus new proteins localizing to acrosome are still being discovered. therefore, we performed sperm proteome analysis using 2d page and mass-spectrometry to identify novel proteins in mouse sperm. one of the spots chosen for analysis from a 2d-gel in the pi range of 5– <dig> was reported as hypothetical protein from riken cdna 1700026l <dig> localizing to mouse chromosome number  <dig>  immunolocalization studies using antibody raised to the protein in the lab showed localization of the protein to acrosome and sperm tail. the protein has been named mast  based on its localization on the sperm. multi-tissue western blot analysis showed that this is a protein that is specific to mouse testis. studies using co-ip showed that although this protein that has no known motifs, interacts with two calcium-binding proteins calreticulin and caldendrin localizing to the acrosome. comparative western blotting using the wild type and a subfertile yq-deletion mutant mouse showed that this protein is absent in yq-del sperm regardless of the fact that this gene localizes to an autosome.

RESULTS
identification of hypothetical protein
total proteome from specialized cells such as spermatozoa are good source of identifying unreported proteins that may have functional significance associated with the cell or the tissue of origin. protein spots isolated from 2d gel of mouse sperm proteome in the pi range of 5– <dig> were subjected to in-gel digest and maldi-tof analysis. the mass fingerprint obtained was submitted to probability-based search engine mascot . one of the spots encircled in figure  <dig> was identified as a hypothetical protein  with high mowse score by mascot. identity of this protein was further established by de-novo sequencing using ms-ms. analysis of the spectra yielded an ms tag of ten amino acids – vsqsndlssl - . blast against the ncbi database revealed this as a hypothetical protein with only the riken cdna 1700026l <dig>  localizing to mouse chromosome number  <dig>  the position of the protein spot on 2d gel matched the expected pi and molecular weight of the hypothetical protein from the riken cdna 1700026l <dig>  the ms tag obtained is highlighted in the protein sequence as shown below:

myhits motif scan did not identify any known motifs in mast   <cit> .

as we identified a hypothetical protein for which the cdna sequence was available in the database, in order to characterize the protein the cdna was cloned in pet-15b vector, over-expressed in bl <dig>  cells , and purified on a ni-nta column . maldi analysis confirmed that the overexpressed protein corresponded to riken cdna 1700026l <dig> 

tissue specific expression and immunolocalization of a mouse protein
in vivo expression of the newly identified protein was checked on a multi tissue western blot using the primary antibody raised in the laboratory. presence of a single band of about 20 kda only in testis indicated mouse male restricted expression of the protein . semi quantitative rt-pcr using mouse tissues kidney, brain, heart, spleen, liver from both males and females, testis and ovary showed testis-specific expression of mast transcript . this confirmed the male specific and testis-specific expression of the protein. rsb <dig> is reported as the rat homologue of loc1700026l <dig> . western blot analysis using the polyclonal antiserum raised against mast did not identify a signal in rat sperm lysate indicating absence of cross-reactivity from mouse to rat .

immunolocalization on testis sections of the wild type riii strain of mice showed cytoplasmic localization . the protein was expressed from almost all the cell types of testis, with abundant expression in round and elongated spermatids. immunostaining of caudal sperms showed localization of the protein onto sperm head, with intense staining at the acrosome region. protein was also present on midpiece and principle piece of sperm tails . based on the localization of the protein on to the acrosome and sperm tail, it has been named the mouse acrosome sperm tail  protein. we have submitted the protein to the ncbi database and it has now been given the accession number q7tpm <dig> .

interaction with calcium binding proteins caldendrin and calreticulin
localization of mast to the acrosome indicated possible functions in acrosome reaction/fertilization. in order to query the physiological role of mast, interaction with other proteins localizing to the acrosome was studied by immunoprecipitation studies. three acrosomal proteins considered in this study were caldendrin, acrosin and calreticulin. first, caldendrin was probed for interaction with mast, if any. the immunopulldown  using mast antibody when probed with caldendrin antibody raised in the laboratory identified a signal on a western blot. when the pull down product of caldendrin antibody was probed with the mast antibody also, a signal was identified that corresponded to the molecular weight of mast from mouse testis and the overexpressed recombinant protein. thus the co-ip studies confirmed the interaction between caldendrin and mast . co-ip studies using antibodies to calreticulin and mast showed the presence of calreticulin in the pull down complex of mast and vice versa; i.e. mast antibody identified a signal on the western blot containing the complex pulled down with calreticulin antibody . as caldendrin and calreticulin were both identified in the pulldown complex of mast, this showed the presence of the three proteins in the same complex. co-ip studies using mast and acrosin antibodies showed that they did not interact . these results show interaction of mast with the calcium binding proteins caldendrin and calreticulin, but not with acrosin. interaction of mast was also tested with the testis-specific superoxide dismutase  that localizes on the mouse sperm tail as mast. co-ip using antibodies to mast and sod did not yield any signal . this further confirms the interaction of mast with the two calcium-binding proteins. the gene corresponding to caldendrin localizes to chromosome number  <dig> and that for calreticulin to chromosome number  <dig> in the mouse.

comparative studies using a yq-deleted strain of mouse
a strain of mutant mouse wherein there is a 2/3rd deletion of the heterochromatic long arm of the y chromosome is deleted shows sperm abnormalities and subfertility  <cit> . comparative immunoblotting using testis and sperm lysates from normal and yq-del mice showed that mast was present in testes of normal and yq-del mice in equal quantities; mast was present in sperm lysate from wild type mice, but absent in sperms from yq-del mice . comparative immunolocalization studies on testes sections of wild type and yq-del mice showed that in yq–del testes signal was barely present in cells of the basal lamina and round spermatids and was substantially reduced in elongated spermatids . yq-del sperms showed only a faint signal restricted to midpiece . thus mast was found to be absent in yq-del sperms by western blot analysis and immunolocalization. western blot using normal and yq-del testes lysates showed equal expression of mast, but immunolocalization onto yq-del testis sections showed a drastic reduction in signal in comparison to that of the wild type. as there was no difference in the intensity of the signal between the normal and yq-del mice by western blot analysis, these results indicate that there is no reduction in expression of mast in yq-del testis; the reduction in intensity in immunolocalization studies might reflect failure of localization to the correct locus rather than a quantitative difference in expression.

upregulation of caldendrin and calreticulin in yq-del mice
the expression of the interacting partners of mast, caldendrin and calreticulin were also studied in yq-del sperm by western blot analysis. immunoblotting using anti calreticulin antibody on sperm lysates from normal and yq-del males showed  <dig>  fold higher expression in yq-del sperms . the expression of caldendrin, the other interacting protein was found to be  <dig> fold higher in yq-del sperms when compared to normal sperms .

discussion
sperm bears the responsibility of delivering the male genome to its female counterpart, and thus has specialized function of motility in male and female reproductive tracts, recognition of female gamete and fusion thereafter. sperm proteins have a major role in sperm function and thereby male fertility  <cit> . in the current study we have identified a protein that was reported in the ncbi database as a hypothetical protein, from riken cdna 1700026l <dig> with homology to rat rsb <dig> and human c9orf <dig> proteins . since the identity of the protein was established by maldi and ms-ms based peptide mass fingerprinting, this study provides evidence and confirms for the first time that the protein encoded by 1700026l <dig> riken cdna does exist in vivo. rsb <dig> on the other hand localizes only to spermatids in rats  <cit>  although it shows 96% identity to the mouse protein. multi-tissue immunoblotting using antibody raised against the protein identified it only in mouse testis thereby confirming the male-specific expression of the protein. in mature epididymal spermatozoa protein localizes to the sperm acrosome and is present in midpiece and principle piece of sperm tail. based on the presence in mouse acrosome and sperm tail the protein has been named as mouse acrosome and sperm tail ‘mast’ protein.

localization to the acrosome would suggest a role in either recognition or penetration of the female gamete. the absence of known functional motifs in mast did not enable prediction of functions. in the absence of signal sequences it is not clear as to how the protein localizes to the acrosome. in order to infer any pathway that the protein may be involved in, we attempted to identify the interacting partners. as mast localizes to the acrosome and sperm tail, proteins localizing to sperm acrosome and tail such as acrosin, caldendrin calreticulin and superoxide dismutase were chosen for the study. co-ip studies showed that mast complexes with two proteins calreticulin and caldendrin both of which localize to the acrosome and bind calcium.

calreticulin is a calcium-binding acrosomal protein implicated in sperm functions such as motility, capacitation and acrosome reaction  <cit> . calreticulin localizes also to the neck and midpiece of the human sperm  <cit> . it has many cellular functions including chaperon activity  <cit> . whether the over-expression of a calcium binding chaperon, calreticulin has any role in non-localization of mast is not clear from the present study.

caldendrin is expressed abundantly in the somatodendritic compartment of principal neurons in brain regions with a laminar organization like cortex or hippocampus  <cit> . caldendrin, which is presumed to be a stimulus dependent multifunctional regulator of intracellular calcium ions also localizes to the rat acrosome  <cit> . brain and testis are known to show inexplicable similarity in gene expression  <cit> . this study is however, the first report to show interaction of caldendrin with the mouse testis-specific protein mast. due to the presence of minimal cytoplasm and limited organelles, ions such as ca2+ play pivotal role in manifestation of cellular response of sperm  <cit> . it is possible that mast has ca2+ dependent cellular function such as calcium signaling and/or exocytosis associated with acrosomal reaction.

it is interesting to note that all the three proteins identified in a complex are misexpressed in sperms of the yq-deleted mutant mice. the significance of over-expression of caldendrin and calreticulin, the interacting partners of mast in sperms of a strain of subfertile mouse is not evident from the present study. as mast does not localize to sperms in yq-deleted subfertile mice, these proteins may play a role in the localization of mast to its functional locus, the acrosome. earlier studies from the lab reported putative regulation of cdc2l <dig> by a y-heterochromatin derived noncoding rna testis-specifically in human  <cit> . the deregulation of proteins of a complex localizing to the acrosome in yq-deleted mice, perhaps indicates the existence of a pathway regulated by the y heterochromatin, the region deleted in the mutant mouse. the report of subfertility in yq-del mice supports the above hypothesis  <cit> . further studies are required to unravel this pathway. however based on the partnership between mast and these calcium-binding proteins, all of which are deregulated in subfertile mice, a pivotal role in sperm function can be envisaged. these proteins might have roles in acrosome reaction/fertilization, as all these proteins localize to the acrosome in normal mice.

CONCLUSIONS
this study identified a mouse sperm protein, that localizes to the acrosome and sperm tail. although mast does not contain any known motifs, it complexes with calcium binding proteins, which localize to the acrosome. therefore further study of mast would reveal novel motif for interaction with calcium binding proteins. results from the study also indicate the existence of a complex regulated by the y chromosome. detailed study of the proteins in the mast complex would most likely unravel a pathway in mouse testis regulated by the y chromosome as well.

