BACKGROUND
sexual reproduction is a fundamental biological process that creates novel and beneficial allelic combinations by bringing together and mixing maternal and paternal gametes  <cit> . in most animals, sexual reproduction has led to the evolution of separate sexes, whereas among angiosperm plants only about 5% are dioecious with female and male flowers on separate plants  <cit> . dioecious species are found in multiple plant lineages, suggesting that separate sexes have repeatedly evolved from co-sexual ancestors  <cit> . in organisms with separate sexes, natural selection is expected to maintain a balanced sex ratio, provided that the cost of producing male and female offspring is equal . many species however, display more or less stable female or male biased sex ratios , governed by often unknown genetic or ecological mechanisms. the limited knowledge on causes of biased sex ratios partly owes to the difficulty in determining the phenotypic sex in juvenile and non-reproducing individuals, and therefore there is a lack of knowledge on when in an organism’s life cycle the sex bias is introduced. molecular and cytological methods can in some cases however be used for determining sex also in non-reproducing individuals .

biased progeny sex ratios can for example arise from sex chromosome meiotic drive, which is the non-mendelian segregation of sex determination alleles  <cit> . sex chromosome meiotic drive is common among drosophila species, although it has rarely been documented in plants  <cit> . x chromosome meiotic drive is however involved in creating female biased sex ratios in silene latifolia . pollen competition  is another phenomenon that can distort progeny sex ratios in plants and has been demonstrated to lead to female biased sex ratios in the male heterogametic species rumex nivalis  <cit>  as well as in silene latifolia . sex-biased mortality can furthermore influence both progeny and adult sex ratios, which can be a consequence of both genetic and ecological differences between the sexes. examples are genotype specific mortality of zygotes, seeds or seedlings possibly arising from allelic or genotypic incompatibilities at key loci. for instance, a single-locus self incompatibility system has been suggested to have caused male-biased sex-ratios in the adrodioecious shrub species phillyrea angustifolia  <cit> . allelic/genotypic incompatiblitites can also possibly act prezygotically, preventing fusion of sperm and egg carrying certain alleles at key loci. a similar mechanism is the well-known phenomenon self-incompatibility in plants, which prevents self fertilization in co-sexual species and can, if acting late, even prevent the embryonal development of zygotes generated by self mating or by the mating of close relatives  <cit> . furthermore, in species with heteromorphic sex chromosomes, the theoretical background to the ‘unguarded sex chromosome hypothesis’ predicts that mortality will be higher in the heterogametic sex compared to the homogametic sex because the heterogametic sex will be hemizygous for a large number of loci and will be unable to mask the expression of recessive deleterious alleles  <cit> . on the other hand, it has been demonstrated that the presence of recessive deleterious alleles, in combination with systematic inbreeding, can cause a greater mortality in the homogametic sex  <cit> . these results suggest that hemizygous individuals may carry a genetic factor that consistently mask deleterious alleles from expression.

willows in the salix genus are long-lived woody angiosperm shrubs or trees. most willows are dioecious, with female and male flowers on separate individuals. interestingly, most lineages in the salicaceae family are dioecious, indicating that dioecy evolved early in this clade  <cit> . furthermore, the majority of willow species are wind- and insect pollinated, can propagate both sexually and clonally and have wind-dispersed seeds. most willows are diploid with a basis chromosome number of n =  <dig>  although rare cases of polyploids have been encountered  <cit> . willow species studied thus far have largely undifferentiated, homomorphic sex chromosomes with narrow sex associated regions on chromosome  <dig> . a female specific haplotype and high heterozygosity levels in the sex associated region suggests that females are the heterogametic sex with one z and one w allele in a sex determination locus, whereas males have two z alleles  <cit> . there is thus far no indications that females are hemizygous over any long distances as they were perceived as heterozygous at all genetic markers linked to the region  <cit> .

interestingly, many willow species display distinct female biased sex ratios in wild populations  . until now, mechanisms creating the sex bias in willows are unknown. it is however possible to dismiss some of the mechanisms that are known to create sex biases in other systems because they would not create female biased sex ratios in organisms with female heterogamety with homomorphic sex chromosomes. z chromosome meiotic drive would for example lead to male biased sex ratios and certation is unlikely in female heterogametic species with homomorphic sex chromosomes since the male gamete  is not determining the sex of the offspring. most likely some mechanism involving sex biased mortality is operating. the main aim of the present study is therefore to identify underlying genetic mechanisms associated with the female biased sex ratios in willows. in addition, we confirm previous findings of single locus sex determination and female heterogamety and finally we present genetic models that would be able to explain the sex bias while simultaneously be evolutionary stable. to achieve this, we studied two pedigree populations of salix viminalis, one that displays an even sex ratio and one that displays a female biased sex ratio by performing segregation analyses using genome-wide single nucleotide polymporphism  markers.

RESULTS
in this study, genotype data from the s. viminalis s <dig> pedigree population was analyzed. the s <dig> population is composed of  <dig> females and  <dig> males, and therefore displays an overall 2: <dig> female biased sex ratio. additionally, data from the s <dig> pedigree population were re-analyzed . the analyzed s <dig> population consists of  <dig> females and  <dig> males, hence displaying an even sex ratio. both populations share the same male parent , whereas the female parents differ . in a previous study, coancestry coefficients, estimated from molecular marker data  <cit> , suggested the parent pairs to be close to unrelated , thus implying low inbreeding in the s <dig> and s <dig> offspring.

a maternally segregating sex determination locus located on chromosome 15
in a female heterogametic sex determination system, maternal alleles are expected to co-segregate with the sex of the offspring. we therefore studied the segregation distortion between male and female offspring for all maternal markers to identify putative female heterogametic regions. for both the s <dig> and the s <dig> population, the majority of significantly  distorted maternal markers were located on chromosome  <dig> . the most significantly distorted markers from both populations co-located, suggesting a shared location of a female heterogametic region on chromosome  <dig> that likely harbours a common sex determination  locus . since the populations differ in their sex ratio this suggests that sex determination and sex ratio distortion are two separate processes.table  <dig> number of significantly distorted genetic markers grouped by genomic position. maternal markers are such markers that are heterozygous in the mother, paternal markers are heterozygous in the father. population s <dig> shows unbiased sex ratio while population s <dig> has a 2: <dig> female:male sex ratio


fig.  <dig> 
p-values for distorted marker alleles between male and female offspring. the markers were assigned genomic positions based on blast searches against the p. trichocarpa genome. a markers that were heterozygote only in the mother and thus reflect inheritance of maternal alleles. b markers that were heterozygote only in the father and thus reflect inheritance of paternal alleles. datapoints in turquoise are based on the s <dig> population with unbiased sex ratio, datapoints in orange are based on the s <dig> population with female biased sex ratio




paternal alleles linked to sex ratio distortion
to identify genomic regions associated with sex ratio bias, we searched for distorted paternal markers in both the s <dig> and the s <dig> population. of the  <dig>  paternally segregating markers in the s <dig> population,  <dig> were significantly distorted between male and female offspring  and for the most significantly distorted markers, one allele was present in 50% of the female offspring but 100% of the male offspring hence expressing an overall 2: <dig> ratio. the majority of these markers were located on chromosome  <dig> , in close proximity to the maternally segregating sd locus . in contrast to this observation, paternal markers in the s <dig> population showed limited segregation distortion. in fact, only two of  <dig> paternal markers were significantly distorted . these markers were located on chromosome  <dig> and showed only weak deviations from the 50% allele frequency in males. segregation distortion of paternal markers were thus primarily found in the s <dig> population with biased sex ratio, suggesting that these markers are associated with a sex ratio distorter  locus on chromosome  <dig>  in close proximity to the sd locus.

absence of a male genotype class explains the female biased sex ratio
to more precisely map the sd and the sr loci and to detect putative recombination points, we inferred maternal, paternal and recombinant offspring haplotypes based on the genotypes at markers surrounding the sd and sr loci on chromosome  <dig> in the s <dig> population. to obtain the order of markers, we generated a dense genetic linkage map covering the whole s. viminalis genome in  <dig> linkage groups . the finding that the morphological marker for sex mapped at  <dig>  cm on the linkage map of chromosome  <dig> supports the finding from the segregation analysis of a sex determination locus on this chromosome. the linkage group that represents chromosome  <dig> contained  <dig> markers over the distance of  <dig>  cm. we focused our analyses to the region of strong segregation distortion of both paternal and maternal markers from  <dig>  to  <dig>  cm. to increase the marker density in this region, markers that showed a distorted segregation but were not previously integrated into the map, were anchored through the s. purpurea genome assembly. all four parental haplotypes were obtained by inferring the phase from the genotypes at each marker locus. as expected, all female offspring carried one of the maternal haplotypes and all male offspring carried the other maternal haplotype . as a low number of recombinants were observed towards one end of the region, the sd locus is likely located in the non-recombining region, assuming the absence of recombination between the z- and w-gametolog in females . the two paternal haplotypes  were found in approximately equal frequency among the female offspring  including several paternal recombinants that showed no significant bias to a certain haplotype. interestingly, no male with the whole paternal z1-haplotype was found and only a few recombinants with parts of the z1-haplotype towards one end of the analyzed region were encountered . for the s <dig> population with even sex ratio, no such effect was observed, although the populations share the same male parent , indicating that this effect is not solely dependent on the paternal z1-haplotype. in summary — since all males carry the maternal z <dig> haplotype — it is the combination of z1/z <dig> haplotypes that was absent from the population even though it should be found in approximately 50% of the male offspring according to mendelian segregation. this suggests that the 2: <dig> sex ratio in the s <dig> population is a result of the lack of males possessing the z1/z3-genotype in the sr locus implying that this specific haplotype combination is lethal. since the s <dig> population and the s <dig> population have different mothers, they posses different alleles on the maternal z-gametolog, which are compatible  and therefore the sex ratio in the s3-population is unbiased.fig.  <dig> segregation of marker alleles and inferred haplotypes in proximity to the sex determination and sex ratio distorter  loci on chromosome  <dig>  the inheritance of maternal  and paternal  haplotypes are presented  and the haplotypes that are present in the population  are shown divided by male and female offspring . the mode of segregation of the non-recombined parental haplotypes for the observed offspring is depicted schematically . a all female offspring inherit the w-gametolog. b the analysis of paternally segregating haplotypes shows that no males possess the z1/z3-genotype in the sr locus. recombination events are shown as change in color in the line representing an individual. missing data: gray




close linkage between the sd and the sr loci
if recombination between the sd and sr locus happened, the female determining gametolog of the sd locus would be paired with the sr allele that is absent from the male offspring population. such females should only be viable if they inherited the compatible paternal sr allele. to assess the genetic distance between the sd and sr loci, we used all  <dig> female offspring that showed signs of a single maternal recombination event within the sd/sr haplotypes. we then grouped them by all possible recombination points or recombination regions and analyzed if any of the paternal haplotypes were significantly over-represented in these groups . since none of these tests were significant, our data did not provide evidence for the presence of female offspring with maternal recombination between the sd and sr locus. similarly, as no male offspring with the full paternal z <dig> haplotype exists, there is no evidence for maternal recombination between the sd and sr in male offspring. we can thus state that we did not observe recombination between the sd and the sr loci in the s <dig> population with  <dig> offspring, indicating that the linkage between the loci is tight. the linkage might even be complete, suggesting that the gametologous region not only contains the sd locus but also the sr locus. conceivably, a specific  sr allele could be located on the w-gametolog while multiple z-gametologs with either compatible or incompatible sr alleles exist.

an overdominance locus could maintain the sex ratio distorter allele
given that sex ratios differed between the s <dig> and s <dig> populations and that the female biased sex ratio in population s <dig> was caused by the absence of a genotype class among males, we hypothesize that the biased sex ratio in willows and its variation among crosses is explained by certain alleles or haplotypes causing either pre- or postzygotic incompatibility at homozygosity. to assess the stability of such alleles through many generations of random mating, we performed simplistic simulations taking into account potential allele frequency attrition as a result of incompatibility. the possibility that the w-gametolog would be devoid of any alleles causing incompatibility was also considered  as a contrast to the situation where incompatibility factors could be attached to both w- and z-gametologs . the simplest genetic model that could possibly explain the observations of this study would be the segregation of a lethal recessive allele being situated at the sex ratio distorter locus. iterative simulations showed however that such an allele would have a strong negative impact on reproductive success and should thus be purged from the population rapidly despite full recessivity  and irrespective of whether a sex-neutral or sex-dependent model was used.fig.  <dig> simulated development of the frequencies of lethal/incompatible alleles/haplotypes during  <dig> generations  of random mating given an overdominance model , a sex-neutral pseudooverdominance model  or a sex-dependent pseudooverdominance model . scenarios included simulations of two alleles  and ten alleles  where all alleles, whether lethal/incompatible or not, exhibited equal initial allele frequencies . the pseudooverdominance model for two alleles is in effect equivalent to a model with a single lethal recessive allele. the stability of the overdominance model was further assessed by performing a simulation of ten alleles where initial frequencies varied  spanning a range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  at t =  <dig>  note: the frequency of the w-gametolog is discounted from allele frequencies of the sex-dependent models and sex-dependent and sex-neutral versions of the overdominance model behaved identically




instead, we suggest the sr locus to be either a multiallelic overdominant effect locus in tight linkage with the sd locus , or that the sr region contains several loci potentially featuring recessive lethal alleles in tight linkage with each other and the sd locus . both the multiallelic overdominance and multilocus pseudooverdominance models could explain the sex ratio bias and its variation among the s <dig> and the s <dig> populations and could furthermore explain the missing genotype noted for male offspring in the s <dig> population. simulations illustrated that the overdominance model would perfectly preserve allele frequencies over  <dig> generations . stability was complete irrespective of whether two or ten alleles were simulated  and irrespective of whether sex-neutral or sex-dependent models were used. stability was furthermore not affected in the long term by variable allele frequencies at the outset . the allele frequency stability is explained by the fact that only individuals heterozygous at the overdominance locus would be rendered viable. given that the population itself survives, severe depletion or allele loss would thus become impossible. the second multilocus pseudooverdominance model was, in contrast, not strictly stable even when ten haplotypes were considered . this was mainly as a result of rare recombination events eventually producing a haplotype devoid of lethal recessive alleles. the rate of allele depletion was nonetheless slow, especially for the sex-dependent scenario, thus indicating that minor alterations  would be sufficient in order to achieve stability. interestingly, the sex-dependent model versions exhibited overall female biased sex-ratios. given overdominance, the frequency of females was found to be stable across generations at  <dig> and 53% for two alleles and ten alleles respectively. the corresponding pseudooverdominance models showed similar biases although these decreased asymptotically towards the equal sex ratio as the alleles causing incompatibility were depleted.fig.  <dig> conceptual figure showing how the multiallelic overdominance model  and multilocus pseudooverdominance model  work to make the parents  produce the marker and sex segregation patterns observed in the s <dig>  and s <dig> populations . potentially lethal alleles are coded as small letters  in contrast to alleles of with no adverse effect . sex-marker genotype combinations not observed and potentially being caused by incompatible/lethal genotypes are crossed over. note: the particular examples in this figure show a sex-neutral version of the model where the w- as well as z-gametologs may be associated with lethal alleles




discussion
in this study, we have undertaken an in-depth segregation analysis of genome-wide snp-alleles and compared the segregation pattern between two contrasting pedigree populations, one with even and one with female biased sex ratio. we found sex associated markers  on chromosome  <dig> in both populations, which were located in gametologous genomic regions confirming previous findings that females are the heterogametic sex in s. viminalis  <cit> . all female offspring in both populations inherited the w-gametolog from their mother while all male offspring inherited the maternal z-gametolog .

by contrasting the segregation pattern of paternal markers between the two populations, we discovered significantly distorted markers primarily in the s5-population with biased sex ratio. interestingly, these markers were predominantly located in a sex ratio distorter  locus close to the sd locus on chromosome  <dig>  by analyzing the transmission of haplotypes, we were able to identify the cause of the female biased sex ratio in population s <dig>  we discovered that all male offspring had the paternal z2-haplotype in the sr locus. in contrast, the other paternal z1-haplotype was never encountered although it was, as expected from mendelian segregation, found in 50% of the female offspring. as a consequence, a 2: <dig> female biased sex ratio arises due to the absence of 50% of expected males with the z1/z3-genotype in the sr locus. no missing male genotype was found in the population with even sex ratio.

the markers in the sd locus were maternally segregating, whereas the distorted markers in the sr locus were paternally segregating. as a consequence, the relative position of these two marker types in the genetic map was dependent on nearby bi-parentally segregating markers not present within the sd/sr region. we therefore used maternal recombinant haplotypes to investigate the relative position of the sd and the sr loci. interestingly, we did not find evidence for recombination events between the sd and the sr locus, suggesting that the two loci are tightly linked in the s5-population. this even raises the possibility that the gametologous region not only contains the sd locus but also the sr locus. a specific  sr allele is therefore likely located on the w-gametolog while multiple z-gametologs with either compatible or incompatible alleles in the sr locus exist.

our data thus support that the z <dig> and the z <dig> alleles are incompatible in the sense that this allelic combination leads to death of male offspring during their development. alternatively the elimination may happen before fertilization if the allelic incompatibility prevents fusion of the sperm and egg. we are however unable to distinguish between these two mechanisms, since we have no exact information on when the sex bias arise. this is because sexing and genotyping was done on adult individuals, which means that we cannot strictly determine if the allelic incompatibility is pre- or postzygotic and if postzygotic, if it happens at the zygote, seed or seedling stage. the plants were however transferred to the field at recorded positions at an early age  and several years after planting, very few plants had died, which suggests that the z1/z3-males were eliminated early, possibly before or at the seed set. this is furthermore supported by previous studies on s. viminalis  <cit>  and s. repens  <cit> , which showed that germination approached 100% for most crosses and postgermination mortality was near 0%, suggesting that the sex bias was determined early. similarly, in five alpine willow species it was demonstrated that the bias was not a consequence of ecological processes acting on established adult plants but rather determined at an early life stage  <cit> . as we have demonstrated that the biased sex ratio is the result of the absence of a male genotypic class while females are present in two classes and follow mendelian segregation patterns, we can firmly reject the hypothesis that meiotic drive is causing the sex bias. certation can furthermore not explain the observed genotype composition as both paternal alleles are found at similar rate in females and thus differential performance of pollen based on their genotype can be excluded.

a possible explanation to the missing male genotype is that the incompatibility allele has a recessive mutation, that in homozygous state leads to lethality of male offspring. recessive lethal mutations are a well known phenomenon that has been shown to remove certain genotypes from a population . however, isolated recessive lethal alleles at large frequencies would have a strong negative impact on reproductive success and should be purged to lower frequencies in very short time. admittedly, such alleles could still have an impact if the population was subjected to inbreeding thus increasing the probability of generating homozygous individuals. but the coancestry coefficient of the s <dig> parents was very low in turn indicating low inbreeding in the s <dig> population and therefore a very low likelihood of generating genotypes homozygous for classical recessive lethal alleles. instead, we suggest our observations to be explained by a number of incompatible alleles/haplotypes, either exhibiting overdominance or pseudooverdominance effects because such a set of alleles could be maintained in the populations over longer periods of time. such loci, containing potentially incompatible haplotypes closely linked to the sd locus could thus explain the variation in sex ratios among offspring populations generated from different crosses  <cit> . given that such loci would be associated only with the z-gametolog , such models could even explain the generally observed female biased sex ratio.

it should be noted that the concept of overdominance and pseudooverdominance effect loci regulating allelic compatibility and offspring generation is not new. similar systems have been shown to repress the offspring generation from self crosses in several plant species . incompatibility can happen as late as at the moment of fertilization or even at the postzygotic stage  raising the possibility of the abortion of incompatible haplotype combinations. although incompatibility systems are usually designed to prevent the mating of relatives and the generation of inbred offspring, they may still occasionally be triggered in a mating of non-related parents just due to an unfortunate combination of a limited number of haplotypes/alleles. it can also be argued that dioecious species like s. viminalis would have no use of selfing incompatibility  <cit> . nonetheless, s. viminalis may have retained an obsolete and partially functional self-incompatibility system, which could have been crucial in the days before dioecy was fully evolved. indeed, a recent study on the androdioecious plant phillyrea angustifolia has suggested that self-incompatibility systems can play an important role for the transition process from hermaphroditism to dioecy as well as contributing to biased sex-ratios  <cit> .

we also considered a system of haplotypes containing several loci with lethal recessive alleles in close repulsion linkage  since such effects have been previously observed in other studies of allele mediated lethality, usually connected with inbreeding depression  <cit> . however, as explained previously, inbreeding in the s <dig> population appeared unlikely and, with respect to the pseudooverdominance model, our simulations showed that long-term stability of such a system would require an additional factor to preserve the frequencies of the incompatibility alleles over longer time periods. it is not yet clear what this factor could be. in general the nature of the forces leading to overdominance or pseudooverdominance selection in this species system remains to be understood. the role of incompatibility mechanisms in establishing biased sex ratios is hitherto poorly studied.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we showed that the 2: <dig> female biased sex ratio in a s. viminalis pedigree population is caused by the absence of a specific allelic combination in male offspring. this can be attributed to a lethal interaction between maternal and paternal alleles which leads to incompatibility. we demonstrate that such a system for sex ratio distortion can be stable over evolutionary times. additionally, we also confirm previous findings of single locus sex determination and female heterogamety in s. viminalis even in a population with strong female biased sex ratio.

