BACKGROUND
dna restriction-modification  systems are valuable tools for molecular biology and the methyltransferases in particular, which have well conserved structures  <cit> , also represent excellent model systems for studying the specific interactions between dna and dna-binding enzymes. despite the large number of cloned and sequenced r-m systems  <cit> , in comparison to unique recognition sequences, there is remarkably little sequence similarity amongst the restriction enzymes and, though to a lesser extent, between the target recognition domains of the methyltransferases implying a diverse ensemble of dna recognition modes and methods is used by these enzymes.

we report the cloning, sequencing and subsequent expression and purification of the bsahi r-m system from bacillus stearothermophilus. these enzymes target the degenerate sequence grcgyc, where r= g/a and y = t/c . the inherent degeneracy of the dna recognition by these enzymes provides an opportunity to study directly the mechanism of specific dna recognition and to examine the question of how this breaks down into degenerate dna recognition. furthermore, such enzymes are exciting targets in the ongoing effort to manipulate the recognition sequences of enzymes, particularly for the restriction enzymes  <cit> .

r. bsahi belongs to the type ii subfamily of restriction enzymes  <cit> . it recognises a palindromic sequence of bases and cleaves within this sequence between the purine and cytosine bases: gr/cgyc, where '/' is the cutting site. the restriction enzymes are also sub-classified as belonging to one of several 'superfamilies', named for their conserved motifs. examples of such superfamilies include the pd-xk, hnh or giy-yig superfamilies  <cit> . in the present work, we utilise a bioinformatics approach to classify and identify the conserved, putative catalytic motifs of the r. bsahi enzyme. subsequent in vitro transcription/translation of a series of mutants is used to identify a motif that is crucial for enzymatic activity.

the target recognition domain  of the methyltransferase enzymes is the least conserved region of the enzymes of this type. however, some amino acids of the trd are conserved and a previous report  <cit>  has revealed a consensus motif towards the c-terminal end of the trd that reads xx5pptx5–16h. structural studies have shown that the residues within and around this motif form critical interactions with the dna duplex  <cit> . this so-called 'tl' motif lies between  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids from the conserved methyltransferase motif ix. trautner et al were the first to note that the tl motif was conserved and applied this knowledge to carefully define and modify the target recognition of multi-specific methyltransferase enzymes in domain swapping experiments  <cit> . a key feature of this work was that it showed that the residues lying to the n-terminal side of the tl motif are responsible for the recognition of the base to the 5'- side of the target base for methylation. later bioinformatic analysis by cheng and blumenthal  <cit>  noted that the recognition of the base directly 5'- of the target base for methylation could be correlated to a conserved r or q/n upstream of the tl motif for recognition of g or c at this position, respectively. we have built on this previous work with a new bioinformatics analysis, in which we show that, to some extent, prediction of the target specificity of a given methyltransferase is possible by examination of the residues around the conserved tl motif in the variable region of the enzyme.

RESULTS
r. bsahi
the amino acid sequence of the r. bsahi enzyme is strikingly similar to the restriction enzymes belonging to two soil gliding h. giganteus bacteria, r. hgidi and r. hgigi, which share the bsahi recognition sequence, grcgyc. r. bsahi also shares significant sequence similarity with several putative restriction enzymes: splzorfnp from spirulina platensis, nlacorfdp from neisseria lactamica, npuorfc228p from nostoc punctiforme and hindvp from haemophilus influenzae rd. figure  <dig> shows a mafft  <cit>  alignment of these amino acid sequences along with a putative enzyme from the crocosphaera watsonii wh <dig> draft sequence, cwatdraft_ <dig> 

this group of r. bsahi homologues show strong conservation of several short amino acid sequences, particularly in the n and c-termini. the central region of the protein has a predicted secondary structure that is consistent with the conserved catalytic core of the pd-xk superfamily of restriction enzymes, i.e. a 5-stranded β-sheet, flanked by α-helices. the conserved residues from this family, including the possible catalytic evk motif , are highlighted in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows a sequence alignment of the putative r-box and exk motifs with those from endonucleases where these motifs have been established  <cit> . the alignment shows good correlation between the r-box r. bsahi residues and those of the gatc-recognising enzymes . these amino acids are important for dna binding and cleavage in mboi and are likely to be similarly important to the activity of r. bsahi. likewise, the exk and following rxxexxxe motif and conserved hydrophobic β-sheet align well to those motifs in the enzymes recognising rccggy . this is consistent with the putative assignment of evk as catalytic in r. bsahi. notably, the known restriction enzymes  share conservation of this 'exk' motif but it is absent in three of the five putative enzymes. thus, we hypothesised that these enzymes should not be active endonucleases. indeed expression of the hindvp and crocosphaera genes by in vitro transcription/translation revealed that these enzymes have no activity on λ-dna , consistent with the absence of the 'exk' motif in these genes and the proposed assignment of these residues as catalytic.

the expasy scanprosite tool was used to carry out a search for enzymes matching any one of three strongly conserved sequence motifs dkaf' and 'sperrfd') from the bsahi homologues  <cit> . these motifs were not found beyond the enzymes shown in figure  <dig>  suggesting that their functionality is specific to these homologues.

here, we focus on the 'sperrfd' motif that is conserved at the c-terminal end of the amino acid sequences of the bsahi homologues. these conserved amino acids are largely capable of forming specific hydrogen bonding interactions and as such could potentially be critical for the enzymatic activity, either as part of the dna recognition machinery of the enzyme or as part of another intermolecular process, such as dimerisation. we carried out a mutational study in which each of the conserved amino acids in r. bsahi, q <dig> and s348-d <dig>  were mutated to alanine, effectively removing the ability of these residues to form hydrogen bonds or act as bulky, sterically important residues. the mutants were expressed using in vitro transcription/translation and the resultant enzymes were incubated with λ-dna, the digested products of which were separated by electrophoresis on an agarose gel, shown in figure  <dig> 

lane "-bashir" in figure  <dig> shows that, in the absence of the bsahir gene no sequence-specific digestion takes place. however, a small amount of smearing is evident, indicating that there is a little non-specific nuclease activity in the ivtt mixture. the positive control, with wild-type bsahi , shows complete digestion of the λ-dna during the four-hour incubation. the q344a, s348a and r352a mutants all show similar activity and only a small fraction of the dna is not completely digested. the activity of all of the other mutants has been significantly impaired by the mutation and can be described by p349a~f353a > e350a~d354a > r351a, where the activity of the r351a mutant is negligible.

the similar activity of the q344a, s348a and r352a mutants to the wild-type r. bsahi enzyme indicates that these amino acids do not play a functional role in the enzyme. however, all of the other mutations significantly decrease the rate of the digestion. this implies that q <dig> and s <dig> lie in a region of the enzyme that is tolerant of mutation, perhaps a turn or flexible region of the amino acid chain. those residues from p <dig> to d <dig> define a region of the enzyme that is critical to its function. there are clear differences in the digestion rates with the different mutants. the improved activity of the p349a and f353a mutants as compared to the e350a and d354a mutants perhaps indicates that alanine is able to somewhat compensate for the absence of the bulky p/f residues, whereas it clearly cannot mimic the hydrogen bonding functionality of the e/d residues. remarkably, the r351a mutant is inactive. this result becomes more striking when one considers that the mutation of the neighbouring residue, r352a displays activity comparable to that of the wild-type enzyme. the marked difference in the activity of these mutants of identical, adjacent residues suggests a critical and tightly defined role for r <dig> in ensuring the activity of r. bsahi.

m. bsahi
the tl motif at the centre of the trd is shared by m. bsahi , its homologues and m. haeiii . the amino acid residues on either side of the tl motif are crucial for dna recognition  <cit> . for instance, the m. bsahi homologues share a conserved r with m. haeiii eleven bases upstream of this motif. in m. haeiii, this conserved r forms a specific contact to the most 5'-g of the m. haeiii recognition sequence  and a similar assignment is possible for this residue in m. bsahi. cheng and blumenthal  <cit>  showed that, where the base 5'- of the target cytosine is a guanine, a conserved arginine is often found eight or nine amino acids upstream of the tl motif. in the case of m. bsahi, nine amino acids upstream from the 'tl', where m. haeiii is known to be recognising the g directly 5'- to the flipped c, either glycine or alanine is present. the absence of an amino acid capable of forming a specific interaction with the dna at this position is a possible source of the degeneracy in the m. bsahi recognition sequence.

a muscle alignment of the characterised and putative cytosine c5-methyltransferases with known or predicted four base recognition sequences, which contain a clear tl motif, is shown in additional file  <dig>  for each of the distinct recognition sequences there is conservation of the highlighted n-tl motif and the c-tl motifs. the conservation within these critical regions of the enzymes suggests that, as in m. hhai and m. haeiii, these amino acids describe regions involved in dna recognition and can potentially be employed to diagnose the recognition sequence of the four-base targeting cytosine c5-methyltransferases.

in the case where there is the most sequence information available for characterised enzymes, i.e. those recognising ggcc, the n-tl motif reads exclusively 'srn'. the c-tl motif is also relatively well conserved with a preference for the trimer 'grq'. there are intriguing overlaps in the amino acids used in both the n-tl and c-tl motifs. most notable are the gcgc recognising enzymes whose c-tl motif reads 'rhg' and the cgcg recognising enzymes, which employ a c-tl motif reading 'hhg'. similar overlap is seen between the gcgc/cgcg recognising enzymes with n-tl motifs reading 'qge'/'qg' and those recognising ccgg/ggcc with n-tl motifs reading 'ern'/'srn' such overlap is likely an indicator of the common modes of dna recognition employed by this group of cytosine c <dig> methyltransferases. the common use of c-tl and n-tl motifs by enzymes recognising opposite recognition sequences  is likely a result of the simple, reversible nature of the hinged structure about the tl motif and implies that this motif is suited to dna binding in either direction along the duplex.

the number of distinct recognition sequences with conserved n-tl and c-tl motifs decreases with increasing length of the target recognition sequence. of the "five"-base recognising cytosine c5-methyltranferases, there are two, the grcgyc and yggccr recognising enzymes, which have clear tl motifs as shown in figure  <dig> 

examination of the amino acid sequences for the six-base recognising enzymes reveals that the cytosine c <dig> methylating enzymes targeting gtcgac contain an easily identifiable tl motif. alignment of the sequences, however, shows that there are no significantly conserved amino acids with the spacing from the 'tl' residues seen for the 4- and 5-base recognising enzymes . furthermore, although the motif ygrx8tx9grxgh is well conserved in the gtcgac recognising enzymes the recently sequenced m. tspmi enzyme, recognising cccggg, utilises an almost identical motif . clearly, the amino acids around the tl motif cannot be used to wholly describe the recognition sequences of the enzymes targeting these relatively long sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
the bsahi restriction-modification system has been cloned and sequenced. the sequence alignment of r. bsahi and its homologues clearly shows many highly conserved motifs. we showed through sequence alignment that these enzymes belong to the pd-xk superfamily of restriction enzymes and, based on this sequence alignment, have identified residues that are potentially catalytic or involved in dna binding. we also chose a motif reading 'qxxxsperrfd' at the c-terminus of r. bsahi and mutated this to investigate its function. we have shown that this motif is crucial to enzymatic activity and represents a good target for future studies. in particular, we have shown that the r <dig> residue is critical to the function of r. bsahi.

m. bsahi is a cytosine c <dig> methyltransferase that has been found to methylate the central cytosine of its grcgyc recognition sequence. the amino acid sequence was found to contain all of the conserved motifs  for a cytosine c <dig> methyltransferase. furthermore, the target recognition domain of the m. bsahi was found to contain the conserved tl motif. on either side of the tl motif, we identified two amino acid trimers, the n-tl and c-tl motifs, which can potentially be used to diagnose the recognition sequence of the four- and some five-base recognising cytosine c <dig> methyltransferases. should these motifs turn out to be reliable indicators of recognition sequence, such information has potential application in the search for restriction enzymes with new specificities, since it should be possible, by simple sequence inspection, to discriminate against genes containing the n-tl and c-tl motifs for known recognition sequences.

