BACKGROUND
recombinant monoclonal antibody technology comprises a series of molecular approaches that allows for the production of therapeutic antibodies  <cit> . molecular cloning and expression of polymerase chain reaction -amplified immunoglobulin variable  genes from single, isolated primary b cells provide powerful tools for the generation of recombinant monoclonal antibodies  <cit> . introduction of the pcr-amplified v gene fragments into expression plasmids has been performed using traditional cut-and-paste dna cloning techniques  <cit> . recently, site-specific recombination and homologous recombination cloning techniques, which eliminate the use of restriction endonucleases and ligases, offer several advantages in the context of high-throughput procedures  <cit> . these methods, however, still require plasmid amplification in bacteria, followed by plasmid purification and verification of the insert.

because of the need for a more convenient method for the generation of recombinant antibodies, the overlap extension polymerase chain reaction method  has been developed. in this method, a pcr-amplified v gene fragment is joined to dna cassettes by pcr to build a linear immunoglobulin gene expression  construct  <cit> . while the current overlap pcr method is rapid compared with traditional plasmid-based cloning methods, it still has several limitations. one of the major drawbacks of this method is that the pcr-amplified v gene fragment must be purified to remove primers and nonspecifically amplified dna fragments to achieve successful production of ig-expression constructs. because short homology overlaps within the ends of dna cassettes are generated at the ends of pcr-amplified dna fragments with primers, both v gene fragments and nonspecifically amplified pcr products are joined to the dna cassettes. another problem is this technique's complicated joining reaction in which a promoter cassette, the purified v gene fragment and a terminator cassette must be assembled in a specific order based on their short homology overlaps. this process sometimes results in a low yield of ig-expression constructs. therefore, a more efficient system that bypasses these tedious steps is required to generate recombinant antibodies from large numbers of single, isolated cells.

this study describes a novel overlap pcr method termed target-selective joint pcr . with this method, a pcr-amplified v gene fragment can be selectively assembled into a linear ig-expression construct, even in the presence of nonspecifically amplified dna fragments. ts-jpcr is accomplished by joining the 3'-random nucleotide-tailed v gene fragment and an immunoglobulin-selective cassette . the ig-cassette contains all the essential elements for antibody expression and v-gene-specific long homology overlaps within a single dna molecule.

we also developed a robotic magnetic head handling instrument  that allows for automated single cell-based cdna synthesis and 3' end homopolymer tailing using the magrahd method  <cit> . the magrahder is a non-contact magnetic power transmission instrument in which 12-channel, parallel magnetic rods installed on a robotic arm transport nucleic acid-bound magnetic beads in a magrahd reactor tray. using magrahder and ts-jpcr, we were able to produce recombinant monoclonal antibodies from large numbers of single plasma cells within four days .

RESULTS
development of ts-jpcr
to evaluate the performance of ts-jpcr, we conducted a pilot experiment using an artificially amplified mouse v gene and a mock dna fragment . the mock dna fragment served as a model for a nonspecifically amplified dna fragment and was composed of an upper pcr primer , a green fluorescent protein  gene segment and a lower pcr primer  sequence. the v gene fragment was composed of the p <dig> sequence, a poly dg/c sequence , a mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain variable sequence, part of the constant gene sequence  and the p <dig> sequence. the t <dig> and t <dig> sequences are specific regions of v gene fragment amplified by the rapid amplification of 5' cdna ends pcr . an ig-cassette contains all essential elements for expression of the antibody, including the cmv promoter, the immunoglobulin chain constant region and the poly  signal. additionally, the cassette has long overlapping regions of immunoglobulin gene-specific homology on its ends . vt <dig>  sequence localizes at the end of the ig-cassette and shares homology with t <dig>  sequence. vp <dig>  sequence localizes internally to the vt <dig>  sequence and shares homology with p <dig>  sequence. before the joining of these dna fragments to the ig-cassette, each dna fragment was tailed with random nucleotides on its 3' end using a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase . as shown in figure  <dig>  the joining of the tailed v gene fragment to the ig-cassette by ts-jpcr resulted in the amplification of a single major band corresponding to the expected size of the linear ig-expression construct. when ts-jpcr was conducted with the tailed mock dna fragment and the ig-cassette, no amplification product was detected. when ts-jpcr was conducted with the cassette and a mixture of the v gene and the mock dna fragment , a single major band corresponding to the expected size was detected . to examine whether the amplified band resulted from the ig-cassette joining to the v gene, the mock or both, we performed direct sequencing. as shown in figure 3b, the sequencing showed a clear chromatograph pattern that corresponded to the v gene sequence. furthermore, no insertion or deletion at the joint junctions was found. these results clearly confirm the high selectivity of the ts-jpcr method, even in a case in which the nonspecific amplification happened to be the same size as the v gene fragment.

the scheme in figure  <dig> explains the mechanism that enables the selective joining of ts-jpcr. when ts-jpcr is conducted, the melted strands of the ig-cassette and the v gene fragment partially hybridize with each other via the long homology overlaps  to generate stable hybrid duplexes. each of the hybridized cassette strands that contain the v gene-specific sequence at the 3' ends  can serve as a primer for strand extension, which leads to the generation of an ig-cassette-v gene fusion strand in each hybrid duplex. however, each of the hybridized v strands that contain 3'-end random nucleotide tails fails to serve as a primer . after denaturing the hybrid duplexes, the melted fusion strands partially hybridize with each other via the complementary v gene sequences, which leads to the generation of a double-strand dna that is composed of two copies of the ig-cassette joined to each end of the v gene in a head-to-tail orientation . this repeating unit facilitates partial hybridization of each strand, which leads to the generation of an ig-cassette-v gene concatemer . until the end of the fifth pcr cycle, the p <dig> and p <dig> pcr primers used for amplification of an ig-expression construct do not hybridize with their complementary strands because of the high annealing temperature. conducting the following  <dig> additional pcr cycles at a low annealing temperature allows the p <dig> and p <dig> pcr primers to hybridize with their complementary strands, which leads to amplification of the ig-construct.

when ts-jpcr is conducted with the ig-cassette and the tailed mock dna, the melted strands of the ig-cassette and mock dna partially hybridize with each other via their short homology overlaps  to generate unstable hybrid duplexes. it is important to note that these structures render the polymerase unable to extend any strands because of the 3'-end mismatches. therefore, nonspecifically amplified dna that lacks the v gene-specific sequence  internal to the primer-derived sequence  is unable to be joined to the ig-cassette .

high-throughput amplification of immunoglobulin variable genes
single cell-based cdna synthesis is a costly and time-consuming process for the production of recombinant monoclonal antibodies from large numbers of single cells. to speed up this process, we developed an automatic non-contact magnetic power transmission instrument, magrahder. magrahder is composed of a magrahd reactor tray and a desktop robot. the magrahd reactor tray can be assembled from a reusable tray and a single-use super-hydrophobic film upon which a  <dig> ×  <dig> grid of cup-shaped structures to hold drops are embossed . the robot provides a tip- and tube-free platform that allows magnetic beads to be transferred between arrayed hanging drops deposited on the cup-shaped structures of the super-hydrophobic film with an externally applied magnetic force. magrahder has 12-channel, parallel magnetic rods installed on a robotic arm, which transports and mixes nucleic acid-bound magnetic beads in magrahd reactor trays . the instrument performs mrna extraction, reverse transcription and the homopolymer-tailing reaction and is capable of handling up to  <dig> samples per instrument, in parallel, within an hour by touching neodymium permanent magnet rods to the opposite side of the thin glass surface of the magrahd reactor tray above the drops. we prepared 3'-end homopolymer-tailed cdna from isolated single plasma cells and used them as templates to amplify immunoglobulin heavy chain variable  and immunoglobulin light chain variable  genes by 5'-race pcr. as shown in figure 7a, 5'-race pcr resulted in the successful amplification of the cognate pair of vh and vl genes with an overall success rate of 100%.

application of ts-jpcr for the production of recombinant mouse antibodies
we next attempted to demonstrate the utility of ts-jpcr by producing ig-expression constructs from amplified v genes. after 3'-end random nucleotide tailing of the 5'-race pcr products, they were joined to the respective ig-cassette using ts-jpcr. as shown in figure 7b, ts-jpcr resulted in the amplification of single major bands corresponding to the expected sizes of igg- and igk-expression constructs. the joining success rate was 100% in both igg and igk. when we transfected the cognate pair of unpurified ig-expression constructs into 293ft cells, expression of the recombinant monoclonal antibodies was detected in all examined samples . analysis of the antigen binding activity of the recombinant antibodies revealed that eight clones specifically reacted with the antigen . because of the high selectivity of ts-jpcr, we next attempted to determine the v--j repertoire of the assembled v genes. direct sequencing of the ig-expression constructs was readily achieved with an overall sequencing success rate of 96% . the sequencing failed in only two cases of vh  and two cases of vl . cloning of the corresponding 5'-race pcr products into plasmids revealed that these fragments contained pseudo v gene segments that had t <dig> and t <dig> sequences internal to the p <dig> and p <dig> sequences.

discussion
we have established ts-jpcr and used it for the rapid production of recombinant monoclonal antibodies from mouse plasma cells. while the principle of this procedure is essentially the same as other recently reported pcr-based methods, ts-jpcr has several useful features that overcome the limitations of the current methods. first, purification of the amplified v genes represents a significant, major bottleneck for the high-throughput production of recombinant antibodies. in contrast, ts-jpcr enables the production of ig-expression constructs, even in cases where the nonspecific amplification product happens to be the same size as the v genes. second, current pcr-based methods sometimes suffer low ig-expression construct yields. this result is likely due to inefficient hybrid duplex formation between the v gene and the promoter or terminator cassette, which is mediated through their short homology overlaps . ts-jpcr can produce a sufficient amount of linear expression construct for dna transfection and direct sequencing by using a single cassette that has long and specific homology overlaps  at both ends.

several methods for single cell-based cdna synthesis have been reported to amplify v genes by 5'-race pcr, including the use of multi-well methods  <cit> . however, these methods generally require manual input, thereby limiting the throughput of the experiment and increasing the susceptibility to cross-contamination and nonspecific amplification. the magrahder provides more effective single cell-based cdna synthesis by using a non-contact automatic magnetic power transmission system in which the magnetic beads are transported and mixed by the combined action of magnetic and gravitational fields in the hanging drop. the advantage of magrahd is that high quality cdna synthesis for downstream applications can be achieved in a short time because nucleic acid-bound magnetic beads were separated from residual contaminants, such as salts, nucleotides and enzymes, by extracting the beads from the drops. additionally, the magrahd reactor tray protects against cross-contamination because all steps were proceed in a pipet tip-free environment in a closed space. furthermore, the technical variation is significantly decreased when compared to a corresponding manual experiment, which results in the successful amplification of v genes by 5'-race pcr. the fact that the gene amplification unit is not integrated may be considered a disadvantage of magrahder. however, the collection of cdnas from the magrahd reactor tray can be easily transferred into the wells of a 96- or 384-well pcr plate with a twelve-tipped pipettor. given the time required for pcr, it is far more efficient for the machine to solely operate for cdna synthesis. thus, there is no need to include the gene amplification unit into magrahder.

we recently developed a target-selective homologous recombination cloning method  for the single-step insertion of pcr-amplified v gene fragments into expression vectors  <cit> . because ts-hr is a plasmid-based cloning method, ts-jpcr is preferable to ts-hr in the context of high-throughput production of large numbers of recombinant antibodies. once recombinant monoclonal antibodies with the desired specificity have been obtained by screening, the corresponding v genes can be inserted into an expression plasmid by ts-hr, which can in turn be used for large-scale antibody production.

CONCLUSIONS
starting from fifty-three isolated mouse plasma cells, we achieved amplification of the vh and vl genes within a single day. on the next day, each of the amplified v genes was joined to an ig-cassette by ts-jpcr to generate ig-expression constructs that can be used for dna transfection and direct sequencing. our methods are directly applicable to rapid and scalable automation for the generation of large numbers of recombinant monoclonal antibodies.

