BACKGROUND
the leptospires are motile, helical bacteria constituting a physiologically unique genus of spirochetes that includes the saprophyte l. biflexa and the pathogen l. interrogans. leptospirosis is a globally important zoonotic disease caused by pathogenic leptospira species including l. alexanderi, l. borgpetersenii, l. interrogans sensu stricto, it l. kirschneri, l. noguchii, l. santarosai, l. weilii, l. fainei, l. inadai and l. meyeri  <cit> . it affects a wide range of mammalian hosts, including humans, horses, dogs, pigs, cattle and wildlife. because of the large spectrum of animal species that serve as reservoirs, leptospirosis is considered to be the most widespread zoonotic disease  <cit> . aside from warm-blooded animals, leptospires can also survive in swamps, streams and rivers and alkaline muds and soils  <cit> . humans and other animals become infected through contact with urine-contaminated soil and water. when it infects warm-blooded animals, l. interrogans must differentially express virulence and other genes at temperatures ranging from roughly 25°c to 37°c. several in vitro studies have mimicked the temperature shift that l. interrogans encounters during infection of a host from an environmental source  <cit> . however, for practical reasons, such studies have been restricted to examination of relatively few proteins.

a more complete analysis of the adaptive responses occurring during the temperature shift will be invaluable for understanding l. interrogans transmission, expression of virulence and immune evasion, and for the potential identification of new vaccine candidates. for this purpose, dna microarrays are being applied to survey globally the adaptive responses to temperature shift in l. interrogans. it is now feasible to construct microarrays for analysis of l. interrogans because the complete leptospira interrogans serogroup icterohaemorrhagiae serovar lai type strain # <dig> genome is available  <cit> . in this study, expression of differential genes at 37°c relative to 28°c was studied to elucidate the overall gene expression patterns in l. interrogans. the differentially expressed genes found in this study are likely to be expressed differentially during natural mammalian infection and thus provide insights into the infection mechanisms of l. interrogans.

RESULTS
entry of l. interrogans into a warm-blooded host is usually accompanied by an upshift in temperature. specific genes are activated or repressed in the bacterial response to temperature elevation  <cit> . to assess gene expression in cultures grown at different temperatures, l. interrogans were cultivated to mid-log-phase at 28°c, then passaged into fresh medium incubated either at the original culture temperature or shifted to 37°c . rna was isolated from l. interrogans that grew well at each temperature. in our present work, two independent cultures were prepared as biological replicates for rna isolation for each test or reference condition.

microarray experiments
two genome sequences of l. interrogans serovar lai and l. interrogans serovar copenhageni have been released  <cit> . the average nucleotide identity between the two genomes is 95%. the average nucleotide identity between pairs of predicted orthologous protein coding genes is 99%. however, the serovar lai genome has  <dig> putative genes annotated while serovar copenhageni has only  <dig>  it would appear that the serovar copenhageni sequence has fewer putative structural genes than that of serovar lai. however, this difference occurred mainly because the copenhageni sequence contained no predicted coding sequences less than or equal to  <dig> bp in length that lacked significant homologues. the serovar lai genome has  <dig> predicted genes of this kind. genes shorter than  <dig> bp were indeed expressed according to proteomics analysis . also, among the genes  <dig> bp or more in length,  <dig> are unique to serovar lai and  <dig> to serovar copenhageni  <cit> . the  <dig> orfs spotted on the microarrays represented most of the genes more than  <dig> bp in length  in both serovars lai and copenhageni. two independent experiments demonstrated that, on average, transcripts of 93% of all genes on the microarrays were detected in the mid-log phase of l. interrogans. data from two independent experiments showed that transcripts of  <dig> genes were absent under both temperature conditions; these genes seemed not to be expressed at either 28°c or 37°c .

intrachip and interchip reproducibility
to evaluate intrachip and interchip reproducibility, we analyzed the expression values of three copies of all genes at various positions on each of two genechips. after some spots were excluded , the correlation coefficients r <dig> of the log <dig> for three different copies of the gene were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  for one chip and  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  for another. the correlation coefficient r <dig> of log <dig> for the two chips  was  <dig> . these results show good chip reproducibility .

verification of the microarray data
the microarray transcription data were verified by real-time pcr assays of the same sample of  <dig> genes representing the upregulated, downregulated and unchanged genes . the log-transformed change in relative quantity of mrna between each test and reference condition was calculated for each gene. the correlation coefficient r <dig> between the data obtained by the two techniques was  <dig>  . although the fold change in gene expression differed between the microarray and real time pcr results, the general trends were consistent. the real time pcr results therefore corroborated the microarray results but demonstrated the need for confirmation .

classification of temperature-related genes
temperature shift has been reported to alter protein synthesis in l. interrogans  <cit> . in order to characterize these changes at the global genome level, l. interrogans was cultured at different temperatures to mid-log-phase and gene expression was quantified. the scanned data generated from tiffsplit software were imported into genespring  <dig>  software for further analysis. fold change analysis was used to evaluate differential gene expression. the data showed that several genes were induced after temperature shift from 28°c to 37°c; expression of  <dig> genes was at least twice as high in organisms grown at 37°c as in those grown at 28°c . upregulation was apparent in  <dig> genes  and downregulation in  <dig> . fewer genes were differentially regulated than in other temperature shift experiments  <cit> . the differentially expressed genes belonged to nine functional categories as shown in fig  <dig>  many but not all of these categories contained both upregulated and downregulated genes. among the upregulated candidates were hsp <dig> heat shock proteins genes, cell wall/membrane biogenesis genes, intracellular trafficking and secretion genes and information storage and processing genes. unexpectedly, most of the upregulated genes were of unassigned function. downregulated genes were more numerous and were represented in more categories than upregulated genes. they include pathogenic genes , cell wall/membrane biogenesis genes, signal transduction mechanism genes and metabolism genes. the fact that more genes are downregulated at 37°c than at 28°c might partly explain why l. interrogans grows more slowly at the higher temperature. taken together, the data suggest that the composition of the l. interrogans proteome is substantially influenced by temperature.

heat shock protein genes
in contrast to classical heat shock studies, our observations are based on shifting cultures from 28°c to 37°c and growing them for several days, simulating conditions that would be encountered during the infection of hosts from environmental sources. typically, two major hsps, groel and dnak , are of considerable importance in the immunology and pathology of various bacterial and parasitic infections. no differences between the expression levels of dnak and groel in l. interrogans maintained at 28°c and those shifted from 28°c to 37°c were detected in our study. the same results in protein expression were also reported by jarlath e. nally  <cit> . however, two other small heat shock genes   belonging to the hsp <dig> family showed increased expression when the organisms were cultured at 37°c for several days. some studies have shown that low molecular mass heat shock proteins  appear to act as molecular chaperones  <cit> . others have shown that members of the hsp <dig> family protect effectively against stress  <cit> . for example, in babesia bovis, hsp <dig> proteins are involved in the cellular response to stress. when the temperature was increased, hsp <dig> expression was upregulated  <cit> . there have been no reports of temperature-related changes in expression of these two proteins in l. interrogans. the present result shows that these two hsp20s play an important role in the response to temperature shift in l. interrogans.

membrane protein genes
membrane proteins, especially outer membrane proteins, are critical for understanding the interactions of bacteria with their environments and are the main candidates for protective antigens in extracellular pathogens. many membrane proteins play an essential role in the development of new immunoprotection and serodiagnosis strategies  <cit> . therefore, many studies have been focused on membrane proteins  <cit> . a recent surfaceome study of leptospira showed that the expression of constituents remained unchanged under temperature changes  <cit> . the microarray data showed the same result. the genes for only six membrane-associated proteins were differentially expressed during culture at 37°c relative to 28°c. two  was upregulated and four  were downregulated at 37°c relative to 28°c. la <dig> is one of two orthologues of the type i secretion tolc protein in l. interogans, which is a outer membrane channel protein playing a role in the secretion of extracellular hemolysins and enzymes  <cit> . studies on other bacteria have shown that tolc in association with other membrane proteins exports a wide variety of drugs and toxic compounds  <cit> . in vibrio alginolyticus, tolc is a stress-responsive protein  <cit> . it seems that increasing tolc expression in l. interrogans may be associated with virulence and with changes in export and other aspects of metabolism in response to the temperature shift. another three downregulated membrane protein genes with no assigned function should be further studied to establish their physiological role in l. interrogans.

hemolysins encoded genes
the primary lesion caused by leptospira is damage to the endothelia of small blood vessels, leading to haemorrhage and localized ischaemia in multiple organs. as a consequence, renal tubular necrosis, hepatocellular damage, meningitis and myositis may occur in the infected host  <cit> . hemolysins may play a fundamental role in this process  <cit> . several hemolysin genes have been identified in the l. interrogans genome. we therefore determined whether these genes  were differentially expressed at 37°c relative to 28°c. interestingly, one hemolysin gene  encoding sphingomyelinase c was downregulated at the higher temperature, but the other hemolysin genes showed unchanged expression. the mechanism of regulation of these genes is not well understood and there have been no previous studies on their response to temperature shifts, so it will be interesting to conduct further studies on their regulation at different temperatures.

motility and chemotaxis genes
motility and chemotaxis are believed to be important in pathogenesis by many bacteria  <cit> . motility and chemotaxis responses enable many pathogenic leptospires to penetrate host tissue barriers during infection and adapt to a variety of environments and hosts  <cit> . chemotaxis has been extensively studied in the model organism escherichia coli. e. coli encodes several chemoreceptors that sense environmental conditions and relay this information to a histidine kinase, chea, through the coupling protein chew. chea phosphorylates the response regulator chey, which in turn interacts with the flagellar motor in its phosphorylated form, altering both the direction of flagellum rotation and the swimming path of the bacterium  <cit> . comparison of the complete sequences suggests that the l. interrogans genome contains a relatively large number of motility and chemotaxis genes and has a more complex chemotaxis system than e. coli  <cit> . it may be reflects the survival and adaptation of pathogenic leptospira to a variety of environments and hosts by selected differential expression of different motility and chemotaxis genes. in our study, two chemotaxis genes  encoding the chemotaxis protein chew and the methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein were downregulated at 37°c relative to 28°c. chemotaxis plays multiple roles in the adaptation of a bacterium to its environment, so the changes in these two chemotaxis genes may enable l. interrogans to adjust to environmental changes.

two-component systems and other regulator genes
the leptospira life cycle requires the ability to respond to a complex array of environmental conditions  <cit> . one mechanism for adaptation to changing environments is through two-component regulatory systems, a family of proteins that are widely distributed among many bacterial genera  <cit> . two-component systems allow specific environmental signals to be detected through a sensor histidine kinase that is usually associated with the cell membrane. in many cases, signaling through a single two-component system results in a coordinated change in expression of multiple genes, the products of which play a role in adaptation to a particular environment  <cit> . this is the most common type of signal transduction system in bacteria and controls such diverse processes as gene expression, sporulation and chemotaxis  <cit> . in pathogenic bacteria, two-component regulatory systems can also control the up- and down-regulation of different virulence determinants  <cit> . in our study, la <dig>  a two-component sensor, was upregulated and three two-components  were downregulated at 37°c relative to 28°c. it is unknown whether these two-components regulate virulence production or only adaptation to the temperature shift, which is disadvantageous for organism growth. these changes in gene regulation might enable the organism to adapt to the hostile environment of the host. in addition to the two-component systems, one anti-sigma factor antagonist gene, two cyclic nucleotide genes containing the ggdef motif and a gaf domain regulator gene were also down-regulated at 37°c relative to 28°c. cyclic nucleotides appear to have a major regulatory role in leptospira species  <cit> . ggdef-domain proteins are more commonly found in non-obligate parasitic bacteria than in obligate parasites, indicating their importance in responding to environmental signals  <cit> . gaf is a cgmp binding domain. l. interrogans may respond to the temperature shift through these regulators, thus controlling other physiological changes that are important in adapting to the environment.

energy and metabolism genes
bacteria respond quickly to environmental stimuli, so energy production and metabolism adjust rapidly to new growth conditions. indeed, many genes related to these processes were upregulated and downregulated by the temperature shift from 28°c to 37°c, as shown in table  <dig> and table  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, cdna microarrays covering  <dig> genes were used to investigate temperature shift adaptation by means of whole genomic transcription analysis. this is the first study of whole genomic transcription using the l. interrogans cdna-genechip based on the complete sequence.

several global transcription analyses of bacterial responses to growth temperature variation have been published; e.g. e. coli  <cit> , group a streptococcus  <cit> , b. subtilis  <cit> , campylobacter jejuni  <cit> , borrelia burgdorfer  <cit>  and mycoplasma pneumoniae  <cit> . although temperature-regulated bacterial gene expression has been well described in l. interrogans  <cit> , our study delineates global gene expression changes in this organism in response to temperature changes.

bacteria use multiple molecular strategies to alter gene expression in response to temperature change. our microarray analyses demonstrated that l. interrogans responds globally to temperature alteration. temperature-induced genes include heat shock proteins genes, cell wall/membrane biogenesis genes, virulence genes, regulatory genes and unidentified proteins. our data demonstrate that l. interrogans has the ability to alter gene transcription extensively in response to temperature during infection. importantly, many of the genes that are differentially regulated in response to growth temperature encode proteins of unknown function, and thereby provide additional avenues for pathogenesis research.

