BACKGROUND
grapes species  represent the most widely cultivated and economically important fruit crop in the world  <cit> . the use of grape berries includes the production of juice, fresh and dried fruit, and distilled liquor, although wine produced from cultivars of v. vinifera has the highest economic value of grape products. grapevine berries are non-climacteric fruits with a characteristic double sigmoid growth curve. the initial phase of exponential berry growth  is followed by a lag phase , with growth resuming after the onset of ripening or "veraison" . berry development is characterized by changes in numerous biological processes, including cell division and enlargement, primary and secondary metabolism, and resistance or susceptibility to abiotic or biotic stresses  <cit> . the importance of this plant species to agriculture has made the development of genomic resources a high priority. among these resources, transcriptional profiling of important grape tissues is a practical option that may reveal transcriptional complexity and changes in this dynamic developmental system.

massively parallel signature sequencing technology   <cit>  is a sequence-based method for measuring gene expression. the depth of sampling provided by mpss can identify a nearly complete inventory of transcripts in a given sample. the method is based on a unique process for parallel sequencing, which starts with the cloning of a cdna library on  <dig> μm diameter microbeads; one transcript from the original rna sample is represented on a single bead  <cit> . from each bead, a sequence of the 'signature' of  <dig> or more nucleotides is obtained by successive round of sequencing reactions  <cit> . these signatures are derived from and include the most 3' occurrence of a specific restriction enzyme site in a transcript   <cit> . the output of the method is conceptually similar to a possibly more familiar method called serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> . however, the mpss technology permits the simultaneous sequencing of millions of signatures from a given library  <cit> . by matching these signatures to the genome to identify specific genes, the abundance of each signature represents and measures the gene expression levels in the sample tissue. among several published applications of this technology, we have previously conducted comprehensive transcriptional analyses of the reference plant species arabidopsis thaliana and rice  <cit> . while mpss, sage, and expressed sequence tags  are all sequence-based technologies for transcriptional profiling, mpss provides more thorough qualitative and quantitative description of gene expression due to its tremendous depth. while novel sequencing technologies, such as sequence-by-synthesis  and  <dig>  offer deeper sequencing and longer read lengths, none have yet demonstrated consistently better results than mpss for mrna profiling  <cit> .

in this report, we have measured gene expression in developing grape berries using mpss, compared this expression profile with that provided by the current vitis unigene set  <cit> , and we developed a novel web-based resource for utilization of the grape mpss data. as a result of this analysis, we were able to annotate thousands of signatures matching predicted genes, quantify the expression level of these genes in the developing berries, compare the expression profiles derived from ests and mpss signature frequencies, and expand the coverage of known transcripts in an important grapevine organ at a specific developmental stage. because these data are based on sequences, they comprise a resource that will be useful for the annotation of any grape genomic sequence produced in the future.

RESULTS
analysis of the v. vinifera berry mpss dataset and signature annotation
an mpss library was constructed using rna extracted from stage ii berries  that were sampled from field-grown v. vinifera cv. cabernet sauvignon. after cloning of the cdna library onto beads, 17-base and 20-base signatures were generated by mpss sequencing  <cit> . we note that these are not independent samples, in that 20-base signatures are obtained by extending previously recorded 17-base signatures by three nucleotides; due to a low failure rate at each additional base of sequencing, the raw count of sequences is lower for the 20-base data. a total of  <dig> , <dig> 17-base and  <dig> , <dig> 20-base signatures were produced that corresponded to  <dig>  and  <dig>  distinct sequences, respectively . this represents a discovery rate or average raw abundance value of approximately one distinctive sequence for every ~ <dig> sequenced cdna tags.

"absolute" indicates the total number of successful sequencing reads, while "count" or "distinct" indicates the number of different sequences.

a r = reliable, nr = non-reliable, s = significant, ns = non-significant, rs = reliable and significant, rns = reliable and non-significant, nrs = non-reliable and significant, nrns = non-reliable and non-significant.

initially, to link the mpss signatures to predicted gene annotations, all sites  that could potentially produce an mpss signature were identified from the available vitis unigene dataset in public databases. this comprised  <dig>  contigs  and  <dig>  singletons . all potential signatures starting with the gatc anchor sequence were extracted from both sense and antisense directions of the grape sequences. a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  distinct 17-base potential signatures were identified, respectively, in contigs and singletons of this version of the vitis cdna data. when both datasets were combined, the total number of unique genomic signatures equaled  <dig> . the total number of in silico-extracted distinct mpss signatures is approximately six-fold lower than the  <dig>  distinct "genomic" mpss signatures reported for the completed arabidopsis sequence  <cit> , reflecting the incomplete nature of the grape est dataset and the lack of intergenic and intron sequences.

observed mpss signatures were classified based on the output of "reliability" and "significance" filters  <cit> . the purpose of these filters is to separate high quality data, which is represented by signatures encountered above specified frequency thresholds, from background signal generated by very low abundance mpss signatures. as with other mpss datasets, the grape library was generated from four sequencing runs representing two sequencing frames  <cit> . there were two runs for each of the "two-step" and "four-step" sequencing frames. the reliability filter asks whether a signature is present in more than one sequencing run ; signatures observed in more than one run are considered "reliable". the significance filter identifies as "significant" only those signatures with a normalized abundance greater than three transcripts per million . the classifications of 17- and 20-base expressed signatures in terms of reliability and significance are shown in tables 1a–c and 2;  <dig> % of all mpss signatures corresponded to the "reliable" and "significant" category, consistent with an extremely low abundance for signatures not passing the filters. this value is similar to the  <dig> % reported for the arabidopsis mpss dataset  <cit> . among mpss signatures with exact sequence matches to est contigs  and singletons , unique "reliable" and "significant" signatures represented the largest category .

percentages refer to the total distinct signatures. filters are described in the text, and are as defined in meyers et al.,  <cit> . in parts a and b, the number of est contigs matched was out of a total of  <dig>  unique contigs matched by 17-base signatures or  <dig>  by 20-base signatures; signatures from different filter categories may match to the same contig . in parts c and d, the number of est singletons matched was out of a total of  <dig>  unique singletons matched by 17-base signatures or  <dig>  by 20-base signatures; signatures from different filter categories may match to the same singleton .

expressed signatures were mapped to grape est contigs and singletons based on exact matches to the in silico extracted "potential signatures" . a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs were matched by expressed reliable and significant 17-base and 20-base mpss signatures, respectively . this represented, on average, more than 40% of all known vitis sp. genes. on the other hand, only 14% of singletons in the vitis sp. est set were matched by mpss signatures . the vast majority of the unmatched vitis sp sequences had in silico potential signatures that were not detected in the mpss data. it is possible that the corresponding genes were not expressed in this sample; alternatively, unmatched contig and singleton est sequences may represent 5' reads of cdna clones, and thus fail to represent 3' regions where the majority of mpss signatures originate. the disproportionate representation of singleton ests among the unmatched set is consistent with this later interpretation, because singleton ests in the vitis dataset are more often the product of 5' sequencing reactions.

most signatures matched a single contig or singleton, while ~40% matched two or more . in excess of 70% of matched contigs and singletons showed a one-to-one assignment to a reliable and significant mpss signature  . the remaining sequences had one-to-many assignments of up to a maximum of  <dig> different signatures to a single contig . sequences of 17– <dig> bp are rarely duplicated by chance in unrelated genes  <cit>  . instead, biological factors involving gene duplication or transcript processing may complicate the unambiguous assignment of signatures to transcripts. thus, gene family members with high sequence similarity are likely to yield distinct transcripts containing the same signature, while the use of multiple polyadenylation sites or alternative splice site selection can yield multiple signatures from the same transcription unit. to estimate the frequency of alternative termination, a subset of  <dig>  contigs was properly aligned in their 5' to 3' orientation. from this subset,  <dig> contigs matched by at least two mpss signatures were identified. the abundance counts of 17-nucleotide significant and reliable mpss signatures were transformed to relative frequency values and the location of each signature was plotted along the 3'-to-5' axis for each of the  <dig> contigs . the signature frequency per contig decreased exponentially from the 3'-to-5' direction. on average, ~70% of all signatures originate from the 3' most gatc site, while only ~29% and ~14% of signatures originate from the second and third 3' most positions , respectively. therefore, most of the transcripts matched by mpss are the product of polyadenylation at the most distal of all recorded 3' sites. it is possible, however, that the mpss signatures that did not match ests  are derived from longer 3' ends for which transcript sequence was not available.

analysis of sense-antisense expression
approximately 15% and 11% of the est contigs and singletons, respectively, were matched by mpss signatures in both sense and antisense orientations . the mpss signature frequencies were much higher on the sense strand for some sequences, while other sequences had higher mpss abundances on the antisense strand . contigs matched in both orientations represented ~12% of the known berry transcriptome , with the  <dig>  mpss signatures matching these contigs representing ~52% of the total mpss abundance. it is possible that the sense-antisense transcript pairs are an important transcriptional feature which could provide a mechanism for post-transcriptional gene silencing  <cit>  during this dynamic phase of berry development. functional categorization of these contigs showed no particular overrepresented category . moreover, none of these contigs had significant identifiable tblastx hits in both reading frame orientations, suggesting protein coding is a property of only one strand. it is possible that anti-sense transcripts could result from overlapping 3'utrs of adjacent genes, or from transcription of an overlapping non-coding rna.

a categories are as follows: "5' and 3"' indicates contigs matched by reliable and significant  tags in both sense and antisense orientation simultaneously; "5' or 3"' indicates contigs matched in their sense or antisense orientation but not both; "with tag but no match" indicates contigs with in silico identified gatc tag sites but without sequenced signatures ; and "without tags" indicates contigs lacking gatc sites.

expression profiles determined by est and mpss abundances
to quantify gene expression levels, we used the relative abundance of the  <dig>  reliable and significant 17-base mpss signatures from the stage ii berry library. these signatures represent the most robust subset of the mpss expression data. although the remaining  <dig>  reliable but not significant signatures were not considered in this analysis, prior analysis suggests that these signatures are likely to represent genuine transcripts expressed at very low levels  <cit> . the transcripts represented by these signatures may be expressed at higher levels in different specific cells or tissue layers that were not sampled.

the mpss sequences provide an inventory of the transcript population in a given organ or tissue that can be sorted based on abundance. this data is particularly powerful when aligned with est data from related tissues, as it allows sorting based on abundance and predicted gene function. the mpss-matched set of  <dig>  grape est contigs are derived from a series of cdna libraries that survey several stages of plant development, as well as responses to biotic and abiotic stress  <cit> . off these,  <dig>  contigs contained ests derived from one or more grape berry tissues, while  <dig>  contigs were composed of ests from other grape tissues but not from berries . a total of  <dig>  est contigs matched by mpss signatures were from ests found in only a single grape tissue; of these,  <dig> corresponded to berry-specific est contigs. the remaining contigs were exclusively derived from leaves, flowers, petioles, stems, buds and even roots. the remaining  <dig>  cdna contigs and sequences were detected in two or more grape organs . only three mpss-matched est contigs were found in all seven of the grape cdna libraries. in a similar analysis of the est singletons, the vast majority corresponded to transcripts previously observed exclusively in berry cdna libraries, but only  <dig> were stage ii berries . among the contigs and singletons not previously associated with berry libraries were those derived from flower and leaf cdna libraries. mpss signatures provided valuable information to confirm the presence and relative transcriptional levels of transcripts. many of these transcripts may have been previously mistakenly identified as tissue-specific based on est data only because est sequencing was not deep enough to detect these low abundance transcripts in different tissues. the mpss data demonstrate that the inventory of genes in a given tissue is complex and there may be substantially more overlap in diverse tissues than previously characterized, and this can be identified only by sequencing ests at a very deep level.

only  <dig>  distinct, reliable and significant, 17-base mpss signatures were used in this analysis.

a matched contigs with at least one est derived from berry libraries excluding those from ucd. berry libraries in this category include multiple developmental stages and growing conditions  <cit> .

b matched contigs with ests found in cdna libraries originated from at least two or more different grapevine organs. it may or may not simultaneously include berry libraries.

cindicates matched contigs assembled with ests not previously associated with berry libraries

dindicates matched contigs assembled with ests not previously associated with the ucd flower-berry libraries. this number includes contigs with at least one est derived from flower-berry libraries reported by other groups.

e indicates contigs containing at least one est produced from the flower-berry ucd libraries  <cit> .

fcorresponds to the sum of a and b.

gtotal number of contigs and non-ests sequences  <cit>  not matched by 17-mer reliable and significant tags. this value corresponds to the sum of c and d.

h contigs with at least one est derived from sii berry libraries  <cit>  but not matched by 17-mer reliable and significant tags.

one advantage of tag-based transcriptional profiling technologies such as ests, sage and mpss is that the targets are not preselected prior to analysis. while the discovery rate of new transcripts using ests-based approaches is limited by the extent of sequencing effort and redundancy within a given cdna library, unmatched or low abundance mpss signatures could be used as primers for pcr based methods to expand the current set of known genes for vitis  <cit> . there were  <dig>  distinct 17-base mpss signatures that did not match known grape est sequences, of which  <dig>  were both significant and reliable; these are most likely to represent novel genes not previously identified as transcribed or transcriptional variants. we tested this hypothesis by using available sequence of the grape genome, composed of  <dig>  contigs containing  <dig> , <dig> base pairs  <cit> . in total,  <dig>  17-mer and  <dig>  20-mer distinct mpss signatures matched to genome contig sequences. among these, there were  <dig>  and  <dig>  distinct 17-mer and 20-mer mpss signatures that matched only genomic contigs and not ests. taking the 17-mer signatures as the benchmark, the mpss data reveal 44% more transcript diversity than recorded in the existing public est resource.

in silico expression profiles resulting from est  and mpss signature frequencies  showed both differences and commonalities in the relative abundance of the top-ranked genes. for example, a common feature of both datasets is the relative high abundance of several chitinases, metallothionein-like and storage proteins, as well as a putative transcription factor and an elongation factor 1-α. on the other hand, two hexameric polyubiquitins and a plasma membrane aquaporin were among the top ranked genes based on mpss signatures but not based on est counts, and the opposite was true  for a non-specific lipid transfer protein a. a similar pattern emerges from the analysis of singleton ests that matched abundant mpss signatures . among such singleton ests, there were transcripts related to cell wall modification , abiotic/biotic stress factors , a eukaryotic translation initiation factor and several poorly annotated transcripts.

the expression level was determined based on the signature with the maximum normalized abundance.

a the sum of abundance of matching 17-base mpss signatures from the grape library.

b ests derived from stage ii green, hard berries

c ests derived from stage ii green, soft berries

d total signatures matching contigs present in the uc davis berry stage ii libraries.

a the sum of abundance of matching 17-base mpss signatures from the grape library.

b ests derived from stage ii green, hard berries.

c ests derived from stage ii green, soft berries.

d total signatures matching contigs present in the uc davis berry stage ii libraries.

a the sum of abundance of matching 17-base mpss signatures  from the grape library.

b ests derived from stage ii green, hard berries

c ests derived from stage ii green, soft berries

d total signatures matching contigs present in the uc davis berry stage ii libraries.

significant differences were observed in the relative abundance of contigs from est or mpss signature counts. while a total of  <dig> contigs accounted for approximately 50% of the ests sequenced from the two berry sii libraries, only  <dig> contigs matched an identical proportion of the filtered mpss signatures. the top  <dig> contigs ranked based on mpss frequency accounted for  <dig>  , suggesting a steeper curve and perhaps lower level of diversity in mpss data. in contrast, the  <dig> most frequent contigs based on est counts represented only  <dig> % of the total est for these two libraries.

as might be expected, mpss signatures sequenced from v. vinifera berries stage ii also matched several non-vinifera est singletons and contigs in the vitis unigene set. although the transcriptome of the non-vinifera species has been minimally characterized, a comparison of the top-ranked transcripts based on mpss signature frequency  showed remarkable similarities between the different species.

a the sum of abundance of matching 17-base mpss signatures from the grape library.

b species abbreviations are as follows: vae = vitis aestivalis; vru × var = d8909- <dig> 

a the sum of abundance of matching 17-base mpss signatures from the grape library.

b species abbreviations are as follows: vae = vitis aestivalis; vru × var = d8909- <dig> , vci × vru = vitis cinerea × vitis rupestris, vsh = vitis shutthelworthii.

a website for access to the grape mpss data
to facilitate public access and utilization of the mpss data, we developed a database and web-based interface  <cit> . the database and interface is a customized version of a previously described website  <cit> . unlike the arabidopsis or rice mpss sites which utilize the complete genomic sequence of these species, our grape database focuses on est contigs. this required the development of specialized tools and methods. for example, the incomplete nature of ests required a blast tool that would allow the user to identify the closest grape sequence to their gene of interest. the mpss data can be accessed by entering the grape contig identifier or est code, the mpss signature sequence, the grape sequence of interest, or a list of contig identifiers. the data on transcriptional activity that this website provides may be used as the starting point for analyses of individual genes or gene families in grape.

discussion
we have explored expression patterns at a specific stage in grape berry development by comparing and combining two tag-based methods: ests and mpss. both approaches described similar patterns of transcripts abundances, although there were some clear differences perhaps associated with the methods themselves. in principle, due to deeper sequencing, the mpss data should provide a more thorough and quantitative representation of the absolute transcript population in terms of representation and relative abundance than that from ests  <cit> . this is particularly true when the number of cdna clones sequenced from any given library is low or for genes expressed at only low levels in the sampled tissues. for the est frequency to represent the absolute transcript frequency, sequencing efforts must be large and sampling must be unbiased. the goal of achieving saturation for libraries constructed from a specific tissue may be overcome by combining library information available in public domain databases, if those resources are large enough. however, the different protocols used for library construction and est sequencing, the lack of complete control of growing conditions, genotype and even standardized guidelines to describe a particular stage in development, makes it difficult to achieve unbiased sampling. on the other hand, mpss analysis is also subject to bias. for example, some highly transcribed genes  were unmatched by any mpss signatures, possibly due to either the lack of a gatc site in the sequence or a technological artifact. the lack of suitable dpnii sites in some arabidopsis transcripts is one source of negative results in mpss transcriptional profiles compared against other high-throughput technologies  <cit> . in addition, mpss substantially underestimates expression for signatures either containing the recognition site for the type iis restriction endonuclease bbvi , or signatures containing certain four-nucleotide words in the sequencing frames  <cit> . the formerly high cost of tag-based methods limited biological replication as part of the experimental approach; such data would be highly desirable to determine the degree of biological variation and technical noise derived from these technologies  <cit> . this may be more achievable with the next generation of technologies as costs are reduced. the combined application of multiple approaches for transcriptional profiling is likely to provide the most robust determination of transcript levels.

in the grape mpss dataset, when multiple signatures matched to one contig, these usually varied significantly in abundance. however, these data were consistent with the most abundant mpss signature derived from the predominant form of the transcript among the ests  <cit> . an assessment of alternative transcript polyadenylation based on mpss in diverse tissues and treatments could provide insight into this mechanism of gene regulation by identifying differentially terminated transcripts. the annotation and analysis of signatures matching multiple contigs is a more difficult task, but validation of these data could be performed by using microarrays with specifically designed probes to determine the relative expression of all matched genes, or by repeating the mpss experiment using a different "anchoring enzyme" such as nlaiii  instead of dpnii .

the occurrence of genome-wide duplications may drive genome diversification and speciation in the plant kingdom  <cit> . gene- and organ-specific silencing and unequal expression levels have been reported in upland cotton for homeologous genes resulting from whole genome polyploidization  <cit>  and a similar phenomenon may be the cause of yellow-seeded commercial soybean cultivars  <cit> . the extent to which duplication-associated changes in gene expression may be playing a role in grapevine phenotypes is largely unknown. due to the ancestral polyploid nature of the grape genome  <cit> , duplication events leading to interactions or silencing among homeologous genes may have occurred. evidence of extensive antisense expression was identified by comparing the ests and mpss transcriptional profiling data. initial whole transcriptome analysis in mammalian systems indicated that up to 20% of all transcripts formed sense-antisense  pairs  <cit> . recent analysis derived from a large scale mouse cdna sequencing project  <cit>  and a high resolution transcriptional map of human chromosomes  <cit>  revealed that s/as pairs exists for up to 72% and 50% of all mouse and human transcripts, respectively. s/as frequencies observed in the berry transcriptome are similar to those reported in arabidopsis, where approximately 22% of all known genes have tissue specific natural antisense transcript pairs  <cit> . considering the unequal contribution of different genes and regions in the genome to the formation of s/as pairs  <cit> , whole transcriptome analysis would certainly provide a more accurate description of the extent of the phenomena in grapes than the one determined with a limited coverage of the transcriptome in this study.

two distinct sources of native antisense expression have been identified: cis- and trans-encoded antisense  <cit> . the former correspond to transcripts derived from the opposite strand in the same genetic locus as the sense rna. cis-encoded antisense transcripts tend to have complete overlap with the sense strand forming long perfect match rna duplexes  <cit> . approximately 50% of sense-antisense pair categories in humans fell within this category  <cit> . trans-encoded antisense transcripts derive from alternative loci and tend to have partial overlap with the sense strand of the original locus  <cit> . the function of endogenous populations of dsrna or small rnas in grape remain to be elucidated with more detailed experiments, and this is best performed using short-read sequencing methods  <cit> .

tag-based transcriptional profiling approaches provide unique advantages for the discovery of novel expressed sequences. mpss signatures derived from a specific stage in berry developmental revealed the existence of potentially  <dig>  novel transcripts in grapes. these transcripts could be more fully identified to expand the set of known and experimentally verified vitis genes either by pcr-based approaches  <cit> , or ultimately aligning the signatures with grape genomic sequence. in the absence of full genome sequence information, pcr-based approaches may become particularly important for transcripts that are difficult to identify by means of est-based approaches due to their low copy number or technical limitations of rna-dependent cdna synthesis. whole genome sequencing of the v. vinifera genome, combined with data-rich tag-based  and microarray-based transcriptional data will greatly contribute to our understanding of the complex relationships between genome organization, transcriptional activity, and phenotypes. because automated genome annotation systems are both error-prone and greatly improved with the incorporation of experimental data, the est and mpss data will prove invaluable in the coming years for gene discovery and the annotation of genomic sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
we have performed a complete transcriptional analysis of v. vinifera berries in transition to the ripening stage using mpss combined with est data. approximately  <dig>  distinct signatures, each representing a distinct transcript, were identified from the mpss data and the signatures were mapped onto est sequences. the number of mpss signatures matching to one est ranged from one to  <dig> and suggests the existence of numerous alternative transcripts in v. vinifera. in addition, a large set of mpss signatures that matched to the anti-sense orientation ests was identified. although the existence of antisense transcripts has been reported in many plant species, this is the first data to suggest the existence of antisense transcripts in v. vinifera. in addition to the signatures with est matches, large numbers of mpss signatures which do not match to ests were identified. while a small proportion could be due to sequencing errors, we believe the majority of these were mainly due to the low depth of sequence coverage in the current est dataset; support for this interpretation derives from the fact that the proportion of signatures matching v. vinifera sequences was nearly doubled by incorporation of whole genome sequence data. high capacity, short read sequencing technologies, in particular next generation gigabase methods, have potential to contribute an important element to ongoing annotation of the genome sequence of v. vinifera. the grape mpss data is accessible from university of delaware mpss website  <cit>  and the est data sets are available through ucdavis college of agricultural and environmental sciences genomics facility  website  <cit> .

