BACKGROUND
bacteria ingested by the immature stages of mosquitoes  are generally known to provide nutrition  <cit> , facilitate successful development  <cit> , and influence vector competence . the presence of certain bacteria has been also shown experimentally to provide immunity against pathogens, and reduce vector competence . therefore, interest has grown in understanding the obligate and facultative roles of the gut microflora of mosquitoes, their interaction with parasites and their manipulation to devise alternative and more sustainable vector control strategies  .

to date, the majority of the studies on microbiomes of mosquitoes have focused largely on investigating the gut microflora  associated only with adult mosquitoes . the focus on adult mosquitoes is justified, on one hand, because adult mosquitoes transmit pathogens directly or cause nuisance to humans and animals. on the other hand, the interactions of bacteria and immature stages of mosquitoes will potentially influence the microbiome of the adult mosquitoes. moreover, previous studies focused on the dominant tropical disease vector mosquito species such as anopheles gambiae, and not much was known about north american native mosquito species such as culex tarsalis. few studies have considered transstadial transmission  of microbial communities because the entire midgut of culicid mosquitoes is generally thought be replaced during development such that entire bacterial communities associated with the larval midgut are eliminated prior to eclosion  <cit> . however, circumstantial evidence in anopheles mosquitoes suggested that some bacteria species found in larval stages persist through metamorphosis and are transferred to adults  <cit> . recently, these contradictory observations have been reconciled in studies from anopheles stephensi where the malpighian tubules function as a “refugium” for bacteria during metamorphosis  <cit> . in addition, most other studies were based on laboratory-reared mosquitoes, fed standardized diets, and raised under controlled environmental conditions for several generations. however, these artificial conditions are likely to restrict and/or alter the host microbiomes of lab-raised insect populations relative to natural populations .

the gram-negative genus thorsellia  is the most abundant bacterial group found among the gut microflora of field-collected late instar larvae of culex spp. . thorsellia anophelis was first described from adult anopheles arabiensis in kenya  <cit>  and is the type specimen for a new family of the bacteria, thorselliaceae  <cit> . thorsellia anophelis has been reported to be the predominant bacterial species found in adult anopheles gambiae sensu lato  <cit>  and has also been found in anopheles culicifacies  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that the bacterium is acquired during larval feeding, and is then transferred transstadially to adult anopheles, although the evidence is somewhat conflicting  <cit> . rani and colleagues recovered this bacterium in both larvae and adults of anopheles stephensi, but not in the pupal stage  <cit> , whereas briones and colleagues did not recover the bacterium from either larval or pupal stages of anopheles  <cit> . however, others found thorsellia to be the 5th most abundant genus in anopheles gambiae larvae, and the 10th most abundant genus in pupae  <cit> . direct evidence supporting the transstadial transmission of thorsellia and other bacterial species in the microbiome of culex mosquitoes is lacking.

it was unknown whether succession or other factors such as use of pesticides causing changes in bacterial communities of the larval developmental sites also affect the microbiome in mosquitoes. pesticides  alter bacterial communities in the larval environment  <cit> . removal of mosquito larvae using biopesticides such as bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis  was reported to lessen grazing pressure on bacterial communities  and increase the diversity of bacteria in the habitats  <cit> .

in this study, we: 1) identified bacteria found in the guts of different developmental stages of c. tarsalis; 2) compared the microbiomes of field-collected c. tarsalis larvae with laboratory-reared individuals; and 3) assessed the effects of habitat age and manipulating larval mosquito density  on the microbial communities found in late-instar mosquito larvae.

RESULTS
bacterial taxa in developmental stages of c. tarsalis
a total of  <dig>  otus  were generated from  <dig> culex mosquito samples . proteobacteria , bacteroidetes , cyanobacteria , firmicutes , actinobacteria , and spirochaetes  were the most abundant bacterial phyla found in developmental stages of culex mosquitoes . unclassified sequences accounted for ~ <dig>  % of sequences, whereas, bacterial sequences unclassified to phyla accounted for  <dig>  % of sequences. another  <dig> phyla accounted for the remaining 1 % of the bacterial communities. although the relative abundance of bacterial taxa changed across the mosquito developmental stages, proteobacteria were the dominant bacteria found in the guts of c. tarsalis .fig.  <dig> proportional sequence abundance of bacterial phyla across culex developmental stages. the samples were taken  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 days after the onset of the experiment. only phyla with an average abundance ≥  <dig>  % were included. numbers on the x-axis represent sample identification numbers. stages of mosquitoes are denoted by early instar, late instar, lab = lab reared late instar, pupae, and adults. light bar refers to control; gray refers to low bti and dark bar for high bti treatments



a total of  <dig> bacterial otus, comprising 82 % of the total bacterial sequences, were found among the three life stages of field-collected larvae , pupae, and adults. however, only  <dig> otus classified into seven phyla, representing 66 % of all the sequences recovered from the field-collected mosquitoes, were shared among the samples from all developmental stages . proteobacteria, cyanobacteria, bacteroidetes and firmicutes were the most abundant phyla shared among the different stages . thorsellia , cyanobacteria  and dysgonomonas  were the most abundant genera shared across developmental stages. a thorsellia otu  was found in all developmental stages of field-collected larvae, pupae, and adults of c. tarsalis, and was the most abundant bacterial species across all mosquito life stages . phylogenetic analysis using longer 16s rrna gene sequences  of thorsellia obtained from c. tarsalis larvae revealed that this species is closely related to t. anophelis described from anopheles gambiae sensu stricto but may also contain a separate strain . the two thorsellia sequences from culex mosquitoes were both 99 % similar to t. anophelis, but with individual differences. out of the six clones sequenced, five clones were identical to clone # <dig>  whereas clone # <dig> was unique but had nucleotide differences that are supported by the other thorsellia species .fig.  <dig> molecular phylogenetic analysis of thorsellia from culex larvae by maximum likelihood method. the proportion of trees in which the associated taxa clustered together is shown next to the branches . the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site



early instar larvae 
a total of  <dig>  otus  in  <dig> bacterial phyla were recovered from early  instars of culex larvae. proteobacteria , firmicutes , and bacteroidetes  dominated the early instar culex larvae . overall, bacterial taxa in gammaproteobacteria , betaprotobacteria  and bacilli  were the three most abundant classes found in the early stages of the mosquito life cycle . thorselliaceae  and comamonadaceae  were the two most abundant families found in early instar larvae . thorsellia was the most abundant  genus found in the early stages followed by an unclassified taxon of gammaproteobacteria  and aeromonas  .fig.  <dig> family-level abundance of bacterial communities. family-level abundance  of bacterial communities in field-collected early  instar larvae, late  instar larvae, pupae and adults of c. tarsalis. only sequences classified to family level were included. because the treatments effects on the gut bacterial community structure within each stage were not significantly different, mosquitoes from all treatments were included in this figure



late instar c. tarsalis larvae
field-collected c. tarsalis larvae
overall,  <dig> bacterial phyla  were found in field-collected late larval  instars. proteobacteria accounted for nearly half  of the sequences followed by cyanobacteria , bacteroidetes , and firmicutes  . spirochaetes and actinobacteria accounted for nearly 3 % and 2 %, respectively, of the sequences recovered from late-instar larvae. thorselliaceae  and porphyromonadaceae  were the two most abundant families found in late-instar larvae . thorsellia was the most abundant genus in field-collected late instar larvae  followed by cyanobacteria  and dysgonomonas  .

laboratory-reared larvae
the late-instar larvae from a laboratory colony were dominated by proteobacteria  followed by actinobacteria  and bacteroidetes . overall,  <dig> otus  were obtained from the laboratory-reared colonies. enterobacteriaceae  was the most abundant family found in late instar laboratory-reared mosquitoes . rahnella  , unclassified enterobacteriaceae , and unclassified microbacteriaceae   dominated the bacterial communities in the larvae from the laboratory-reared colony .fig.  <dig> family-level abundance  of bacterial communities in laboratory-reared late instar c. tarsalis. only sequences classified to family level were included. these samples were from a laboratory c. tarsalis colony



in addition to the two otus of rahnella, we found  <dig> other bacterial otus, including one otu of each of thorsellia , spirochaeta, aeromonas, enterobacteriaceae, rhodocyclaceae, bacillaes, microbacteriaceae, hydrogenophaga, halomonadaceae, alteromonadales, flavobactrium, diaphorobacter, cloacibacterium, aquabacterium, propionibacterium, sphingomonadales, dysgomonas, and two otus of cyanobacteria, gammaproteobacteria and clostridium that were also shared among other samples.

in comparison to late instar larvae collected from the field, nearly 62 %  of all the otus found in lab were also found in the field-collected larvae, whereas only 5 %  of the otus found in the field-collected larvae were found in the lab colony.

c. tarsalis pupae
twenty phyla  were recovered from c. tarsalis pupae among which proteobacteria , bacteroidetes , actinobacteria , firmicutes , and cyanobacteria  were the dominant phyla . unclassified bacteria accounted for  <dig>  % of sequences. thorselliaceae dominated the bacterial community at the family level . members of gammaproteobacteria genera  dominated the bacterial communities in c. tarsalis pupae . however, the composition of the bacterial communities in the two samples varied considerably. pupae collected from untreated control contained a greater percentage  of thorsellia and the bacterial community was similar to late-instar larvae. the bacterial community in pupae collected from the high bti treatment contained a much smaller  relative abundance of thorsellia and was more similar to that in adults.

newly emerged non-blood-fed adult c. tarsalis
overall,  <dig> genera representing  <dig> otus  were found in newly emerged non-blood-fed adult c. tarsalis. the most abundant bacterial phyla found in eclosing c. tarsalis included proteobacteria , bacteroidetes , actinobacteria , firmicutes , and cyanobacteria  . another  <dig> bacterial phyla contributed for < 1 % of the total sequences recovered from adults. at the family level, the bacterial communities of adult c. tarsalis were dominantly enriched with an unclassified taxon of halomonadaceae , moraxellaceae , commamonadaceae , and flavobacteriaceae  . three gammaproteobacteria members  were the dominant genera found in adult mosquitoes . thorsellia accounted for  <dig>  % of all the sequences recovered from adult mosquitoes .

diversity of bacterial communities across developmental stages of culex
beta diversity of bacterial communities differed significantly among mosquito developmental stages as assessed by multi-response permutation procedure  on the bray-curtis and unifrac distance matrices . bacterial diversity in early-instar culex larvae from the first sampling date separated significantly from that of the late-instar larvae, pupae, and adults. bacterial communities from lab-reared mosquitoes differed significantly from the bacterial communities in field-collected samples . only two samples of pupae and two samples of lab-reared larvae were analyzed in this study. bacterial communities from one of the two pupal samples grouped tightly with adult samples, whereas the other sample was closely clustered to samples of field-collected late-instar larvae, mainly due to the differences in abundance of thorsellia . bacterial communities from late-instar culex larvae collected from the field were significantly separated from the other developmental stages  and were dominated by thorsellia and cyanobacteria.fig.  <dig> principal coordinate analysis  of bacterial communities in c. tarsalis. bacterial communities in early and late instars, pupae, and adults sampled from outdoor mesocosms, and in laboratory-reared late larval instars of c.tarsalis were significantly separated. pupae and adults were collected only from high bti treatment and untreated control . late instar larvae were sampled from all treatments

fig.  <dig> principal coordinate analysis ordination  of bacterial communities sampled from different stages of c. tarsalis. top panel: the ten most abundant bacterial taxa found in the different mosquito life stages as they relate to the ordination space in the bottom panel. bottom panel: mosquito life stages projected on bacterial community profiles of samples collected in this study. “lab” is late instar larvae from a laboratory colony of c. tarsalis




alpha diversity of bacterial communities in early instar c. tarsalis larvae was significantly higher than the bacterial diversity found in field-collected late larval instars and adults, and in laboratory-reared late-instar larvae . the diversity of bacterial communities in pupae varied considerably between the two samples and did not differ from the other developmental stages. the laboratory-reared larvae contained significantly less diverse bacterial communities than did larvae collected from the field .fig.  <dig> alpha diversity. alpha diversity  of bacterial communities  in different culex mosquito stages: early-instar larvae, late-instar larvae  and adults. pupal samples were not included in the alpha diversity plots shown below because there was a large variation in the number of sequences between the two samples analyzed



influences of bti and habitat age on gut bacterial communities of late instar mosquitoes
the bacterial communities in the late instar culex larvae were not influenced significantly by age of the habitat or the larvicide treatments , although there was noticeable separation of bacterial communities from high bti treatments from the other treatments. the bacterial communities in these larvae were dominated by otus of thorsellia, cyanobacteria, porphyromonadaceae, aeromonadaceae, rhodocyclaceae, clostridiales and spirochaeta in descending order of abundance .fig.  <dig> principal coordinate analysis ordination  of bacterial communities sampled from c. tarsalis late-instar larvae. top panel :  <dig> most abundant taxa found in field-collected late-instar c. tarsalis larvae as they relate to the ordination space in the middle and bottom panels. middle panel : bacterial community profiles from mosquitoes sampled in different habitat ages. bottom panel : bacterial community profiles from mosquitoes sampled in three bti treatments. neither bti treatment nor sampling date significantly influenced the bacterial communities in late-instar larvae of c. tarsalis


fig.  <dig> principal coordinate analysis of bacterial communities in c. tarsalis late-instar larvae. late-instar larvae collected from three bti treatments , and three sampling dates 



discussion
marker gene sequence analysis revealed the dynamics of bacterial community structure across developmental stages of culex tarsalis  and suggested transstadial transmission of some bacterial groups in culex mosquitoes from north america. overall,  <dig> bacterial otus in the phyla proteobacteria, cyanobacteria, bacteroidetes, actinobacteria, firmicutes, spirochaetes, and rsahf <dig> persisted from the early larval instars to newly emerged adults of c. tarsalis. the relative abundance of taxa in bacterial microbiome differed among the developmental stages  but, within 3rd and 4th instars, did not differ significantly across sampling dates or in response to changes in the microbial community of the feeding zone that occurred following the application of a high dose of biopesticides. our study provides additional evidence that, contrary to a commonly accepted hypothesis  <cit> , metamorphosis does not completely eliminate gut microbiota. in culex pipiens mosquitoes, some bacterial communities from the larval stages were shown to be sequestered in meconial peritrophic membrane and can be passed to the adult stages  <cit> .

thorsellia was found across all stages of c. tarsalis collected from the field but was rare in mosquitoes from laboratory colonies. however, the proportion of thorsellia sequences in field-collected mosquitoes decreased during development. in adults derived from field-collected larvae, thorsellia only accounted for  <dig>  % of all sequences identified to the genus level, as compared to the early , and late  instar larvae, and pupae . this genus accounted for only  <dig>  % of sequences identified to genus level from a lab colony of late c. tarsalis instar larvae suggesting that this bacterium is associated more strongly with natural aquatic habitats. the possible symbiotic role played by the thorsellia to the different species of mosquitoes is currently unknown. briones et al. reported a dominance of t. anophelis in the guts of adult anopheles gambiae  <cit> . likewise, wang and colleagues found thorsellia to be the dominating species in newly emerged adults making up 2/ <dig> of their bacteria  <cit> . in this study, thorsellia sequences obtained from c. tarsalis adults only accounted for a very small proportion of the bacterial sequences. that said, thorsellia was found to be the primary resident in the guts of early and late larval instars of field-collected c. tarsalis . overall, nearly 44 % of the sequences identified to genus level in the present study were thorsellia sequences. our finding indicates the persistence of taxa from this bacterial genus across all developmental stages of c. tarsalis.

early instar larval mosquitoes harbored significantly more diverse bacterial communities  than the late-instar larvae collected from the field, and pupae and adult stages. the early instar larvae were sampled four days after the onset of the experiment and the bacterial communities in the guts of these mosquitoes mirrored the higher bacterial diversity observed in the water column on this sampling date  <cit> . it is unknown whether the reduction of bacterial communities especially during the late stages of development was due to the dominance of phytoplankton  in the water column  or the reduction of some bacterial taxa from the gut of the mosquitoes during metamorphosis. in addition, the early instar larvae likely included culex stigmatosoma and culex quinquefasciatus, and the greatest diversity observed in this stage might be because different mosquito species were present in the samples.

late instar culex larvae maintained fairly stable bacterial communities in their gut regardless of changes of microbial communities in the feeding zones of developmental sites. duguma et al. also found that the bacterial communities within mosquito larvae did not change significantly during succession in two bioremediation treatments  <cit> . as revealed by pcoa ordinations, marked differences in the diversity of bacterial taxa were found between late instars, pupae and adults. although the majority of the microbes found in the feeding stages  were lost likely during metamorphosis, our study suggests that certain species of bacteria were found among life stages investigated and warrant further experimental evaluation of these microbiomes whether they are obligate or facultative symbionts and persist through the different mosquito life stages.

the microbiome communities in laboratory-reared mosquitoes differed significantly from those found in mosquitoes in nature. we found that bacterial communities from field-collected culex larval guts were significantly more diverse than their lab-reared counterparts. on average, 21 % of the sequences per sample from field-collected larvae were cyanobacteria, whereas this taxon was virtually absent from the guts of lab-reared mosquitoes . similarly bacteroidetes accounted 17 % of sequences found in the larvae collected from field whereas this bacterium only accounted 3 % of the sequences recovered from the lab-reared colony. the bacterial communities from laboratory-reared c. tarsalis larvae were primarily dominated by rahnella , which occurred rarely in the field-collected larvae. rani et al. also reported a significant reduction of bacterial diversity in lab-reared anopheles stephensi  <cit> . it is well documented that gut microbial consortia play a significant role in shaping the physiology of insects  <cit> . bacteria found in lab-reared fruit flies were either rare or absent from wild drosophila populations  <cit>  posing a fundamental question on the extrapolations of many lab-reared host insect-microbiome models to the natural populations.

the high bti treatment  that reduced late  larval mosquito abundance by >50 % for a month, changed the microbiota  and nutrient concentrations in the water column  <cit> . however, neither the differences in planktonic bacterial communities caused by this larvicide treatment nor the differences in succession of bacterial communities across time influenced the bacterial communities in the gut of c. tarsalis. interestingly, the water column bacterial diversity was significantly higher in the high bti mesocosms and significantly separated from the other treatments on this date  <cit> .

although the majority of late instar larvae were removed from the water column by the high bti treatment, the late instar larvae that were analyzed in this study were likely unaffected by the bti application at the time of sampling. nine weeks  after the bti application, larval mosquito abundance in the high bti treated mesocosms was significantly higher than in the low bti and untreated control mesocosms  <cit> . assessing the gut microbiota of mosquitoes surviving the biopesticide treatment has important implications because it might help understand the resistance mechanism and other physiological attributes provided by microbiota to the larval mosquitoes  <cit> .

c. tarsalis is one of the most important vectors of arboviruses  in north america. interestingly, this mosquito species lacks endosymbionts such as wolbachia, which is ubiquitous among several other arthropods including congeners  <cit> . most other notable symbionts of mosquitoes such as asaia and spiroplasma are also lacking from c. tarsalis. the present study and a previous study  <cit>  showed the dominance of the promising potential symbiont candidate, thorsellia, in c. tarsalis collected from natural habitats. both studies also reported the first evidence of this bacterium in a north american mosquito species. the function of this potential symbiont in the nutrition, physiology and vector competence of this mosquito species warrants further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
the metagenomic analysis of the bacteria microbiome  revealed significant differences among three life stages  of c. tarsalis collected from the field, and larvae from a laboratory colony. the greatest diversity was observed in the early instar larvae and the lowest bacterial diversity was found in the lab colony. thorsellia  dominated the active feeding stages  collected from the field and persisted through non-feeding developmental stages suggesting, respectively, that these bacteria are ingested from the aquatic habitats and transstadial transmission is possible between stages. however, it is unknown whether the persistence of thorsellia in the gut of larval mosquitoes is due to its resistance to digestion or is the result of continuous ingestion from the environment. the physiological role of this dominant bacterium within mosquitoes and whether it invades tissues also warrants further investigation.

the higher bacterial diversity in early instar larvae compared to the later developmental stages might have been due to either species-specific microbiomes that differed among c. tarsalis and two other congeners in the early -instar samples or other factors associated with the age of the habitat. the bacterial diversity was highest in the water column early in succession in the mesocosms. the gut bacterial community within late instar larval mosquitoes in outdoor mesocosms was conserved and did not change concomitantly with changes in the bacterial community present in the larval feeding zone across time as well as following the manipulation of larval density using a biopesticide treatment. the gut bacterial communities in pupae and adults were less diverse than in larvae. the mechanism causing the loss of gut bacteria diversity during ontogeny require further study.

finally, the bacterial communities found in laboratory-reared larvae were significantly less diverse compared to those found in field-collected larvae and only constituted a very small percentage  of the bacterial microbiomes found in the field-collected counterparts. thorsellia was rare in mosquitoes from the laboratory colony. the low microbiome diversity found in the laboratory mosquitoes could have important implications for the interpretation of results and applicability to natural populations from mosquito-microbiomes studies using laboratory-reared mosquito larvae.

