BACKGROUND
studies of the evolutionary history of protein interaction network  data have produced an almost bewildering range of  contradictory results  <cit> . while pin data is notoriously prone to false positive and negative results  <cit> , reasons for disagreements are probably more diverse than just the quality of the interaction data. failure to account for protein abundance – as measured by gene expression levels, or by proxy, the codon-adaptation index – has been criticized  <cit> ; the choice of species for comparative analysis will also affect any evolutionary inferences as shown by hahn et al.  <cit> . this may either be due to loss of power  or to differences in underlying pins in distantly related species. below, for example, we will show that results obtained from a comparison between the two hemiascomycetes saccharomyces cerevisiae and candida albicans differ considerably from those obtained using a distant s. cerevisiae – caenorhabditis elegans comparison. finally, it has recently been shown that many studies may have suffered from the fact that present network data, and this is in particular true for pins, are random samples from much larger networks. unless these subnets are adequate representations of the overall network, their structural properties  may differ quite substantially from that of the nodes in the global network. this is, for example, the case for so-called scale-free network models  <cit> .

moreover, many studies have ignored the underlying network structure  <cit>  in the statistical analysis. the network, however, introduces dependencies between connected proteins which should not be ignored. fraser et al.  <cit>  for example find that  there is a negative correlation between a protein's evolutionary rate and its connectivity k ,  connected proteins have positively correlated evolutionary rates, and  connected proteins do not have correlated connectivities. all three statements cannot, of course, be strongly true simultaneously. here we observe only relatively weak – though statistically significant – correlations between connectivity and evolutionary rate. we will argue that in a regression framework  <cit>  some of these quantities contain very little information indeed about the corresponding properties of their interaction partners. furthermore, we will demonstrate that when analyzing network data the network structure must be included into the analysis from the outset. here we will first perform an evolutionary analysis of the yeast and nematode pin data available in the dip database  <cit> , a hand-curated dataset combining information from a wide range of sources, followed by a comparison of the two datasets. when making comparisons between yeast species and between nematode species, we use only a single pin dataset – for s. cerevisiae and c. elegans, respectively – and take comfort from the observation of hahn et al.  <cit>  who find that evolutionary analysis involving closely related reference taxa produces consistent results. previously, topological comparisons of biological network data from different species have been made  <cit>  but here we focus on shared evolutionary characteristics of pins in the two species. we would expect at least some level of similarity of biological networks between species; but the more distantly related two organisms are, the more changes can have accumulated in their respective molecular networks. thus, the depth of the phylogeny can affect the evolutionary analysis of pins; it is, for example, unlikely that pins have been conserved over large evolutionary time-scales.

RESULTS
evolutionary analysis of the s. cerevisiae pin
for the evolutionary analysis of the yeast pin we use a panel of related yeast species: saccharomyces mikatae, saccharomyces bayanus, saccharomyces casteliii, saccharomyces kluyveri, c. albicans and schizosaccharomyces pombe ; the evolutionary relationship between these species is shown in figure  <dig>  we thus focus on relatively recent evolutionary change which allows us to study the effects of the network structure on the rate of evolution more directly than e.g. distant comparisons of s. cerevisiae and c. elegans, which may, after all, have different pins.

connectivity, expression and evolutionary rates in the s. cerevisiae pin
for most protein sequences we have not been able to identify orthologues in all yeast species used in this analysis. we therefore defined the averaged relative evolutionary rate r  in the methods section) which allows us to make comparisons for  <dig> out of the  <dig> yeast genes for which we have interaction data.

in figure  <dig> we show the dependence between inferred evolutionary rates and connectivities and expression levels, respectively. our comparative analysis found statistically significant, though small, negative correlation, measured by kendall's τ, between estimated evolutionary rates and a protein's number of interactions. in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> we observe that comparisons with all species support this notion we furthermore estimated approximate confidence intervals for τ from  <dig> bootstrap replicates  <cit>  .

observed negative correlations between estimated evolutionary rates and the expression level – which have been reported previously by pal et al.  <cit>  – are more pronounced. equally, k, the number of a protein's interactions, and expression levels are also correlated . there has been considerable controversy as to whether the effect of a protein's connectivity can be studied independently of expression levels . the observed values of τ suggest that expression levels are better predictors of the evolutionary rate than are connectivities. calculating partial rank correlation coefficients, τp, provides further evidence for this: correcting for expression reduces the correlation between the evolutionary rate r  and the number of interactions, as is apparent from figure  <dig>  as the phylogenetic distance between species increases, the negative partial correlation between evolutionary rate and connectivity decreases compared to the uncorrected rank correlation measure τ.

in the supplementary tables s1-s <dig>  we show the evolutionary rates for the different functional categories, processes and cellular compartments   <cit> . interestingly, once the effects of expression and protein function on the estimated evolutionary rate are taken into account the dependence of the latter on connectivity in a generalized linear regression model  <cit>   is considerably reduced. this can be assessed formally using the akaike information criterion   <cit>  on the sub-models where one of the terms has been dropped . for the full model we obtain aic = - <dig> . dropping expression from the model results in aic = - <dig> , indicating that a substantial amount of information about the evolutionary rate is contained in the expression levels. dropping the other terms individually while retaining the rest results in: aic = - <dig>  if the connectivity is dropped from the statistical model, and aic = - <dig>  , - <dig>   and - <dig>  . we thus have the following order of statistically inferred impact on the evolutionary rate : expression>function>process>connectivity≈compartment. using the rates obtained from comparisons with the individual species results in the same ordering.

evolution of interacting proteins in s. cerevisiae
so far we have treated nodes/proteins as independent  but we will now consider the extent to which interactions introduce dependencies into the data. it is intuitively plausible that interacting proteins have similar evolutionary rates, and this has indeed been reported by fraser et al.  <cit>  and studied by others, too, e.g.  <cit> . just like them we find that evolutionary rate decreases with connectivity; we also observe that the connectivities of interacting proteins are anti-correlated in yeast . this is well explained from the statistical theory of networks  <cit> , as well as structural analyses of pin data, where it is found that highly connected proteins form hubs which connect sparsely connected proteins.

taken together this would mean that the evolutionary rates of connected proteins should also be anti-correlated. this is, however, not the case when we look at the yeast pin, where we find that evolutionary rates of interacting proteins are positively correlated as measured by kendall's τ. the correlations we observe are only relatively weak  τ ≈  <dig>  –  <dig>  with p < 10- <dig>  in figure  <dig> we show the distribution of the τ rank correlation under the correct network null model  for rates, expression levels and connectivities of interacting proteins. the observed value always lies outside the distribution of the expected values. also shown in the figure are the probabilities that two interacting proteins have identical go-classifications for function, process and cellular compartment, respectively. again the observed probabilities lie outside the distribution under the null model.

correlation, even partial correlation, may, however, be an inadequate statistical measure if the data is structured ; one should then rather focus on the power of a factor such as expression level or connectivity to predict evolutionary rates. we assess this formally through the use of statistical regression models which describe the evolutionary rate of one protein as a function of the rate of its interacting partner, as well as of its expression level, number of interactions, function, process and cell compartment. the aic, which for the full model is aic = - <dig> , allows us to order the factors by the information they contain about a protein's evolutionary rate. the order  is as follows: expression , function , process , cellular compartment , connectivity , and the rate of one of its interaction partners . note that, measured by the aic, the evolutionary rate of an interaction partner provides virtually no additional information about a protein's own evolutionary rate, once the protein's own expression level, function and process have been taken into account.

thus, in summary, we observe that the evolutionary rate of yeast proteins is inversely related both to their connectivity in the pin and to their expression levels, with expression levels having a greater impact on a protein's evolutionary rate than connectivities. finally, while there is statistically significant correlation between the rates of interacting proteins, the rate of one interaction partner carries very little information about the rate of the other protein if other factors are taken into account.

evolutionary analysis of the c. elegans pin
in the evolutionary analysis of c. elegans we use c. briggsae, the only other congeneric nematode for which high quality whole-genome data is available. since nematodes are multicellular, care has to be taken when analysing the effects of gene expression on evolutionary rate, as expression levels will vary considerably between tissues and, indeed, between different stages of the nematode life cycle. because codon usage bias as a selective response increasing translational efficiency should be driven by the overall expression level of a protein integrated over both tissue and time, the codon-adaptation index  can serve as a meaningful averaged quantity reflecting overall integrated expression levels better than a direct measurement of mrna expression level data obtained from any single tissue type.

connectivity, expression and evolutionary rates in the c. elegans pin
the correlation of evolutionary rate and connectivity is somewhat reduced compared to s. cerevisiae with a point estimate of τ = - <dig>  with a 95% bootstrap ci of . anti-correlation between the cai measure of expression and evolutionary rates is again much more pronounced with τ ≈ - <dig>  and approximate bootstrap cis of . the resulting scatter plots of rate vs. connectivity and rate vs. cai are shown in figure  <dig> 

partial correlation coefficients again show that the influence of expression is greater than that of connectivity: τp ≈ - <dig>  for the partial correlation measure between rate and connectivity, while τp ≈ - <dig>  if the correlation between expression  and rate is corrected for connectivity. this is confirmed by performing an anova  <cit>  on the regression between rate, cai and connectivity where no significant correlation can be found between rate and connectivity . generalized linear regression modelling shows that measured by the aic a model in which the rate depends only on the cai but not on the connectivity  is more powerful than a model in which the rate depends on both connectivity and cai . in the absence of extensive go data we find that the cai is the only statistically significant predictor for a protein's evolutionary rate.

evolution of interacting proteins in c. elegans
comparing properties of interacting proteins we again find a negative correlation between their respective connectivities  and a weaker positive correlation between their evolutionary rates .

the corresponding 95% bootstrap ci for τ does, however, include  <dig> and negative values; thus there is no statistical basis for concluding that evolutionary rates of interacting proteins are correlated in c. elegans even if we consider only the rank correlation measure. in figure  <dig> the distribution of τ under the correct null model  confirms this result as the observed correlation between the evolutionary rates of interacting proteins falls into the 95% confidence interval obtained from the null model. expression levels are, however, significantly correlated and connectivities remain significantly anti-correlated. regression models, equivalent to those performed for yeast, confirm the negligible information a protein's evolutionary rate contains about the evolutionary rate of an interacting protein.

in summary, for c. elegans we find that expression, even if measured indirectly through the cai, is a better predictor about a protein's evolutionary rate than connectivity and go classifications. the evolutionary rates of connected proteins do not appear to be correlated.

comparing the pins of s. cerevisiae and c. elegans
it is instructive to compare the pins of the two model organisms, yeast and worm, directly. we have therefore used our earlier approach of identifying and analysing orthologues to the yeast and nematode pin data. while we are, of course, aware that this may be problematic given the two or three billion years of evolutionary history separating the two organisms, it should serve as a useful illustration of the amount of information one model-organism is likely to provide about another . using this approach we found a total of  <dig> pairs of orthologues. these we aligned and from the alignments we estimated evolutionary rates. for all of these proteins we have pin data and for most we also have information about their expression levels in the two species. the results are summarized in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  although they essentially agree with the earlier results, they do suggest that the choice of species used for inferring the evolutionary rate can influence the analysis. for example, the partial correlation between interaction and evolutionary rate  accounting for expression is much less reduced compared with the simple correlation coefficient  than when evolutionary rates are calculated using more closely related target species. over long evolutionary distances it appears as if connectivity and expression level act almost independently. however, the more reliable comparisons of the previous section suggest that this is not the case.

comparing properties of orthologous proteins we find that their expression levels  show the strongest correlation while their respective pin connectivities show the lowest value for kendall's τ statistic. this may be due to the noise in the pin data or the incomplete nature of present pin data sets. we expect that the relatively small proportion of c. elegans proteins included in the dip database will also lead to an inaccurate representation of the c. elegans pin.

discussion
there are considerable differences between the various published studies  <cit> , both in terms of protein interaction data and phylogenetic comparisons. we therefore focus on closely related species for both s. cerevisiae and c. elegans in the evolutionary analysis, since we probably have to assume that the underlying pin is relatively more conserved over short evolutionary distances. while we found some evidence that highly connected proteins evolve more slowly than sparsely connected proteins,  the negative correlation between rate and expression level is more pronounced,  in s. cerevisiae and c. elegans connectivity turns out to be a worse statistical predictor of the evolutionary rate than expression. for s. cerevisiae we also find that protein function and the principal biological process a protein is involved in have a greater impact on the evolutionary rate of a protein than its connectivity.

we believe that the importance of expression over connectivity in determining the evolutionary rate may be due to three factors. first, highly abundant genes are perhaps more visible to purifying selection  <cit> , which might tend to lower the rate at which they evolve. second, and more importantly, highly expressed genes, which are under selection for translational efficiency, use only a small subset of the cognate codons for a particular amino acid , and because this subset is often the same even in phylogenetically remote organisms – for example, for those amino acids encoded by nnu and nnc , nnc is almost universally preferred – the silent substitution rate is reduced. third, the replacement substitution rate in highly expressed proteins should also be reduced for a similar reason to selection for translational efficiency at silent sites: selection for more cheaply synthesised amino acids at replacement sites  <cit> . this can be shown to lead to the avoidance of amino acids which are metabolically expensive to synthesise at functionally-unconstrained sites in highly expressed proteins, which reduces the set of acceptable amino acids at such sites and thereby lowers the replacement substitution rate compared with that at functionally-unconstrained sites in low expression proteins  <cit> .

we have also applied an improved resampling procedure to the analysis of correlation between rates and expression levels of connected proteins. in our analysis we treated properties of the network as a confounding variable and in addition to studying correlations we also show how informative properties of one protein are about properties of its interaction partners. we find that the correct procedure broadens the resampling confidence intervals but that expression levels of interacting proteins remain considerably closer than would be expected by chance. conversely we found no evidence of a correlation in the evolutionary rate of interacting proteins in c. elegans and only extremely weak evidence in s. cerevisiae. our results also suggest, that the evolution of interacting proteins is not as tightly correlated as some researchers have proposed. this level of disagreement may be caused by uncertainties in the data or the fact that subnets sampled from larger networks inaccurately reflect the properties of the true network  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we believe that the effects of the network structure on the evolution of proteins, and vice versa, is much more subtle than has previously been suggested. in the present dataset expression levels appear to have shaped a protein's evolutionary rate more than its connectivity. if we are happy to accept present pin data with the necessary caution, then this observation is consistent with a scenario where expression levels are more conserved between species than are details of the interaction network. nevertheless, we believe that it is important to consider the pin and a protein's connectivity explicitly and from the outset in any statistical analysis as the underlying network appears to act as a confounding factor.

