BACKGROUND
plants have developed a number of different physiological and developmental responses to cope with abiotic stress. one important factor is acclimation, where mild stress conditions greatly enhance tolerance to later, more severe conditions  <cit> . transcriptome analysis using microarray technology is a very powerful tool to identify cold responsive genes  <cit> . amongst these are genes encoding transcription factors , signal transduction components, osmo-regulatory proteins, membrane stabilisation proteins, regulatory factors for protein folding, ice nucleation proteins and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of various kinds of small molecules like polyhydroxilated sugar alcohols, amino acids and derivatives, tertiary sulphonium compounds and quaternary ammonium compounds  <cit> . furthermore, molecular and genomic analyses have shown that the cbf  tfs have a prominent role in the cold acclimation process. however, it is known that additional pathways do exist, although they are less studied or have not even been discovered yet. overlaps between pathways mediating cold, drought and salt stress have also been documented  <cit> . the plant hormone aba, the biosynthesis of which is also induced by salt or drought stress, can be correlated to some, but not all of these pathways  <cit> . the only regulatory factors above cbf in the gene hierarchy presently known are ice <dig>   <cit> , hos <dig>   <cit>  and hos <dig>  <cit> . the signalling events that activate the ice <dig> transcription factor gene during cold stress are not known, and the primary receptors sensing a drop in temperature  have not yet been characterised. therefore, a further identification and characterization of genes involved in the molecular regulation of cold acclimation may enable us to develop plant varieties with improved tolerance to cold  <cit> .

the development of whole-genome microarrays and the resulting availability of gene expression data has inspired many efforts to infer genetic regulatory networks using computational methods such as discrete boolean networks  <cit> , bayesian approaches  <cit> , differential equations  <cit> , stochastic petri nets  <cit>  and clustering approaches  <cit> . other approaches have explored strategies for using a combination of information sources in the network derivation process. pilpel et al.  <cit>  attempted to identify regulatory networks in yeast by a combinatorial analysis of promoter regions and gene expression data. briefly, in their method, at first, for all motif pairs, all the genes containing the pair in their promoter region were identified. then an expression coherence score was calculated for each gene cluster and significantly synergistic combinations of motifs were identified. caselle et al.  <cit>  developed a model to identify upstream cis-elements involved in gene regulation in eukaryotes. their method grouped genes in a cluster if they shared common over-represented motifs or motif combinations in their upstream region and correlated them to gene expression. attempts have also been made to infer regulatory networks from a combined analysis of gene expression data, promoter regions and tf binding site data  <cit> . for example, in the statistical approach developed by xing et al.  <cit> , transcriptional regulatory interactions were identified by analyzing  <dig> tfs and  <dig> microarray experiments on yeast gene expression at various conditions.

in this study, we apply a combined rule-based and statistical approach to infer genetic regulatory networks by integrating the information from: 1) known binding-site motifs and the corresponding tfs; 2) the time-order relationships between tfs and their target genes in terms of expression initiation; and 3) motif synergies identified by gene expression profile similarities. in our approach, genes containing known over-represented motifs are grouped into disjoint clusters fulfilling three constraints. first, all genes in each cluster must contain in their upstream regions the same known motif or combination of motifs, for which there is a known binding tf. second, the earliest recorded time-point of significant expression of each gene in the cluster must occur at the same time as the first recorded time-point of significant expression of the gene encoding the regulating tf, or at the immediately following time-point. third, the expression profiles of the genes in the cluster must show a higher correlation than the expression profiles of randomly selected genes. applying these three constraints leads to formation of a grouping of the genes, based on which a regulatory network is derived by linking each known tf to the group of co-expressed genes that it regulates.

motifs or cis-elements are the regulatory regions found within the promoter region of any gene that controls the expression of that particular gene. thus, in order to identify the motifs to be used for the first constraint, we searched the upstream sequences  for the presence of known motifs using the patmatch tool  <cit> . however, since the mere presence of a motif in the upstream region of a gene is not sufficient to prove its role in regulation, our method only includes a motif if its frequency of occurrence in the upstream region is greater than the frequency by which it is expected to occur by chance. for estimating the over-representation of the motifs within the  <dig> kb upstream region , the number of occurrences of the motif was calculated and the motif was considered over-represented if its number of occurrences upstream of the particular gene was found to be higher than the upper bound of the confidence interval of its average number of occurrences for all genes . in most cases, the upper bound of the confidence interval was well below  <dig>  which meant that a single occurrence of the motif was considered as a case of over-representation when using this method.

the second constraint was implemented by identifying whether the first time-point of significant expression of each target gene occurred at or after the first time-point of significant expression of the tf-encoding gene. any genes not fulfilling this constraint were excluded from the cluster.

for the third constraint, we used the method of pilpel et al.  <cit> , where the average similarity of the expression profiles of a group of potentially co-regulated genes is compared with that of an equal number of randomly selected genes. genes were considered to be co-regulated if their degree of similarity was significantly higher than that of the randomly selected genes.

RESULTS
our method for discovery of putative genetic interactions was applied on the microarray data obtained from the cold acclimation experiments of ~ <dig>  genes conducted on the plant arabidopsis thaliana and generated by atgenexpress . the processed data was downloaded from the nasc repository  <cit> . from this dataset, genes that were differentially expressed by at least  <dig>  folds at one or more time-points were selected. overall,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> genes down-regulated. all these genes  were further analyzed. a number of tf-expressing genes were identified  from the up-regulated gene set and were grouped into their corresponding tf families. those tfs for which the binding sites were experimentally determined were selected in order to identify the target genes for that corresponding tf family. when applying the here described selection criteria to the up- and the down-regulated gene sets,  <dig> genes in the up- and  <dig> genes in the down-regulated set passed through all the criteria and were grouped into  <dig> and  <dig> clusters respectively, containing varying numbers of genes. each individual cluster is thus predicted to be regulated by one or more tf families  . interestingly, in most of the cases, the target genes are predicted to be regulated by more than one tf. this strongly suggests that combinatorial control is very common in stress-related gene regulation. a combinatorial control of gene regulation makes a lot of sense when the stimulus involves a variety of different signals, like in cold stress. this means that relatively few tfs can control the expression of a large number of genes.

transcription factors selected for further analysis. a: transcription factor family. b: binding site or motif to which the tf binds, where 'w' = 'a'/'t'; 'm' = 'a'/'c'; 'y' = 'c'/'t'; 'n' = 'a'/'t'/'g'/'c'. c: minimum number of copies required to be found within  <dig> kb upstream of a gene in order for the motif to be considered as over-represented according to the confidence interval threshold. d:locus id of the gene. e: common name of the tf. e: literature reference.

results obtained by applying the method using the confidence interval criterion on the genes filtered from the  <dig> k gene array data set. a: tf families. b: ec score obtained from the cluster of putative target genes predicted by this method. c: threshold above which the ec score is acceptable. d: number of putative target genes that are regulated by the tf families that are indicated in the first column.

motif synergy groups for down-regulated genes. for explanations see legend in table  <dig> 

to our knowledge, no systematic study has previously been done on combinatorial control of stress signalling in arabidopsis. in our computational approach we therefore identified several previously unknown combinations of different tfs regulating a cluster of target genes . for example, hsfs  is identified as the sole family of regulators of  <dig> up-regulated genes. however, in total, hsfs are predicted to regulate  <dig> genes. thus, the remaining  <dig> genes  seem to be under combinatorial control of the hsf and other tf families, such as bzip, ap <dig> , wrky, dof and nac. similar results could be observed with the other clusters of genes, which strongly indicates that cold-regulation at the molecular level can be more efficiently studied if combinatorial regulation is taken into consideration.

one way to computationally validate combinatorial regulation is through expression coherence scores. this technique was developed by pilpel et al.  <cit>  in order to study the effect on gene expression patterns when adding or subtracting motif combinations that seem to be directly responsible for particular expression patterns. for each motif or motif combination, pilpel et al. calculated the expression coherence  score, a measure of similarity of the expression profiles of all the genes containing that motif only or in combination with other motifs. gene clusters were accepted if their ec scores were found to be significant. we applied this technique to the obtained results, but with some modifications. in our work, the genes were clustered together only if they were predicted to be regulated by the same set of tfs. thereafter, the ec scores were calculated for all gene clusters and a particular cluster was accepted if its ec score was found to be above a certain threshold .

the putative regulatory networks  generated by this approach again demonstrate the degree of complexity that seems to be involved in the regulation of the target genes. as seen in figure  <dig>  the method predicts that tfs typically co-operate with several different tfs to regulate the downstream target gene. figure  <dig> gives an overview of the predicted regulation of the analyzed genes. in general, most of the tfs regulate a core cluster of genes that are not under combinatorial control and in addition also pair up with other tfs in different combinations to regulate an entirely different cluster of genes. this complex pattern of activity may be required to accomplish the large and diverse set of morphological and physiological changes that are necessary to resist cold.

for each tf family, all of its putative targets were grouped and for each such group of genes, the functional annotations were analysed. the statistical significance of the annotations was estimated online with the mips web interface  <cit> . from this analysis, it can be deduced that different tf families preferentially regulate different cellular processes involved in cold regulation. for instance, in the up-regulated set, the cell rescue, defence and virulence process is predicted to be preferentially regulated by the proteins belonging to the ap <dig> family ; the transcription process by the wrky , dof  and nac  families; metabolic processes by the bhlh family  and energy processes by the bzip family  . however, there are also instances where two or more families of tfs have a significant score for the same biological process. this pattern suggests that when required, many families of tfs participate in combinatorial regulation to regulate more complex biological processes. this is also supported by the work of by tong et al.  <cit>  where they found that in yeast, synthetic genetic relationships frequently coincide with a known functional relationship between gene pairs.

significant functional annotations of the cluster of genes putatively regulated by the tf-encoding genes. a and b: annotation categories in the mips functional annotation database. c to m: p-values obtained for all the genes putatively regulated by the corresponding tf. the significance of the annotation  for the list of all target genes putatively regulated by a tf was calculated using the mips online interface. entries in bold denote significant annotations .

discussion
the availability of both genomic and microarray data in several model organisms has opened up possibilities to elucidate important genetic regulatory mechanisms in these models. here we made an attempt to expand the known genetic network underlying the cold acclimation process in arabidopsis by a systematic integration of genomic and transcriptome data. our approach was able to correctly identify earlier described targets from the literature. besides identifying new potential targets of the known transcription factors, our approach also identified putative novel pathways in the cold acclimation process. thus, we illuminated pathways regulated by the bhlh, bzip, hsf, ap <dig>  nac, wrky, dof, mads, myb, and tcp <dig> families of tf-genes.

the bhlh family of tfs is known to be involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis, light response, flower development and abiotic stress  <cit> . analysis of up-regulated targets indicates that under cold stress there are  <dig> up-regulated target genes of bhlh, several of which are connected to metabolism, transport activities, stress response and cell fate activities  . one important response in cold acclimation is starch degradation. two especially important genes in this process are phosphoglycerate mutase   and pyruvate kinase  , which encode enzymes that take part in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis in the first steps of the starch biosynthesis pathway. since sugar levels have to be closely regulated during cold acclimation, pgm is therefore an important target gene. bhlh tfs are known to regulate the expression levels of pgm  <cit>  and pk  <cit> , both of which were correctly identified by our approach. in addition, the myb, nac and dof tfs were also predicted to be regulating pgm, while pk was predicted to be regulated by myb. these are to our knowledge all novel interactions. moreover, adenosylhomocysteinase  , a gene involved in methionine biosynthesis, was also identified as being regulated by bhlh and dof. this could be a novel interaction, since no evidence relating ahc to bhlh and dof could be found in the literature. on the other hand, it is known that alcohol dehydrogenase   catalyzes the inter-conversion of aldehyde and alcohol. abe et al.  <cit>  found that transgenic plants over-expressing atmyc <dig>  and atmyb <dig>  produced elevated levels of adh <dig>  while knockout mutants of atmyc <dig> were less sensitive to aba and showed significantly decreased expression of adh <dig>  <cit> . thus, abe et al.  <cit>  suggested that both myc <dig> and myb <dig> tfs are involved in aba-regulated gene expression of adh <dig> under drought and salt stress and that bhlh tfs putatively regulate adh. our model correctly predicted bhlh and myb tf family genes as regulating adh <dig>  dolferus et al.  <cit>  showed that mutation of the g-box motif located between - <dig> and - <dig> upstream of adh significantly reduced induction of adh specifically under cold stress but did not affect expression under un-induced conditions. as bzips are known to bind to the g-box motif, our approach correctly predicted bzip as a regulating factor of adh <dig>  in addition, dof tfs were also predicted to regulate adh <dig> expression. this is intriguing; since to our knowledge, no literature evidence is available that demonstrates the regulation of adh <dig> by dof tfs.

the bzip family of tfs is known to be involved in seed-storage, gene expression, photomorphogenesis, leaf development, flower development, defence response, aba response, gibberellin biosynthesis  <cit>  and cold stress  <cit> . an analysis of the functional annotations of the up-regulated target genes showed that processes regulated by bzip tfs include energy  and in particular transcription  . in the cold acclimated plant cells, sucrose is produced in large quantities. the source of sucrose that accumulates during cold acclimation is not known, but it could be produced from starch degradation  <cit> . the enzyme α-amylase is involved in the starch degradation pathway and transcript levels of the α-amylase gene are induced  during cold acclimation. yamauchi suggested that bzip regulates α-amylase gene expression  <cit> . in accordance with this hypothesis, our approach identified bzip as a putative key regulator of α-amylase .

under heat stress, hsfs are the primary molecules involved in transcriptional regulation of heat shock response  <cit> . the fact that hsfs are induced by diverse types of stresses suggests that they might play a central role in regulating the cell repair process and to counteract cytotoxic effects of protein denaturation  <cit> . analysis of the functional annotations of the putative up-regulated hsf target genes indicates that hsfs significantly regulate biological processes such as energy  and transcription , as well as cell rescue, defence and virulence  . some of the putative targets of hsfs are involved in regulating glycolysis, glyoxylate metabolism, sucrose metabolism and trehalose biosynthesis. trehalose  <dig> phosphate phosphatase  converts trehalose  <dig> phosphate to trehalose. it has been previously shown that heat shock proteins and trehalose together confer thermotolerance in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . our model identified t6pp  as being regulated by bzips.

ap <dig> domain containing proteins are known to be involved in regulating several developmental processes including flower development, cell proliferation, secondary metabolism, abiotic and biotic stress responses, aba response and ethylene response  <cit> . the cbf regulon is considered to have a major role in regulating the cold acclimation process in a. thaliana  <cit> . analysis of functional annotations of the up-regulated set suggests that cbf tfs, as expected, significantly regulate several biological processes, including cell rescue, defence and virulence  . gilmour et al.  <cit>  suggested a list of  <dig> genes involved in the cbf regulon. of these,  <dig> genes were up-regulated by at-least  <dig>  folds in the data we analyzed. out of  <dig> genes,  <dig> contain at least one crt motif  within the  <dig> kb upstream region. of these  <dig> genes, our approach predicted  <dig> genes to be regulated by cbf tfs . in addition, tfs from other families, including bzip, nac, hsf and dof, were also identified as key regulators of one or more of these target genes. in total,  <dig> genes were predicted to be regulated by cbf tfs.

nac tfs are specific to plants and they are known to play a role in both developmental processes  <cit>  and stress response  <cit> . our results support the involvement of nac genes in phospholipid biosynthesis , transcription , cell rescue, defence and virulence  and late embryonic development  .

wrkys are known to be involved in several different defence responses  <cit> . our analysis suggests that they are significantly involved in transcription , protein activity regulation , cell rescue, defence and virulence  and in immune response  .

finally,dof genes encode dof domain proteins that act as transcriptional regulators in plant growth and development including seed germination, endosperm-specific expression and carbon metabolism  <cit> . our analysis suggests that dofs are significantly involved in processes such as energy , transcription  and cell rescue, defence and virulence  . they also interact with transcription factors from other families, including bzip, hsf, wrky and nac. combinatorial regulation of targets by both dof and bzip tfs, as predicted by our model, is supported by previous work  <cit> .

from fig  <dig>  it could be suggested that some tf families preferentially regulate either up-regulated or down-regulated genes. for example, the bhlh family of tf putatively regulates a larger number of down- than up-regulated genes. on the contrary, tfs of the myb family of tf putatively regulates more up- than down-regulated genes. the cbf tfs, on the other hand, seem to regulate approximately equal numbers of up- and down-regulated genes.

in this work we analyzed only those motifs that were previously known from the literature. however, the approach is general and can easily be extended by using motifs that are generated by other motif finding tools. this approach is not yet capable of predicting auto-regulation, i.e., a gene regulating its own expression, or feed-back loops, and efforts will be made in the near future to find appropriate solutions for these two situations. an additional limitation is that gene targets were predicted for the tf gene families and not for the individual tfs. this is due to the fact that individual binding site data for each tf within a family is not available. on the other hand, even though the tfs within a family may have unique functions and target genes, they may still share similar binding sites and may be involved in similar biological processes. thus, applying the method at the gene family level will in many cases identify relevant interactions that can be further analysed experimentally.

from the above analysis it is clear that our model created an elaborate putative network is in which several previously known interactions were correctly predicted. in addition several novel interactions between key genes involved in the genetic control of cold acclimation in plants was suggested. these can now be directly addressed experimentally. in addition, since the model is general, it could in principle be used to study networks regulating any biological process in any biological systems. as far as cold stress is concerned it could pave the way for identification of useful molecular markers or relevant mutagenesis experiments in the development of cold tolerant commercial plant species.

CONCLUSIONS
we here presented a novel approach to identify putative target genes for transcription factors where the binding sites are known. this approach utilizes upstream sequences, expression data and functional annotation to build large-scale regulatory networks. such networks will be useful in studying regulatory activities in the cell at the molecular level. when we applied this model to the plant cold acclimation data, we were able to predict several new putative targets of known transcription factors. we also generated a large-scale genetic network related to cold acclimation in arabidopsis. however, the approach presented here can of course easily be adapted to any species as long as the model requirements are fulfilled. since the genomes of several organisms already have been sequenced and new genomes are continuously being added, the method presented here may serve as an additional tool to explore and validate important regulatory pathways and mechanisms in various biological systems.

