BACKGROUND
pollen development is a well characterized and highly conserved process in flowering plants  <cit> . typically, following anther differentiation, a sporogenous tissue develops within the anthers producing microsporocytes or pollen mother cells. prior to meiosis, pollen mother cells become isolated by a wall with the deposition of a callose layer. each pollen mother cell, as the result of the two meiotic divisions, generates four haploid cells forming a tetrad and, for a short time, these four sibling microspores are held together in a persistent pollen mother cell wall that is surrounded by callose. the tapetum then produces an enzyme cocktail that dissolves the pollen mother cell wall and the microspores are shed free and become independent  <cit> . the unicellular microspores go through an asymmetric mitotic division  to produce a pollen grain with two cells, a larger vegetative cell that hosts a smaller generative cell; the latter will divide once more to produce two sperm cells . pollen mitosis ii can take place before or after pollen release and, depending on when it occurs, the pollen will be bicellular or tricellular at the time of anther dehiscence. throughout the manuscript we will use the term "pollen tetrads" for mature pollen to avoid confusion with the tetrads of early developmental stages .

angiosperms pollen is most commonly released as single pollen grains or monads  <cit>  which represent the basic angiosperm pollen-unit. dehiscence of aggregated pollen  is considered a recent apomorphic characteristic  <cit>  that has arisen independently several times during evolution primarily in animal-pollinated taxa although, in some cases, monads may have evolved secondarily from groups of four grains  <cit> . pollen release as tetrads has been reported in some or all members of  <dig> different angiosperm families and also in some pteridophytes  <cit> . blackmore and crane   <cit>  put forward that the maintenance of pollen tetrads could be the result of relatively minor ontogenetic changes and, consequently, this could be an excellent example of convergence in situations where the release of pollen as tetrads is an effective reproductive strategy. interestingly, the dissemination of pollen as tetrads has also been reported in the quartet mutants of arabidopsis  <cit> .

annonaceae, included in the order magnoliales, is the largest family within the basal angiosperm magnoliid clade  <cit> . due to its phylogenetic position among the basal angiosperms, the family has been the object of considerable interest from a taxonomic and phylogenetic point of view  <cit>  and a number of studies have focused on pollen morphology  <cit> . although most genera of the annonaceae produce solitary pollen at maturity, in several species of the family pollen is released aggregated in groups of four or in polyads  <cit> . recent studies on the mechanism of pollen cohesion in this family have been performed in species of the genera pseuduvaria  <cit> , annona and cymbopetalum  <cit> . pollen cohesion in these species is generally acalymmate  with simple cohesion  <cit> . but these studies show differences in cohesion mechanisms; thus, while pollen grains in pseuduvaria are connected by wall bridges , involving both the exine and the intine, in a. glabra, a. montana and cymbopetalum cohesion is achieved through a mass of callose-cellulose. evolutionary transitions in flowering plant reproduction are proving to have a clear potential in plant evolutionary biology  <cit> , and the need for more detailed ontogenetic studies in the family has been put forward  <cit> . indeed the fact of being the largest family among basal angiosperms, together with the puzzling connection mechanisms so far described in the different species examined, provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the ontogeny of pollen development and its evolutionary implications.

in this work, pollen development is characterized in a. cherimola, one of the species in the annonaceae where pollen is shed aggregated in groups of four, paying special attention to the events close to pollen formation and retention of the individual pollen grains together, observed by immunolocalization of different wall components. results are discussed in relation to the shedding of pollen in groups of four in other species and how this event may have occurred and settled during evolution.

RESULTS
the mature a. cherimola flower is a syncarpous gynoecium with a conic shape composed of about  <dig> fused carpels surrounded at its base by several rows of anthers with up to  <dig> stamens, encircled by two whorls of three petals. the flower cycle from opening to anther dehiscence lasts two days: the flower opens on the morning of the first day in the female stage and remains in this stage until the afternoon of the following day when the flower enters the male stage. anther dehiscence occurs concomitantly in all stamens of a flower and, as the anthers dehisce, they detach from the flower and fall over the open petals.

flower buds of a. cherimola develop in the leaf axes following leaf expansion; the basal nodes are differentiated in the year preceding anthesis. the uppermost distal buds differentiate in synchrony with shoot growth  <cit> . flower bud growth begins  <dig> days prior to anthesis. anther differentiation proceeded centripetally, with the most developmentally advanced anthers placed in the outermost rows and the different stages of anther and pollen development present within the same flower. this fact was helpful for establishing successive stages of anther development. the anther becomes septate with pollen mother cells positioned between rows of interstitial tapetum similar to the anthers described in a sister species, annona squamosa  <cit> .

to determine if pollen development followed a standard pattern and whether pollen tetrads at anther dehiscence corresponds with the cytological and morphological features of mature pollen, anther and pollen development were examined from microsporogenesis to maturity. special attention was given to the events responsible for pollen cohesion. microgametogenesis and tapetum degeneration were also examined sequentially.

microsporogenesis
initial hypodermal archesporial cells were apparent  <dig> days before anthesis . from them, anther septa initials and pollen mother cells  developed in  <dig> cm long flower buds  <dig> days before anthesis . each anther contained a uniseriate row of pollen mother cells with a conspicuous common wall. the pmc began to accumulate starch grains  and increased in size . starch grains vanished concomitantly with the beginning of meiosis, some  <dig> days before anthesis, as a translucent cell wall layer was apparent surrounding the pmc . meiosis proceeded rapidly and was followed by a new accumulation of starch grains in the young microspores   <dig> days before anthesis. the microspore tetrads remained together in isolated tapetal chambers surrounded by the pmc wall that stained positively with periodic acid-shiff's reagent  for carbohydrates .

immunocytochemical essays revealed the localization of various cell wall components . callose surrounded the pmc wall and, following meiosis i, an additional furrow of callose developed inwards  forming a callose positive band between the dyad cells . successive cytokinesis followed , resulting in a tetrad , each separated by callose. dyad and tetrad stages coexist in the flower as centripetal maturation progresses. the pmc wall also reacted positively to jim <dig>  and jim <dig>  staining, indicating the presence of methyl-esterified and unesterified pectins respectively. however, while the walls of the anther somatic and tapetal cells also reacted positively to the jim <dig> for methyl-esterified pectins , they showed only a faint staining for the presence of unesterified pectins .

pollen cohesion
following tetrad formation, callose disappeared but the microspores remained within the pmc calcofluor-positive cellulosic wall . at this developmental stage, an interesting event was detected: the microspores within each tapetal chamber, which initially had their pollen aperture sites facing outward towards the pmc wall , appeared to float and rotate within their individual chambers . this movement was not random, but the microspores turned 180° until the pollen aperture sites faced each other . the remaining pmc cellulosic wall, which persisted for some time, together with the confined space provided by the tapetal chamber, appear to contribute towards keeping the microspore tetrad together. subsequently the pmc cellulosic wall disappeared completely  and the tapetum degenerated as the microspores increased in size. they remained in their new orientation attached by their apparently sticky aperture sites that now faced each other .

at this stage, both the cell walls of the somatic cells of the anther and the inner wall of microspores  reacted similarly for methyl-esterified pectins , while unesterified pectins were present just in the microspore intine . the exine showed a low unspecific autofluorescence but in a different fluorescence wavelength  than the fluorescent marker of the antibodies, alexafluor  <dig>  which emitted green fluorescence. as a consequence, exine autofluorescence was clearly differentiated from the immunofluorescence signals. anti-callose immunofluorescence revealed remnants of callose at the pollen aperture sites where the thick external layer of the microspore wall, the exine, was extremely thin or absent. these callose remnants were apparent in all microspores at this stage . the four microspores showed crosswall cohesion bridges that stained with antibodies against unesterified and methyl-esterified pectins in the microspore wall . following this inter-intine cohesion, additional deposition of sporopollenin with a joint layering of the four microspores further strengthened this connection .

microgametogenesis
as the microspores increased in size, their cytoplasm became vacuolated  and starch grains were absent . during this vacuolization, nuclear migration preceded the first mitosis to form bicellular pollen grains. following the first mitosis, 4- <dig> days before anthesis, the vacuoles decreased in size  and starch was again stored . young pollen grains had no vacuoles  and numerous starch grains were present . the second mitotic division producing the first tricellular pollen grains started some four hours prior to anther dehiscence  and one day prior to anther dehiscence starch grains began to hydrolyze . mitotic divisions were not synchronized within a pollen tetrad and single pollen grains with different numbers of nuclei could be observed in the same tetrad resulting in the coexistence of bicellular and tricellular pollen upon anther dehiscence.

in mature pollen, while intine thickness was similar around the pollen grain, the exine was thinner or absent at the pollen aperture sites where contact points between sibling pollen grains were established . at these areas unesterified and methyl-esterified pectin bridges were maintained throughout pollen development although these connections seemed to be less strong in mature pollen . however, mature pollen tetrads resisted separation during acetolysis, showing the permanence of joint sporopollenin .

scanning electron micrographs revealed that mature pollen had a radiosymetric globose shape, was inaperturated, tectate perforate, and with a diameter of  <dig> μm . mature pollen was shed in groups of four sibling pollen grains that stick together having an exine cohesion, clearly visible with high magnification scanning electron microscopy images .

tapetum degeneration
a. cherimola has a secretory tapetum with tapetal-type septa similar to those described in other species of the genus annona such as a. squamosa  <cit>  and a. glabra  <cit> . prior to meiosis, septal initials formed tapetal chambers that host the pmc . after meiosis, the tapetum showed a vacuolization and a progressive degeneration as the tapetal chamber enlarged . the nuclei of the tapetal cells displayed elongated and lobular shapes together with a extremely high chromatin condensation, revealed by an intense 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole  fluorescence , typical features of programmed cell death  <cit> , which have also been found in the tapetal nuclei of other species  <cit> . at the same time, tapetal cells released their cellular contents that coated the pollen grains to form the pollenkit. at anther dehiscence the tapetum was completely degenerated and had disappeared .

discussion
pollen development
pollen in a. cherimola is shed in groups of four, originating from the same meiotic division and, hence, the same tetrad. pollen development, however, continues beyond tetrad formation and, although held together, pollen grains are fully mature upon anther dehiscence. meiosis cytokinesis occurred through the formation of ingrowths of callose that are also found in genera of some primitive angiosperms  <cit>  including species of the magnoliid clade as magnolia tripetala  <cit>  and degeneria vitiensis  <cit>  in the magnoliales, laurelia novae-zelandiae  <cit>  and liriodendron tulipifera  <cit>  in the laurales or asarum in the piperales  <cit>  as well as in monocots as sisyrinchium  <cit> .

starch accumulated prior to meiosis and the first pollen mitosis and vanished with the onset of these two divisions; this also occurred  <dig> days before anther dehiscence, preceding the shedding of starchless pollen. the accumulation of starch in pmc has also been reported in other primitive angiosperms, such as anaxagorea brevipes  <cit>  or austrobaileya maculata  <cit> , and in other evolutionarily more recent angiosperms  <cit> . vacuolization also follows a conserved pattern  <cit> . the cytoplasm enlarges through a first vacuolization and, later on, following the first pollen mitosis, small vacuoles appear as starch builds up.

in most species a dehydration process takes place prior to pollen shedding and starch is hydrolyzed to form sucrose that protects pollen against desiccation  <cit> . starchless pollen is the most common pollen type in the angiosperms  <cit> , being more frequent in bicellular than in tricellular pollen  <cit> . in a. cherimola, pollen is shed in a highly hydrated stage  <cit>  and this lack of dehydration may explain why the second mitotic division continues in free pollen after pollen shedding, producing a mixed population of bi and tricellular pollen  <cit> . however, both types of pollen are starchless at anther dehiscence.

pollen cohesion
several reasons could account for the release of pollen in groups of four. in arabidopsis, failure of different enzymes during the dissolution of the pectic layer that surrounds the pmc wall has been reported in two quartet mutants  <cit> . in our work the immunolocalization of esterified and non-esterified pectins showed that, although they were clearly present in the pmc wall, the pectins disappeared following tetrad formation. a closer examination of the photographs reveals that the pmc wall, which stains for cellulose, remained beyond the tetrad stage. interestingly quartet mutants of arabidopsis also show a defect in the degradation of the pmc wall  <cit> . cellulase has also been shown to be involved in the breakdown process of the pmc wall  <cit>  and a delay in its action could lead to this phenomenon. however, this failure does not seem permanent, since  <dig> days later this wall is completely dissolved. thus, the permanence of the pmc wall appears as a key factor contributing to pollen grouping as pollen tetrads in a. cherimola, similar to the observations in arabidopsis mutants. a mixture of enzymes is require to break down the complex pmc wall  <cit> , and a failure of one or more of these enzymes could result in a similar final result.

different events that take place during the retention of this wall may explain pollen adherence once this wall disappears. the confining of pollen within the tapetal chamber keeping the young microspores in close proximity may contribute to this wall maintenance. surprisingly, the young microspores are apparently separated from their sibling cells allowing some free movement indicated by the strange 180° rotation of the pollen aperture sites. thus, those aperture sites that originally looked outwards rotate inward to face each other. a similar rotation has been reported previously in other annonaceae . however, a complete study of  <dig> annonaceae genera with species that release aggregated pollen showed proximal apertures  <cit>  and, consequently, the distal-proximal transition observed in pollen development of a. cherimola and other annonaceae  <cit>  could represent a widespread situation in this basal family.

another reason proposed for this permanent binding of pollen in groups of four could be a failure in the synthesis of the callose layer during microspore separation in the tetrad  <cit> . however, the results shown in this work in a. cherimola indicate that callose is layered following the standard pattern and vanishes later, after meiosis is completed, similar to the way it occurs in arabidopsis quartet mutants, in which callose dissolution proceeds normally  <cit> . however, the use of antibodies against callose showed that callose remains for a while in the area where pollen apertures will form hampering the layering of sporopollenin. callose remnants in this area have also been reported in other annonaceae and it has been suggested that these remnants pull the pollen grains to undergo the 180° turning  <cit> . in the formation of the pollen wall, callose dissolution occurs concomitantly with the layering of the exine  <cit>  and the formation of the pollen aperture is related to endoplasmic reticulum blocking the deposition of primexine  <cit> . the callose remnant at the pollen aperture sites has not been investigated in detail in other species and, given the high conservation of pollen ontogeny in angiosperms, this is a topic worthy of a detailed study. interestingly, in an arabidopsis mutant lacking the gene responsible for callose synthesis, pollen develops unusual pore structures  <cit> .

further binding at the aperture sites could follow this initial adhesion process through the observed joint deposition of pollenkit that has also been reported in other species  <cit> . thus, two key processes could contribute to holding together the four pollen grains in a. cherimola, the confined space that permits the delay in the dissolution of the pmc wall and the tapetal chamber and pollen rotation that allows the adhesion of the sticky proximal faces by the formation of small pectin bridges. later, the join deposition of sporopollenin would further strengthen this initial binding.

biological significance of the pollen dispersal unit
a failure or delay in the dissolution of the pmc wall and tapetal chamber appears to be a critical step, resulting in the continued proximity of the four microspores produced by meiosis of a single pmc. however, this phenotype could also result from failure in the different enzymes that dissolve the pmc wall. the distribution of this character, together with the information provided by arabidopsis mutants, shows that this has occurred independently several times during evolution, suggesting that it must provide some evolutionary advantages  <cit> .

the adaptive advantages derived from aggregated pollen have been reviewed recently  <cit> . the release of aggregated pollen in insect pollinated species could increase pollination efficiency, since more pollen grains could be transferred in a single pollinator visit and, in this sense, a correlation between pollen tetrads and polyads with a high number of ovules per flower has been shown in a survey of the annonaceae  <cit> . the release of aggregated pollen is more advantageous in situations where pollinators are infrequent  <cit>  and in situations of short pollen viability and pollen transport periods. a short pollen viability period has been reported in a. cherimola,  <cit>  and a short pollen transport episode is common in several annonaceae  <cit>  and in other beetle pollinated species of early divergent angiosperm lineages  <cit> .

an additional possible benefit of aggregated pollen is protection against desiccation and entry of pathogens through the thin walls of the pollen aperture sites. pollen grouped in dyads, tetrads or polyads show a strong proximal reduction of the exine in annonaceae  <cit> . a. cherimola pollen is inaperturate and germinates in the proximal face, showing a large area of unprotected intine  <cit> . more evolutionarily recent species present a colpus that, in dehydrated pollen, is just a narrow slit protected by loose pollenkit. only upon hydration, when the pollen faces a wet surface on the stigma, this slit swells developing a wider colpus through which the pollen tube protrudes  <cit> . inaperturate pollen does not have this protection from desiccation and the development of inward facing intines may play a role in protecting pollen against desiccation.

CONCLUSIONS
the results obtained in this work support the hypothesis that aggregated pollen could be the result of relatively minor ontogenetic changes beneficial for pollen transfer or/and protection from pollen desiccation. comparison of the events reported here with those recorded in recent pollen development mutants in arabidopsis suggests that a simple event along development, the delay in the dissolution of the pollen mother cell wall and tapetal chamber, results in conspicuous morphological changes that lead to the release of pollen in tetrads. a variety of different mutations within the enzymes required to breakdown this wall, may contribute to this common morphology. these changes have occurred and recur in nature and, due to their adaptive advantages for pollen transfer, have been selected during evolution several independent times, representing an example of convergent evolution.

