BACKGROUND
since the pioneer work of brandt  <cit> , a wealth of literature has been devoted to suprafamilial relationships among rodents. to date, however, no consensus has been reached based on morphological or paleontological evidence. nearly a century after brandt  <cit> , simpson  referred to the order rodentia and stated that "their relationships are involved in an intricate web of convergence, divergence, parallelism, and other taxonomic pitfalls."

the addition of molecular data contributed significantly in constructing a species tree for the order rodentia and the most up to date taxonomic arrangement includes at least  <dig> species distributed among  <dig> families and five suborders  <cit> . recently huchon et al.  <cit>  recognized the laotian rock rat  from laos  <cit>  as an additional family diatomyidae closely related to the ctenodactylidae. despite this new addition, the number of initially recognized rodent families by simpson  <cit>  and wood  <cit>  remained fairly stable . the number of rodent clades identified above the familial level, however, led to numerous inconsistencies and controversies . in the present study we adopted the most up to date suprafamilial classification as reviewed by carleton and musser  <cit>  who recognize five suborders .

hystricomorpha contains  <dig> families , and includes the previously problematic ctenodactylidae  <cit>  and the newly discovered diatomyidae  <cit> . the two latter families were identified as the sister taxon of the  <dig> traditional families comprising the infraorder hystricognathi  <cit> . the monophyly of hystricomorpha is currently supported by morphological, paleontological and molecular data . sciuromorpha includes gliridae, aplodontidae and sciuridae. the latter two families are closely related based on hard and soft morphological features  <cit> , albumin immunology  <cit>  and sequence data . the myomorphous gliridae is regarded as an early offshoot of sciuromorpha and this is supported by middle ear anatomy  <cit> , arterial patterns  <cit> ) and previous molecular investigations . castorimorpha also comprises three families, castoridae, heteromyidae and geomyidae. this association was first suggested by tullberg  <cit>  and, although not well supported by morphology, has fairly strong molecular support . the two superfamilies, dipodoidea and muroidea  comprise the suborder myomorpha and their close affinity is well established . the anomaluromorpha contains anomaluridae and pedetidae. associations between the later two families are strongly supported by mitochondrial and nuclear data  <cit>  and this agrees with winge  <cit>  and tullberg  <cit> . however, a recent paper by horner et al.  <cit>  based on the coding regions of the mitochondrial genome disagrees with these suggestions and places anomaluridae  as a sister taxon of hystricognathi.

evolutionary associations among these five suborders are not well resolved  <cit>  and even the monophyly of the order has been questioned in the past based on mtdna analyses  <cit> . the notion of paraphyly of the rodentia, however, was short lived and never supported by morphology and more comprehensive genetic studies  <cit> . based on available evidence, carleton and musser  <cit> , suggested that sciuromorpha, myomorpha and hystricomorpha are well established while the monophyly and/or phylogenetic position of castorimorpha and anomaluromorpha is less secure. subsequent retroposed sines provided additional evidence for the monophyly of myomorpha, anomaluromorpha and hystricomorpha whereas no sine has been identified for castorimorpha or sciuromorpha. a clade including myomorpha, anomaluromorpha and castorimorpha  was also confirmed by several unique sine insertions  <cit> . unfortunately, no sine has been found for any relationships among the three members of the "mouse-related clade" . finally the phylogenetic relationships among the three major rodent groups: sciuromorpha, "mouse-related clade" and hystricomorpha are as yet unresolved.

the introduction of phylogenomics and whole organism genome sequencing , coupled to the use of probabilistic methods based on models of sequence evolution, implicitly led to the belief that inconsistency in tree reconstructions will soon be something of the past. however, it is clear now that increasing the number of nucleotides does not always solve incongruence in phylogenetics  <cit> . even phylogenomic reconstructions can result in biases, and as a consequence, produce well supported incorrect tree topologies . in addition, gene tree reconstructions are based on numerous implicit assumptions that are seldom tested . violations of these assumptions may lead to compositional bias, contrasted patterns of saturation and heterogeneous evolutionary rates among genes and lineages. current phylogenetic reconstruction methods do not efficiently test and account for such biases, the consequence being reconstruction artefacts such as long branch attraction . to avoid these pitfalls, some authors  <cit>  emphasize the necessity to test the quality and consistency of the data and recommended that sources of inconsistencies should be excluded . this is more feasible with large datasets because removing a part of the data will theoretically leave enough informative positions to recover confidence and consistency.

the aims of this paper are firstly to test the current phylogenetic hypotheses surrounding the higher level relationships among rodent families. moreover, by using a large dataset we hoped to decipher remaining unsolved relationships among the five recognized rodent suborders. secondly, we were particularly interested in comparing the contribution of three different datasets: two mitochondrial genes , two nuclear exons  and four nuclear introns . for each dataset, we determined the distribution of sites according to eight evolutionary rates and we documented how the removal of the fast-evolving positions influenced phylogenetic reconstructions.

RESULTS
alignment, partition and heterogeneity of substitution rates
the alignments of the mitochondrial cytb and 12s rrna genes are respectively  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp long. a total of  <dig> bp in a loop region could not be aligned for the 12s rrna fragment and was excluded . the mitochondrial dataset comprised  <dig> bp and was subdivided into  <dig> partitions: one for each codon position of cytb , and stems  and loops  for the 12s rrna region. the two nuclear exons, irbp and vwf represented  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp respectively. the resulting  <dig> positions have been partitioned into the three codon positions either for each gene separately  or from the  <dig> genes concatenated . for the introns , the number of base pairs for the full alignments and those remaining after removal of the poorly aligned positions with gblocks, together with the number of positions in intronic and exonic regions, are indicated for each gene in table  <dig> . although the total length of each intron varied considerably between taxa , the number of conserved positions used for phylogeny reconstruction was close to the mean length for each fragment. for each gene and each pair of taxa, we graphically compared the p-distances  before and after removal of poorly aligned positions using gblocks. with the exception of prkc, the slopes of the regression lines  indicated a fairly good correlation before and after the exclusion of poorly aligned regions.

number of positions: in the full alignment , after elimination of poorly aligned positions by gblocks , in the remaining exonic parts  and in the intronic regions . for each gene, columns  <dig> and  <dig> give the mean intron length before alignment and its standard deviation.

the estimated number of sites in each of the eight gamma rate categories for the three main data types  is presented in table  <dig>  using tree-puzzle the proportion of invariable sites has been estimated to be zero in each case. thus, invariable positions are all included in the first gamma rate category which encompasses the most sites for the three datasets, especially for the mitochondrial and exon genes . these latter two datasets show nearly no sites in the rate categories  <dig> and  <dig>  whereas introns show a noticeable homogeneous increase between categories  <dig> to  <dig> . fastest-evolving sites  are more numerous for introns when compared to the other two data types . these results indicate that mitochondrial and exonic regions show a similar behaviour in terms of gamma rate distributions and vary greatly among sites: ~40% of the positions were invariable and ~12% reached a very high rate . this heterogeneity is also evidenced in the gamma value of the distribution parameter alpha which varies from  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for mitochondrial, exon and intron datasets, respectively. the differences between the fragments sequenced can best be explained by the coding nature of mitochondrial and exon genes when compared to the non-coding introns.

for each dataset and the eight gamma categories, the number of sites  is given in the left column and relative rates in the right column.

for the mitochondrial genes,  <dig> positions have been identified as fast-evolving sites  and subsequently removed. for the cytb gene,  <dig> positions were eliminated  of which  <dig> were at third codon position whereas only one of the removed characters was at a second codon position. stems and loops of the 12s rrna gene are also markedly different with  <dig> of the  <dig> positions excluded occurring in the loop section. as for the coding-cytb, exclusion of fast-evolving positions for the two concatenated exons  was also concentrated at third codon positions . for introns,  <dig> fast-evolving positions  were excluded representing  <dig> sites for mgf,  <dig> for prkc,  <dig> for sptbn,  <dig> for thy and  <dig> for the combined flanking-exonic regions of the introns. when sites corresponding to the eighth gamma category are removed, amplitude of evolutionary rates becomes  <dig> – <dig>   for mitochondrial genes,  <dig> – <dig>   for exons and  <dig> – <dig>   for introns. in terms of heterogeneity of substitution rates, improvement is substantial for introns  but much less for exons  and mitochondrial genes .

protein coding genes  have been partitioned according to codon positions, the 12s rrna is partitioned in stems and loops and there is one partition for each intron and one partition for combined exons. in each case, the number of positions is given in parentheses.

base composition and saturation analysis
for each dataset , several taxa deviate significantly in base composition when compared to the average base frequencies of the total alignment calculated by tree-puzzle. for introns, eight out of  <dig> rodents deviate from the average composition. when fast-evolving sites are removed , deviation in base composition was confined to six taxa . the exons  and mitochondrial regions showed respectively  <dig> and  <dig> taxa  deviating in base compositions. after removing 12% of the fast evolving positions in the exons and also in the mitochondrial regions, only one  and three  taxa showed base composition deviations. it can be concluded that the fastest-evolving positions are partly responsible for the biases in composition and it seems reasonable to suggest that the exclusion of some of these biases will reduce the violations associated with base composition assumptions. it can also be noted, however, that in all datasets, taxa deviating in base composition were found to cluster at their expected phylogenetic position .

saturation was estimated for each partition, before and after removal of fast-evolving sites. when using complete sequences, the slopes of the linear regressions  indicated that  <dig> partitions in particular appeared saturated : first and third codon positions of cytb, loops in 12s rrna and third codon positions of vwf. third positions of irbp, stems of the 12s rrna and the flanking-exons of introns are moderately saturated . the nine remaining partitions  are least saturated and probably also the most informative phylogenetically . removal of fast-evolving positions improves the phylogenetic signal, as indicated by the steeper slope values for the  <dig> partitions tested . for third codon positions of cytb, the slope is increased by an order of magnitude of  <dig>  even though the resulting value  is still indicative of significant saturation present at this position. as shown previously , the mitochondrial dataset is the most saturated whereas the nuclear genes  are less affected. our analyses demonstrated that removal of the fastest evolving sites decrease saturation in the data and, although we believe that this provides a substantial improvement, saturation could not be totally eliminated.

contribution of different data types to rodent phylogenetics
the various analyses performed in the present study supported the monophyly of all rodent families represented by two or more taxa . for each dataset , nodal support obtained from the mlp  and bayesian analyses is provided as additional file  <dig> for different suprafamilial groupings . when the different datasets are compared, only  <dig> clades are supported by all three types of data separately: a-myomorpha, b-anomaluromorpha, f-sciuroidea and h-hystricomorpha. two groupings  are weakly supported by mitochondrial genes and moderately by exons whereas clade g-sciuromorpha received the most support from the mitochondrial dataset. by comparison, the intronic regions that are less affected by bias in rate distributions among sites, and seem to be less saturated, gave more resolution than the exon or mitochondrial data sets. well established clades from the literature are strongly supported and moreover the introns also suggest two other subordinal relationships. first, inside the "mouse-related clade" , the myomorpha cluster with anomaluromorpha  to the exclusion of the  <dig> other alternatives . secondly, the introns suggest a less secure but consistent sister taxon relationship between sciuromorpha and hystricomorpha . the contribution of each intron to this node is mixed since prkc  and thy  support this grouping while mgf  and sptbn  rather suggest a basal split for hystricomorpha as the first emerging rodent clade. on the other hand, all four introns individually found anomaluromorpha as sister group to myomorpha . it is noticeable that separate analyses of the introns each contributed signal for these difficult nodes whereas each mitochondrial and exonic gene does not suggest any relationships.

removal of fast-evolving positions leads to mixed results. for the mitochondrial and exon genes, there is a clear improvement for the support for three clades: c-castorimorpha, e- + castorimorpha and g-sciuromorpha. with the mitochondrial dataset, however, the well established anomaluromorpha and myomorpha clades  <cit>  are distorted when characters are excluded because of the inclusion of jaculus as a sister species of anomalurus. when taken separately, the exclusion of fast evolving sites for introns negatively affected the support for most nodes , whereas, when concatenated, all of them  are strongly recovered . furthermore, a noticeable increase in support was found for sciuromorpha as a sister clade to hystricomorpha  at the base of the tree.

each dataset is analysed with and without  fast-evolving sites and the numbers of characters analysed is indicated in parenthesis. in each case, the bootstrap support resulting from  <dig> replications in partitioned maximum likelihood analysis with raxml and the posterior probability in bayesian analysis with mrbayes are indicated from right to left, respectively for the three possible relationships among the "mouse-related clade"  and between the three main rodent lineages .

for mitochondrial and exon datasets, we further exclude potential homoplasious characters by eliminating fast-evolving sites belonging to the gamma rate category  <dig>  a total of  <dig> additional positions were eliminated for the whole mitochondrial dataset. for exons,  <dig> sites were additionally removed at the third positions only because saturation analyses revealed that first and second positions were not plagued by saturation after elimination of rate category  <dig> . thus,  <dig> and  <dig> positions were reanalysed for the mitochondrial and exon datasets, respectively. analysis with puzzle indicated no improvement in among site rate variation with the intervals ranging between  <dig> – <dig>   for mitochondrial genes and  <dig> – <dig>   for exons. phylogenetic analyses conducted with raxml on these reduced datasets only led to the deterioration of support for various phylogenetic relationships and in fact rather found more ambiguous clusterings . the exclusion of these data thus clearly reflect a decrease in the resolving power of the data and therefore support suggestions that more saturated data also contains phylogenetic signal  <cit> . the same explanation can also be put forward to explain the reduced support for the myomorpha + anomaluromorpha node after removal of fastest sites .

finally, to further explore the utility of each dataset  the three datasets  were combined in a pairwise fashion  and results are presented for the two main nodes of interest . based on all nucleotides, none of the three pairwise combinations support the branching pattern between the three main rodent clades. after removal of the fastest-evolving positions, the clade hystricomorpha + sciuromorpha is supported by two out of three combinations . in fact, the combined mitochondrial genes + exons do not support any one of the two clades. on the contrary, the combinations that included the intron data were fully congruent with the combined analyses in the sense that the clade anomaluromorpha + myomorpha is well supported and the sciuromorpha + hystricomorpha is revealed after elimination of fastest positions.

concatenation of datasets, alternative hypotheses and molecular dating
concatenation of the eight genes resulted in the analyses of  <dig> characters for the full dataset and  <dig> characters when fast-evolving sites are removed. results are presented in table  <dig>  figure  <dig>  and additional file  <dig>  with the two probabilistic approaches, removal of fast-evolving sites recovered a strong basal clade uniting hystricomorpha+sciuromorpha  whereas less support for this grouping was obtained using the full data set . the "mouse-related group"  is strongly supported in both cases and the sister taxon relationship between myomorpha and anomaluromorpha  is well supported by both data treatments . the remaining rodent relationships also received good support when using concatenated gene sequences and confirmed an increase in phylogenetic resolution when data are combined .

for the mp analyses, the number of informative characters was  <dig> and  <dig>  for the complete and reduced datasets respectively. only one tree was recovered in each case and, as with probabilistic methods, most relationships were strongly supported . the two parsimony trees differed in the basal branching order in that the complete dataset suggests the sister group relationship between sciuromorpha and the "mouse-related clade"  whereas the reduced dataset weakly supports the clustering sciuromorpha + hystricomorpha . as with other reconstruction methods, the clade myomorpha+anomaluromorpha  is better supported by the complete  than by the reduced  dataset.

when the  <dig> fastest evolving sites  were analysed separately,  the well supported relationships such as the monophyly of the five rodent suborders was supported . at the higher level clade e- + castorimorpha was found , but other relationships  were weakly supported .

to evaluate the stability of the most likely topology , we tested nine hypothetical topologies representing the clustering possibilities between suborders of "e-mouse-related clade" , and "g-sciuromorpha" and "h-hystricomorpha". when these nine topologies are evaluated on the whole concatenated dataset, results of the au and sh tests indicated that tree- <dig> is identified as the best hypothesis but none of the other eight topologies were significantly worse  than the most likely tree . both tests are congruent even if probabilities obtained are sometimes quite different . after removal of fast-evolving sites, tree- <dig> is still identified as the best topology and p-values increased. five out the nine trees  can reasonably be rejected and the grouping i-sciuromorpha+hystricomorpha is consistently supported. posterior probabilities also decreased for hypotheses indicated by trees  <dig> to  <dig>  however, trees  <dig> and  <dig> are also not supported by pp when the whole dataset is tested.

p-values of the approximately unbiased test , shimodaira-hasegawa test  and approximate bayesian posterior probability  for nine topologies tested before  and after  removal of fast-evolving positions. the best topology is indicated in bold with the following abbreviations: myo = myomorpha; ano = anomaluromorpha; casto = castorimorpha; hyst = hystricomorpha; sciu = sciuromorpha.

estimation of divergence times and the 95% credibility intervals are reported for each clade on the chronogram in figure  <dig>  the ctenodactylidae and geomyidae families show a recent origin: around  <dig> and  <dig> mya , whereas dipodidae is the oldest family originating approximately  <dig> mya . other families  originated between  <dig> and  <dig> mya . four of the five suborders  diversified nearly contemporaneously between  <dig> and  <dig> mya  whereas sciuromorpha diverged earlier at  <dig>  mya . the deepest bifurcations among rodents  are dated to around  <dig> mya  and the origin of order rodentia is estimated around  <dig>  mya .

discussion
removal of fast-evolving sites and contribution to rodent phylogeny
the objective of removing fast-evolving positions was first to identify and improve the signal to noise ratio in all three different datasets  that showed different patterns of evolutionary rates. the first conclusion we reached, in agreement with rodriguez-espelata et al.  <cit> , is that fast-evolving sites are positively correlated with saturation and these sites also suffer the most from compositional bias. in most instances the elimination of these sites resulted in better supported relationships among rodent suborders. there was also an indirect indication of an increase in the phylogenetic signal for all partitions tested, as measured by base composition and saturation analyses . however, the indiscriminate removal of fast evolving sites actually decreased the phylogenetic resolution in some instances .

we observed that the proportion of fastest sites is greater in introns than in the other two data sets  as the non-coding introns are under less selection. nonetheless, removing of fast-evolving positions had little impact on gamma rate distribution  and also the global heterogeneity as measured by the alpha parameter. this result is not really surprising because mitochondrial and exonic regions are characterized by much contrasted categories among sites with numerous positions  that do not vary . removal of the few fastest positions  does not really influence the overall distribution. a more uniform distribution of evolutionary rates is one reason for making introns valuable evolutionary markers  especially when compared to mitochondrial and exonic genes which encompass a big proportion of invariable sites alternating with a relatively large proportion of fast-evolving positions. these categories are either useless  or problematic  for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships.

the removal of the fast-evolving positions improved support for a number of nodes but at different taxonomic levels. for introns, the reduced dataset improved the basal split among rodent suborders  whereas for mitochondrial and exonic regions, support is increased at the more terminal nodes . our interpretation is that removing the fastest positions cannot totally eliminate saturation  and thus, elimination of fast-evolving sites can improve the support only for nodes that are moderately affected by homoplasy .

with the two probabilistic methods of tree reconstruction, no substantial changes in the topology were observed between the whole and reduced concatenated datasets. pisani  <cit>  suggested that more sophisticated and realistic models of evolution can lead to a more robust topology. with mp analyses, the complete matrix suggests a grouping sciuromorpha + "mouse-like clade" whereas the reduced dataset clustered hystricomorpha with sciuromorpha, which corresponds to the topology obtained using ml and bi reconstructions. following the arguments proposed by bergsten  <cit> , these conflicting topologies might suggest that the mp tree  could result from long branch attraction as this "artefact" disappears when fast-evolving sites are removed. strikingly, the reduced datasets contributed to a significant improvement when testing alternative topologies . elimination of some noise in the data leads to better discrimination between the different topologies.

our conclusion is that identification and removal of fast-evolving positions has been shown to be useful in revealing some phylogenetic information previously concealed by homoplasy  <cit> . moreover, elimination of a small number of sites , particularly for introns and concatenation of markers, allows for increase in the support for deeper nodes. this method can effectively be useful because the deepest phylogenetic relationships, characterized by short internal branches, are very often the most difficult to resolve. our recommendation would be that complete and reduced analyses should be conducted on the same dataset, in order to empirically confirm the presence and location of the phylogenetic signal.

early rodent relationships and evolution of rodentia
this study fully support the recognition of the five subordinal clades as described in carleton and musser  <cit>  and previously identified in several molecular studies  <cit> . in addition to these five suborders, the "mouse-related clade" , is strongly supported by the introns and the concatenated datasets with and without fastest sites and the support for this clade is reinforced with the reduced exon and mitochondrial datasets . among this grouping, anomaluromorpha is the sister taxon of myomorpha, leaving castorimorpha as the first offshoot in the "mouse-related clade". this branching order is strongly supported by the complete intron dataset and is only moderately supported by the reduced introns or by the complete- or reduced-concatenated datasets. moreover, we found no indication of a basal position for anomaluridae as suggested by horner et al.  <cit> . interestingly, when 25% of fastest evolving mtdna amino acid sites were removed by horner et al.  <cit>  the anomaluridae was placed as the sister taxa of myomorpha. it is possible that the mtdna result, placing the anomaluridae at different positions, may be due to incomplete taxonomic sampling . analyses of the two mtdna genes included in the present study indeed reveal anomaluromorpha included in the "mouse-related clade" . the close phylogenetic association between myomorpha and anomaluromorpha is also strongly supported in huchon et al.  <cit>  and moderately supported in the papers of adkins et al.  <cit>  and waddell and shelley  <cit> .

our study provides the first evidence for a monophyletic clade comprising hystricomorpha and sciuromorpha and also the first evidence that this clade represents the deepest dichotomy amongst rodentia. this association is mostly obtained by the intron data and also the combined analyses. when datasets are combined in a pairwise fashion, no significant conflicting phylogenetic signal was found between topologies derived from introns and those derived from the other two datasets . moreover, this clustering gained additional support when alternative hypotheses were compared . although this clade has never been proposed based on morphological or paleontological data it has been mentioned in previous molecular studies that were mostly based on limited taxonomic sampling for rodents  <cit> . sciuromorpha as the first emergence among rodentia represents an alternative hypothesis  <cit>  but these studies were also based on limited taxonomic sampling. finally, sine data derived from two studies  <cit>  could also not conclusively resolve the basal diversifications of rodents. taken the data at hand, the early rodent dichotomies are complicated as also depicted by the short internal branches at the base of the tree. two of our intron data sets gave good support for the monophyly of hystricomorpha + sciuromorpha while the two others suggest a basal position for hystricomorpha as the first diverging rodent lineage. considering these conflicts, we cannot rule out the possibility that the difference in branching order is a result of independent lineage sorting  <cit> . although there is no strong phylogenetic conflict between the intron, exon and mitochondrial datasets , resolving the basal node in rodentia will require more data.

according to our molecular dating, the order rodentia arose during the late cretaceous  between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya, which places its oldest origin before the kt boundary. this date is slightly older but comparable to the ranges suggested by springer et al.  <cit>  and huchon et al.  <cit> . all these molecular estimations predate the oldest rodent fossils which are identified in the late paleocene  and are more in agreement with a late cretaceous superordinal diversification of placentals  <cit> . as soon as the early eocene , rodentia already appeared to be diverse and was present on all continents with the exception of south america  <cit> . our date estimates are compatible with an early contemporaneous explosion of rodent diversity  that gave rise to the five suborders .

one of the earliest classifications of rodents was proposed by brandt  <cit>  on different arrangements of the jaw musculature. three types were recognized: sciuromorphy, myomorphy, hystricomorphy and wood  <cit>  added a fourth type: protrogomorphy. these morphotypes have been recognized as homoplasious for a long time  <cit> . for example, marivaux et al.  <cit>  came to the conclusion that the hystricomorphous condition arose at least four times independently. based on our rodent phylogeny , it can be argued that these complex patterns are not entirely homoplasious. sciuromorphy evolved merely twice  but it is noteworthy that the four zygommasseteric arrangements found in the sciuromorpha clade is an unique case among rodents since other major suprafamilial groupings are characterized by one or two types at most. further detailed morphological or morphometric analyses could now be conducted to test if a pattern shared by several related rodent families  might be considered as real homology or if this pattern is only reflecting morphological grades  without any phylogenetic meaning.

CONCLUSIONS
suprafamilial phylogenetic relationships among rodentia were assessed using ~ <dig> characters including mitochondrial as well as exon and intron nuclear dna. for each dataset, we determined the distribution of sites according to eight evolutionary gamma rates and we assess the impact of removing fastest sites on phylogenetic reconstructions. our conclusion is that fast-evolving sites are positively correlated with saturation and bias in base composition but their removal is not sufficient to fully eliminate homoplasy. removing of the fastest evolving eighth nucleotide category in each of the three dataset resulted in improved support only for nodes moderately affected by homoplasy: the deepest node for introns and more recent nodes for exons and mitochondrial genes. our study fully support the recognition of the five subordinal clades as described in carleton and musser  <cit>  but proposed for the first time new intersubordinal clusterings. the relationship between myomorpha and anomaluromorpha appears well supported by the intron data in particular whereas the association between hystricomorpha and sciuromorpha is better supported when the data are combined and fast-evolving characters are excluded.

