BACKGROUND
if we wish to predict the resilience of a species to current challenges, such as those caused by climate change, one important source of information may be the past history of that taxon. a species that has persisted through very long periods – and thus, survived across a wide range of environmental conditions – may be more resilient than a recently evolved taxon whose vulnerability has not yet been tested to the same degree. the age of a species can then be considered as a consequence of resilience, which, in turn, will be determined by specific phenotypic traits. all else being equal then, we might thus expect “older” species to be more resilient. an important question is then what are the factors that affect a species’ age?

previous research shows that a species’ geographic location is linked to how long it has persisted since being formed . on average, terrestrial vertebrate species are older in the southern than in the northern hemisphere . the severity of the last glacial maximum was different in these two hemispheres: extensive ice sheets were almost entirely absent from the southern hemisphere, whereas large portions of north america and eurasia were covered by glaciers  <cit> . these differences placed fewer constraints on organismal viability, enabling populations to persist over extensive areas in the southern hemisphere. as a result, the lack of glaciation reduced the loss of genetic diversity  <cit> . for similar reasons, the latitudinal distribution of organisms might also impact the age of species. for example, weir and schluter  <cit>  found that within new world birds and mammals, the age of species, as well as the divergence between sister species is older towards the tropics.

intrinsic factors might also influence the resilience of species. in particular, it has been proposed that the reproductive strategies and neonatal behaviour, phenotypic characteristics, as well as the presence of intraspecific phenotypic variations, can have an effect on species ages . in this respect, recent studies have shown that intraspecific colour polymorphism allows species to exploit different habitat types or have broader distributions because of potential differences in behaviour, thermoregulation capacities, or prey–predator interactions . in addition, a study strictly focusing on snakes highlighted that the age of colour polymorphic species was older than those of monomorphic taxa  <cit> . in combination, these results suggest that being colour polymorphic enhances the resilience of species. concerning the reproduction strategies and precociality of neonates, studies on the evolution of viviparity in reptiles suggest that it is a key innovation compared to oviparity, buffering species against the negative impact of past climate fluctuations or enabling them to better exploit cold areas  <cit> . however, it may also be a dead-end in some circumstances as the transition to viviparity is often irreversible, meaning that cold adapted viviparous species might be at high risk in a context of global warming  <cit> . lastly, species with independent  neonates would be expected to be more resilient. under changing conditions, independent neonates can move by themselves to find a better environment. in contrast, dependent  neonates need to be carried during moves, which burdens the parents and lessens their survival rate.

any investigation of intrinsic factors associated with species age must also consider the indirect effect of body size. it is well known that body size is correlated with generation time and life history traits, as well as with population density. for example, small-bodied species have been shown to be more resilient than large ones . nonetheless, this factor has been neglected in previous studies looking at the age of species.

in the present study, we aim to understand how extrinsic and intrinsic factors influence the resilience of vertebrate taxa and hence their age. based on a dataset of  <dig> species worldwide and using phylogenetic comparative methods, we tested for an effect of the geographic location, body size, reproduction mode , newborn dependence behaviour , and presence of intraspecific colour polymorphism on the timing of the oldest diversification event within species. our study differs from previous studies by including taxa that are distributed in all areas of the world and we consider in our model all the factors that have been hypothesized to affect the age of species. it is also the first to consider all classes of vertebrates simultaneously and consider for the first time the phylogenetic effects due to shared ancestry between species. it therefore provides a much more complete and clear picture of the factors shaping the resilience of species.

RESULTS
the phylogenetic tree for the  <dig> vertebrate species  was congruent with existing knowledge on the relationships of the taxonomic groups included . most of the nodes were well supported and the  <dig> trees sampled from the posterior distribution of trees that were used to account for phylogenetic uncertainty showed small differences . the divergence times obtained by maximum likelihood are within the 95 % interval of the posterior samples obtained with beast. the two analyses resulted in very similar divergence times and we therefore use the dates obtained by maximum likelihood for the remaining of the analyses. the dates obtained for the main lineages of vertebrates are also congruent with recent large scale phylogenetic reconstructions . we used phylogenetic gls to test the factors affecting the age of species, which was used as the response variable in our analyses. the backward model selection retained three single factors and one interaction in the final phylogenetic gls model . colour polymorphism and latitude were highly significant , while mode of reproduction was maintained due to its significant interaction with latitude. polymorphic species had a much higher resilience than monomorphic ones  and, on average, the age of the polymorphic species was   <dig>  myr older than the age of monomorphic ones . latitude was also significant, but its effect was influenced by the mode of reproduction. oviparous species showed a strong latitudinal trend, with species living far from the equator being younger than species living in tropical climates . in contrast, viviparous species did not show any latitudinal trend in species age .fig.  <dig> best tree obtained from mrbayes and used for the comparative analyses

fig.  <dig> 
a distribution of p-values for the different explanatory factors retained in our final model with the age of species as response variable, for  <dig> trees sampled from the posterior distribution of trees obtained from mrbayes ; relationships between the age of species and  the presence or absence of intraspecific colour polymorphism and  the interaction between the mean latitudinal distribution of species and their reproduction mode 



discussion
our study, based on a dataset of  <dig> vertebrate species, allowed us to identify several extrinsic and intrinsic factors that influence significantly the age of vertebrate species. it also clarified results from previous studies that were not based on comparative methods, focused on particular taxa or considered fewer factors . overall, absolute mean latitude of the species distribution was negatively correlated with species age and colour-polymorphic species were older than monomorphic species. moreover, the age of oviparous species decreased with latitude, whereas no such pattern was apparent for viviparous ones.

the latitudinal gradient found in this study is consistent with the results of weir and schluter  <cit> , who found that within new world birds and mammals, the age of species, as well as the divergence between sister species, is younger towards the poles. using interspecific divergences, they estimated that the highest recent speciation and extinction rates occurred at high latitudes and declined toward the tropics. this pattern is likely explained by the presence of more stable climatic conditions in the tropics than in temperate areas during pleistocene climatic fluctuations  <cit> . according to weir and schluter  <cit> , this climatic stability leads to a lower species turnover in the tropics compared to temperate areas, resulting in a lower diversity in the latter. based on the similarity between our results and those of weir and schluter  <cit>  in term of intraspecific latitudinal gradient, this pattern might be generally valid for vertebrate species from both hemispheres. however, the situation is likely more complex. indeed, the age of viviparous vertebrate species was not influenced by their mean latitudinal distribution, whereas the age of oviparous species decreased towards the poles. this result suggests a higher resilience of viviparous species to cold climate, and can be attributed to their buffering capacity against inadequate environmental conditions during the embryogenesis. this is particularly true for heliothermic vertebrates, for which a cold year might result in an absence of reproduction if favourable nesting sites are absent. in contrast, viviparous species might be able to better deal with poor environmental conditions by modifying their sun-basking activities . for instance, pincheira-donoso et al.,  <cit> , found that, in a widespread south american lizard genus , the evolution of viviparity was associated with a radiation into cold climates. this argument is not relevant to birds or placental and marsupial mammals  because their breeding type is constant and they are more widely distributed. however, the argument can be extended to other ectothermic vertebrates .

body colour plays a major role in the evolution of organisms as it is involved, for instance, in thermoregulation, prey–predator interaction, behaviour, protection against uv-light or abrasive agents  <cit> . therefore, the presence of intraspecific colour polymorphism may promote the ecological success of species as previously shown for squamates  <cit> , amphibians  <cit>  and owls  <cit> , through their capacity to exploit a larger range of habitat types. in turn, polymorphic species might be more resilient to past and future climatic fluctuations. our results are also in agreement with the study of pizzatto & dubey  <cit> , which found that colour-polymorphic snake species were older than monomorphic species.

recent studies focusing on temperate vertebrate taxa highlighted that species from the southern hemisphere are older than those from the northern, and that differences in past climate are likely responsible for this pattern . interestingly, the hemisphere of origin is not impacting the age of species in our study, which is likely due to the inclusion of additional intrinsic and extrinsic factors and to the use of phylogenetic comparative methods. indeed, when the hemisphere of origin is included in our analyses without accounting for the phylogenetic relationships between taxa, southern species remained significantly older than northern ones . the same is true when strictly temperate species of our dataset are included . these differences illustrate the importance of considering an array of factors in such analyses. in addition, the phylogenetic relationships of studied taxa might deeply influence such studies, keeping in mind that northern and southern hemisphere temperate fauna are distantly related genetically, numerous families and genera being solely distributed in one of the two hemispheres.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our findings suggest that intrinsic and extrinsic variables might contribute to the resilience of species to past environmental changes and hence are relevant in a context of climate change. overall and independently of current threats, organisms which exhibit ancient intraspecific diversification events are more likely to deal with future modifications of their environment, those species being colour polymorphic, viviparous, or living at low latitudes.

