BACKGROUND
lower jaw protrusion or mandibular prognathism  is a developmental malformation conferring a very distinctive facial phenotype. the most famous example of mp is the habsburg family, one of the oldest european royal families, where prognathism has been observed in several successive generations  <cit> , suggesting a strong genetic component for this disorder. in fact, although environmental factors appear to contribute to the development of mp, familiar aggregation of this character has been reported in several human populations, providing strong support to the hypothesis that heredity plays an important role in the etiology of mp. a recent study indicates the presence of a major gene that influences the expression of mp with clear signs of mendelian inheritance , and a multifactorial component  <cit> . mandibular prognathism is not limited to royal families nor to the human species, as it has been reported in several other vertebrates, e.g. iguanas, short-nosed dog breeds, and rabbits. in the latter species, pedigree analysis showed a simple autosomal recessive inheritance with incomplete penetrance for this condition  <cit> . different types of lower jaw deformities have been reported also in several cultured as well as wild fish. in the european sea bass, dicentrarchus labrax, a phenotype similar to prognatism is often observed  <cit> . in some cases lower jaw protrusion appears to be related to hypertrophy of the mandible , in others it has been explained as an antero-posterior compression of the ethmoid region and upper jaws, with the resulting apparent protrusion of the lower jaw, and named "pugheadness". in d. labrax, this malformation has been attributed to a dietary excess of vitamin a as well as to absence or excess of Ω- <dig> poly-unsaturated fatty acids   <cit> . whilst external conditions  are considered the most likely causative factors of bone  deformities in cultured d. labrax, genetics does play a role as recently demonstrated for spine malformations  <cit> . likewise, genetic analysis of a population of juvenile sea bass showed a highly significant bias in the frequency of lower-jaw protrusion across different full-sib families raised under communal rearing conditions .

gene expression analysis of jaw development/deformities in early ontogenetic stages has been reported for a few candidate genes in different fish species, including the european sea bass  <cit> . expression profiling of individuals showing alternative phenotypes has been suggested as a complementary approach to linkage analysis, in order to identify loci involved in the genetic determination of the trait . furthermore, a transcriptomic approach might provide a broader picture of the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of cranial deformities, which could shed light also on environmental factors influencing this condition. here, gene expression profiling of normal against jaw-deformed individuals from segregating families is reported. to this end, an oligo dna microarray, specific for d. labrax, was developed, first constructing a database of unique sea bass transcripts, then annotating transcribed sequences through extensive data mining, finally designing two non-overlapping 60mer oligonucleotide probes for each transcript. probes were synthesized in situ using the agilent sureprint™ technology to obtain a dna microarray platform with over  <dig>  probes. a similar approach has already provided robust and flexible microarray platform in other fish species  <cit> . while gene expression profiling of early developmental stages in the sea bass has been carried out using a salmonid microarray  <cit> , to our knowledge, the present study represents the first report of a species-specific dna microarray for d. labrax, either based on cdna or oligo-dna technology. this is quite surprising, taking into consideration the importance of the species in fisheries and aquaculture. the european sea bass is a euryhaline and eurythermic fish living in marine, estuarine, and lagoon habitats, from scandinavia to western sahara in the north-eastern atlantic ocean and from the western mediterranean sea to the black sea  <cit> . although the sea bass supports local fisheries and recreational fishing, the main interest in this species is related to aquaculture. sea bass hatcheries are present in several countries, from france to greece, and sea bass farming is now widespread along the atlantic and mediterranean coasts from portugal to turkey, with a total annual production of over  <dig>  metric tons . despite sea bass culture has greatly improved since the '80s, when the first sea bass hatcheries were established, significant bottlenecks still remain, including high frequency of cranial and skeletal malformations. these developmental abnormalities severely affect sea bass production as deformed juveniles show reduced fitness and/or marketability, requiring time-consuming and personnel-intensive manual selection to discard abnormal fish, with relevant consequences on farming costs, but also on animal welfare.

the aim of the present paper was thus to analyze mrna expression in  <dig> and  <dig> days-old individuals, on whole heads and lower jaws respectively, using a newly developed transcriptomic platform. at the same time, expression profiling of jaw deformity represents a challenging test trial, to evaluate the performance of the platform itself.

RESULTS
dlpd database
a total of  <dig>  unique sequences are present in the dicentrarchus labrax padova database . nearly half of dlpd entries  produced a significant blastx hit against either swissprot or trembl or ncbi protein databases . a venn diagram showing the number of matches with each database is presented in figure  <dig>  further improvement in the annotation of dlpd sequences was obtained searching the ncbi nucleotide non redundant database using the blastn option . this approach provided a significant match for additional  <dig>  dlpd transcripts, which showed no correspondence with any known protein database, bringing the final number of dlpd entries associated with a known protein or transcript to  <dig>  . fish-specific searches against five teleost transcriptomes  identified  <dig>  dlpd sequences matching against at least one species, while  <dig>  ones found a significant match with all five databases . additional functional information could be obtained using the blast2go software that allowed association of one or more go terms to  <dig>  dlpd entries. of these,  <dig>  were linked with biological process  go entries,  <dig>  to cellular component , and  <dig>  to molecular function . unique go terms represented in dlpd are  <dig>  for bp,  <dig> for cc, and  <dig> for mf. a simplified view of these go terms using a "generic go slim" showed  <dig> bp classes,  <dig> for cc, and  <dig> for mf . all dlpd sequences are publicly available in a dedicated database , together with associated annotations, go entries, and putative homologous genes in fish model species.

microarray quality assessment
probe design was positively completed for  <dig>  dlpd entries. probe sequences and other details on the microarray platform can be found at the geo database  <cit>  under accession number gpl <dig>  hybridization success for each probe was evaluated considering a total of  <dig> experiments . hybridization was considered successful when the value of flag "glsfound" was equal to  <dig> . across all experiments, only three probes  never showed a signal higher than background, while  <dig> , corresponding to  <dig> % of the total number of target probes, successfully hybridized in at least half of the array experiments . six pools of stage  <dig> were treated as biological replicates in order to evaluate the repeatability of array results. the degree of mutual agreement between replicates was assessed estimating pearson correlation coefficients  on the entire set of expression values. pair-wise comparisons of replicate experiments showed correlation coefficients with r >  <dig>  and always significant  .

**p-value <  <dig> 

for each transcript two probes at non-overlapping positions as near as possible to the 3'-end of each transcript are present in the sea bass microarray platform. the variability between each two probes for the same transcript was evaluated using the ratio between their intensity levels  as a measure of signal difference. this ratio is predicted to assume a value around  <dig> unless technical  or biological factors  are present, causing significant deviations from the expected. in additional file  <dig>  each plot describes the distribution of observed fold changes between probe_ <dig> and probe_ <dig> for each array experiment in  <dig> days-old sea bass heads, which is symmetrical, centered around  <dig>  and equal across all the experiments. probe pairs show a small difference in terms of intensity values, with  <dig> % of transcripts having a fc lower than  <dig>  pearson correlation coefficient between probe_ <dig> and probe_ <dig> for each gene across six experiments was always greater than  <dig>  and highly significant , further confirming the overall concordance of hybridization signal for probe pairs.

analysis of expression data
raw and normalized fluorescence data of both stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> microarray experiments have been deposited in the geo database  <cit>  under accession numbers gse <dig> and gse <dig> respectively. statistical analysis on stage  <dig> whole heads showed no significant differentially expressed genes. in contrast, even after complete exclusion of hybridization data for probes with an excess of missing values , analysis of filtered data showed significant differential gene expression between normal and deformed mandibles of  <dig> days-old juveniles. after filtering, normalized fluorescence data for  <dig>   dlpd transcripts, represented by either one probe  or two probes , were subjected to a two-class sam test. setting fdr to 5%, a list of  <dig> significant probes, corresponding to  <dig> unique transcripts, was obtained. for  <dig> dlpd sequences, both probe_ <dig> and probe_ <dig> were identified by sam. the remaining  <dig> transcripts were represented by a single probe. for  <dig> dlpd entries identified by one probe the second probe was previously excluded in the filtering step. for all the other transcripts pointed out by sam, all second probes  were differentially expressed in prognathous individuals compared to controls , although not significant . all  <dig> transcripts were down-regulated in pooled-samples of deformed mandibles compared to controls with a fc ranging from - <dig>  to - <dig> . seventy transcripts were down-regulated four-fold, with two of them more than 10-fold . a putative annotation could be obtained for  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts. of the  <dig> most differentially-regulated transcripts , half had a significant match against a known protein/dna sequence. a substantial fraction of putative protein homologs to this "short list" of dlpd entries appears to be specific to the nervous system, including genes involved in synapsis function and neuronal development . this observation is confirmed when analyzing the complete set of differentially regulated sea bass rnas . other genes with a relevant role in the development of anatomical structures can be found in the full list of differentially expressed genes  gamma; additional file 3).

functional annotation of differentially expressed genes
in order to obtain a more systematic functional interpretation of the set of differentially expressed genes, go enrichment analyses were performed following two alternative strategies. in the first one, go enrichment analysis was performed using the gostat tool  <cit> . four go terms with more than two gene counts were over-represented with significant uncorrected probability . in the second strategy, dlpd entries were linked either to human ensembl gene ids or to zebrafish zfin ids, following different approaches , with a variable number of correspondences between sea bass and human/zebrafish sequences depending on the chosen method . human or zebrafish ids were then used in the bioinformatic tool david   <cit> . results from direct comparison of dlpd entries against the human transcriptome yielded  <dig> putative human homologs of differentially expressed sea bass transcripts present in the david  <dig> knowledgebase. enrichment analysis showed that  <dig> go_bp terms are significantly over-represented . twenty six genes  have a role in the regulation of biological processes  and  <dig> are involved in the development of anatomical structures . more specifically, five terms are directly related to nervous system development and function . two terms of go cellular component , were found to be significantly over-represented. both are related to the single entry for go molecular function , since cytoskeletal proteins are involved in synapsis genesis and function as well. further evidence of the involvement of nervous system processes/components comes from tissue specificity of differentially regulated genes, with  <dig> genes showing up significantly in the brain . similar results were obtained using panther definitions .

natural antisense transcripts
all cdna sequences represented in the sea bass microarray consist of public mrna sequences or ests produced through 5' end sequencing of clones from directional cdna libraries. for this reason as well as to exactly reproduce the available sea bass transcriptome without further assumptions, oligonucleotide probes were designed assuming that each unique transcript in dlpd were a "sense" strand. however, it is increasingly recognized that a substantial fraction of coding genes are transcribed on both strands, yielding sense as well as antisense transcripts. to assess whether this phenomenon occurs in the sea bass, the orientation of sea bass transcripts was compared with that of the best matching sequence in five fish species . a conspicuous number of dlpd entries  showed opposite orientation against one or more putative homologs in model teleost species . for  <dig> of these sea bass sequences, the matching gene had always the same  orientation, while for  <dig> the orientation was discordant among putative homologous sequences in the matching species. a subset of dlpd entries  had a significant match against all five fish species, always with antisense orientation. at least, the latter likely represent natural antisense transcripts  in the sea bass transcriptome. these putative nats appear to be generally expressed at significant levels, since  <dig>  yielded a successful hybridization in more than half of the  experiments. similar evidence was obtained for the complete set of candidate nats . to further explore this issue,  <dig> pairs of dlpd entries matching with opposite orientation a single transcript in the closest reference species, g. aculeatus, were identified. these sense/antisense sequences most likely represent either non-overlapping regions or alternative splicing isoforms of the same transcript, or two duplicated loci in d. labrax . a comparison of hybridization signal for the corresponding probes to each pair of sense/antisense dlpd entries could therefore provide preliminary evidence on the ratio between sense and antisense transcription level at the same locus or for duplicated loci. after filtering out probe pairs with an excess of missing data  across different experiments, in  <dig> days-old as well as  <dig> days-old sea bass samples sense transcripts showed higher levels of expression compared to the corresponding putative nats, respectively in 86%  and 82%  of analyzed loci . functional annotation of the largest set of putative nats indicated that over 50% are involved in cell metabolism, with over 20% being related to protein metabolism.

real-time rt-pcr validation
to cross-validate platform performance, a set of significant genes were tested using qrt-pcr assays. a total of  <dig> genes were selected for qrt-pcr analysis, within the annotated transcripts, encompassing the whole range of fold change values  observed in stage  <dig> head samples. in order to increase the number of data points in correlation analysis between microarray and qrt-pcr results, stage  <dig> samples were included in the validation procedure as well. fold changes between stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> samples  were calculated for  <dig> selected target genes. a spearman rank correlation test was then performed considering a total of  <dig> experiments. a statistically significant correlation was obtained comparing expression levels for each target gene across all samples . nine genes showed high correlation coefficients  for both probes  with qpcr data. three genes exhibited a significant correlation  while no correlation was observed for cyclin dependent kinase 2-associated protein  <dig>  exhibiting a fold change <  <dig> . fold changes detected by gene-specific pcr assay and by both microarray probes  for the same target transcript were also compared. fold change was calculated as the ratio of mean signal intensity between prognathous and controls on both stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> as well as between stage  <dig> and stage  <dig>  for all tested targets, the direction of change in expression was concordant between qpcr and microarray results. for both probes, linear regression of microarray-estimated fold change against qpcr results demonstrated a strong positive correlation  between the two technologies .

** p <  <dig> 

discussion
four major points emerge from the results obtained in the present study. the first one regards the high level of flexibility, reliability, and reproducibility of the microarray platform developed for the european sea bass. oligonucleotide probe design proved to be feasible on nearly all available transcribed sequences and almost every designed probe yielded a successful hybridization signal, providing a most complete representation of the current transcriptome for d.labrax. one of the most important requirements for a microarray platform is good reproducibility. analysis of biological replicates showed extremely high correlation coefficients, demonstrating great reproducibility of microarray data. as already reported  <cit> , the use of a one color labeling scheme has apparently no negative effects on the quality of data, but it greatly simplifies the experimental design and allows easier analysis of novel samples. finally, validation with qrt-pcr, a method that is based on a different technical approach, confirmed microarray hybridization data with the exception of a single gene, cdk2-associated protein  <dig>  which showed a positive, but not significant correlation between results of the two different methodologies . this is likely due to the small difference in expression for this gene . lack of correlation between microarray and qrt-pcr for genes exhibiting low levels of change  has been commonly reported. indeed a two-fold change is usually considered as the cut-off below which microarray and qrt-pcr data begin to lose correlation  <cit> .

the second point concerns the annotation of the sea bass transcriptome. whilst the design and validation of a custom oligo dna microarray has become a straightforward procedure, a proper functional classification for the collection of unique transcripts that are represented onto the dna microarray is certainly more difficult to achieve in non-model species, particularly in teleost fish.

high-throughput technologies have now prompted different comprehensive approaches toward functional analysis of lists of differentially expressed genes/proteins, gene ontology  <cit>  being the most popular of them. these methods offer relevant advantages, although gene ontology annotations suffer from known limitations  <cit> . in non-model species these approaches are based on putative homology against better characterized organisms rather than on direct experimental evidence. there are here two major sources of error; the first related to the problem of identifying true orthology  <cit> , the second to the fact that sequence homology does not always imply functional homology, due to inherent differences between the species compared. in the case of teleost fish, extracting gene functional annotations from mammalian models poses an additional problem. the ancestral teleost genome underwent a whole genome duplication  after the separation from the tetrapod lineage  <cit> , which led to the presence of two copies of each gene present in higher vertebrates, a fraction of which genes was retained through different mechanisms , whereas others have been lost by gene deletion or pseudogenization  <cit> . a ready example of such phenomenon is provided by the gene that showed the largest fold change difference in the present study, arrestin  <dig>  . arr <dig> belongs to the cluster of beta-arrestins, which includes four paralogs  in the human genome  <cit>  but at least seven paralogs  in the stickleback genome. despite all these limitations, functional annotation through sequence homology remains the best available method in non-model species. in the case of d. labrax, a good percentage  of dlpd entries has a significant match with a known gene/protein, generally higher than the value observed in similar studies on other species . a smaller proportion  of sea bass transcripts could be associated with a go term, most likely as a result of the more stringent criteria enforced in blast2go and the lack of go annotation for part of the protein sequences matching dlpd entries. nevertheless, sufficient information was obtained to construct a custom background, which takes into account the fact that the sea bass transcriptome is only partly represented onto the microarray, and to identify biological processes that are significantly enriched among differentially expressed genes . a second approach of annotation by similarity, through direct or indirect comparison against a model species transcriptome appears to convey comparable information, with over  <dig>  human or  <dig>  zebrafish putative homologs. the use of the human transcriptome as a reference provides a larger number of significant functional annotations , which is somehow expected since the probability of identifying significantly enriched go terms depends in part on the size of the gene list to be analyzed and the corresponding background. on the other hand, using human-centered annotations might be more prone to the risks described previously. finally, the results obtained with different methods  show a certain degree of overlap, yet there are terms that appear only in one or two analyses, therefore the obtained results should be interpreted with some caution.

while the majority of dlpd entries can be associated to a known gene, a substantial "silent" minority exists of transcripts that could not find any significant match against a variety of sequence databases. even if not associated with a known coding gene, these transcripts might convey useful information. for instance, a large proportion  of all differentially expressed transcripts in jaw deformed sea bass find a significant match against a specific region in the stickleback genome. the strong conservation of large genome segments between d. labrax and g. aculeatus  and the availability of a physical map of the sea bass genome  will allow the use of matching dlpd transcripts as positional candidates to identify loci involved in the genetic determination of mandibular prognathism.

the 40% of non-matching dlpds likely represents different types of transcripts, e.g. 5' and 3' end untranslated regions  or alternative splicing isoforms that have not been  characterized in other species, extremely fast-evolving protein-coding regions, novel genes. in addition, a fraction of non-matching sea bass transcripts might belong to the expanding universe of non-coding rnas, which appear to cover an increasing part of the animal genome  <cit> . although originally dismissed as transcriptional noise, evidence is accumulating for a functional role of these transcripts  <cit> . the third point of the present study, the presence of nats in the sea bass transcriptome, is related to this issue. natural antisense transcripts have been originally identified searching est collections, and appear to be widespread across animal species, albeit at diverse frequency  <cit> . various putative functions have been proposed for nats  <cit> , with an increasingly relevant role in the production of endogenous sirnas  <cit> . oligo dna microarrays have been used to specifically detect sense-antisense gene expression  <cit> , although there are some caveats about the risk of false positive nat detection due to genomic dna contamination of rna extracts or unintended labeling of both cdna strands  <cit> . microarray analysis of the sea bass transcriptome was not specifically aimed at investigating nats yet it provided preliminary evidence for the existence of putative antisense rnas in this species. based on sequence homology with the stickleback genome, in most cases sea bass nats represent non-overlapping regions of corresponding sense transcripts , and can derive from protein-coding regions as well as non-protein-coding sequences, including exonic, intronic and intergenic sequences. while the biological roles of nats remain to be elucidated, putative sea bass nats show lower levels of expression compared to the corresponding sense dlpd transcripts , as already reported for other species  <cit> . however, more than 10% of putative nats showed higher expression levels compared to sense transcripts . functional analysis of sea bass nats also showed significant enrichment of certain molecular functions, although these results require further confirmation.

the fourth and last evidence from the present study was the discovery of a set of differentially regulated transcripts in the mandible of jaw-deformed juvenile sea bass compared to normally developed animals. developmental defects are generally thought to trace back early in the ontogeny. for instance, mutations in master regulatory genes start to exert their effects during early patterning of craniofacial development , while precocious treatment of japanese flounder larvae  with retinoid acid receptor agonists produces lower jaw deformities  <cit> . in the present study, transcriptional changes are observed at a much later stage, which might represent either the downstream effects of earlier changes in the expression of hierarchically higher genes and/or transcriptional perturbations that start at a less differentiated stage and are maintained until later stages. on the other hand, no statistically significant differences in the expression profile of 38-days old sea bass juveniles were observed comparing deformed against normal fish. for this stage, however, whole heads were analyzed, which might have caused a reduced sensitivity in detecting differential expression. using image analysis on juvenile sea bass pictures it was estimated that the lower jaw represents less than 1/ <dig> of the entire head, while the anterior region of the mandible, the dentary, is approximately 1/ <dig> of the sampled tissues. this means that if for instance a certain gene has an average expression level of  <dig> in the whole head whereas it is up-regulated 10-fold  exclusively in the mandibular region of deformed animals, the observed overall fold change would be  <dig> , and in case differential expression is limited to the dentary a  <dig>  fold increase would be present, likely below the threshold of reliable detection using microarray analysis. microdissection of the mandible or part of it will therefore be required to identify differentially expressed genes in deformed animals at early stages, as reported here for 58-days old juveniles. the relatively large set of down-regulated transcripts in the lower jaw of prognathous fish also suggests that mandibular prognathism observed in the present study might be distinct from pugheadness, which is reported to be the result of under-development of the upper jaw, with only apparent protrusion of the normally developed lower jaw. as in most teleost fish, mandible development in d. labrax is characterized by the presence of a cartilagenous component, the meckel's cartilage, which is established early and subsequently regresses and ossifies, and a dermal bone component, the dentary, which appears later  and undergoes direct  ossification  <cit> . both components receive an important contribution of cells originating from the neural crests  <cit> . the ossification process of the meckel's cartilage is relatively well known, with a central role of the hedgehog pathway, and it appears to be conserved in fish and mammals  <cit> , whereas the molecular mechanisms controlling the dentary development are less characterized and seem to be at least partially distinct from those observed in the meckel's cartilage  <cit> . how can this relate to the genes that were found to be differentially expressed in the present study? a significant enrichment in regulatory genes, especially in the development of anatomical structures was obtained in go functional annotation, and gene-by-gene evaluation confirmed that some of them might be linked to bone formation. for instance, sox <dig> has been reported to act downstream to parathyroid hormome  and pth related protein  in osteoblast-like cells, being highly expressed in hypertrophic condrocytes during the mineralizing phase of endochondral ossification  <cit> . pleiotrophin or hb-gam is highly expressed in bone, where it seems to play a role in bone development and remodelling  <cit> . retinoic acid receptor x gamma  forms heterodimers with vitamin d receptors, peroxisome prolifireator-activated receptors , and retinoic acid receptors . all these nuclear receptors are somehow involved in bone formation and more in general in controlling skeletal growth. for instance, vitamin a and its metabolites, acting through rars, have been reported to cause vertebral and craniofacial deformities in farmed fish  <cit> . remarkably, high levels of dietary vitamin a significantly increased the frequency of cranial malformations  in d. labrax  <cit>  as well as in other fish species  <cit> .

it seems, however, that bone development is not the most represented biological process when examining the functional roles of protein encoded by differentially expressed genes in deformed sea bass. a substantial fraction of them appears to affect nerve growth and function. this evidence might be explained by a temporal shift in the development of mandibular nerves, which in turn may be a consequence of the altered process of mandible bone formation. down-regulation of several markers of neuronal development seems to suggest a delay in the differentiation of neuronal cells that constitute the nervous component of the lower jaw. however, there could be a closer relationship between mandibular bone formation and transcriptional changes for neuron-specific genes. increasing evidence indicates that the nervous system participates in the regulation of bone physiology  <cit> . peripherally-released neurotransmitters exert their actions on osteoblasts and osteoclasts, which have been demonstrated to express specific receptors for these mediators. of particular interest for the present study is the role of calcitonin gene-related peptide , which is a neuropeptide with a well-established function in bone metabolism, promoting bone formation and repressing bone resorption  <cit> . as other neuromediators, cgrp is also produced directly by osteoblasts as an autocrine factor  <cit> . the expression of neuronal-specific genes in bone cells is not limited to neurotransmitters and their receptors, but it extends to the molecular network for regulated glutamate exocytosis  generally described in pre-synaptic nerve terminals  <cit> . the role of glutamate signalling in osteoblasts and osteoclasts is complex and in vivo studies are still limited  <cit> . evidence from conditional ko mice lacking components of the glutamate pathways showed reduced mineralization and delayed ossification. several genes involved in exocytosis and glutamate signalling are represented among down-regulated transcripts in the present study . a working hypothesis to hold together the above evidence might be that in jaw-protruding sea bass the bone formation process is delayed compared to normally developed animals, through down-regulation of different signalling pathways, which control bone formation/remodelling, either directly in osteoblasts and/or in neuronal terminals innervating the mandible. a delay in the ossification process might allow a prolonged growth of the mandibular bone components resulting in a protruding lower jaw.

finally, it should be noted that part of the transcriptional differences observed in deformed animals might point, at least in part, to other regions of the dissected mandible. for instance, the formation of the tongue and/or the teeth might be indirectly affected by the deformity, and contribute to the differential gene profile. this in turn might provide a complementary/alternative hypothesis to explain the prevalence of neuron-related transcripts. in fact, tooth development has been shown to be tightly linked with nerve development.

clearly, the above hypotheses await further confirmation from additional developmental stages and with the use of methods that allow better dissection of anatomical structures.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, assembly and annotation of a first version of the european sea bass transcriptome led to the construction and validation of a species-specific oligonucleotide microarray. microarray analysis of the sea bass transcriptome provided preliminary evidence for the existence of putative antisense rnas in this species. this genomic platform was applied to detect differentially expressed genes in the mandible of jaw-deformed fish, revealing significant down-regulation of several transcripts involved in bone formation and neuronal function.

