BACKGROUND
in gram-positive bacteria, proteins released in the extracellular environment are synthesized as precursor polypeptides with a cleavable n-terminal leader peptide as the sole topogenic signal. precursors are moved across the plasma membrane by a translocon and signal peptidases act on newly translocated precursors to release the mature polypeptide from the membrane  <cit> . the events leading to protein translocation across the plasma membrane have been genetically dissected using the model organism  escherichia coli . most precursor proteins travel in an unfolded state through the secyeg translocon  <cit> , pushed by the cytoplasmic atpase seca  <cit> . precursor proteins bearing a leader peptide with the twin-arginine motif are moved across the plasma membrane by the tat translocon  <cit> . recently, it has been observed that some bacteria, in particular firmicutes and actinobacteria, can secrete proteins lacking a canonical leader peptide  <cit> . many of these proteins share some distinguishing and conserved features that include small size , a wxg amino acid motif in the middle of the protein  <cit>  and a conserved three-dimensional structure   <cit> . together, these proteins form the wxg <dig> family of proteins  <cit> . esat- <dig> and cfp- <dig> of  mycobacterium tuberculosis  are the founding members of the wxg <dig> family of proteins and are identified with the acronym esxa and esxb for esat- <dig> extracellular protein a and b <cit> . bioinformatic and genetic approaches have revealed that the  esxa  and  esxb  genes cluster with both conserved and non-conserved genes of unknown function that are required for the stability and secretion of wxg100/esx proteins into the extracellular milieu  <cit> . these clusters are conserved among several firmicutes  but not with mycobacteriaceae who only share essc-like atpases  <cit> . the name esx has been used to refer to such gene clusters in mycobacteriaceae and  m. tuberculosis  for example encodes five esx clusters   <cit> . in more general term, esx mediated secretion has been refereed as type  <dig> secretion but it was noted that this general designation should not be used for firmicutes owing to the lack of overall sequence conservation  <cit> . clusters bearing  esx  genes have therefore been referred as esat- <dig> secretion systems  in  staphylococcus aureus  and  bacillus anthracis  where they have been experimentally examined  <cit>  and sometimes as wxg <dig> secretion systems   <cit> . it has been proposed that at least three factors, esat- <dig> secretion system genes a, b and c , are important for secretion of wxg <dig> proteins in  s. aureus  based on the phenotype of transposon insertions in the three corresponding genes  <cit> . here, we present genetic and biochemical data that support this hypothesis for essb. by generating a minimal deletion of  essb  in strain usa <dig> ,  we observe that esxa remains in the cytoplasm and is no longer secreted into the extracellular milieu. further, we demonstrate that essb localizes to the plasma membrane of  s. aureus  and that truncated variants of essb confer a dominant-negative phenotype on chromosomally encoded essb . these results are consistent with the notion that essb oligomerizes and/or interacts with a larger complex of proteins to mediate translocation of esxa across the plasma membrane of  s. aureus . 

RESULTS
essb is required for the secretion of esxa by  s. aureus  usa300
the ess pathway has previously been examined in  s. aureus  strain newman, where a transposon insertion in gene nwmn_ <dig> resulted in a severe loss of esxa and esxb production. a definitive function for the  ess  gene product in  s. aureus  newman could not be revealed, owing to the instability of esxa and esxb in this strain. nevertheless, it was hypothesized that nwmn_ <dig> may contribute to the secretion of esxa and esxb across the membrane. the gene was named essb for esat- <dig> like secretion system gene b. further examinations revealed low expression of the ess cluster in  s. aureus  newman as compared to the more virulent staphylococcal isolates  s. aureus  usa <dig>  usa <dig> and usa <dig>  <cit> . we therefore sought to study the secretion of esxa in strain usa <dig> and generated an  essb  mutant via allelic replacement. this mutant harbors an internal deletion by fusing the first fifteen and last fifteen codons of the  essb  open reading frame, which otherwise encodes a  <dig> amino acid polypeptide. in parallel, we produced recombinant essb in  e. coli   and used the purified protein to generate a polyclonal rabbit serum. cultures of wild-type  s. aureus  usa <dig> and the isogenic  essb  mutant were grown to mid-log phase and treated with lysostaphin to generate total protein extracts . proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid and separated on sds/page followed by transfer to pvdf membrane for immunoblotting. blots shown on figure 2a identify an essb-immune reactive species in  s. aureus  usa <dig> that is absent in the extract of the  essb  mutant. as a control, ribosomal protein , α-hemolysin  and sortase a  were identified in all extracts. the essb immune species migrated at about  <dig> kda on sds/page. to evaluate the phenotype of the  essb  mutant, staphylococcal cultures were centrifuged to separate bacterial cells  from the medium , and proteins in both fractions were examined by immunoblotting with esxa-specific rabbit antibodies . esxa was found in bacterial cells and in the extracellular medium of  s. aureus  usa <dig> cultures. in contrast, esxa remained in the cytoplasm of  essb  mutant staphylococci  .  esxa immune reactive signals were reduced to non-detectable levels in the extracellular milieu of an  essb  mutant, supporting the notion that essb is required for the secretion of esxa. the deletion of the  essb  gene did not affect the localization of the ribosomal protein l <dig> in the cytoplasm or the secretion of hla into the extracellular medium . esxa secretion was restored to wild-type levels when  essb  was expressed from a plasmid , suggesting that deletion of the  essb  gene does not affect the expression of downstream genes also involved in the ess pathway  <cit> . 

subcellular localization of essb
we wondered whether essb is itself secreted or localizes to a particular subcellular compartment . a culture of  s. aureus  usa <dig> was centrifuged to separate cells from the extracellular milieu. as expected hla, but not essb, was found in the extracellular medium . further fractionation was achieved by subjecting lysed cellular extracts to sedimentation at  <dig>  ×  g . as a control for subcellular fractionation, samples were examined by immunoblot for the ribosomal protein l <dig>  and membrane protein srta . essb was identified in the membrane sediment along with srta , suggesting that essb may either be inserted into the lipid bilayer or associated with one or more proteins in the membrane. this finding is in good agreement with a recent report suggesting that yukc the  b.  subtilis homologue of essb  belongs to the membrane proteome of  b. subtilis  <cit> .

the tmhmm algorithm  was used to perform sequence-based prediction of essb, which identified a string of hydrophobic residues amino acids 229– <dig>  at the center of the essb polypeptide. hereafter we refer to the segment of hydrophobic amino acids within essb as the putative trans membrane domain .

deleting  essb  affects the production of several ess factors
recently, we reported that the last gene of the ess cluster,  esad,  is required for the effective secretion of esxa   <cit> . we therefore wondered whether the esxa secretion phenotype of the  essb  mutant could be explained by the possible loss of expression of other esad factors. to examine this possibility, extracts of bacterial cultures  derived from wild-type or the  essb  mutant carrying either a plasmid control without insert  or the complementing plasmid , were subjected to immunoblot analysis using antibodies against esad as well as the control protein srta . interestingly, esad appeared to accumulate in the  essb  mutant. intrigued by this finding, we performed a similar analysis using antibodies against esab, a small cytoplasmic protein that modulates the ess pathway by an unknown mechanism  <cit> . esab is conserved in the minimal ess cluster of  b. subtilis  where it is designated yukd . we observed that deletion of  essb  also led to the accumulation of esab . these observations were quantified by performing each experiment in triplicate and comparing the average abundance of proteins in wild-type and  essb  mutant strains. esad and esab were found to accumulate with  <dig> -fold and 5-fold increase over wild type, respectively . expression of wild-type  essb  from the complementing plasmid rescued this phenotype, albeit that only partial complementation was achieved. perhaps, the physiological ratio between essb and esab could not be achieved upon overexpression of  essb  using a plasmid. taken together, these observations suggest that essb is a critical component of the ess pathway required for secretion of esxa and proper accumulation of esab and esad. 

recombinant essb is soluble and prone to multimerization
essb is a  <dig> amino acid protein with relative molar mass  m r  <dig>  . its production could be achieved to high yield in  e. coli  bl <dig> harboring pet15b encoding  essb.  in order to purify the protein, cells were lysed in a french pressure cell and lysates were subjected to ultracentrifugation at  <dig>  ×  g  for  <dig> min. to our surprise most essb remained in the supernatant . assuming that amino acids 229– <dig> represent a hydrophobic buried segment, the primary sequence of essb can be roughly divided in two soluble n-terminal and c-terminal domains . we generated five recombinant variants encompassing the predicted soluble n- or c-terminal domain with or without the ptmd as well as a variant lacking ptmd . the variants were named essbn, essbc, essbnm, essbmc, essbΔm, respectively. similar to full length essb, over 75% of the overproduced proteins could be recovered from the supernatant of  e. coli  lysates subjected to ultracentrifugation  with the exception of essbΔm that was poorly expressed. full length essb along with all variants were purified to homogeneity using affinity chromatography and the affinity tags were removed by thrombin digestion. the purity of the polypeptides was evaluated on coomassie-stained sds/page . next, these polypeptides were subjected to gel filtration onto sephacryl s- <dig> column and aliquots of eluted fractions were evaluated once more on coomassie-stained sds/page . when subjected to gel filtration, essb eluted as a homogenous peak with  m r ~  <dig>  . the elution profile did not change when the protein concentration was increased or decreased by a factor of  <dig> and essb protein did not scatter uv light suggesting that the polypeptide remained soluble . variants that lacked ptmd, essbn and essbc, eluted with  m r of ~22- <dig> , close to their calculated masses . in contrast, variants that retained ptmd, essbnm and essbmc, eluted with  m r > <dig>  following size exclusion chromatography . removal of ptmd caused essbΔm to elute with a  m r of ~ <dig>  suggesting that quite like essbn and essbc, this variant did not multimerize .

visualization of purified essb protein by transmission electron microscopy suggested that the sample is homogenous. small dense structures could be seen throughout the field and at larger magnification they revealed a clear rod-shaped organization of the molecule . a similar analysis was performed for affinity purified essbΔm. transmission electron micrography revealed that overall the protein preparation was homogeneous , however the rod-shaped structure of essb is lost in this variant . together, these results suggest that the ptmd segment is required for the multimerization of essb and that the rod-shaped structure may be an energetically favorable conformation in the cytoplasm of  e. coli . interestingly, the structure for a so-called “cytoplasmic component of essb” has been deposited in the databank and made publicly available . this component encompasses the first  <dig> amino acids of essb and behaves as a soluble monomer quite like essbn examined in this study.

truncated essb variants display a dominant negative phenotype in  s. aureus 
we wondered whether truncated essb variants may trigger misassembly of the ess secretion machinery and interfere with the secretion of esxa in  s. aureus . to test this, the essb variants illustrated in figure 4a were cloned into the expression plasmid pwww <dig> and transformed into  s. aureus  usa <dig> wild-type and  essb  mutant strains. first, complementation of ess function was assessed in the  essb  mutant, using plasmids carrying either no insert or wild-type  essb  controls or  essb  variants encoding essbn, essbc, essbnm, essbmc, essbΔm, respectively . cell extracts were fractionated to reveal synthesis and subcellular localization of full length or truncated essb proteins following sedimentation of lysed cells at  <dig>  ×  g  . as a control, sortase a  was found in the sediment  of ultracentrifugation samples. essb protein expressed from p essb  in the  essb  mutant strain also sedimented during ultracentrifugation  similar to endogenous essb from  s. aureus  usa <dig> . an additional immune reactive species was observed when essb was overproduced from the plasmid . variants carrying the ptmd sequence, essbnm and essbmc, sedimented during ultracentrifugation, whereas essbΔm, the variant that lacks the ptmd sequence, did not. two proteins assumed aberrant behavior. the essbn protein was either poorly produced or very unstable in  s. aureus essb  mutant . essbc partitioned into both the soluble and the insoluble fractions. perhaps, this domain interacts weakly with components of the secretion machine embedded in the membrane. of note, only the plasmid encoding full-length essb restored esxa secretion into the extracellular medium of  essb  mutant cultures ; all other plasmids failed to complement  essb  for esxa secretion . as expected, the control ribosomal protein l <dig> was found in cell lysates  .

when transformed into wild-type  s. aureus  usa <dig>  plasmid produced essb and variants fractioned as before following  <dig>  ×  g  ultracentrifugation . briefly, essb, essbnm and essbmc were found in the sediment, essbΔm remained soluble and essbc fractionated equally in the soluble and insoluble compartments . expression of essbnm led to some degradation of essb . as before, very little essbn immunoreactive material could be detected in  s. aureus  usa <dig> cells . interestingly, its production caused a reduction of wild-type essb . essb was also unstable in the merodiploid strain expressing essbmc . not surprisingly, destabilization of essb by either essbn or essbmc led to altered expression and secretion of esxa . sedimentable variants encompassing the ptmd, essbnm and essbmc, caused a dominant-negative phenotype on the activity of wild-type essb and as a result expression or secretion of esxa were altered. on the contrary, essbΔm lacking ptmd remained soluble and did not interfere with essb function. taken together, these data suggest that essb variants that sediment with staphylococcal membranes interfere with the stability or function of endogenous essb and as a consequence esxa production and secretion are also affected. thus, essb is part of the secretion machine and its multimerization and possible association with other ess components enables the secretion of esxa.

discussion
secreted proteins are generally tagged with topogenic sequences for recognition by a specific secretion machine and transport across the plasma membrane. over a third of all proteins synthesized by a bacterial cell carry leader peptides, the topogenic signal for recognition by the sec machine  <cit> . the corresponding  sec  genes are scattered on the chromosome although their gene products assemble specifically at the membrane to mediate the faithful secretion of a variety of polypeptides. bacteria have also evolved highly specialized secretion systems for the transport of specific proteins across lipid bilayers and organized the genes encoding machine components and their substrates into clusters whose expression is controlled by adjacent transcriptional units  <cit> . the  s. aureus  ess cluster represents one such dedicated secretion pathway. ess genes are encoded within an eleven gene cluster and when deleted impair the production or secretion of small proteins with the wxg amino acid signature. here, we have begun the characterization of essb, one of the proteins of the staphylococcal ess cluster .

bioinformatic searches revealed that essb is found in gram-positive bacteria that harbor ess gene clusters closely related to the staphylococcal ess pathway . the protein belongs to the cluster of orthologous groups of protein cog <dig> and is annotated as a predicted membrane protein homologous to  b. subtilis  yukc . cog <dig> protein members are all arranged in a single architecture meaning that the entire protein defines a single domain that is never truncated nor fused with another protein domain. by performing a position-specific iterative blast  in ncbi , an obvious homology can be identified between the essb/yukc family of proteins and the traf proteins from gram-positive conjugative plasmids  <cit> . this is interesting  because it has been proposed that the specialized secretory apparatus esx- <dig> of  m. smegmatis  that lacks an essb/yukc/traf homologue carries out dna transfer  <cit> .

by raising a polyclonal antibody against essb, we find that the protein sediments with  s. aureus  membranes in a manner similar to srta, a well-characterized membrane embedded protein  <cit> . residues 229– <dig> roughly define a hydrophobic sequence reminiscent of a transmembrane spanning segment . interestingly, recombinant essb behaves as a soluble oligomer in  e. coli  with a rod-shaped like structure and the ptmd sequence appears to be necessary and sufficient for this oligomerization process. obviously, this conformation may simply represent an energetically favorable state for an otherwise membrane-spanning. nonetheless, recombinant essbnm and essbmc are more prone to multimerization than intact essb suggesting that the full-length sequence limits or regulates the oligomerization of the protein. protein translocators of other secretion systems such as the tat or holin pathways undergo regulated multimerization to facilitate pore function in the membrane  <cit> . in  s.aureus , the presence of the ptmd targets essbnm and essbmc to the membrane. this targeting appears to affect the function of endogenous essb in wild-type staphylococci. on the contrary, essbΔm  is soluble. it is unable to complement the  essb  mutant and it displays no dominance over wild-type for esxa secretion. as such, none of the truncated essb variant could complement wild-type essb for secretion. further studies are needed to determine whether the ptmd sequence serves as an autonomous membrane-spanning domain or whether it provides a mean to associate with another integral membrane protein encoded within the ess cluster.

deletion of  essb  in strain usa <dig> leads to loss of esxa secretion and esxa remains in the cell. because overproduction of essb is not toxic in  e. coli , we do not believe that this protein alone is capable of forming a pore for the passage of secreted substrates. interestingly, two other proteins esab and esad also accumulate in the  essb  mutant. while the exact role of esab is still unknown, it does not appear to be a secreted substrate  <cit> , and thus the reason for this increase is unclear but it points to additional biochemical interactions within proteins of the ess cluster. recent evidence suggests that esad is a membrane protein also required for esxa secretion  <cit> . perhaps essb interacts physically with esad to either complete or regulate formation of the translocon. future studies are needed to address this possibility and determine whether essb is an integral or peripheral element of the ess translocon.

CONCLUSIONS
the ess pathway is an alternate and conserved secretion system of several gram-positive bacteria. here, we show that essb is found in the membrane of  s. aureus  and deletion of the corresponding gene abrogates secretion of esxa. we show that a hydrophobic segment in the middle of the protein referred as ptmd is required for targeting to the plasma membrane. we observe that recombinant essb harboring ptmd folds into an oligomeric rod-shaped structure that allows the protein to remain soluble in  e. coli.  interestingly, truncated essb variants harboring an intact ptmd display a dominant negative phenotype over wild type essb for secretion of esxa. the data indicate that essb is an essential component of the ess translocon and likely interacts with itself and other machine components. together, this study provides the first genetic and biochemical characterization of the ess translocon in  s. aureus .

