BACKGROUND
the quasispecies model
the quasispecies theory describes the replication of asexual replicators at high error rate, and was first proposed to describe error-prone replication of primitive information-carrying macromolecules at the origin of life  <cit> . a quasispecies is often viewed as a steady-state population of variant biopolymer sequences, generated by mutations from a sequence  <cit> . this replication with mutation can lead to a population with a different dominant sequence than the original one, even if the original had the highest replication rate, i.e. highest fitness. as such, the quasispecies model is an example of how selection and evolution can arise from simple kinetic underpinnings  <cit> . selection acts on the population as a whole rather than on the individual members  <cit> .

while the theory is general to replication, a widely used application of quasispecies is in describing rna viruses, which have low replication fidelity with measured high mutations rates  <cit> , though the model’s validity for some rna viruses has been a topic of dispute  <cit> . other biological applications of quasispecies are to the multiple laboratory instances of the chinese hamster ovary cell line  <cit>  and to catalytic rna molecules  <cit> .

using the quasispecies equation  <cit> , it is possible to quantify an error threshold which relates the amount of information a replicating system can store to its single digit error probability  <cit> . the error threshold is defined as the minimum accuracy of replication which is required in order to preserve the information of the selected state of the system, beyond which the population structure breaks down. when the genotype-phenotype map involves redundancy , the error threshold can be formulated in terms of phenotypes, and it the population can sustain a lower degree of replication accuracy  <cit> . as rna viruses replicate with relatively high mutations rates  <cit> , they are susceptible to conditions which increase their mutation rates to push them beyond the error catastrophe  <cit> , a process parallel to extinction by the direct induction of deleterious mutations  <cit> . the error catastrophe path not only supports the quasispecies nature of rna viruses, but is also an example of a relation between modeling and experiments.

sequential versus compositional information
biological systems have two types of information. the first is the well-established sequence-based information, as manifested in biopolymers such as dna, rna and proteins. the second information type is compositional information, which plays a parallel central role in biological systems  <cit> . composition is formally defined as a vector v whose elements are the counts or concentrations of molecular types. in an example, the identity of a living cell can be defined, to an extent, by the counts of all its rna types  and proteins types   <cit> . compositional information is intrinsically different from sequence-based information, and the total number of different possible compositions, for a given alphabet size of ng and a total count of nmax molecules in v is: ng+nmax−1nmax, while the total number of different sequences of a string of length nmax is: ngnmax.

there are significant differences between sequential and compositional entities. for one, biopolymer sequence information is digitally encodable but compositional information is not, which may be viewed as a key difference between chemistry and biology. in the realm of polymeric entities, a point mutation is the replacement of a monomer type in a particular sequence position, necessitating the breaking and formation of covalent bonds. for compositional entities, a point mutation is the “random access” exchange of a molecule of a given type with a molecule of another type. further, for sequences, the probability of a mutation at a specific location only depends on sequence length and not on the specific sequence. in contrast, for compositions such probability depends both on the size and the actual composition of the entity. for a composition with ng =  <dig> and nmax = m + n: ambn, the probability of a mutational transition to am+1bn- <dig> is m/. finally, for sequences, replication entails the template-based synthesis of a polymeric strand. in clear difference, a compositional entity undergoes replication/reproduction via composition-preserving growth, facilitated by a network of “many-to-many” molecular interactions, followed by fission  <cit> . in some formal respect, this is true also for present-day living cells. for example, a crucial step prior to cell division is the biosynthetic doubling of the compositional counts of the proteins that characterize a given cell type. but such similarity cannot be taken very far, since present day cells divide by a highly complex and completely genetically controlled mechanism. compositional entities have been invoked in models for early evolution  <cit> .

the present manuscript attempts to show that compositional replicators, as described above, behave as quasispecies . as a model of compositional replication/reproduction, we employ the graded autocatalysis replication domain , a chemistry-based formalism that simulates network dynamics within amphiphile-containing compositional assemblies  <cit> . the gard model quantitatively describes dynamics of out-of-equilibrium homeostatic growth, mediated by a network of mutual rate enhancement parameters with occasional assembly fission  <cit> . molecules join assemblies, in a probabilistic fashion which is biased by a network of mutual rate enhancement parameters as dictated by assembly-composition, and occasional fission occurs such that an assembly is out-of-equilibrium  <cit> . gard provides a detailed microscopic description of the walk in compositional space between the points representing molecular assemblies in a replication-like process. this is different from the quasispecies model, in which a microscopic view of replication is typically not provided.figure  <dig> 
single growth process . sgp is the common “generator” for both quasispecies and gard. using sgps, the quasispecies and the gard formalism are compared in this work. an sgp entails the growth via molecular accretion of a compositional assembly from size nmax/ <dig> to nmax .



gard’s quasi-stationary states in compositional space are composomes, and their species-like clusters are compotypes  <cit> . the latter may serve as targets for selection  <cit> , and exhibit ecology-like constant population dynamics  <cit> .

as gard assemblies store information in the form of non-random molecular compositions, and transfer this information to fission-generated progeny, they could be considered as alternative to the rna world scenario for the origin of life  <cit> . to obtain a more complete picture of this proposed analogy, we asked whether gard compositional assemblies may behave similarly to sequence-based quasispecies, despite the differences between the realms of sequence composition. we show that the cloud of compositional variants within a compotype obeys the quasispecies model and that it exhibits an error-catastrophe similar to the classical quasispecies.

RESULTS
a compotype is qualitatively similar to a quasispecies
the gard model depicts the dynamic behavior of a population of compositional assemblies. it portrays a “cloud” of compositional states, with dynamical interconversions . depending on the values of the rate enhancement parameters in β network , this may lead to cases with one or more compotypes . there are qualitative points of similarity between such compositional entities and quasispecies of sequence-based entities such as rna molecules or viruses: both cases embody an ensemble of informational entities displaying a relatively high degree of mutual differences. despite the similarities in the dynamics, the quasispecies and gard equations are not identical. if each assembly-joining reaction is a poisson process, gard turns into a markov chain . the corresponding steady state of frequencies of different compositional assemblies is then linear, in contrast to the non-linear quasispecies equations. those linear equations, however, require the complete set of all possible assemblies with all possible sizes , which is unattainable due to huge dimensionality of the system. it is the central empirical observation of this paper that the use of non-linear but rather simple quasi-species equations reproduces the statistics of gard. while the complex reasons for this fact constitute a separate study, currently underway, here a numerical analysis is performed indicating that gard is well-described by the quasispecies equations. the focus in the present study is on cases which exhibit only a single compotype each , whereby compositional entities are disposed around a single center of mass , analogous to the master sequence in sequence-based quasispecies.figure  <dig> 
gard’s population dynamics results in a cloud in the compositional space.  an example of a constant population dynamics . this β exhibits  <dig> compotypes . solid lines are a fit to a multi-species logistic equation  <cit> .  assemblies from the steady-state of this simulation  were subjected to a principle-component-analysis , and the top two axis are plotted. each point represents an assembly and the color marks whether it belongs to a compotype or to drift.
the inner structure of gard’s cloud.  an example of a constant population dynamics, using a β which exhibits nc =  <dig>   pca of assemblies from this simulation’s steady-state. all the assemblies picked belong to the compotype and are colored according to their euclidean distance from its center of mass. the black cross marks the location of the compotype center of mass after the pca. all other details are as in figure  <dig> 



compotypes are quantitatively similar to sequence-based quasispecies
a central aim of the present paper is to provide evidence for quantitative similarities between the compositional assemblies and quasispecies in sequence space. for this, a total of almost  <dig> cases of gard population steady states, each with nc =  <dig>  were analyzed. a simplifying principle in which groups of compositional assemblies with similar euclidean distance to the compotype’s center of mass are lumped into “shells” was utilized . this is in analogy to certain quasispecies analysis, in which sequences with a similar hamming distance towards the master sequence are lumped together  <cit> . this allowed deriving the compositional assemblies’ parameters for the quasispecies equation , and to compare the results from gard’s simulations with those predicted from the quasispecies formalism. due to the high dimensionality of the system  the difference in volume between neighboring shells is enormous, which is why the results give the occupancy rather than the concentration of assemblies in each shell.

as a first step, a single growth process  is defined, which serves as a common “generator” for both the quasispecies and the gard formalisms . an sgp entails the growth via molecular accretion of a compositional assembly from size nmax/ <dig> to nmax . for gard simulations, this serves as an “atom” of the computational procedures that portray multiple growth and fission cycles in numerous assemblies in a reactor under constant population conditions  <cit> . for the quasispecies formalism, sgps allow measuring the elements of equation 1: the growth rates collected in the vector a and the transition probabilities collected in the matrix q. growth rates are obtained by a route analogous to the calculation of replication times in gard populations . transition probabilities from initial to final positions in compositional space are computed using sgps . in other words, assemblies in the same distance shell are grouped together and the relevant properties  of each shell are averaged over the assemblies contained in this shell. fitness is defined as the rate of faithful replication .

once a and q are populated, it is straightforward to employ the quasispecies formalism in order to compute the steady state distribution of fractional occupancy of assemblies within the different distance shells. in parallel, the same distribution is computed based on the full-fledged gard model, essentially a long series of single growth process followed by fission events  <cit> . rewardingly, the distributions obtained by both methods portrayed a high degree of similarity . such results support the notion of inherent resemblance between the presently analyzed compositional entities and the classical constituents of quasispecies, namely sequence-based entities.figure  <dig> 
examples of steady state distance distributions of gard vs. quasispecies. each panel shows an example of the distribution when measured from a particular gard simulation  and when calculated based on the quasispecies model. blue solid line is gard and green broken line is quasispecies. asterisk marks the average distance of assemblies from the compotype center of mass in the simulation. fitness landscapes of these β’s are given in the additional file 1: supporting data. each shell thickness  =  <dig>  the estimated effective volume of the compositional space in each panel is proportional to: 3 ×  <dig>  1 ×  <dig>  5 ×  <dig>  4 ×  <dig>  1 ×  <dig> and 6 ×  <dig>  respectively. lognormal seeds used for generating these β’s are:  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively for panels a-f.
gard is similar to quasispecies. a widespread comparison of gard vs. quasispecies, based on  <dig> simulations.  the expected distance dr) of each of distribution of gard vs. quasispecies. black solid line is linear fit: y =  <dig> *x +  <dig> , r =  <dig> .  each pair of distributions is subjected to a pearson-correlation , and this panel shows the histogram of these correlation coefficients. 75% of cases show high correlation , with high mean correlation .



importantly, such a good agreement between the distributions is obtained only when a and q are measured with respect to the compotype , whereas comparing the distributions with respect to a random assembly or even the eigenvector of β results in a meager agreement .

similar time dependent dynamics for gard and for quasispecies
it is asked whether the similarity of dynamic behavior transcends the steady state distributions. for that, the time dependent evolution of the fractional occupancy distribution between the gard and the quasispecies equation were compared. in both cases the computation started from the same initial conditions, and the system was allowed to propagate towards steady state. the time development as predicted from the gard equations showed appreciable similarity to that predicted by the quasispecies equation . this lends further support to the mutual resemblance of the two models.figure  <dig> 
an example of the dynamics towards steady-state. each panel shows gard’s and quasispecies’ distance distributions at different times. both gard’s and quasispecies’ time dependent dynamics show the same behavior, where the steady state peak at distance =  <dig> grows at the expanse of the peak at distance =  <dig>  gard’s time dependent dynamics were sampled at fixed time intervals from t =  <dig>  to a time close to steady state . in parallel, the same was repeated for quasispecies. lognormal seed used for generating this β is  <dig>  further details are given in the additional file 1: supporting data.
gard’s time dependent dynamics are similar to quasispecies’. this figure shows the pearson correlation coefficient for the time dependent dynamics, for groups of simulations that reached steady state after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> time points. further details are given in the additional file 1: supporting data.



compositional error threshold
it is asked whether compositional entities, as described by gard, may manifest an error threshold, in resemblance to sequence-based entities in the quasispecies model. for this a quantitative analog of the global mutation rate was sought. a change in such a parameter should show a graded diversification of the compositional vectors away from the compotype’s center of mass, eventually leading to a dismantle of the compotype structure. it is discovered that one of the basic rate constants of the gard model, kf, the basal molecular joining rate , is a suitable proxy. decreasing kf results in an overall diminution of assembly growth, leading to a predominance of the backward  reactions governed by kb. this results in an enhanced probability of amphiphile mis-incorporation, and hence increased compositional mutations. indeed, as kf diminishes by a factor of  <dig>  the assembly population typically strays away and the assembly fraction residing within the compotype boundaries goes to  <dig> .figure  <dig> 
compotype average frequency and relative frequency for increased error-rates. for each kf value, all simulations were run in a single-lineage mode for  <dig>  generations and the frequencies were recorded. relative frequency is measured against the frequency with the typical value of kf =  <dig> . this figure shows the average across all simulations.



when kf was gradually diminished, a behavior reminiscent to that of classical error catastrophe in sequence-based quasispecies  <cit>  . with decreasing kf, the occupancy of increasingly distant compositional shells was enhanced and then diminished. beyond a specific range of kf values there was a relatively sharp decline of the compotype occupancy, similar to the sharp decline of the consensus sequence in sequence-based quasispecies. the specific shape of this response to decreasing kf depends on the fitness landscape in each simulation .figure  <dig> 
an example of gard’s error catastrophe. compotype frequency  and occupancy at increasing distance shells  for decreasing kf values. lognormal seeds used for generating these β’s are  <dig> for panel a and  <dig> for b. each shell thickness =  <dig>  similarly to a consensus-sequence  <cit> , the consensus-composition is a vector, where each molecular-type i is assigned with the most probable ni value within the compotype member assemblies.



discussion
the present work aimed at showing that compositional replicators may behave as quasispecies. for this, the graded autocatalysis replication domain  model, which simulates the kinetics of amphiphile-containing compositional assemblies, was employed. gard was originally developed in an attempt to bridge between the “genetic-first” and the “metabolism-first” scenarios for the origin of life  <cit> . the genetic-  first scenario, also known as “information first” scenario, assumes that a molecule identical or very similar to present day rna played the role of the self-perpetuating biopolymer  <cit> . the “free-floating” or surface-adsorbed mixture of such molecules is assumed to have later evolved both a metabolic network and an encompassing container. the metabolism-first scenario suggests that the very first life precursors are likely to have been relatively elaborate molecular networks of simple molecules  <cit> . the gard model is basically about small molecules, resembling those typically considered as metabolites, which when accreting into molecular assemblies portray a dynamic behavior resembling that of replicators. when doing so, gard assemblies utilize an unorthodox form of information transfer, namely, the propagation of compositional information.

an error threshold is a hallmark of quasispecies dynamics. in the case of sequence-based quasispecies, one of the parameter that influences this threshold is polymer length, whereby longer polymers show higher error threshold susceptibility  <cit> . in our analyses a more facile approach to error threshold is observed when diminishing kf, the basal rate of monomer joining into a molecular assembly. it may be asked whether, as a parallelism, gard error threshold could be related to an assembly size parameter. previously, it was shown that for a given ng, diminishing the maximal assembly size  results in higher compotype diversity  <cit> . this may be interpreted as occurring via compositional mutations as described  <cit> . thus, an enhanced mutability via reduced nmax is suggested as a good candidate proxy to increasing polymer length in the context of an error catastrophe. future detailed analyses could provide support to this notion.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, molecular assemblies that hold compositional information rather than sequence-based information are shown here to comply with a quasispecies description. because the transmission of compositional information has been proposed to be important in early evolution, these results further underline the importance of the quasispecies model in studying prebiotic evolution. further, because present-day cells are, in many ways, compositional entities, such results may also have implications to the understanding of populations of present-day cells.

