BACKGROUND
thermal injury is among the most severe forms of trauma and its effects are both local and systemic. response to thermal injury includes cellular protection mechanisms, inflammation, hypermetabolism, prolonged catabolism, organ dysfunction and immuno-suppression  <cit> . changes in energy expenditure following burn injury have been attributed to processes such as gluconeogenesis, ureagenesis, fatty acid synthesis and catabolism, processes relating to the need to compensate for the increased loss of body heat through the injured skin, as well as changes in the circulating levels of plasma proteins primarily synthesized in the liver  <cit> . therefore, physical stress as a result of burn has a significant impact on the liver, an organ that plays a critical role in modulating immune function, inflammatory processes and the acute phase response in the attempt to restore homeostasis.

it has been hypothesized that gene expression patterns in the liver will change with severe burns, thus reflecting the role the liver plays in the response to burn injury. characterizing the molecular fingerprint  of the inflammatory response resulting from burns may help elucidate the activated mechanisms and suggest new therapeutic intervention. to record the transcriptional characteristics of hypermetabolism following severe injury, various animal models have been proposed to quantify in vivo the appropriate gene expression response  <cit> . transcriptional profiling used in the context of monitoring burn-induced inflammatory responses  <cit>  may eventually provide the detailed mechanism behind burn injury if information can be extracted from the reams of data generated. it is our belief that relevant genes tend to be part of large highly correlated clusters due to the coordinated actions of these genes and can therefore be isolated if one were to utilize clustering to obtain sets of highly correlated gene and combine it with a selection step that denotes clusters as relevant based upon their population.

even though individual components of the overall inflammatory response have received intense scrutiny, deciphering the cross-talk between components is a daunting task due to the extraordinary complexity of the inflammatory response, thus necessitating an integrative approach  <cit>  that requires the combination of outside information besides strictly gene expression levels or metabolic flux levels. while gene expression in inflammation is not solely transcriptionally controlled  <cit>  the first step towards understanding inflammation is to evaluate possible mechanisms which give rise to expression data, the most readily available source of cellular response.

in this paper we propose an integrated framework for analyzing time-series transcriptional data, with emphasis on the burn-induced response within the context of the rat animal model. the proposed approach is composed of three elements:

 <dig>  novel characterization of the dynamic transcriptional response

 <dig>  identification of maximally informative genes

 <dig>  elucidation and quantification of regulatory interactions

our analysis robustly identifies critical expression motifs, indicative of the dynamic evolution of the inflammatory response, and subsets of informative genes and their associated metabolic pathways, thus integrating extracted genes with known networks of interaction. we will demonstrate how, based on the reduced set of informative genes that are optimally selected, we can construct a potential network of regulatory interactions and suggest potential targets for further investigation and intervention.

RESULTS
following severe trauma, the liver plays a crucial role in mediating a host of physiological responses. these processes include an increase in energy expenditure  <cit> , the production of acute phase proteins  <cit> , activation of the complement, kinin, clotting, and fibrinolytic pathways  <cit> , the initiation of immune response to prevent against later onset of sepsis, as well as the up-regulation of mechanisms to prevent against oxidative damage induced by the activation of these responses  <cit> . through our robust analyses we have identified  <dig> motifs which capture many of these underlying biological mechanisms, as well as the expected temporal responses.

to dissect the onset of inflammation, we have summarized the key physiological components, as identified through ontology searches, listed in table  <dig>  we have further subdivided these components into  <dig> major groups: 1) those processes which fit within the global characterization of metabolism, as a means to verify our approach, since a large body of work has been established to characterize these responses; 2) other processes which we have detected that are integral in the inflammation process, but have not been documented in detail in the literature. we have also subdivided the inflammation process into three phases: 1) early ; 2) middle ; and 3) late .

in the early phases of inflammation, we see a majority of those processes which can be grouped as metabolic in nature exhibiting distinct temporal changes. for example, motif  <dig>  which displays a peak in up-regulation within the first  <dig> hours following burn injury, contains genes which are primarily responsible for the transport of fatty acids and triglycerides into the cell. cluster  <dig>  characterized by genes involved in fa oxidation clearly demonstrates an early up-regulation followed by significant down-regulation. cluster  <dig> is also actively involved in fatty acid transport. furthermore, the ccaat/enhancer binding protein a known transcription factor for gluconeogenesis  <cit>  is a key regulator of cluster  <dig>  these coupled processes of fatty acid transport and breakdown have been shown to be activated quite early in the inflammatory response, and it has been hypothesized that they allow the liver to build up energy stores in the form of atp for the later production of acute phase proteins  <cit> . one final ontology, related to cellular energetics and the derivation of energy stores, is glycogen metabolism, is also present in motif  <dig>  taken together, one may conclude that the utilization of fatty acids, and other energy sources, happens very early on following thermal injury, a point which is validated through biochemical analysis of free fatty acid levels in burn injury in vivo models  <cit> .

within the initial temporal phases of inflammation, our approach has identified biological processes above and beyond those categorized as cellular energetics. for example, we have identified ontologies involved in catecholamine metabolism and inflammation. endogenous catecholamines are primary mediators of the hypermetabolic response to burn  <cit> . shortly after severe burn, plasma catecholamine levels have been observed to increase significantly. consistent with this observation, cluster  <dig> is enriched in catecholamine metabolism genes. the inflammatory process within this time period is defined in large part by the initiation of the complement and kinin and cascade systems, present in motif  <dig>  basically, two genes, murinoglobulin  <dig> homolog  and complement component  <dig> receptor  <dig>  regulate these key inflammatory/acute phase responses in an attempt to dampen the overall inflammatory response so as to prevent it from progressing to a chronic state  <cit> . during the middle temporal phase we have identified genes involved in the acute phase response, ubiquitin dependent protein catabolism, and interleukin  <dig>  synthesis. cluster  <dig> is enriched with genes associated with the acute phase response and also exhibits the most significant enrichment in the known inflammatory transcription factors  nf-kβ and hnf <dig>  ubiquitin catabolism is a major mechanism of muscle wasting characteristic of hypermetabolic states and systemic inflammation  <cit> . up-regulation of associated genes initiated in this middle temporal phase and is pronounced at latter stages, as indicated by the ontology enrichment of cluster  <dig>  interleukin  <dig> and its receptor have also been discovered to mediate the acute phase response and dysfunction within the liver  <cit> . known to regulate the production and activity of many inflammatory mediators and cells, interferon regulatory factors   <cit>  were identified as a key transcription factor family of cluster  <dig> which is primarily responsible for interleukin- <dig> biosynthesis.

in the final temporal portion of the acute phase response to thermal injury, we have identified processes which can be grouped into two major components which again, are unique to our analysis procedure: 1) ras-rac signaling cascade ; 2) response to stress . within motif  <dig>  which has a secondary peak at  <dig> hours, we have identified the gene for protein phosphatase 2a, catalytic subunit, beta  which is a negative regulator of ras-rac signaling, which in turn will down-regulated ras induced activation of nf-kb pathways  <cit> , and will provide a late-stage mechanism and like the effect of alpha 1-inhibitor  <dig> and c5ar <dig> prevent a transition to a chronic inflammatory state. late stage stress response is also a beneficial process and is aimed at attenuating the stress response. for example we have identified glycogen synthase kinase  <dig> beta  within motif  <dig> which exhibits a  <dig> hour peak. gsk- <dig> beta is known to be a key element in the switch from acute to chronic/systemic inflammatory response  <cit> . another interesting finding in this late stage inflammatory response is the up-regulation of two pathways, involved in generating large pools of thioredoxin and n-acetylglucosamine. in  <cit>  the levels of thioredoxin were measured in severely burned patients, and noticeable increases were observed, interestingly characterized by two peaks of increase. cluster  <dig> is enriched in genes involved in this particular pathway. it was also recently observed  <cit>  that the acute-phase response is accompanied by increased liver pools of n-acetylglucosamine at about  <dig> h post inflammation. consistent with this observation, cluster  <dig> is enriched in genes of that ontology. interestingly glucosamine is currently considered as a dietary supplement for wound healing  <cit> .

in addition to the genes which are active in the aforementioned responses we have also assembled the set of transcription factors for all the genes involved in the four maximally informative motifs by making use of trafac  <cit> , which runs the genomatix matinspector analysis suite in the background. we ran two sets of analysis one upon the transcription factors which were enriched at a statistically significant level , and those that showed large deviations after the network component analysis  operation.

of special interest are hypoxia inducible factor, p <dig> tumor suppressor , and cas-interacting zinc finger protein. severe burns typically cause a hypovolemic shock response during the first  <dig> hours; therefore, it is plausible that there was reduced oxygen delivery to the liver resulting in hypoxia. one way that cells respond to hypoxia is through increased activation of the hypoxia inducible factor , which is thought to enhance cellular adaptation to low oxygen. recent evidence verified the stimulation of hif by well known inflammatory signals, such as tumor necrosis factor  and interleukin  <dig> , which results in the transcription of several genes leading to proteins that increase blood flow  <cit> . cluster  <dig> is enriched in hypoxia-related genes and, furthermore, hif is a leading tf for the genes within that cluster based on the corresponding tf-enrichment analysis. p <dig> has been reported elevated during inflammation in several studies. specifically, p <dig> represses mapk as well as ras signaling pathways  <cit> , both of which play a major role in signaling of the inflammatory response  <cit> . thus, p <dig> may be an important factor for the down-regulation of the acute inflammatory response. aside from hypoxia as an outcome of inflammation, it has been shown  <cit>  that thermal injury exhibits an interplay between liver cell apoptosis and proliferation while attempting to establish a trend towards homeostasis. among the regulators associated with cluster  <dig> we identified cas-interacting zinc finger protein  which is a known regulator of the bone morphogenetic protein  signal regulating apoptosis  <cit> . furthermore, aryl hydrocarbon receptor  is a ligand-activated transcription factor known to influence apoptosis, conceivably by regulating the expression of genes involved in apoptotic signaling  <cit> .

taken together, these three parallel approaches  allow us to identify multiple layers of the inflammatory response process to thermal injury. it should be noted that all three approaches are needed in combination, being that the control elements we have identified as transcription factors are not contained within the four motifs. this phenomenon may be explained by one or both of the following. first, the motif identification algorithm itself has been established to identify motifs that contain a large quantity of genes, and the regulatory elements we have found are contained in motifs with lower quantities of genes. second, these regulatory elements exhibit different temporal profiles then those of the four motifs, since they work on a different time scale. thus, these regulatory elements, which exist higher in the signaling cascade, may be immediately up-regulated in the inflammatory process, and demonstrate their delayed effect in the up-regulation and down-regulation of the large clusters of genes present in each of the motifs.

discussion
the symbolic transformation of the gene expression profiles, followed by the proposed hashing, results in a fine-grained clustering of the expression profiles, as shown in the top part of figure  <dig>  each peak indicates the number of transformed expression profiles that hash to a particular motif value. all such expression profiles will have identical symbolic representations and as a result, very similar raw expression profiles. the z-score transformation eliminates differences due to magnitude, thus the intensity of the signal is not taken explicitly into account. however, at this point we will assume that if two genes have similar normalized profiles they should both be considered for further analysis regardless of the differences in magnitude. with each peak there is an associated transformed average profile and typical examples are depicted in the lower part of figure  <dig>  thus, the combination of the symbolic representation and hashing allowed the identification of a large number of potential clusters of genes whose transformed expression profiles are identical. we term those "expression motifs." it is important to realize that similarity is based now on the fact that similar motifs hash to the same value and not to some point-wise distance metric . as seen in figure  <dig>  each of the motifs contains expression profiles which are highly correlated and tightly grouped; pointing to the overall quality of the hash based clustering in terms of intra-cluster variance, supporting our use of a hashing based methodology in creating the initial clusters.

the fine-grained clustering provides a potential, albeit enormous, number of tentative clusters. however, our assumption is that the underlying dynamic response of the transcriptional experiment can be expressed in terms of a smaller number of expression "motifs". when performing our selection step, we selected  <dig> motifs containing a total of  <dig> gene probes. the transcriptional state which corresponds to the most informative genes also illustrates an interesting dynamic insomuch that a two wave burn response as observed by  <cit>  is evident, as shown in figure  <dig>  what we can see is that at hours  <dig> and  <dig>  time points previously identified as critical points in the evolution of the burn response, a distinct breakpoint between the low and high expression levels for the informative genes is evident; something which is not seen at the time points  <dig> and  <dig> hours. this is in contrast to a transcriptional state which includes all of the genes. by including all of the genes the dynamics are not visible, especially the two events which have been previously observed. given the clear evidence of two critical events in our informative set of genes, we believe that it is reasonable to state that we have selected genes which are playing a critical role in the short-term evolution  of the burn response.

these probes were selected due to their ability to exhibit the greatest change within their associated transcription state. in figure 3a we can see that the addition of a single peak, the kolmogorov-smirnov  statistic has an intermediate value, and as more peaks are added, it reaches a maximum at four, after which it decreases. the presence of this maximum allows us to assert that our algorithm has managed to extract a set of genes in which the changes in an organism's response is most evident.

randomized testing
in both of the randomized testing cases figure 3b, it is evident that neither the case where motifs were randomly selected nor the case in which genes were randomly selected did the ks statistic show as great a deviation as found under the greedy selection heuristic. while this does not preclude the existence of a better globally optimal solution, it does however suggest that our current heuristic is a reasonable approach to finding a set of optimal of motifs that reflects the underlying dynamics of the system.

identification of significant processes and regulators
by selecting ontologies and transcription factors that are enriched with , we have identified hypothetical processes and regulators behind thermally induced inflammation. genes involved in the acute phase response, inflammation, fatty acid metabolism, cholesterol import  were found to be significantly enriched within our cluster, all with a p-value less than . <dig>  and the acute phase response showing a p-value on the order of  <dig> × 10- <dig>  the significance of these ontologies is that in addition to being statistically significant in our selected genes, they are also known to be significant processes that occur during severe thermal injury. from this ontology result, we believe that our algorithm has shown the ability to extract genes which are involved with the overall biological response to burn.

given the set of statistically enriched transcription factors given in table  <dig>  the relative dynamics of the transcription factors predicted via nca for the genes associated with these transcription factors are given in figure  <dig>  from these plots, it is evident that the majority of the transcription factors show activity within a narrow range of expression levels, while a relatively few transcription factors show expression levels which differ greatly over the experimental time course. it is our hypothesis that these highly active transcription factors represent important parts of the signaling process. the identification of transcription factors allows us to precisely target unwanted responses through techniques such as sirna without disrupting the overall signaling cascade.

identification of hypothetical primary regulators
what we can extract from figure  <dig>  is a set of transcription factors which can be hypothesized to be important in the response of each cluster of genes to the initial burn injury. the transcription factors that nca identified as highly active are the aryl hydrocarbon receptors, octamer binding units, erythroid kruppel like factors, and cell cycle homology elements . the presence of the octamer binding units can be rationalized due to the generalized stress response <cit>  of the organism leading to the initiation of the immune response normally observed during burn <cit> , while the presence of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and cell cycle homology elements can be rationalized by the parts that they play in the cell cycle and cell regeneration <cit> . finally the presence of the erythroid kruppel factors coupled with its role as a pro-inflammatory initiator <cit>  suggests a possible role for it in the inflammatory response associated with burn injury.

analysis of gene interaction networks
metabolic networks are known to exhibit small-word characteristics  <cit>  with average path length significantly smaller than the corresponding length of a random network. the small word properties in addition to the existence of hubs give gene interaction networks some of their key distinct characteristics, namely:  local perturbations are quickly propagate across the entire network as nodes interact with each other via the hub proteins;  the existence of hubs proteins is advantageous because it identifies key controls whose manipulation can have significant effects such as controlling the onset of a detrimental process and thus identify major points of intervention; and  hubs make these networks prone to quick deterioration should one of the key controls be attacked  <cit> . therefore, hubs proteins play a critical, important, role thus requiring additional attention. through our analysis we have determined three major hubs of activity, within our protein interaction network, those being interleukin1-beta , prolactin , and mitogen activated protein kinase  <dig> . il-1b has been reported to be a dominant cytokine that acts as a central regulator of the acute inflammatory response, basically through the production of acute phase proteins  <cit> . this is evident in the large cascade of genes influenced through the activities of il-1b . in addition, one specific cascade which is initiated through the activity of il-1b, is that regulated by prl, another of the dominant nodes we identified  <cit> . while il-1b has the outcome of up-regulating a variety of genes needed in mediating the acute phase response, prl has the inverse effect, in that it aides in the acute phase response by opposing the immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids and other inflammatory mediators to maintain steady-state homeostasis  <cit> . the third hub we identified, p38mapk, has also been established as a prominent gene involved in the acute phase response  <cit> . the p <dig> signaling cascade exhibits its effects following thermal injury, generally through the up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines, such as the aforementioned il-1b  <cit> . thus, not only are these hubs capable of regulating a variety of down-stream genes, they themselves exhibit a high-degree of cross-talk, and regulate each other within the overall context of the protein interaction network. in addition, identification of these hubs provides potential therapeutic targets, to mitigate the inflammatory response observed following thermal injury.

comparisons with other clustering algorithms
finally, we comparatively evaluated several clustering algorithms, all of which are publicly available, such as stem   <cit> , hierarchical clustering  <cit>  and k-means based on the matlab bioinformatics toolbox to determine the relative enrichment of ontologies and transcription factors  <cit> . with the exception of stem which has a built-in selection criterion based on the frequency of an expression pattern, the other methods do not perform a selection but rather cluster all responses. the results of table  <dig> demonstrate the advantages of the proposed analysis in terms of the ability to enrich both ontologies and tfs in relevant processes and transcription factors. it is important to realize that even though stem appears to enrich the clusters more than our motifs method, our approach takes into account the dynamic responses that actually affect the experiment therefore it achieves significantly superior enrichment in terms of inflammation-specific ontologies and tfs. hence the comparative results provide a strong justification for our initial hypothesis that relevance in dynamics results in relevance of extracted information.

the motifs, key regulatory elements, and ontologies we have identified may serve as a valuable basis for the identification of therapeutic options to detect as well as manage the onset of acute inflammation. given the progress today in the areas of metabolic engineering and gene silencing, the therapeutic utilization of these genes can occur within two broad categories: 1) metabolically supplementing the patient suffering from acute inflammation, following burn injury in order to maintain the energetic levels of the liver required to produce acute phase proteins; 2) utilizing silencing techniques in order to control key regulatory elements we have identified, in order to mitigate the effects of acute inflammatory response that arises.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a novel approach combining a fine-grained clustering and informative expression motifs identification. the key novelty of our methodology is the introduction of the concept of transcriptional state which allows the quantification of the deviations from a control state. hence, we are able to measure the ability of expression motifs to capture deviations from the control state and, therefore, identify relevant components of the transcriptional response. the method was applied to the analysis of burn-induced inflammation based on a rat animal model. our approach for informative expression profiles selection has identified motifs which characterize the inflammatory response as observed in liver during the first  <dig> hours after thermal injury. significant processes identified, and associated with informative genes, involved in glycogen metabolism, catecholamine metabolism, ubiquitin dependent protein catabolism, as well as genes involved in the production of thioredoxin and n-acetylglucosamine. in addition, we identify critical regulators controlling the expression of the informative genes and we quantified the reconstructed activities of the corresponding transcription factors. we have demonstrated that our proposed methodology can significantly reduced the number of relevant probes while maintaining a high level of specificity in the processes that are identified.

