BACKGROUND
ixodes ricinus is the most common tick species and the most important vector of human and animal pathogens in western europe  <cit> . ixodes ticks are obligate hematophagous ectoparasites of vertebrates with a single blood meal at each development stage of their life cycle from larvae to nymphs and adults. during feeding, they transmit a range of pathogens, mostly bacteria , anaplasma spp., rickettsia spp.), but also viruses  and protozoa . globally, they are only second to mosquitos as disease vectors with serious consequence for human health. they also effect productivity and/or welfare of livestock, wildlife and companion animals. with  <dig>  cases diagnosed annually and a high number of unreported cases, lyme borreliosis  is the most important vector-borne disease in europe. lb is a multisystemic disease with a pathognomonic erythema migrans, that develops in  <dig> - 80 % of infections with borrelia. the incubation period can be as long as 36 days  <cit> . unspecific symptoms like headache, fever or fatigue are frequent. if the early stage of the disease is not treated appropriately, lyme arthritis, lyme neuroborreliosis or acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans may develop  <cit> . in luxembourg, 11 % of i. ricinus ticks are infected with human pathogenic members of the borrelia burgdorferi s.l. complex  <cit>  which is slightly below the overall infection rate of 14 % in europe  <cit> . borrelia bacteria live within the midgut of the tick and migrate, after primary blood uptake, to the salivary glands from where they are transmitted to the host  <cit> . interactions between i. ricinus and borrelia in the tick’s midgut are essential for survival of the pathogen in the tick and its transmission to the host. thus, midgut proteins are the important players in vector-pathogen interactions and present potential targets for blocking transmission, e.g. by vaccines. vaccination of the host could induce antibodies that could potentially interfere with vital functions of the midgut already during the early feeding stage. the only commercially available tick vaccine, which is directed against the cattle tick rhipicephalus microplus, is indeed based on a midgut protein  <cit> . since tick midgut proteins are normally hidden from the host immune system, they have no immunomodulatory effect on the host  <cit> . many midgut proteins are involved in the digestion of blood proteins. in arthropods, proteases and peptidases involved in blood digestion were found to be encoded in paralogs, which are expressed under different environmental conditions and developmental stages  <cit> . in ticks, a dynamic multi-enzyme network responsible for hematophagy has been identified in the partially and fully engorged midguts  <cit> . the presented sequences will now allow for further investigation of the presence of digestive enzymes already in the unfed midgut and paralogous genes encoding digestive enzymes in i. ricinus. due to climatic change  <cit> , afforestation and increasing deer populations  <cit> , the number of ticks and the risk of tick bites is on the rise in europe. since ticks and tick-borne diseases become more and more important for human and animal health, understanding of tick-host and tick-pathogen interactions is essential. the development of mitigation strategies is complicated by weak and incomplete databases for ticks in general and i. ricinus in particular. therefore, genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data with robust annotation of their function and localization are urgently needed as publicly available reference databases. to fill this gap, we combined genome and transcriptome sequencing with proteome analysis by peptide mass fingerprinting - providing the first insight into the genome of i. ricinus as well as annotation of putative function and cellular localization of transcripts and proteins in the naïve i. ricinus midgut.

RESULTS
genome sequencing and de novo assembly
as a first step towards the whole genome of the tick i. ricinus,  <dig> , <dig> paired-end reads were obtained from an illumina hiseq™  <dig> sequencer. the  <dig> , <dig>  bp obtained correspond to a theoretical  <dig> fold coverage, assuming a genome size similar to the ~ <dig>  gb of ixodes scapularis, the american relative of i. ricinus.  <dig> , <dig> reads  were assembled into  <dig>  contigs with a minimum size of  <dig> kb.  <dig> , <dig> reads remained as singletons. the n <dig> size was  <dig>  bp and the n <dig> size was  <dig>  bp. the longest contig had a size of  <dig>  bp. mismatches within reads and contigs during back-mapping of the paired-end reads to the assembled contigs identified potential local sequence errors  as well as structural errors . accordingly, sequences were error-corrected, whenever necessary. the assembled contig sequences as well as the raw sequencing reads are publicly available at the national center for biotechnology information  . altogether, the contigs span a length of  <dig> ,918 bp, which corresponded to 19 % of the putative genome size of ~  <dig>  gb. the algorithm is not able to assemble short sequence repeats to large contigs as it is not possible with short read lengths to distinguish between high sequence coverage and large domains of short sequence repeats. so the assembly of repeats with a repeat unit larger than the length of the reads cannot be solved. therefore, the assumption was made that mostly unique sequences were covered in their full length by the assembly and that repetitive regions may be covered only once per repeat. this hypothesis is supported by the results from a redundancy analysis, revealing that there are no highly similar contig sequences in our genome assembly. according to ullmann et al.  <cit> , only 30 % of the i. scapularis genome consists of unique dna sequences. if the i. ricinus genome has a similar organization, our contigs would cover 63 % of unique sequences. this estimate is in line with our finding of 67 % of midgut mrna reads mapping to the assembled genome contigs. since the midgut is a major organ of the i. ricinus tick, we may assume that a high percentage of both, house-keeping transcripts and organ-specific transcripts were covered by our transcriptomic data. compared to the 26–27 % of i. ricinus rna reads from adult females and larvae that could be mapped against the i. scapularis genome reference by the genomics resources development consortium  <cit> , the more than doubled percentage of mapped reads further underlines the need for and the utility of an i. ricinus reference genome also for transcriptome and proteome analyses. direct mapping of our genome contigs against the i. scapularis genome assembly as a reference revealed that 54 % of our contigs aligned with at least 80 % identity to i. scapularis scaffolds, whereas 46 % showed less similarity. we found homologous sequences to 89 % of the i. scapularis scaffolds in our i. ricinus contigs, indicating coverage of most genome regions by our assembly, even if coverage is partial . since there is no annotation of paralogs for the i. scapularis genome available, no conclusion on the coverage of paralogous sequences can be drawn from this homology analysis. however, the mapping of 67 % of all mrna reads to 79 % of our genome contigs  is another strong indication of a broad coverage of most genome regions. thereby we demonstrate, that the assembled genome contigs do not only represent a minor part of the non-repetitive genome consisting of a small set of highly expressed genes, but rather a broad spectrum of unique genome regions with various expression levels . furthermore, complementary genome sequences for all i. ricinus genes in ncbi genbank were identified in our assembly . vice versa,  <dig>  genome contigs  represented sequences that did not match our homology criteria against i. scapularis . a homology comparison of the latter sequences to all acari genomes available at ncbi genbank excluding i. scapularis  revealed  <dig> contigs with homology to one of the further related species. thus, with few exceptions, contigs without homology to i. scapularis did not show homology to any other sequenced acari species, but were rather unique to i. ricinus .

identification of putative genes in the assembled genome contigs
in order to identify putative open reading frames and genes in the i. ricinus genome,  <dig> , <dig> midgut mrna reads of average 118 bp lengths were mapped with a large gap read mapper to the above assembled genome contigs. the different techniques by which the genomic and mrna reads were obtained  do not interfere with the integration of both individual data sets by mapping and alignment, because these methods are not affected by technique-specific error types or rates. for performing analyzes that could be critical to this issue, e.g. de novo assembly, the datasets were strictly separated. the large gap read mapper algorithm is able to map rna-seq reads that span introns without prior transcript annotation by allowing large gaps in the mapping. it is therefore also suitable for transcript analysis in non-annotated reference genomes. for transcript discovery, the position of each gap in the read mapping was analyzed with respect to its location at a valid splice site. these mapping events were analyzed for proximity to identify events that are close enough to belong to the same gene . events that supported the same splice sites were merged. events with unaligned ends shorter than 17 bp were retained if they were within 9 bp of an observed splice site and were fixed to these sites. this fixation allowed the merging of events within a coverage region that were not mergable before . as a next step, the coverage region was split into potential gene regions . noise events were filtered by excluding un-spliced events which were incompatible with spliced events , internal unspliced events  and external events without spliced reads and a coverage below 25 % of the highest coverage in the gene region. these filters excluded spurious expression within introns as well as upstream and downstream of the event in the region of coverage. after a third merge, transcript annotations were predicted and genes identified. as a result,  <dig>  putative genes were identified. a summary of the transcript discovery data is presented in table  <dig>  the length, genomic location and sequence coverage of all putative genes identified are described in additional file  <dig>  due to the lack of an annotated reference genome and the fragmentation of our i. ricinus genome, a full genome annotation is hardly possible at this stage and will be subject of further investigations. whole genome annotation is even further undermined by the fact, that a large part of the i. ricinus amino acid sequences registered at ncbi are putative and accordingly require individual detailed analyzes. nevertheless, the genomic information provided including this first list of putative genes contributes to the identification of so far unknown genes of i. ricinus. it will allow to further analyze splice site usage, to identify tick specific splice sites, average gene lengths etc., thereby further elucidating the genetic structure of the main european tick.table  <dig> summary of transcript discovery analysis for identification of putative genes in the i. ricinus genome

transcript discovery analysisa

adetailed information for all  <dig>  identified putative genes is included in additional file 5




transcriptome sequencing and de novo assembly
de novo assembly of the mrna reads was performed on  <dig> , <dig> quality trimmed reads generating  <dig>  contigs with a minimum size of 200 bp. the assembled contigs as well as the raw sequencing reads are publicly available at ncbi . the assembled contigs were aligned against  <dig>  contigs available from a recently published mixed midgut and salivary gland transcriptome assembly of partially fed i. ricinus ticks  <cit> . instead of a mixed approach, we focused on the midgut only and used naïve i. ricinus ticks. although we retrieved only around one third of the total midgut read numbers of the mixed approach and our reads were only around one third of the length, we were able to enlarge the total transcriptome lengths  by 11 mb to  <dig>  mb and identified  <dig>  additional transcriptome sequences. moreover, we could map our contigs back to 96 % of the coding sequences from the above combined assembly of mrna sequences from midgut and salivary glands. this large overlap is probably predominantly due to ubiquitously expressed house-keeping genes. the high transcriptome overlap between unfed and partially fed stages of the midgut is also in line with the 85 % overlap  of proteins expressed in the midgut and salivary glands of partially fed i. ricinus ticks reported by schwarz et al.  <cit>  and kotsyfakis et al.  <cit> , which was also suggested to derive from ubiquitously expressed house-keeping genes. the large overlap between the two completely different approaches is a strong indication of a virtually complete coverage at least of the most abundant i. ricinus midgut transcripts in unfed and partially fed stages as well as a complete overall transcript coverage of house-keeping transcripts.

annotation of the i. ricinus midgut transcriptome
in the following, we combined an alignment-based strategy with a motif search-based strategy for annotating transcripts of the unfed midgut of i. ricinus tick.

all  <dig>  assembled transcriptome contigs were blasted against all arthropod protein sequences available at ncbi at the time of analysis. for  <dig>  contigs, a blast result matching the evidence filter criteria was retrieved. analysis of species distribution revealed that  <dig>  contigs had an i. ricinus protein as best match and  <dig>  contigs showed highest similarity to a protein identified in i. scapularis. these two species had the highest top-hit numbers . this reflects well the close relationship between these two species and validates the quality of our assembly. in total,  <dig>  contigs matched best to proteins of the  <dig> most prevalent top-hit species, out of which  <dig>  contigs  matched best to a protein sequence derived from a tick species .fig.  <dig> species ranking. species are ranked by number of transcriptome contigs with a top hit in the blast search against ncbi arthropoda database



thirteen thousand, nine hundred ninety-five annotations from go database for the three classes “molecular function”, “biological process” and “cellular component” could be mapped to  <dig>  contigs out of the  <dig>  contigs with blast result. out of these  <dig>  contigs with annotations in the different classes,  <dig>  contigs  passed the high evidence criteria described in the methods section.

since sequence information and even more functional or localization information are very limited for ticks in general and i. ricinus in particular, valid annotation is very scarce. to overcome database limitations, our analysis pipeline was expanded to include motif search by interproscan. with this protein function classification approach,  <dig>  additional go annotations could be retrieved. merging the two annotation strategies yielded  <dig>  validated annotations. we further expanded the mapping by inserting a second go layer that added “biological process” and “cellular component” annotations to transcripts based on their molecular functions . this added another  <dig>  new annotations and  <dig> annotations were corrected. in addition, this approach normalized variations in annotation practice of public databases as each molecular function term became always annotated beyond that to its biological process and cellular component; making the annotation more consistent and more robust.

ten thousand, four hundred eighty-seven sequences  were annotated with high evidence for molecular function, biological process and/or cellular component by  <dig>  go entries. a mapping result not matching the evidence filter for annotation was found in 11 % of sequences. fifty-four percent of the contigs retrieved a blast result for which no information was available in the go database and for which no motif signatures were identified. this high number of sequences with blast result, but without further annotation for function, process or cellular component, reflects the current low level of annotative information about arthropod sequences. eighteen percent of the  <dig>  contigs remained without a blast hit with a sufficient similarity score and e-value. here we present the most extensive transcriptome annotation for function and localization based on a combined annotation approach available for i. ricinus so far. all sequences and the corresponding annotations are provided as additional file  <dig>  go terms to which at least  <dig> sequences were annotated are presented in addition in fig.  <dig> for the different go classes.fig.  <dig> multilevel distribution of annotated mrna sequences by go category. distribution is shown for the go categories “molecular function” , “biological process”  and “cellular component” . only terms with a minimum of  <dig> annotated sequences are shown. detailed information about the number of assigned sequences per term are included in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the numbers in brackets represent the number of sequences that are annotated to this term



within the go class molecular function, “ion binding” , “oxidoreductase activity” , “dna binding” , “kinase activity”  and “nucleotidyltransferase activity”  were the five most important molecular functions among all sequences, when several molecular functions  were allowed to be assigned to the same contig. when all  <dig>  sequences annotated for “catalytic activities” were combined, they represented together with the sequences annotated for “binding activity”  the most diverse subsets within the molecular function group. they were followed by the “transporter activity” subset which was represented by only  <dig> sequences. since the catalytic activity is the most prevalent and the most heterogeneous group among all molecular function groups, it was further analyzed in more detail.

in addition to the combined annotation approach by alignment and motif search, enzyme code mapping classified  <dig>  contigs into the different enzyme classes. table  <dig> presents the variety of the different enzyme classes in the naïve i. ricinus midgut. the most abundant enzymes were classified as hydrolases with  <dig> assigned contigs. in parallel,  <dig>  sequences showed “hydrolytic activity” according to the combined annotation. in summary, the order of enzyme classes according to the number of assigned sequences was identical in both annotation approaches. the total numbers of sequences assigned to the different enzyme classes were always higher for the combined annotation approach. the reason is, that sequences can be annotated according to their motif signature  without being annotated as such in the go database - either because the function has not been annotated to this sequence yet or because the sequence itself has been unknown so far. this is once more a reflection of the limited annotative information for i. ricinus and highlights the need to combine different annotation strategies for non-model species. moreover, the identical order in assigned enzyme classes for the combined approach and the enzyme code mapping confirms the uniform identification of motifs without prioritizing or shifting overall annotations.table  <dig> enzyme code  distribution in the naïve i. ricinus midgut


acombined alignment and motif-search annotation



in the category biological processes, metabolic processes involving dna had the highest diversity in mrna expression . these processes include e.g. dna replication and methylation as well as transcription. six hundred sixty-nine different sequences coded for proteins involved in protein modification, including pre-, co- and post-translational modifications. “signal transduction” and “transmembrane transport” were also among the most diverse processes in the naïve midgut with  <dig> and  <dig> annotated sequences, respectively. 40 % of mrna transcripts assigned to cellular components  code for proteins that are part of macromolecular complexes of proteins covalently bound to molecules such as nucleotides, metal ions or lipid anchors.  <dig> distinct mrnas were assigned to the cytoskeleton. translational activity is represented by  <dig> different mrna transcripts coding for proteins that are part of the ribosomal complex.

thus, the high level of transcripts in the naïve midgut related to dna processing, such as transcription , translation  and the protein modification machinery  vouch for a very active protein metabolism already in the unfed stage of the tick.

the summary of the biological processes in the naïve midgut  shows that “metabolic and cellular processes” were among the most prevalent ones, which aligns with our finding that “catalytic activity” is the most frequent molecular function. systems analysis further suggests that the midgut is in a metabolic phase in the unfed tick to recover the energy spend for questing. moderate numbers of transcripts were implicated in the processes “response to stimulus”, “biological regulation” and “signaling”, apparently in an effort to prepare the midgut for an anticipated blood meal that would activate changes in biological regulation and signaling. complementary to these biological processes, the encoded molecular functions “transporter activity” and “enzyme regulator activity” as well as “protein and nucleic acid binding transcription factor activity” seem to be on hair-trigger alert to enable the tick midgut to shift rapidly from a catabolic to an anabolic metabolism by adapting enzyme activities and transcription. in contrast, transcripts coding for proteins involved in “developmental processes” or “locomotion” were rare. at later feeding stages, these processes may become more important due to structural growth of the midgut during feeding and in particular during molting of the tick, not only in the midgut but also in other organs. the “catabolic-while-ready-to-sensing-status” of the tick is further supported by the preferred cellular localization of encoded proteins in protein complexes or cellular organelles, such as e.g. mitochondria. as the “power plants” of the cells, activity in these organelles aligns and supports the energy recovering mode. on the other hand, numbers of encoded proteins associated with the membrane or extracellular regions were relatively low at the unfed stage. expression of these proteins may increase only when the midgut undergoes dramatic expansion during the late feeding stage.

considering only annotations of transcripts that were not found by schwarz et al.  <cit>  in neither the midgut nor the salivary glands of fed i. ricinus ticks, the patterns are similar to the overall transcript annotations . as schwarz et al.  <cit>  presented a mixed transcriptome assembly of midgut and salivary glands of partially fed i. ricinus ticks, a more detailed comparison of the partially fed to the unfed midgut is not possible.

annotation of the i. ricinus midgut proteome
this study provides the first insight into the midgut proteome of unfed i. ricinus ticks.

after separation of midgut proteins according to size and isoelectric point,  <dig>  protein spots were picked, digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry. in a combined search, pmf and up to  <dig> ms/ms spectra per protein spot were searched via mascot against the assembled mrna sequences from our midgut transcriptome .  <dig> gel spots were significantly identified by mass spectrometry and among these,  <dig> distinct proteins expressed in the naïve midgut could be annotated for function and/or localization. all mass spectrometry data are available via proteomexchange .

in order to cross-validate our transcriptome annotations with the protein annotations, blast hits retrieved for mrna contigs matching a protein in the above mascot search  were compared to the hits of the mascot search obtained for this protein against public arthropod protein sequence databases. in total, a significant hit for both mascot searches was retrieved for  <dig> gel spots. reasons for low scores in one of the mascot searches include mainly limitations of the arthropoda database and/or a very low expression of the protein and poor ms spectra. combining the different isoforms of a protein, these  <dig> gel spots correspond to  <dig> distinct proteins. for  <dig> proteins  of the above  <dig> proteins with matches in both searches , annotations were identical. when the annotations were extended to similar results found in mascot and blast, i.e. same protein family or same protein, but different species, 98 % of protein identifications  overlapped. this overlap unequivocally links these mrnas and proteins, and furthermore confirms by cross-validation the robustness of the annotation results of both, the transcriptome and the proteome, and the annotation strategies used. in addition to the above  <dig> proteins,  <dig> proteins with a significant score in the arthropoda mascot search only and  <dig> other proteins with a significant score in the internal mrna database search only were identified, albeit without cross-validation. there are obvious overlaps between transcriptome and proteome annotations . the most important molecular functions are in both cases “catalytic activity” and “ion binding”. most proteins are found in the mitochondria, which further supports our observations from the transcriptome of a catabolic metabolism in the unfed midgut during questing. the biological process with the highest number of assigned transcripts, “dna metabolic processes”, shows highest diversity in the proteome as well. proteins involved in the “generation of precursor metabolites and energy” are also among the most prevalent categories further highlighting the catabolic profile of the unfed midgut. altogether, there were only small differences between the annotation profiles of the transcriptome and the proteome in the unfed midgut and overall annotation patterns were very similar. since the unfed midgut is in a steady state, similar annotation profiles for transcriptome and proteome are absolutely plausible. one would expect to see a difference between transcriptome and proteome annotations with the start of the blood meal triggering changes in the metabolism. this change would be initiated by a shift in the transcription profile, followed by a delayed change in protein expression profiles. a comprehensive overview of the annotation patterns of the transcriptome and the proteome is shown in figs.  <dig> and  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  a detailed list of the annotations for each protein spot and each mrna sequence is provided as additional files  <dig> and  <dig> fig.  <dig> multilevel distribution of annotated proteins by go categories. distribution is shown for the go categories “molecular function” , “biological process”  and “cellular component” . only terms with a minimum of  <dig> annotated sequences are shown. detailed information about the number of assigned sequences per term are included in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the numbers in brackets represent the number of sequences that are annotated to this term



in summary,  <dig> distinct proteins expressed in the naïve midgut were significantly identified and furthermore annotated for their function and/or cellular localization. an annotated 2d gel picture and a table summarizing all blast and mascot annotations are included as additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. these coding sequences and annotations contribute in an essential manner to the elucidation of the i. ricinus proteome and will facilitate investigation of tick-pathogen and tick-host interactions as well as identification of potential vaccine candidates.

CONCLUSIONS
we constructed here a first reference genome comprising an estimated two thirds of the unique sequences of the i. ricinus tick, the most important european disease vector. when comparing our genome contigs to i. scapularis as a reference genome, 89 % of the i. scapularis scaffolds were found to be homologous to sequences of our i. ricinus assembly. in addition, more than  <dig>  putative new genes were identified. although not complete, the genomic information provided contributes to the identification of so far unknown genes of i. ricinus and provides a robust basis for further elucidating the complete genetic structure of this main european tick.

these genomic data were complemented by about  <dig>  assembled transcriptome sequences and, even more important, by the first large scale functional and local annotation corresponding to more than  <dig>  transcripts and  <dig> proteins expressed in the naïve midgut. it will be the scope of future studies to confirm their predicted functions and cellular localizations.

the combination of both, transcriptome and proteome annotations in the go categories “molecular function”, “biological process” and “cellular component”, provides a systems overview of pathways and metabolic activity in the unfed i. ricinus midgut. our data provide the basis for investigating specific pathways in the tick as well as tick-pathogen and tick-host interactions. they also allow to develop immunoprophylactic approaches by reverse vaccinology and other mitigation strategies against the most important european disease vector. the genome as a reference allows furthermore to identify gene categories, e.g. immunity-related genes, by homology search. in summary, the presented databases will accelerate investigations of tick-host and tick-pathogen interactions, identification of vaccine candidates based on concealed antigens and studies of midgut functions such as blood digestion.

