BACKGROUND
a single escherichia coli chromosome comprises  <dig>  mb and must be compacted at least ~ <dig> fold to fit inside the bacterial cell. despite tremendous compaction the nucleoid is a dynamic structure adapted to varying rates of replication and different transcriptional requirements resulting from changes in environmental conditions. this double requirement of compaction and differential gene expression implies that bacterial chromatin must possess a high degree of spatial organization. recent investigations indicate that the maintenance and utilization of negative supercoils in the dna is central to both issues  <cit> .

in the protein-free dna molecule, dna superhelicity is partitioned into a twist component, tw, which is reflected in a twisting or untwisting of the double helix for positively and negatively supercoiled dna respectively, and a writhe component, wr, which is a measure of the three-dimensional path of the double helical axis. in a closed topological domain these quantities are related to a change in linking number  from the relaxed state such that Δlk = Δtw + wr. negative supercoiling can facilitate both dna folding and compaction as well as the untwisting of dna which is required for the initiation of transcription and replication  <cit> .

gene promoter regions are generally characterized by high deformability, being susceptible to duplex destabilization under conditions of superhelical stress  <cit> . the cellular promoters can be thus understood as devices channeling the free energy of negative supercoiling to localized, biologically relevant sites in dna. several studies using different promoters and promoter derivatives revealed that there is a distinct, yet characteristic, coupling between the superhelical density of dna and the activity of a particular promoter  <cit> . a change of supercoiling could thus globally and differentially affect the efficiency of channeling superhelical energy at distinct promoters, allowing coordinated change of gene expression activities to occur.

besides classical modes of transcriptional regulation through dedicated transcription factors , which we would like to refer to as digital control  <cit> , it is well known that dna topology affects gene expression in prokaryotes  <cit>  as well as in eukaryotes  <cit> , which we call analog control .

we want to emphasize that the terminology of "digital" and "analog" control as contributions to gene regulation, which has been introduced in marr et al.  <cit> , is intended to emphasize the qualitative difference between regulation mediated by transcription factors and regulatory action exerted by dna topology. we are aware that , when zooming into the elementary process of transcription factor diffusion and binding etc., digital control has many graded, non-binary properties and  stabilization of specific structural modes of the dna by naps can be viewed as a discontinuous, discrete features of analog control. however, the advantage of dissecting the digital  and analog  logic of transcriptional regulation is in integrating the distinct types of information into a holistic approach, while separately each approach falls short of describing this multifaceted phenomenon.

in the bacterial cell the abundant nucleoid associated proteins , including fis, h-ns, hu, lrp, dps and ihf, fulfill the role of packaging and dynamic constraint of superhelicity. these naps are assumed to be mediators of analog control exerted by long-range nucleoprotein structures formed by binding of multiple low affinity sites in the chromosome as opposed to digital control exerted by low concentrations of dedicated transcription factors binding specific dna sites with high affinity  <cit> .

in particular, this combination of a global state  and local states  is responsible for the spatial transcript patterns observed along the chromosome  <cit> . dna supercoiling is homeostatically controlled by topoisomerase i, which leads to dna relaxation, and dna gyrase which introduces negative supercoils into the dna  <cit> . furthermore, the superhelical density is responsive to a range of physiological conditions, e.g. the growth phase , phosphorylation potential of the cell  <cit>  and stress conditions  <cit> . it is precisely this physiological dependence that prompted us to ask whether dna supercoiling is a global regulator relating the chromatin structure and transcription to metabolic demand  <cit> .

in order to answer this question on a system level we utilize alterations of superhelical density, facilitated by adding the topoisomerase inhibitor norfloxacin to genetically engineered isogenic e. coli strains containing drug-resistant alleles of topoisomerase genes and thus selectively inhibiting either dna gyrase or topoisomerase iv in these strains  to measure supercoiling induced gene expression changes together with a combination of nap mutations , thus precluding the buffering effects of the homeostatic network  <cit> . fis is stabilizing relatively open dna structures such as loops and interwindings readily accessible to the transcription machinery, whereas h-ns stabilizes tightly interwound plectonemic structures repressing transcription . we are here discussing the interpretational capacity of the cell: the environmental information is sensed by and filtered via chromatin structure. we show that the regulation of the metabolic state is predominantly achieved by this analog type of control.

furthermore, we show that the regulatory control exhibited by dna supercoiling is not mediated by the transcriptional regulatory network , as the consistency of the expression changes with the trn logic of activation and suppression is strongly reduced in the wild type in comparison to the mutants. our data are evidence for an optimal conversion of supercoiling into metabolic adjustments by naps.

while it is true for eukaryotes that the multi-level organization of gene regulation obfuscates the connection between mrna and protein levels, let alone metabolic fluxes, and it seems that most of the control on metabolism is contributed by the post-transcriptional levels  <cit> , the situation is known to be quite different in prokaryotes where transcription and translation are tightly coupled  <cit> . so it is valid to analyze the role of transcriptional regulation in order to understand bacterial homeostasis and the metabolic state of a cell.

to our knowledge, this work is first to show directly on a system-wide level the coordinated regulation of cellular metabolism by dna supercoiling and naps.

RESULTS
analysis strategy
an important feature of our approach is that we analyze subnetworks of the overall metabolic gene network defined by the data at hand. these effective networks contain only the active components  under the given conditions  and are analyzed from a network-topological perspective. the connectivity of these gene-centric effective networks is thus a result of the underlying reaction-centric topology, together with the observed gene expression pattern. deviation of this connectivity from randomness is what we will in the following call metabolic coherence . a second, more refined definition of effective metabolic gene networks, which will also be used in the following, requires both a significant expression change for one of the associated genes and a non-zero metabolic flux predicted for the encoded reaction using flux balance analysis  <cit>  under specified environmental conditions.

the coherence of metabolism and gene expression patterns is quantified as follows : we map the patterns of differentially expressed genes, i.e. genes that are responsive to a variation of the negative supercoiling , from the four genetic backgrounds  directly onto a metabolic gene network in order to extract effective networks. then we compute the ratio of connected nodes and all nodes in the effective network, which we call metabolic coherence ratio . this quantity is then converted into a z-score, by using a random distribution of expression changes as a null model , which is our metabolic coherence  in the following. the mc allows us to compare the amount of network coherence between gene expression profiles and metabolic pathways for the different data listed in figure  <dig> 

in order to validate our results on a broad scale we use network reconstructions from multiple independent databases and also apply different methods to handle gene-reaction mappings as well as currency metabolites . in the following we will present our results for the different variants of the metabolic coherence for the four gene expression profiles from figure  <dig> 

metabolic coherence
in figure  <dig> the four values of the mc  are shown for three different metabolic network representations, namely for the ecocyc database  <cit> , for the kegg database  <cit>  and for the iaf <dig> metabolic model  <cit> .

flux balance analysis  is a quantitative approach for computing steady-state fluxes on metabolic networks  <cit> . it allows us to study whether the observed systematics are enhanced, when only active links in the metabolic network are taken into account. using the iaf <dig> model, we computed a steady-state flux distribution that maximizes biomass production  <cit>  under a rich medium condition and eliminated all inactive links from the network. the resulting mc is shown in figure 4d. strikingly, the restriction to active fluxes enhances the previous pattern , i.e. the gap between the wild type metabolic coherence and the mc values of the three mutants.

the key observation from figure  <dig> so far is that changes in gene expression levels brought about by changes in supercoiling energy in the genome have a strong metabolic interpretation: the agreement of these expression changes with the metabolic network is significantly above randomness . when severely perturbing the internal mechanisms of chromatin organization , metabolic coherence goes down.

robustness of the result
network analysis has established itself as an efficient way of exploring biological systems . nevertheless, network treatment of metabolic systems is accompanied by certain difficulties and we check the robustness of our results against many of them. in order to solidify this initial result, we need to look in detail at several issues, which can potentially affect our analysis :

 gene to reaction mapping. while all our analyses have been performed with gene-centric graphs, the reaction-centric graph serves as the starting point for assessing metabolic information . decisions are therefore necessary, how to relate the reaction level with the gene level. the procedure of mapping genes  onto reactions  can have an impact on our result. excluding ambiguous gene to reaction relations in a step-wise fashion permits us to investigate if our results are sensitive to this issue.

 treatment of currency metabolites. currency metabolites are compounds in metabolic reactions balancing charge, energy, phosphate etc. they are distinguished from main metabolites  only by biochemical knowledge or, qualitatively and indirectly, due to their very high degree in the metabolic network . the treatment of currency metabolites is an important issue in the discussion of the topological properties of metabolic networks . an approximate way of eliminating currency metabolites from metabolic network representations is to remove a certain percentage of highest-degree metabolites. alternatively, one can use a database, where metabolites are already labeled as main metabolites and currency metabolites, respectively. this information is included in the most recent variants of the kegg database . in the e. coli fba model iaf <dig>  <cit> , this information is not available. in order to obtain a currency metabolite free version of iaf <dig> we used either a threshold to remove 4% of the most highly connected metabolites  or a manually curated network .

 differences between metabolic databases. using intersections of the different metabolic reconstructions of e. coli allows us to focus on the commonalities between them.

 definition of the growth medium for determining the active metabolic reactions via fba. all these points are addressed in the following.

large-scale evaluation
 in order to evaluate the influence of the gene-reaction mapping on our results, we computed mc values for all databases using the following configuration:  taking all multiplicities into account,  excluding cases where a single or multiple genes are associated with two consecutive reactions and  taking only reaction links  into account, which are associated with two single distinct genes .

 we also computed signatures for different intersections of all available databases. by doing so, we gradually remove uncertain connections between genes, nomenclature issues and differences in the level of chemical detail captured by the different databases. this increases the confidence of the used gene network. the intersection of the gene networks from kegg, ecocyc and the iaf <dig> model constitutes hereby the network with the highest confidence as it includes only connections being present in all databases. it should be noted that the differences in the results under variation of the database are also due to the balance between enhancing the systematic contribution  and retaining a large enough network to extract statistically meaningful quantities.

 different treatments of currency metabolites in case of the iaf <dig> network :  manual curation,  threshold heuristic and  no treatment.

 recently, flux-coupling networks have been intensely studied in terms of their organizing principles and their relation to gene expression data. a flux-coupling gene network coming from  <cit> , which has been obtained from the ijr <dig> e. coli model  <cit> , is analyzed here. it is subdivided into three subsets:  the total network, and two subsets, i.e.  fully and  directionally coupled gene pairs.

the overall trend seen in figure  <dig> is that metabolic coherence is highest in the wild type. the mutants' expression patterns, while displaying a positive mc, are not as well aligned to the metabolic network as the wild type. this effect is particularly clear when only switched-on fluxes are taken into account. in this case the metabolic coherence directly measures the coherence of the expression pattern with the pattern of metabolic fluxes. furthermore, we find a similar pattern for the fully-coupled flux-coupling gene network, which indicates that besides the topological matching also other metabolic relationships are perturbed in the mutants.

qualitatively speaking, considering intersections and restricting the analysis to fluxes, which are predicted active by fba, enhances the dominant signal of high wild type metabolic coherence compared to the mutants.

growth medium complexity
in order to assess the robustness of the result obtained from the flux-activity network shown in figure  <dig> d, it is instructive to analyze how the metabolic coherence  depend on the growth medium: for figure  <dig> we start out with a rich medium and iteratively remove components until we reach a minimal growth medium. thus the starting points of the four mc curves in figure  <dig> coincide with the mc values shown in figure 4d. when going from a rich to a minimal medium, the number of active genes increases , as more and more reactions have to be switched on to compensate for the decreasing nutrient availability. additionally, from left to right we are deviating ever more strongly from the experimental conditions behind the gene expression data. the main result in figure  <dig> is that the clear separation of the wild type metabolic coherence from the mutants' persists over a wide range in medium complexity. furthermore, when approaching a minimal growth medium, discrimination of mcs is strongly reduced.

link to digital control
is the strong metabolic coherence found for wild type e. coli a direct consequence of chromatin organization  or is it mediated indirectly through the transcriptional regulatory network ? from  <cit>  we know that digital control  is low in the wild type  on the network-wide scale, indicating a buffering effect of the trn. in this study  <cit> , digital control has been measured using the digital ctc , a measure very similar to our metabolic coherence , that evaluates the coherence of patterns of differentially expressed genes with the trn.

here we measure the digital ctc for a part of the trn that only consists of regulatory actions  between metabolic genes found in the ecocyc network and genes coding for transcription factors. as expected, the digital control measured as the digital ctc  is significantly lower in the wild type in comparison to the mutants .

beyond the standard digital control strength from  <cit>  we also integrate the signs of the expression changes with the regulatory information on the corresponding links in the trn . this is an elegant method for strengthening the direct link between supercoiling and the metabolic network: not only is the pattern of supercoiling-induced gene expression changes meaningfully distributed on the metabolic network, but also the transcriptional regulatory network does not provide an adequate interpretation of the data .

CONCLUSIONS
changes to the superhelicity of the bacterial chromosome cause patterns of gene expression changes  <cit> , which have been discussed from a signal processing point of view  <cit> , a global perspective   <cit> , and in the context of transcriptional regulatory and spatial gene-proximity networks   <cit> . our main result, the high metabolic coherence of supercoiling-induced gene expression changes in wild type e. coli, as opposed to mutants lacking the naps fis and h-ns, provides further evidence for a regulatory role of dna supercoiling. it is robust across several metabolic databases and over a wide range of environmental conditions, when taking flux-activity predictions into account. furthermore, it is not qualitatively affected by technical details of defining the metabolic network. we can only bring these mc values down by mutations perturbing the machinery of chromosomal organization. these mutants are still viable, but their pattern of supercoiling-induced gene expression changes shows a markedly reduced metabolic coherence. they are, in fact, close to random expression changes, suggesting that the altered overall superhelical density and topological barriers in these mutants  <cit>  preclude efficient channeling of the changes of superhelicity into metabolism.

furthermore, the low consistency of the wild type expression patterns with the trn topology  and its encoded regulatory logic , suggest that the transcriptional regulation of enzymatic genes is primarily accomplished by chromosomal organization, i.e. the concerted interplay of global supercoiling and naps. quite contrary, the stronger consistency of mutant expression changes and trn topology and logic support the view in  <cit>  that the trn is buffering the lack of naps.

the results presented here, while providing a fairly clear picture of the interplay between mechanisms of gene regulation and metabolism, provide several incentives for our analysis as obvious steps for future work: at the core of our analysis is the metabolic coherence. it would be helpful to compare this measure with related attempts of quantitatively comparing gene expression data with metabolic information  <cit> . also, if suitable data are available, we would like to extend our analysis to other organisms. a more careful discussion of the gene-reaction mapping from a network perspective is certainly necessary in order to go from our observation of metabolic coherence to a more detailed interpretation. it also may be helpful to manually construct metabolite, reaction and gene mappings between iaf <dig>  kegg and ecocyc, in order to better understand the strong differences in mc between the databases.

on a broader level, we believe that the general approach of defining and comparing control strengths and topological coherence measures associated with distinct biological processes and, in this way, dissecting gene expression patterns, may be a useful perspective for systems biology investigation, where a multitude of influences shape a process at hand. in those cases where the control type under investigation is network-based , control strength evaluates effective networks . such effective networks are a novel and highly instructive way of exploring the relation between network architecture and dynamical processes .

