BACKGROUND
for severely paralyzed people or subjects in a "locked-in" state, direct brain-machine interaction provides a way of re-establishing communication. electroencephalogram -based brain-computer interfaces  recognize intention-induced changes in ongoing eeg signals and translate different mental states into the appropriate commands for operating consumer electronics or spelling devices. to provide a natural interaction between humans and machines, bcis must constantly classify ongoing electric cortical activity and allow users real-time control of external devices. users should know exactly how the ongoing electric cortical activity is changing, and hence, considerable feedback must be provided.

virtual reality  has been used as information-rich feedback for bcis  <cit> . the precise three-dimensional graphics in vr are believed to help users feel a sense of reality during bci control. we developed a bci that classifies  <dig> different types of motor intentions  on the basis of the self-paced operation of an avatar . the experiment was done not only to check the effectiveness of long-term use of bci with vr feedback but also to deliver e-communication opportunities to paralyzed persons through the internet. for simplicity, only  <dig> bipolar eeg channels were used for the classification. using our portable vr-based bci system, a tetraplegic subject with muscular dystrophy  successfully communicated with others over a 5-month period. we report this single case to demonstrate our experience with the feasibility of internet-based vr-bci as a new communication tool. we also describe plastic changes in eeg topography by long-term bci training in the md subject.

RESULTS
classification and error rate over time
with the increase in training days, the subject decreased the error rate of the classification and finally succeeded in controlling his avatar and communicating with other users who were logged in to second life® from elsewhere . movie files are also available. additional files  <dig> and  <dig> show the demonstration in the initial and final conditions of avatar controlling, respectively.

the error rate in the classification of left- and right-hand mi decreased after the avatar-control training . on the final training day, about  <dig> months after admission, the error rate showed a larger decrease during the mi period after the cue than on the initial day . fig. 1b shows the average error rate during mi for all  <dig> days of the training. the average error rate reduced from about 38% to 25%.

because of the subject's health condition, we could not conduct all experiments at a constant interval of  <dig> weeks. we started the training on  <dig> apr  <dig> and ended it on  <dig> sep  <dig> . the other  <dig> experimental dates are indicated on the x-axis scale in fig.  <dig> 

along with decreasing the classification errors, the subject also improved his true positive rate  and false positive rate  through the training. fig.  <dig> shows the receiver operating characteristic  curves for left- and right-hand mi detection in the initial and final training sessions and fig.  <dig> indicates changes in tpr, fpr, and area under the roc curve  during the bci training period. these  <dig> parameters tended to increase.

multichannel eeg recording
figs  <dig> and  <dig> represent the event-related desynchronization /event-related synchronization  during the 27-channel eeg recording. fig. 4a-4f shows the time-frequency maps of the erd/ers on both the pre- and post-training days. the mu erd  values following the feet, left-hand, and right-hand mis were all enhanced by the training . the most obvious change occurred at cz for the feet mi . the peak of erd at c <dig> for the left-hand mi  and at c <dig> for the right-hand mi  also increased. these erd changes showed a significant difference  between the pre- and post-training during the mi period . whereas the subject controlled the avatar using the bp of the beta frequency band  at cz, the enhancement of the beta ers showed no significant difference  during the mi period.

eeg topographies on the pre-  and post-training days  show the changes in erd/ers somatotopic organization. in the post-training days, mu erd and beta ers following the feet mi was observed at the vertex and the erd values following the left- and right-hand mi were at the right and left hemispheres, respectively. incidentally, in the left-hand mi, bilateral mu erd was observed.

in addition, the changes in the tpr and fpr for all the three mis  through the pre- and post-training sessions are shown in table  <dig> 

discussion
in this study, we developed an mi-based asynchronous bci system that can help users navigate an avatar in an internet-based vr. this study was the first to show the feasibility of internet-based virtual reality  combined with bci for realization of social communication.

currently, the bci with the highest degree of freedom in bcis for vr navigation is published by scherer et al. , a system that classifies eeg signals and translates the classification results into  <dig> commands: forward movement, left rotation, right rotation, and stop  <cit> , similar to our bci. considering the degree of freedom, other vr navigation systems with bci has fewer commands than the bci by scherer et al. in  <dig>  pfurtscheller et al. published a bci with  <dig> commands: forward movement, backward movement, and stop  <cit> , and most of the other relevant studies showed bcis that control  <dig> commands  <cit> .

to move about freely in vr,  <dig> commands comprise the minimum degree of freedom. implementation of this system achieved the result of physically challenged movement in the vr at free will. in addition, our system's use of second life®, the vr that the voice chat function through the internet is embedded in, helps the physically challenged communicate with others. the subject in our study successfully walked and chatted with other vr users while using the bci at home. networked vr on the internet would create synergy in terms of assistive technology for the physically challenged.

a physically challenged individual with md who was trained to use this system changed his eeg pattern through long-term bci use. it is notable that the subject, who had not moved his feet in approximately  <dig> years, still had the ability to change the eeg patterns to follow the feet mi in the feet representation area. moreover, his hands are also severely impaired, but we found that his hand mis evolved eeg changes. since md causes progressive changes in neuromuscular properties over the course of months or years, it was unclear whether long-term bci use actually changed eeg patterns and classification accuracy in the md subject.

our novel finding in this study is the plastic changes of eeg activity by long-term bci training in the md subject. although the graz bci group has also published a long-term bci training study in a patient  <cit> , that particular patient had injured his spinal cord. spinal cord injuries  cause myelopathy or damage to nerve roots or myelinated fiber tracts that carry signals to and from the brain and are categorized as traumatic injuries. since the site responsible for functional loss is at the spinal cord, the brain itself is intact. indeed, another study indicated that motor skills were considerably intact in sci patients  <cit> . therefore, patients with sci are very likely capable of using bci. on the other hand, md shows progressive skeletal muscle weakness, and the neural strategy of motor control might change over the course of several months or years. thus, it is more unclear in md than in sci whether long-term bci training positively affects eeg change for bci control. the present study is the first to report half-year bci use by a patient with md and evaluate changes in eeg and bci accuracy. while erd/ers caused by mi became more prominent over the study duration of a few months, the neuromuscular properties of patients with md change over the course of months or years. from such observed post-training erd changes in each representation area, we speculate that sensorimotor cortex plasticity was one of the factors causing the bci accuracy improvement.

CONCLUSIONS
we reported the use that  <dig> severely paralyzed individual made of our original bci system. we observed changes in erd and ers patterns and increases in bci performance over long-term use of this system. our results suggest that it is possible to develop vr systems that allow severely paralyzed patients to communicate with others in a virtual world in the same way as a healthy person.

