BACKGROUND
in order to understand cellular complexity much attention is placed on large dynamic networks of co-regulated genes at the base of phenotype differences. one of the aims in molecular biology is to make sense of high-throughput data like that from microarray of gene expression experiments. many important biological processes  are very unlikely controlled by a single gene instead by the underlying complex regulatory interactions between thousands of genes within a four-dimension space. in order to identify these interactions, expression data over time can be exploited. an important open question is related to the development of efficient methods to infer the underlying gene regulation networks  from temporal gene expression profiles. inferring, or reverse-engineering, gene networks can be defined as the process of identifying gene interactions from experimental data through computational analysis. a grn can be modelled as a graph g = , where v is the set of nodes corresponding to genes, u is the set of unordered pair  and d is the set of ordered pairs d . a directed edge dij from vi to vj is present iff there is a causal effect from node vi to node vj. an undirected edge uij represents the mutual association between nodes vi and vj. gene expression data from microarrays are typically used for this purpose. there are two broad classes of reverse-engineering algorithms  <cit> : those based on the physical interaction approach which aim at identifying interactions among transcription factors and their target genes  and those based on the influence interaction approach that try to relate the expression of a gene to the expression of the other genes in the cell , rather than relating it to sequence motifs found in the promoters. we will refer to the ensemble of these influence interactions as gene networks. many algorithms have been proposed in the literature to model gene regulatory networks  <cit>  and solve the network inference problem  <cit> .

ordinary differential equations
reverse-engineering algorithms based on ordinary differential equations  relate changes in gene transcript concentration to each other and to an external perturbation.

typical perturbations can be for example the treatment with a chemical compound , or the over expression or down regulation of particular genes. a set of odes, one for each gene, describes gene regulation as a function of other genes. as odes are deterministic, the interactions among genes represent causal interactions, rather than statistical dependencies. the ode-based approaches yield signed directed graphs and can be applied to both steady-state and time-series expression profiles  <cit> .

bayesian networks
a bayesian network  <cit>  is a graphical model for representing probabilistic relationships among a set of random variables xi, where i =  <dig>  ⋯, n. these relationships are encoded in the structure of a directed acyclic graph g, whose vertexes  are the random variables xi. the relationships between the variables are described by a joint probability distribution p. the genes, on which the probability is conditioned, are called the parents of gene i and represent its regulators, and the joint probability density is expressed as a product of conditional probabilities. bayesian networks cannot contain cycles . this restriction is the principal limitation of the bayesian network model  <cit> . dynamic bayesian networks overcome this limitation  <cit> . dynamic bayesian networks are an extension of bayesian networks able to infer interactions from a data set consisting of time-series rather than steady-state data.

graphical gaussian model
graphical gaussian model, also known as covariance selection or concentration graph models, assumes multivariate normal distribution for underlying data. the independence graph is defined by a set of pairwise conditional independence relationships calculated using partial correlations as a measure of independence of any two genes that determine the edge-set of the graph  <cit> . partial cross correlation has been also used to deal with time delays  <cit> .

gene relevance network
gene relevance networks are based on the covariance graph model. given a measure of association and defined a threshold value, for all pairs of domain variables , association a is computed. variables x and y are connected by an undirected edge when association a exceeds the predefined threshold value. one of the measures of association is the mutual information   <cit> , one of the information theory  main tools. in it approaches, the expression level of a gene is considered as a random variable. mi is the main tool for measuring if and how two genes influence each other. mi between two variables x and y is also defined as the reduction in uncertainty about a variable x after observing a second random variable y. edges in networks derived by information-theoretic approaches represent statistical dependencies among gene expression profiles. as in the case of bayesian network, the edge does not represent a direct causal interaction between two genes, but only a statistical dependency. it is possible to derive the information-theoretic approach as a method to approximate the joint probability density function of gene expression profiles, as it is performed for bayesian networks  <cit> .

time-course reverse engineering
availability of time-series gene expression data can be of help in the study of the dynamical properties of molecular networks, by exploiting the causal gene-gene temporal relationships. in the recent literature several dynamic models, such as probabilistic boolean networks   <cit> ; dynamic bayesian networks   <cit> ; hidden markov model   <cit>  kalfman filters  <cit> ; ordinary differential equations   <cit> ; pattern recognition approaches  <cit> ; signal processing approaches  <cit> , model-free approaches  <cit>  and informational approaches  <cit>  have been proposed for reconstructing regulatory networks from time-course gene expression data. most of them are essentially model-based trying to uncover the dynamics of the system by estimating a series of parameters, such as auto regressive coefficients  <cit>  or the coefficients of state-transition matrix  <cit>  or of a stiffness matrix  <cit> . the model parameters themselves describe the temporal relationships between nodes of the molecular network. one of the first model-free approaches is reported in  <cit> , where a set classification trees is used in order to learn mutual predictions between time-shifted discrete gene expressions. in particular if a tree is able to predict, at a given accuracy, the activity state of a target gene starting from the activation of another genes, then that tree is considered a regulatory relation. our work is related to the work of  <cit>  in the sense that it is basically model-free, but it simplifies the method, in the sense that it does not use any prediction model, but evaluates the degree of independence between activations by an information theoretic approach. in addition, several current approaches try to catch the dynamical nature of the network by unrolling in time the states of the network nodes, this is the case of dynamic bayesian networks  <cit>  or hidden markov models  <cit> . one of the major differences between the approach proposed here and these approaches, is that the dynamical nature of the behavior of the nodes in the networks, in terms of time dependence between reciprocal regulation between them, can be modeled in the connections rather that in the time-unwrapping of the nodes. as reported in figure  <dig>  we assume that the the activation of a gene a can influence the activation of a gene b in successive time instants, and that this information is carried out in the connection between gene a and gene b. indeed, this idea is also at the basis of the time delay neural network model efficiently used in sequence analysis and speech recognition  <cit> . another interesting feature of the reported method, with respect to the aracne algorithm, is the fact that the time-delayed dependencies can eventually be used for derive the direction of the connections between the nodes of the network, trying to discriminate between regulator gene and regulated genes. the approach reported here has also some similarities with the method proposed in  <cit> , the main differences are in the use of different time delays, the use of the data processing inequality for pruning the network rather than the minimum description length principle and the discretization of the expression values.

summary of the proposed algorithm
timedelay-aracne tries to extend to time-course data aracne  retrieving time statistical dependency between gene expression profiles. the idea on which timedelay-aracne is based comes from the consideration that the expression of a gene at a certain time could depend by the expression level of another gene at previous time point or at very few time points before. timedelay-aracne is a three-steps algorithm: first it detects, for all genes, the time point of the initial changes in the expression, secondly there is network construction and finally a network pruning step. is is worth noticing that, the analytical tools for time series often require conditions such as stability and stationarity . although it is not possible to state that these conditions hold in general for microarray data, this is due to the limited number of samples and to the particular experimental setup producing the data, nevertheless time series analysis methods have been demonstrated to be useful tools in many applications of time course gene expression data analysis, for example ramoni et al.  <cit> , used an auto-regressive estimation step as feature extraction prior to classification, while holter et al.,  <cit>  use the characteristic modes obtained by singular value decomposition to model a linear framework resulting in a time translational matrix. in particular timedelay-aracne, just as many related works  implicitly assumes stationarity and stability conditions in the kernel regression estimator used for the computation of the mutual information, as described in the section methods. indeed, the synthetic data generation model  and  assumes a weakly stationary linear autoregressive time series. we do not attempt removal of the trend because of the short length of the data and the wide variability of the periodicity of the cell division cycle.

RESULTS
algorithm evaluation
timedelay-aracne was evaluated first alone than against aracne, dynamical bayesian networks implemented in the banjo package  <cit>   and ode implemented in the tsni package  <cit>   with both simulated gene expression data and real gene expression data related to yeast cell cycle  <cit> , sos signaling pathway in e. coli  <cit>  and an in vivo synthetic network, called irma  <cit> . details on the gene expression data and the construction of the simulated networks are presented in methods section.

synthetic data
in order to quantitatively evaluate the performance of the algorithm reported here over a dataset with a simple and fair "gold standard" and also to evaluate how the performance depend of the size of the problem at the hand, such as network dimension, number of time points, and other variables we generated different synthetic datasets. our profile generation algorithm  starts by creating a random graph which represents the statistical dependencies between expression profiles, and then the expression values are generated according to a set of stochastic difference equation with random coefficients. the network generation algorithm works in such a way that each node can have zero  one or two regulators. in addition to the random coefficients of the stochastic equations, a random gaussian noise is added to each expression value. the performance are evaluated for each network size, number of time points and amount of noise by averaging the ppv, recall and f-score over a set of  <dig> runs with different randomly generated networks. the performance is measured in terms of:

• positive predictive value , it is the percentage of inferred connections which are correct:   

• recall, it is the percentage of true connection which are correctly inferred by the algorithm:   

• f-score. indeed, the overall performance depend both of the positive prediction value and recall as one can improve the former by increasing the detection threshold, but at the expenses of the latter and vice versa. the f-score measure is the geometric mean of p and r and represents the compromise between them:   

since timedelay-aracne always tries to infer edge's direction, so the precision-recall curves take into account direction. as a matter of fact an edge is considered as a true positive only if the edge exist in reference table and the direction is correct.

in the first experiment we test timedelay-aracne performance on different noise levels. we run the algorithm on  <dig> different network  for  <dig> different noise levels . as figure  <dig> suggest timedelay-aracne performance is weakly influenced by noise and the performance decay is stronger in the  <dig> genes network than in the  <dig> genes network. the f-score profile at different noise levels seems to be asymptotic and the performance loss is not more 10%.

we also tested timedelay-aracne performance on networks with different number of genes and different time points comparing such performances with two other algorithms tsni, banjo and the standard aracne algorithm. table  <dig> and table  <dig> show that timedelay-aracne's performance is only partially directly correlated with time point numbers but inversely with network gene numbers. probably the information in the end tails of the profiles is not so much easy to detect or perhaps tails became so flat to give an useful information . timedelay-aracne performs much better than the two considered algorithms, in addition tsni probably need a perturbation in order to work better and banjo needs a very high number of experiments  as compared with the number of genes. as a direct comparison, in these two tables we also report the results in terms of precision and recall of the aracne algorithm, although it was not developed for time series we would like to measure the potential improvement of timedelay-aracne with respect to the standard algorithm. as we can see the standard algorithm has a good precision but a very low recall, this means that even if it is able to correctly recover some true connections, the overall percentage of recovered connections is not enough to obtain a useful f-score.

timedelay-aracne performance results seem to be correlated with network gene numbers.

timedelay-aracne performance results show a partially direct correlation with time points.

real expression profiles
in order to test timedelay-aracne performance on expression profiles we selected an eleven genes network from yeast s. cerevisiae cell cycle, more precisely part of the g <dig> step. selected genes are: cln <dig>  cdc <dig>  mbp <dig>  swi <dig>  clb <dig>  cdc <dig>  sic <dig>  swi <dig>  cln <dig>  cln <dig>  clb <dig>  to try to infer the gene network controlling yeast cell cycle regulation, we choose genes whose mrna levels respond to the induction of cln <dig> and clb <dig> that are two well-characterized cell cycle regulators  <cit> . late in g <dig> phase, the cln3-cdc <dig> protein kinase complex activates two transcription factors, mbf  and sbf , and these promote the transcription of some genes important for budding and dna synthesis  <cit> . entry into s phase requires the activation of the protein kinase cdc28p through binding with cyclin clb <dig> or clb <dig>  as well as the destruction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor sic <dig>  <cit> . swi <dig> associates with swi <dig> to form the scb-binding factor complex that activates g <dig> cyclin genes cln <dig> and cln <dig> in late g <dig>  mbp <dig>  a transcription factor related to swi <dig>  forms the mcb-binding factor complex with swi <dig>  which activates dna synthesis genes and s-phase cyclin genes clb <dig> and clb <dig> in late g <dig>  <cit> . in budding yeast, commitment to dna replication during the normal cell cycle requires degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase  inhibitor sic <dig>  the g <dig> cyclin-cdk complexes cln1-cdk <dig> and cln2-cdk <dig> initiate the process of sic <dig> removal by directly catalyzing sic <dig> phosphorylation at multiple sites  <cit> . in figure  <dig> we report network graphs reconstructed by the timedelay-aracne, tsni and banjo. we also report the kegg pathway of the cell-cycle in yeast. we consider this last information as a true table to compare the results of the algorithm with respect to the others. tsni and banjo are used with default settings reported in their manuals. timedelay-aracne recovers many gene-gene edges as reported in table  <dig>  we don't use ppv, recall and f-score to evaluate the algorithm. differences between true table and inferred network could be eventually due to the possible incongruence between experimental data and true table. we also tested the proposed algorithm using eight genes by e. coli sos pathway  <cit> . in the e. coli after the cell is exposed to dna damaging agents there is the activation of the sos pathway. such dna damaging involves the induction of about  <dig> genes  <cit> . many of these gene products are involved in dna damage tolerance and repair . the sos response to dna damage requires the reca and lexa gene products. near the promoters of the sos response genes there is a site  bonded by the repressor protein lexa that interferes with the binding of rna polymerase  <cit> . selected genes are: uvrd, lexa, umudc, reca, uvra, uvry, ruva, polb as in  <cit> . in figure  <dig> we report the sos pathway reconstruction by the three algorithms and the relative bibliographic control. in table  <dig> there is a detailed description of the eight genes network connections showing that timedelay-aracne recovers these network topologies better than other algorithms.

as a further experimental evaluation, we consider a recent significant contribution to system biology given in  <cit>  where the authors built in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae a synthetic network, called irma, for in vivo "benchmarking" of reverse-engineering and modeling approaches. they tested transcription of network genes upon culturing cells in presence of galactose or glucose. galactose activates the gal1- <dig> promoter, cloned upstream of a swi <dig> mutant in the network, and it is able to activate the transcription of all the five network genes. the network is composed of five genes regulating each other; it also is negligibly affected by endogenous genes. the authors measure both time series and steady-state expression data after introducing different perturbations to the network. this is one of the first attempts at building a reference data set having a fair true table. in particular there are two set set of gene profiles called switch on and switch off respectively. the former correspond to the shifting of the growing cells from glucose to galactose medium, the latter corresponds to the reverse shift. in figure 5-a the true irma network is reported whereas in figure 5-b the inferred network by the proposed algorithm is reported. as we can observe, four edges are correctly inferred, one edge has a wrong direction and one is a false positive  and two edges are missing.  edge represents a protein-protein connection just like gal80→gal <dig>  however this connection in principle cannot have a versus, and this is the reason why the author report a "simplified" network, depicted in figure 5-c, where the complex gal4/gal <dig> is introduced. again in figure 5-d the inferred network is reported. here timedelay-aracne correctly recover four edges, has one false positive and there are two missing edges, however  is a two genes auto-regulation, that is not considered in the developed algorithm. irma's data comes out from very strictly controlled experimental conditions so we can use ppv, recall and f-score to evaluate the algorithm. the overall results, in terms of ppv, recall and f-score, are summarized in table  <dig>  it is to underline that the switch off data are a challenge. there is to take in account the lack of a great stimulus as in the switch on data. in the switch off condition correlation between genes is obviously less evident, so if we have used the bootstrapped mi as threshold, it would surely overcome any signal.

it is important to underline that cdc <dig> is the only yeast cyclin-dependent kinase and it is present during the whole cell cycle. from the kegg pathway it is clear that cdc <dig> makes complex with cyclins  but these complexes are of course at proteomic level and they aren't related to the cdc <dig> transcription but mostly to the cyclins transcript levels. according to this, timedelay-aracne misconnections couldn't be considered errors.

timedelay-aracne correctly infers the lexa to reca edge but can not infer reca to lexa edge due a limitation of the algorithm. timedelay-aracne also infers lexa to uvry edge but the direction is wrong.

accuracy of the considered algorithm on the dataset of the irma network.

according to this we try a compromise: no threshold was applied but we just apply the dpi pruning. we can observe that timedelay-aracne reaches good performance, in terms of recall and f-score, in all considered cases with respect to the results reported in  <cit>  and to the aracne results over the same networks. this means that it reaches a good compromise between ppv and recall.

CONCLUSIONS
the goal of timedelay-aracne is to recover gene time dependencies from time-course data producing oriented graph. to do this we introduce time mutual information and influence concepts. first tests on synthetic networks and on yeast cell cycle, sos pathway data and irma give good results but many other tests should be made. particular attention is to be made to the data normalization step because the lack of a rule. according to the little performance loss linked to the increasing gene numbers shown in this paper, next developmental step will be the extension from little-medium networks to medium networks.

