BACKGROUND
there is an ever-increasing demand for high-throughput, standardized assays for the quantitative detection of multiple infectious agents in different disciplines, ranging from clinical diagnostics, food safety, homeland security, and environmental pest management to the evaluation of treatment efficacy  <cit> .

current technologies for multiplex, quantitative analyses frequently suffer from compromises between the level of multiplexing, throughput and accuracy of quantification. in general, for the detection of nucleic acids, microarrays and macroarrays, can provide very high levels of multiplexing  <cit> , but yield a limited range of accurate quantitative information  <cit>  and relatively low sample throughput compared to real-time, quantitative pcr   <cit> . at present, qpcr provides the most reliable means of target quantification, and it is suitable for the analysis of relatively large sample numbers  <cit> . nowadays, successful multiplex qpcr-based pathogen detection methodologies have been realized  <cit> ; however, due to a limited number of potential dyes, the attainable level of multiplexing is low  <cit> . moreover, the accuracy of quantification in samples with unbalanced target ratios is limited  <cit> . to guarantee accurate quantification therefore, single targets with internal controls should be analyzed, which results in a dramatic increase in the number of reactions needed to be performed in large scale screenings.

recently, a conceptually new, high-throughput platform has become available for real-time pcr, capable of accommodating more than  <dig> reactions per array  <cit> . the openarray™ has  <dig> subarrays, allowing parallel testing of up to  <dig> samples, and each subarray contains  <dig> microscopic through-holes of  <dig> nl volumes . primers are pre-loaded and dried down in user specified holes. the holes function as capillaries, accurately self metering sample and master mix added by an automated loader. hydrophilic holes and hydrophobic array-surface coatings ensure the sample remains isolated through surface tension.

pre-formatted, high-throughput assays are very useful in several fields of clinical and basic research. they lack, however, the necessary flexibility and adaptability to address rapidly changing needs in various diagnostic and ecological fields. further, the needs of these fields are rarely addressed by pre-developed and commercially available assays. therefore, the possibility to develop new applications for a universal, high-throughput real-time pcr platform would be a significant advancement as it increases user flexibility and lowers development cost.

there are a number of hurdles that have hampered the development of efficient and reliable multiplex detection systems. these include the need for high levels of sensitivity as well as specificity, coupled with quantitative, multiplex capabilities and high sample throughput. the assay system described in this report incorporates the most attractive features of several approaches to provide a unique detection platform that combines multiplex technology with stringent diagnostic standards:  high specificity is achieved via the use of ligation-based circularization probes,  real-time pcr methodology provides excellent sensitivity and accurate quantification, and  adaptation to the newly developed openarray™ technology facilitates high-throughput sample screening.

here, we propose that a new, ligation based probe assay can bridge the gap between highly specific target recognition and high-throughput, multiplex pathogen quantification. circularizable ligation probes   <cit>  have previously been applied successfully for multiplex pathogen detection  <cit> , but do not allow quantification. in the currently developed assay, the circularized probes are amplified by using probe-unique primer pairs via real-time pcr, enabling accurate target quantification in a highly multiplex format. the utilized probes have been termed pri-lock probes and they consist of two target complementary regions, one at each terminus of the probe . the target complementary arms are connected via a compound linker sequence, containing unique primer binding sites, a generic sequence and a desthiobiotin moiety for specific capture and release  <cit>  . the primer binding sites were selected to ensure optimal amplification under universal conditions and lack of interaction during the ligation and pcr steps.

in the implemented strategy, mixtures of multiple pri-lock probes are ligated on fragmented dna . target recognition is achieved by specific hybridization of both arm sequences, and efficient ligation occurs only if the end nucleotides perfectly match the target  <cit> . therefore, the probes confer superior specificity  <cit> . after ligation, the probes are reversibly captured via the desthiobiotin moiety, treated with exonuclease  and finally individually assayed via real-time pcr on openarray™ plates .

in this study, we characterize the quantification power of circularizable ligation probes over a range of target concentrations and multiple target ratios and report the development of a high-throughput, quantitative multiplex diagnostic assay. the specificity, sensitivity, linear quantification range, and the dynamic detection range of the developed assay were demonstrated using  <dig> pathogen specific pri-lock probes, ligated on individual and mixed target dnas, followed by real-time pcr on openarrays™.

RESULTS
pri-lock probe design and evaluation of assay performance
the newly designed probing system was experimentally tested using  <dig> pri-lock probes engineered to detect several economically important plant pathogens at different taxonomic levels . the target complementary regions were selected as previously described, and the specificity of the probes was verified  <cit> . unlike padlock probes, each of the pri-lock probes was designed with unique primer binding sites allowing quantitative detection. the pri-lock probes were also engineered with a desthiobiotin moiety between the primers sites for reversible pri-lock probe capture, washing and release using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. the introduction of this additional purification step removes excess non-target dnas and possible enzyme-inhibiting compounds, resulting in increased efficiency of exonuclease treatment and reduced assay background .

nucleotides highlighted in bold font, indicate polymorphism within the target group. nucleotides or gaps owing to deletions used to discriminate from most similar, non-target sequences, are underlined. 

in the demonstrated assay, the pathogen detection and quantification are dependent on the ligation and real-time pcr amplification steps. to provide more precise quantification and to correct for the variability arising from the ligation reaction, we designed an internal ligation control  pri-lock probe  targeting an internal ligation control dna template. in addition, a pcr control was developed to monitor differences in pcr efficiency.

the developed pri-lock probe system was validated in several steps. to evaluate the specificity of the designed pri-lock probes, a mixture of  <dig> probes  was ligated on various individual dna targets. the samples were screened for amplification with all the individual pri-lock probe specific primer pairs in conventional real-time pcr. all the target sequences were specifically detected without exception  and no amplification of ligated pri-lock probes with other, non-cognate primer pairs occurred . in this and all subsequent experiments, the amplification efficiency of the pcr control was found to be uniform  and the ct values were normalized using the ilc as shown in figure 2a. to further ensure specificity towards the targeted pathogens,  <dig> non-target organisms with very similar ligation sites  for the pri-lock mixture were tested. the rest of the probes discriminated their targets from the most similar non-target sequence based on more than  <dig> mismatches and were not tested. in agreement with previous results  <cit> , no signal was observed in the presence of the non-target organisms with very similar ligation sites , demonstrating the specific target recognition by the designed pri-lock probes.

the pri-lock probes were ligated on  <dig> targets/μl ligation mixture. ct values were normalized using the ilc control pri-lock probe. data represent average ct values of three pcr replicates in the conventional real-time platform  and of four pcr replicates in the biotrove openarray™ . standard deviations are indicated between brackets. ab: samples run on the conventional real-time pcr platform. bt: samples tested on the biotrove openarray™ platform. multiplex mix 1: p. soj. and m. ror. dna. multiplex mix 2: p. inf., r. sol. ag 2- <dig>  r. sol. ag 4- <dig> and r. sol. ag 4- <dig> dna. multiplex mix 3: ligation mixture containing all the dna targets indicated in table  <dig>  --: not tested.

the pri-lock probes were ligated on  <dig> targets/μl ligation mixture. ct values were normalized using the ilc control pri-lock probe. data represent average ct values of three pcr replicates in the conventional real-time platform  and of four pcr replicates in the biotrove openarray™ . standard deviations are indicated between brackets. ab: samples run on the conventional real-time pcr platform. bt: samples tested on the biotrove openarray™ platform. number of discriminating nucleotides in the ligation region are indicated between brackets. nd: not detectable. cnt: closest non target.

to evaluate the performance of the pri-lock system in a multiplex setting, the probe mix was ligated on several target dna mixtures and analyzed in conventional real-time pcr. multiple target dna sequences were detected with no statistically significant change in the observed ct values compared with the ct values observed for single-target detection .

in diagnostic applications, we expect to quantify several target organisms over large concentration differences. thus, to investigate the sensitivity and linear quantification range of the pri-lock probe system in conventional real-time pcr, a 10-fold dilution series of a phytophthora infestans target was detected and quantified. as shown in figure 2b, a linear quantification range of  <dig> orders of magnitude was achieved with a sensitivity of  <dig> p. infestans target copies/μl initial ligation mixture. moreover, the correlation between the logarithmic target concentration in the ligation mixture and the observed ct value was very high . all the other pri-lock probes showed similar results , demonstrating that the pri-lock system can be used for reliable quantification over a wide concentration range.

application of the pri-lock based multiplex quantitative detection on the biotrove openarray™ platform
on a conventional real-time pcr machine, analysis of a single sample however, would typically require  <dig> separate reactions, one for each probe, making large scale screenings time consuming, laborious and expensive. a solution was offered by the biotrove openarray™ system, which provides a platform for the parallel analysis of  <dig> samples against the  <dig> pri-lock probes. to compare the performance of the pri-lock system in the biotrove openarray™ with the performance in conventional real-time pcr, samples containing single or multiple targets were ligated and analyzed on the biotrove openarray™ platform. the obtained ct values were found to be similar to the ct values observed in the conventional real-time pcr , although the number of target copies per pcr was lower in the openarray™. similarly to the standard real-time pcr platform, a linear quantification range of  <dig> orders of magnitude was achieved with a sensitivity of  <dig> p. infestans target copies/μl initial ligation mixture .

to test the reliability of the developed assay, we analyzed the inter-array variation of the openarray™ platform and the assay-to-assay reproducibility of the pri-lock probe based quantification. to test the inter-array pcr variation, a pri-lock probe mixture ligated on a 10-fold dilution series of p. infestans target was assayed in triplicate on three separate arrays . the standard deviations of the data points ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ct values, indicating a low inter-array variation. next, a dilution series of p. infestans target dnas was quantified by performing each ligation reaction in triplicate. . the observed assay-to-assay variability was low, with standard deviations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ct values. assay-to-assay reproducibility tests using the other pri-lock probes showed similar results , demonstrating the high reproducibility and quantitative reliability of the pri-lock probe detection system across multiple assays.

quantification and validation
to enable accurate pathogen quantification of unknown samples, calibration curves were constructed for each of the  <dig> pri-lock probe targets. because the ligation of different probes is independent, the calibration curves could be constructed based on ct values measured in a multiplex setting. the pri-lock probes were ligated on a 10-fold dilution series of all target dna sequences and amplified in the biotrove openarray™ platform. the obtained calibration curves showed that all the target pathogens were quantified over at least  <dig> orders of magnitude . the correlation between the logarithmic target concentration and the observed ct value was very high for all the detected pathogens .

 = log <dig>   = ct value.

the corresponding calibration equations enable us to determine the absolute number of targets in the analyzed samples. to demonstrate this, we tested samples of known amounts of dna targets in different ratios as well as genomic dnas in different concentration ratios. first, known amounts of phytophthora sojae and erwinia carotovora carotovora dna targets were mixed in reciprocal ratios of 1: <dig> and 1: <dig> . the calculated target numbers/μl ligation mixture based on the observed ct values in combination with calibration formulas, were very similar to the original target inputs . second, the assay was evaluated using artificial mixtures of different ratios of genomic dna concentrations. using the calibration formulas of the corresponding pri-lock probes and the observed ct values, the original target number for each detected target was calculated . in the first example, an input of  <dig> pg fusarium oxysporum gdna/μl ligation mixture resulted in a ct value for the f. oxysporum pri-lock probe of  <dig> . with the corresponding calibration formula for the f. oxysporum pri-lock probe, we calculated that in the original ligation sample  <dig>  copies f. oxysporum targets/μl ligation mixture were present . in the second example,  <dig> times less f. oxysporum dna was added compared to the first sample. in this case, the observed ct value of  <dig>  yielded a calculated copy number of  <dig>  f. oxysporum targets/μl ligation mixture, closely matching the actual  <dig> times difference in target input .

target numbers were calculated using the ct values and the corresponding calibration curves. data represent  <dig> ligation replicates , each with  <dig> qpcr replicates .

target numbers were calculated using the ct values and the corresponding calibration curves. data highlighted in bold font, indicate data outside the linear range. data represent  <dig> ligation replicates , each with  <dig> qpcr replicates . nd: not detectable. e.c.c.:erwinia carotovora carotovora

discussion
in this study, we demonstrated a specific, multiplex, pri-lock probe-based, high-throughput detection assay using the biotrove openarray™ platform for the detection and quantification of plant pathogens. the described application serves as a model for the development of rapid, molecular detection systems that offer an unprecedented combination of specificity, high throughput capabilities and robust target quantification.

to evaluate the designed pri-lock probes and corresponding primer pairs, the probes were ligated on single target sequences and tested using conventional real-time pcr. in all cases, the targets were correctly detected and no false positives were observed, indicating highly specific ligation of the pri-lock probes on their respective targets. furthermore, a ligation reaction performed on non-target organisms with very similar ligation target sites did not result in detectable fluorescent signals. in agreement with the results obtained previously  <cit> , we demonstrated that the pri-lock probe system could discriminate non-target sequences on a single nucleotide difference. this is of prime importance, because non-target organisms with very similar ligation target sites might be present in diagnostic samples. in addition, the influence of multiple targets on pri-lock probe based detection was tested, and it was demonstrated that the presence of multiple targets had no statistically significant influence. our multiplex detection system provided truly independent detection of the different pathogens, with no evidence of inhibition due to possible ligation competition.

quantitative diagnostic assays require a linear range of quantification of several orders of magnitude. ligation of short oligonucleotides was previously used successfully for the characterization of gene expression and gene copy number  <cit> . in these cases, however, the potential target concentration range was much lower. we showed that ligation of pri-lock probes can reflect well the target quantity over at least  <dig> orders of magnitude.

the sensitivity of detection was determined by testing a 10-fold dilution series of ligation targets for all the pri-lock probes. sensitivities of  <dig> and  <dig> target copies/μl initial ligation mixture were achieved, depending on the pri-lock probe. assuming e.g. an average rrna gene copy number of  <dig> times per fungal or oomycete genome, our assay would require between  <dig> and  <dig> target genomes per  <dig> μl initial ligation mixture for reliable detection. for organisms with lower rrna copy numbers, such as bacteria, the assay would require more target genomes input compared to the previous example. however, the final input in the nanoliter real-time reactions is only a fraction of the original ligation mixture . to increase the final assay detection sensitivity, not the ligation sensitivity but the copy number input of ligated pri-locks per nanoliter reaction should be increased. compared with other circularization probe-based assays, we already increased the applied pri-lock probe concentration in our assay  <cit> . increasing the pri-lock probe concentration in the ligation mixture even further does not seem to yield further gains in sensitivity . a pre-amplification of the ligated pri-lock probes therefore, could serve as an alternative strategy to increase the final assay sensitivity. pcr-based amplification however, often leads to amplification biases, changing the ratios between targets in the original biological sample  <cit> . non-pcr-based strategies, like linear amplification, have been shown to minimize amplification biases and generally conserve the target ratios originally present in the template mixture  <cit> . incorporating a strategy with a linear amplification of the ligated probes into the pri-lock based detection assay, therefore, seems to represent a potential way of increasing detection sensitivity, without compromising quantitative power.

the target copy number used as template in the openarray™ is lower than the copy number in the conventional real-time pcr. despite the lower copy number input, the observed ct values and the linear detection range of the developed pri-lock system were about the same for the two real-time platforms . it is known that, in nanoliter reactions, the concentration of the amplified products reaches the threshold concentration needed to provide a significant fluorescent signal sooner than in microliter reactions  <cit> . this property was previously exploited to detect as little as one template molecule in nanoliter pcr amplifications, without the need to increase the pcr assay cycle number  <cit> . together with the improved ct calling algorithm of the biotrove openarray™ platform  <cit> , this results in a performance equal to conventional real-time pcr despite the reduction in template target copy number.

the robustness of the pri-lock system was tested by analyzing the inter-array variation of the openarray™ platform and the assay-to-assay reproducibility of the pri-lock probes. both, the inter-array and assay-to-assay variation were very low, demonstrating the reproducibility and quantitative reliability of the pri-lock detection assay. the developed quantitative multiplex detection assay was validated by testing various artificial mixtures of target dnas. we demonstrated that the calculated number of p. infestans and e. carotovora carotovora input targets, based on the observed ct values and the corresponding calibration formulas, were highly similar to the actual p. infestans and e. carotovora carotovora input target numbers. in a further test, p. infestans and e. carotovora carotovora targets were mixed in different ratios, using target concentrations within the linear detection range of the entire probe set. for both targets, a reciprocal dynamic range of  <dig> was established in a background of  <dig> ng non-target dna. the observed dynamic range is an improvement over most previously developed multiplex pathogen detection assays, where the dynamic range was often limited to 100– <dig>  <cit> . in the biotrove openarray™ platform, target pcr amplifications are completely independent of each other, and, consequently, no pcr competition among the different ligated pri-lock occurs. the dynamic range of detection in the pri-lock detection assay is therefore, as long as the pri-lock probes ligate on their respective targets, practically unlimited. finally, artificial mixtures of genomic dnas in different concentration ratios were tested. the components of the pathogen mixture were identified, and the original target input was calculated using the calibration formulas. moreover, the ratios of the targets among the different ligation samples were correctly identified as well. the consistent, 10-fold discrepancy in observed target amounts between the e. carotovora carotovora and g. proteo bacterial pri-lock probes is a consequence of the different ligation regions for each probe within the genomic dna of e. carotovora carotovora. apparently, the copy number of the 16s rrna gene detected by the g. proteo bacterial pri-lock is approximately 10-fold higher than the reca gene detected by the e. carotovora carotovora pri-lock probe.

circularization probes have previously been applied successfully for the detection of multiple plant pathogens in diagnostic samples  <cit> , but without the ability to quantify target numbers. to our knowledge, this report presents the first time that numerous plant pathogens could be simultaneously and accurately quantified using specific circularization probes in a single assay. for future applications, however, higher multiplexing is intended and therefore, the number of pri-lock probes will be increased. currently, assay background is considered as the biggest obstacle for increasing the level of multiplexing in traditional circularization probe-based diagnostic assays. traditional circularization probes contain generic primer sites for pcr amplification  <cit> . multiplex pcr via general primer sites carries the potential for competition during amplification, with a cumulative increase in background, which reduces assay sensitivity. in contrast, each pri-lock probe carries a unique pair of primer binding sites, unrelated to the sequences of all the other probes. circularized pri-lock probes can therefore be amplified individually. increasing the level of multiplexing would not be expected to increase the background signal. to further guarantee low background, even in highly multiplex settings, we are currently developing a universal taqman® probe which hybridizes to the generic sequence incorporated in all the pri-lock probes. in addition, including a universal taqman® probe should speed up data analysis, and therefore sample throughput, since there is no need to conduct amplicon dissociation curve analysis. given the independent pcr amplification of the ligated pri-lock probes and the three slide capacity of the openarray™ nt cycler, it should be feasible to engineer ultra-high throughput arrays for the quantitative detection of hundreds of targets simultaneously.

CONCLUSIONS
to date, most multiplex pathogen detection has been performed using traditional hybridization microarrays  <cit> . although such platforms typically allow highly multiplex detection, they generally offer relatively low sample throughput and yield limited quantitative information compared to qpcr  <cit> . in this study, we described a high-throughput diagnostic system that combines very specific multiplex pathogen detection with accurate quantification over a range of target concentrations. the pri-lock probes, combined with the openarray™ system, offer a flexible and adaptable design of high-throughput, quantitative multiplex detection assays, since the target recognition is separated from further downstream processing. it should be noted, although we have demonstrated that large quantities of non-target dna do not influence the accuracy of pri-lock probe-based detection, pri-lock performance remains to be examined within field applications. the pri-lock system described is readily modifiable and expandable to include an almost unlimited range of potential targets, providing an easily accessible platform for versatile diagnostic applications.

