BACKGROUND
a number of high-throughput technologies have been developed that are able to measure the abundance of many mrna transcripts within a sample. these include microarray technology <cit> , sage  technology <cit>  and most recently mpss  technology <cit> . compared with microarray technology, sage and mpss technologies have some clear advantages. in these tag-based technologies, transcript abundance is measured by counting signature sequences and there is no need to identify in advance the set of target transcripts. for most microarray technologies, the set of potential targets must be available in advance so that appropriate probe sequences can be used. moreover, microarrays are sensitive to cross-hybridization noise, which limits their ability to detect transcripts with low abundance. compared with both microarray and sage technologies, mpss is more sensitive and can be used to reliably measure weakly expressed transcripts at concentrations as low as  <dig> tpm , while sage is restricted to measure concentrations of  <dig> tpm or more <cit> . mpss is therefore one of the most powerful and promising new technologies for the quantitative analysis of gene expression. it has the potential to determine the relative concentration of almost all mrna molecules within a cell population and has already been used for expression analysis in several organisms <cit> . an interesting feature of this technology, which differentiates it from microarrays, is that it can be more credibly used to study the relative expression level of different genes within a sample. this is difficult to do with microarrays, because sequence-specific effects result in huge variations in binding affinity for different microarray probes and the signal associated with each probe cannot be considered a measure of relative abundance of different genes within a sample. using microarrays, one can only accurately measure the relative abundance of the same gene between samples while tag-based technologies are thought to provide a better measurement of absolute abundance. mpss and sage data have therefore been useful for studying general features of expression level that are more difficult to assess using microarray data <cit> . there exists two basic mpss methods: one is the original classic mpss method and the other is the more recently developed signature mpss method. the difference between these methods is that for the classic method, the entire fragment from the sau3a  site to the poly is cloned and loaded onto the beads for sequencing. in the signature method, during cloning, a mmei enzyme recognition site is added to cut  <dig> or  <dig> bp from the recognition site for sequencing. the signature method is intended to remove any bias during the bead loading or sequencing reactions that may result from different dpnii-to-poly fragment sizes <cit> . although mpss technology has enormous advantages, as described above, it also has its own associated deficiencies. firstly, not all genes can be identified using mpss technology. genes without sau3a  sites cannot be detected. secondly, meyers mpss lab  has pointed out that, for classic mpss data, if there is an unusually long distance  between the 3' end of the transcript  site) and the first sau3a  site, then these genes may not appear in the library. a recent study of human gene expression using classic mpss data found that tags with this distance greater than  <dig> bp are more than threefold less abundant on average than those with lower distances <cit> . that means there is a tag-position bias in mpss technology. however, until now no detailed analysis of this tag-position bias has been reported. in this paper, our purpose is to investigate the tag-position bias in both classic and signature mpss data and to quantify its impact. we define tag-position to be the distance between the 3' end of a transcript and the 3' most sau3a  site. our approach is to investigate the dependence between the measured gene expression level and tag-position on a genome-wide scale. to do that, we use nonlinear regression techniques. there are many gene structure features that are known to be correlated with gene expression levels, such as mrna length and number of exons <cit> . we therefore also compare these influences with tag-position bias to evaluate the relative size of the effect of tag-position bias in mpss data analysis.

RESULTS
we obtain mpss data sets from the meyers lab <cit>  and the ludwing institute for cancer research  <cit> , including arabidopsis classic and signature data, rice signature data and human classic data. through data preparation and preprocessing steps , we mapped tags to transcripts and selected genes for analysis. the complete list of these genes and related parameters are in the supplementary file. 

relationship between tag-position and measured expression level
firstly, we investigate the relationship between tag-position and measured rna abundance using classic and signature mpss data from arabidopsis. we adopted two different methods to analyse and visualise the relationship . one method is to calculate the percentage of low-count genes  for different tag-position ranges. from fig 1a and fig 1b, we see that classic and signature mpss data show different patterns. classic mpss data shows a greater percentage of low-count genes in the high tag-position range while signature mpss data shows a flatter relationship. both classic and signature mpss data show a constant decrease in the percentage of low-count genes in the low tag-position range. the other method is to only consider genes with significantly measured abundance  and apply locally weighted scatter-plot smoothing  to investigate the relationship between tag-position and measured rna abundance. from fig 1c and fig 1d, we see that classic and signature mpss data again show different patterns. classic mpss data tends to decrease in the high tag-position range while signature mpss data shows little change. both classic and signature mpss data show an increase in the low tag-position range. the dynamic range of the mean measured abundance is more than twofold, although this is really an underestimate of the effect since this excludes those genes with zero tag-count identified in fig 1a and fig 1b. we used human classic and rice signature data to confirm the result from arabidopsis classic and signature data. in fig  <dig> the left column shows the human data and the right column shows the rice data with the plots otherwise corresponding to those in fig  <dig>  we see that the results are broadly similar. one difference is that human classic mpss data seems to behave differently in the low tag-position range. this is probably mainly because human has more genes with high tag-position and less with low tag-position, as shown in the gene density curve of fig 2a which is shifted to the right.

comparison of classic and signature mpss data from the same sample
we have confirmed that there is a significant tag-position bias which affects both classic and signature mpss data. here, using classic and signature mpss data from same samples of arabidopsis, we compare and visualise the difference in their measured abundance . from fig 3a, we observe that many data points are far from the middle line, which indicates that the differences in measured abundance between classic and signature mpss are significant. by selecting different tag-position ranges, as shown in fig 3b–e, we can clearly see some difference between the two mpss methods. as a whole, classic mpss data tends to have higher measured abundance in the low tag-position range; but, with the increase of tag-position, measured abundance of signature mpss data tends to increase quickly and is much higher in the high tag-position range. this result supports our previous observations about the relationship between measured expression level and tag-position.

comparison with effects from mrna length and exon number
although we observe the effect due to tag-position, there exist many other factors which could affect gene expression level. here we compare with the effects from mrna length and exon number, which were found to be significant factors that affect gene expression by chiaromonte et al <cit> . from fig 4a, we see that there exists a slight negative linear relationship between expression level and mrna length. from fig 4b, we see that there also exists a mostly negative correlation between expression level and number of exons with a positive correlation at low exon numbers. however, comparison with the tag-position effect illustrated in fig  <dig> shows that tag-position bias is a much more significant effect than these two features. we initially suspected that some of the trend observed between tag-position and measured abundance might relate to a correlation between tag-position and these features, eg. high tag-position is more likely for genes with long transcripts. these weak trends suggest this is unlikely to be the case.

discussion
with the development of gene expression analysis technologies, many studies have been focused on discovering factors that affect gene expression levels. some studies have looked at gene structure factors such as length of gene, length of mrna, number of exons and distance between genes on the genome, which may genuinely affect expression level <cit> . other studies, like this one, focus on those biases existing in the experimental technologies themselves <cit> . mpss technology has some great advantages as a method for measuring mrna transcript abundance. it is readily allows identification of most of a cell's rarely expressed mrna and it has been successfully used to analyze gene expression for many different organisms. therefore it is important to consider technical biases and deficiencies that should be taken into consideration. one problem is that a small percentage of of mpss tags could be mapped to more than one part of the genome. another problem is that some mrna transcripts without sau3a  sites cannot be analyzed. also, as confirmed in this paper, mrna transcripts having long distances between the 3' end and the first sau3a  sites may not be detected in the classic method. we have analysed the association between measured rna abundance and tag-position. using data sets from both classic and signature methods, from arabidopsis, rice and human, our analysis indicates that there exist consistent tag-position biases in both methods. this bias is greater than the effect of morphological parameters described by chiaromonte et al <cit> . in fact, the only factor considered from that study with a comparable effect was the length of mrna transcript, while exon number has a much weaker influence than tag-position. tag-position bias therefore plays an important role in determining the tag count in mpss technology and should not be disregarded when analysing mrna abundance. we think that the main reason for the tendency of decrease of measured abundance of classic data and flatter measured abundance of signature data in the high tag-position range is that pcr amplification is inefficient for longer sequences. indeed, the signature method was originally designed to solve this problem and our results confirm that the signature mpss method fixes the main problem with the classic mpss method. however, the reason that both classic and signature data have a tendency towards increasing measured abundance with tag-position in the low tag-position range is unclear. the nonlinear regression curves, obtained by lowess, could be used to normalise tag-count in order to correct for this bias. however, little can be done to correct for missing or very low tag counts and this is an especially big problem for genes with high tag-positions in the classic method or low tag-positions under both methods.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis reveals that there exists significant tag-position bias in both classic and signature mpss data. we confirm that, in the classic mpss method, the tags which are far from the 3' end are associated with relatively low tag-counts on average and as the distance increases they are increasingly likely to have very low or zero tag-count. we also found that, in both classic and signature mpss methods, the tags which are closer to the 3' end are associated with relatively low tag-count and an increased likelihood of zero tag-count. our findings confirm that tag-position has an important influence in mpss technology and we argue that this effect should be taken into consideration when measuring mrna transcript abundance using mpss technology, both in the classic and the signature mpss methods. for example, statistical regression methods applied to mpss data could include tag-position as an additional regression variable in order to reduce bias.

