BACKGROUND
molecular studies have made significant contributions to our understanding of higher-level turtle evolutionary relationships  <cit> , but there are still some areas of uncertainty or apparent conflict between data sets. one of the major outstanding issues is the placement of the enigmatic "big-headed turtle" of asia . platysternon megacephalum is the sole living representative of a poorly-studied turtle lineage , and its phylogenetic position within turtles is not easily established. it ranges from myanmar, thailand, laos, and vietnam to southern china where it inhabits rocky mountain streams. platysternon feeds on a variety of prey, including freshwater crustaceans and molluscs. to effect this durophagous diet, platysternon has evolved powerful jaw muscles and a correspondingly hypertrophied cranium. in addition to its large head, it also has an unusually long tail for a turtle.

two hypotheses are the strongest contenders for the phylogenetic position of platysternon, with proponents of each position coming from molecular and morphological systematists. based on some studies of its morphology  <cit>  and mitochondrial dna  <cit> , platysternon has been phylogenetically linked to new world snapping turtles . indeed, platysternon and chelydrids  are superficially similar since both have large heads and long tails. however, other morphological comparisons  <cit>  and studies of serology  <cit>  have supported a relationship to the more diverse  group that includes pond turtles and tortoises . testudinoids are found on all continents except australia and antarctica, but are particularly diverse in asia and north america.

multiple studies have differed in the placement of platysternon, with the results contrasted in figure  <dig>  recent studies of the phylogenetic position of platysternon using nudna  strongly supported testudinoid affinities  <cit> . one of these studies  <cit>  gave a detailed review of the conflicting signals from other data sets . these authors acknowledged the dissenting voices on the "platysternon as a chelydrid" scheme from morphologists, but it should be noted that all such morphological hypotheses were not proposed in an explicit cladistic framework. meanwhile, the most recent cladistic analysis of osteological characters  <cit>  could not resolve the position of platysternon beyond placing it in the same major clade  that includes most extant turtle lineages including the testudinoids and chelydrids, but also softshell turtles , mud turtles , and sea turtles . the combined phylogenetic analysis of short sequences of mtdna  placed platysternon next to chelydrids  <cit> .

in order to pursue a definitive resolution of this issue, we sequenced the complete mt genome of platysternon and nearly complete mt genome of a chelydrid and kinosternoid and compared these data to mt genomes published for other turtle lineages. in the process, we discovered several unusual mt genomic features that further distinguish this enigmatic turtle. we describe these genomic features and review the phylogenetic position of platysternon.

RESULTS
phylogenetic position of platysternon
our phylogenetic analyses of  <dig> – <dig>  kilobases  of mtdna for  <dig> turtles  using maximum parsimony , bayesian inference , and maximum likelihood  methods place platysternon within testudinoidea . although the mp bootstrap values for testudinoid affinities are not strong, the traditional hypothesis linking platysternon with chelydridae was rejected by statistical tests of hypothesis compatibility . although our tree agrees with the nudna  <cit>  in refuting an affinity to chelydrids and placing platysternon firmly within testudinoidea, our results differ by weakly placing platysternon as sister to the emydidae rather than sister to testuguria. while mp constraint searches that retained only those trees wherein platysternon is sister to the testuguria are significantly longer than the unconstrained estimate of turtle phylogeny , identical ml constraint searches failed to produce topologies that were significantly worse solutions than the unconstrained ml tree . furthermore, the placement of platysternon with testuguria received weak nodal support in the nudna studies   <cit>  so the difference here is not seen as an important conflict between mtdna and nudna. other conflicts between the mtdna and nudna involve the outgroups of testudinoidea within cryptodira, though both agree that trionychia is the most basal cryptodiran clade  <cit>  . where the nudna phylogenies differ from our tree, the nodal support in the nudna studies is either weak  or else the topology differs depending on which phylogenetic method of searching was used. as would be expected, a combined analysis  can not resolve these conflicts . additional large mtdna sequences as well as those from additional nudna markers may help resolve these discrepancies.

our phylogeny reconciles the previous conflict between mtdna and nudna  <cit>  by agreeing with the nudna data that platysternon is a testudinoid. the fact that our large mt alignment results in a phylogenetic hypothesis that is congruent with the nudna rather than the analyses based on small  mt sequences highlights the utility of generating large mt sequences for higher-level systematics  <cit> . because independent genetic markers  support testudinoid affinities, and there is no strong morphological argument for chelydrid affinities  <cit> , the continued recognition of platysternon as a chelydrid is no longer tenable.

the paleontological record is consistent with the "platysternon as a testudinoid" hypothesis. the oldest fossil referred to the stem lineage of platysternon , are from the paleogene of asia   <cit> , at about the same time we find the oldest testudinoids  <cit> . chelydrids, on the other hand, are significantly more ancient, extending back into the middle cretaceous   <cit> . consequently, the recognition of platysternon as a testudinoid alleviates a major temporal disparity of ~ <dig> million years. despite this apparent congruence, it is important to realize that the reported fossil record of platysternids is poor and in need of review and confirmation  <cit> . the described material from asia is based largely on fragmentary specimens that have not been subjected to rigorous phylogenetic analysis  <cit> . meanwhile, potentially relevant fossil specimens of possible platysternids in europe  <cit>  and north america  have been mentioned in the literature, but have not been adequately described. the possibility of early platysternids in north america is especially intriguing because our study supports a sister relationship to chrysemys, our representative of the largely north american clade emydidae. however, until more specimens are brought to light, the paleontological perspective on platysternid origins remains highly speculative.

genomic features of platysternon mtdna
the mtdnas of vertebrates almost universally contain the same set of  <dig> genes plus a large, non-coding portion commonly called the "control region" because it contains signals that regulate transcription and replication  <cit> . gene rearrangements are not unheard of, but are very uncommon. the mitochondrial genome of platysternon is unusual by having large-scale gene rearrangements and a duplication of the control region , the two copies of which share  <dig> nucleotides of identical sequence, and beyond which have no apparent sequence similarity. one of these non-coding regions  occupies the typical position of the control region  and so we call this "cr1" and the other  we call "cr <dig> " the ~ <dig>  bp paralogs have  <dig> identical positions in the middle that are flanked on either side by polymorphic sequences.

one protein coding gene  and five trna genes are in derived positions. these have transposed from two portions of the genome  that are ancestrally near to one another, but separated by nad <dig>  trne, cob . in platysternon, both of these regions are inserted between trni and trnq, are separated by a block of non-coding sequence. this is the first true gene rearrangement reported for a turtle. in the pancake tortoise, malacochersus, the cr and trnf are duplicated  <cit> ; however, since the second cr of the pancake tortoise is highly degraded, the two trnf are essentially adjacent . the translocation of the cr and mt genes to between trni and trnq is interesting because this is the same position that contains a duplicated cr and rearranged trna genes in another reptile clade, the advanced snakes  <cit> , and because this has been noted otherwise as a rearrangement "hot spot."

the arrangement of the platysternon genome can be modelled by the "duplication-random loss" model  <cit>  whereby a duplication and transposition of part of the genome occurred, then additional rearrangements resulted from the loss of supernumerary genes. since the transposed genes in platysternon are ancestrally separated by only a block of three genes, it may be that the originally duplicated and transposed region included the entire portion from trnh through the cr. this observation bolsters speculation that the non-coding region now found between nad <dig> and trnt is the degenerating vestige of what was the duplicated nad <dig>  trne, and/or cob and, similarly, that the non-coding region between nad <dig> and nad <dig> is the vestige of a copy of trnh, trns, trnl, and/or nad <dig>  the study of recent duplication events demonstrates that when parts of the genome are duplicated, redundant sequences are rapidly lost  <cit> , and cr duplications have been otherwise associated with gene rearrangements  <cit> .

it is unusual that there should be two similar control regions in platysternon, and uncertain whether this indicates a very recent duplication, maintenance by selection, or some error correction mechanism resulting in their evolving in concert. duplicated control regions have previously been reported for just  <dig> clades spanning the diversity of metazoa  <cit> . some experimental data suggest that mt genomes with two crs have a selective advantage in replication over those with one cr  <cit> , but there are clearly cases where one copy of a duplicated cr is degrading  <cit> .

the maintenance of duplicated sequences is not restricted to crs. a recent study reported seven instances from diverse metazoans, in which reported sequences of coding regions were duplicated  <cit> . to this we can add the duplication of trnk in the reptile sphenodon  <cit> . whether all of these duplications represent cases of stable functional redundancy in coding regions or merely result from recent duplications and have not degraded into pseudogenes remains to be tested.

CONCLUSIONS
platysternon is not related to chelydrids, but is instead a member of the testudinoidea, the group that includes pond turtles and tortoises. testudinoids diversified rapidly in asia and north america during the paleogene   <cit> . additional taxon sampling will help establish the phylogeny for extant testudinoids, including whether platysternon is actually more closely related to emydids or testugurians. however, the best understanding of the timing and geography of this radiation will require the additional description and analysis of important, but neglected, fossil specimens.

the features of the platysternon mitochondrial genome expand our knowledge of variation within vertebrate mitochondrial genomes, adding a new case of duplicated control regions. moreover, the unusual mt genome of platysternon and the pancake tortoise  are good examples of how additional sequencing of turtle mt genomes can improve our knowledge of mitochondrial variation and evolution. at the time of this writing, just ~6% of turtle diversity  have large  mt sequences reported .

