BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar dublin  is a zoonotic bacterium which is host adapted to cattle. although it infects cattle at all ages, severe clinical disease is mostly seen in calves  <cit> . the bacterium occasionally infects humans where it causes severe illness and high case mortality due to septicaemia  <cit> .

an epidemiologically important feature of s. dublin is its ability to cause subclinical persistent infection in cattle   <cit> . such carriers probably harbour the bacterium in cells of the reticular-endothelial system such as the liver and spleen  <cit>  and it is assumed that reactivation of the infection can occur  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that reactivation may be caused by stress due to transport or immunosuppression  <cit> . during reactivation animals may shed bacteria and contaminate the environment, thus constituting a source of infection for other animals  <cit> . identification of such carriers is assumed to be critical in attempts to control and eradicate the infection  <cit> .

bacteriological culture is a common method to diagnose salmonellosis, but due to intermittent shedding of bacteria in milk and faeces by carrier animals, sensitivity of conventional bacteriological culturing is poor in such animals  <cit> . however, serological analyses have indicated that carrier animals elicit a more persistent antibody response to s. dublin lipopolysaccharide  than recently infected animals that have eliminated the infection  <cit> . this has formed the basis for recommendations for control of s. dublin, i.e. identifying carriers by demonstration of persistently high antibody levels against s. dublin lps by elisa on blood or milk  <cit> . the positive predictive value of the test is, however, questionable, meaning that not all animals detected as carriers based on antibodies are truly infected. it has been shown that the bacterium can be isolated at slaughter from around 50% of such persistently seropositive cattle  <cit> . a low positive predictive value has negative economic implications for the producers, because productive animals may be culled at disadvantageous times. on the other hand, a low negative predictive value would allow for undesired and unknown transmission of infection in the face of a test-and-cull strategy for handling of carrier animals.

effective and cost efficient eradication of s. dublin infections in cattle requires detailed knowledge about the pathogenesis of persistent s. dublin infection, including risk assessment on animals with persistently high antibody titres, and the availability of tests with high predictive values for large scale screenings. the aim of this study was to evaluate if reactivation of a latent infection with s. dublin occurs following transportation and immunosuppression in naturally infected cows with persistently high antibody responses to s. dublin o-antigen based lps. the study also adds further knowledge to the distribution of s. dublin bacteria in tissues of cows with persistently high antibody responses.

RESULTS
antibody levels
nine animals from four dairy herds were included in the study. the antibody levels  at time of arrival were above  <dig> for  <dig> animals, while it was  <dig> for one cow . the odc% had either slightly decreased or had remained at approximately the same level through the preceding  <dig> days .

clinical symptoms
the animals were of normal condition at arrival. during the study period mild symptoms related to localised sarcoptes mange , chronic mastitis or positive california mastitis test  and traumatic injuries of the distal parts of the legs  were observed. the most frequent abnormal clinical finding was reduced appetite . furthermore, two cows had reduced rumen motility. diarrhoea occurred in two animals  after treatment with dexamethasone sodium phosphate . cases nos.  <dig> and  <dig> aborted on day  <dig> 

haematology
the haematological profiles were within the normal range from day  <dig> through  <dig>  but a slight increase in the number of segmented neutrophilic granulocytes  occurred on day  <dig>  on day  <dig> a marked increase in sng due to leucocytosis and neutrophilia was observed .

necropsy
necropsy revealed a range of lesions of which some were incidental findings as chronic multifocal interstitial nephritis , and chronic mastitis , while others were most likely related to the relocation of animals and dsp treatment  and diffuse low-grade hepatic steathosis ). four cows had rumenitis probably due to rumenal acidosis before or during the study .

bacteriological culture
bacteriological culture of milk and faeces samples collected throughout the study failed to demonstrate any excretion of salmonella sp. bacteriological examination of 14– <dig> organ specimens from each animal sampled at necropsy revealed the presence of s. dublin in three animals originating from one herd. s. dublin was isolated from mammary lymph node and the liver of cows no.  <dig> and  <dig> respectively, while it was isolated from both the liver and spleen of no.  <dig>  the aborted foetus of cow no.  <dig> was not examined. no other serotypes of salmonella were found.

cattle with persistently high antibody responses to s. dublin lps are expected to harbour the bacterium and control strategies for s. dublin are often based on this hypothesis  <cit> . we were only able to isolate s. dublin from three out of eight cows and one heifer even though all fell within the detection criteria for carriers. this may be due to an insufficient sensitivity of bacteriological examination, but it may also reflect a complete elimination of bacteria by previously infected animals, in particular in adult cows. a previous study in danish cattle demonstrated s. dublin in  <dig> of  <dig>  persistently seropositive adult cows at necropsy despite extensive tissue culturing, while  <dig> of  <dig>  of the young cattle  were culture positive at necropsy  <cit> . the animals all came from herds with recent clinical outbreaks of s. dublin and no control strategies in place. in another study,  <dig> of  <dig> persistently seropositive adult cattle were culture positive at necropsy from animals that had s. dublin isolated from both milk or faeces during the preceding six months indicating active infections prior to necropsy  <cit> . they all came from the same large dairy herd which suffered from severe salmonella dublin related clinical problems and the herd used vaccination of cows as part of the control strategies. thus, the study group in that study was not comparable to the cattle used in the present study. the persistent discrepancy between the serological and bacteriological findings may indicate that only few cows with long-term high antibody responses are truly infected with s. dublin, thus making antibody based testing unreliable in adult cattle. the present study adds knowledge about persistently seropositive cows in herds that have performed control strategies for an extended period of time. these cows continued to be seropositive even under circumstances where herd mates had decreasing or low antibody titers to s. dublin. it could be postulated that some cows with a strong antibody response in fact could be desirable, as they may reflect a superior capability to eliminate s. dublin.

it is likely that excretion of bacteria in faeces and milk reflects the localisation of the infection in the gastrointestinal tract or the mammary gland, or a temporary infection from the environment. it is obvious that a surface lesion such as an intestinal mucosal ulceration is more likely to release bacteria to the environment than a lesion in internal organs such as the spleen. s. dublin was not found in faeces of the cattle in this study, neither before nor after immunosuppression. in accordance with this, bacteria were not isolated from intestinal tissue or intestinal lymph nodes at necropsy. it is likely that the animals in this study did not have infectious foci in the intestinal tract. it is possible, that the culture negative results in faeces found in other studies may have a similar explanation and that discrepancy between culture positive faeces samples and culture negative intestinal tissue specimens may be due to passive transfer of orally acquired bacteria in the intestinal content without mucosal colonisation.

the detection of s. dublin in the liver and spleen probably reflects a previous haematogenous spread. this may either have been restricted to the portal circulation with localisation only in the liver or have been systemic with localisation in multiple tissues. s. dublin was only isolated from a mammary lymph node in one cow. this may reflect a previous s. dublin associated mastitis, but it is more likely that the lymph node localisation is associated with a previous bacteraemia with a primary location in the lymph node or secondary to a localisation in the drainage area.

an important epidemiological aspect of bovine salmonellosis may be the reactivation and excretion of bacteria following stress and immune suppression  <cit> . reactivation apparently occurs rapidly. in an experimental study faecal excretion in carrier animals happened within one day after transportation  <cit> . therefore, a study period of  <dig> to  <dig> days was considered sufficient to detect reactivation if it occurred. the animals in this study were transported, relocated into isolation facilities and finally treated with dsp to induce immunodepression and subsequent reactivation of a latent infection. these events led to changes in the haematological profiles  consistent with dsp induced immune suppression, but reactivation of the infection apparently did not occur. this may be explained by the location of bacteria in the actual animals combined with the mechanisms by which dsp induces immunosuppression. dsp induces a pronounced down regulation of surface l-selectin on circulating neutrophils, which impede their ability to adhere to the endothelium. consequently, their migration into tissues is hindered and extravascular immunodepression develops  <cit> . if it is assumed that bacteriological examination identified the only infected tissues  then excretion of bacteria in milk or faeces would require haematogenous spread to the intestine and mammary gland. thus, even if the bacteria were reactivated, they had to enter the blood to reach these organs. since dsp does not impede the killing mechanisms of neutrophils  <cit> , bacteria entering the blood probably would have been eliminated. the situation is likely to be different in animals harbouring s. dublin in tissues with an external surface such as the intestine, tonsils and mammary gland. dsp treatment of such animals may reactivate the infection, and because haematogenous spread is not needed, such animals may release bacteria. this hypothesis is in accordance with the observations by spier et al.   <cit>  who observed a significant increase in excretion of s. dublin in milk of udder infected cattle following dsp treatment. in the experimental studies of the effect of transportation on shedding patterns in cattle, it is quite possible that the animals had bacteria in the gut even when they were not shedding before exposed to the stressors  <cit>  therefore making it easy to return to a shedding state after transportation. our study indicates that true reactivation of a latent infection located in organs outside external surfaces is not likely to occur under farm conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
this study raises several questions regarding the use of repeated antibody measurements for detection of cows persistently infected with s. dublin and the pathogenesis of reactivation. the isolation of s. dublin from only  <dig> of  <dig> adult animals despite intensive bacteriological culturing of both faecal matter, milk and target organs questions the reliability of both serology and bacteriology in this age group. it is important to have reliable diagnostic tools for identification of persistently infected animals to control the spread of the infection within and between herds efficiently, and the study emphasises these needs.

though the sample size is not large, the study also indicates that the risk of excretion of bacteria may depend on the localisation of infectious foci. it is likely that cattle harbouring s. dublin in organs without an external surface are of lower risk of releasing bacteria to the environment than animals with intestinal or mammary infections. thus, reactivation and excretion of bacteria is probably not only a matter of immunosuppression and latent infection but mainly a question of tissue localisation.

finally, it is possible that other mechanisms of immunosuppression different from those of dsp may lead to reactivation of latent infection, but the pathogenesis of such a mechanism in relation to salmonella infection and reactivation remains to be described. in order to better understand the mechanisms, it appears to be important to differentiate between true latent infections and active persistent infections with continuous or intermittent shedding.

