BACKGROUND
the obligate intracellular bacterium chlamydophila  psittaci, the causative agent of psittacosis in birds and humans, is a well-established pathogen responsible for regular outbreaks of disease in psittacine birds and domestic poultry  <cit> , as well as cases of atypical pneumonia in exposed persons  <cit> .

the current definition of the species c. psittaci includes the former avian serovars of chlamydia psittaci, but even under the recently revised taxonomic classification of the family chlamydiaceae  <cit>  it remains a heterogeneous taxon in terms of host range and virulence. to facilitate epidemiological studies, strains of the agent were subdivided into serovars a, b, c, d, e, and f on the basis of their immune reaction with a panel of monoclonal antibodies  recognising specific epitopes of the major outer membrane protein . each serovar was assumed to exhibit more or less stringent host specificity  <cit> . later on, sayada et al.  <cit>  suggested restriction fragment length polymorphism , i.e. pcr amplification of the ompa gene with subsequent restriction enzyme analysis, for differentiation among c. psittaci isolates. vanrompay et al.  <cit>  were able to demonstrate by comparison of serotyping and pcr-rflp that the serovars had genetic equivalents in the corresponding genotypes, which were defined by their restriction enzyme cleavage pattern. thus, nine different genotypes have been generally accepted to date, seven of which are thought to predominantly occur in a particular order or class of aves and two in non-avian hosts, i.e. genotype a in psittacine birds, b in pigeons, c in ducks and geese, d in turkeys, e in pigeons, ducks and others, f in parakeets, wc in cattle, and m <dig> in rodents. in addition, geens et al.  <cit>  suggested the introduction of genotype e/b to represent a group of isolates from ducks. most of the avian genotypes have also been identified sporadically in isolates from cases of zoonotic transmission to humans.

while serotyping can be conducted with cultured strains only, pcr-rflp was also used with dna extracted from clinical samples  <cit> . however, there are obvious limitations as substantial amounts of a pcr amplicon are needed to produce distinctive and reproducible rflp patterns on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels. related genotypes tend to have quite similar patterns, which may be difficult to distinguish, and typing results based on different enzyme patterns  may be contradictory. genetically aberrant strains cannot be genotyped using the above-mentioned pcr-rflp procedure. sequencing of the ompa gene and alignment with type strain sequences can also be used to identify the genotype of c. psittaci strains  <cit> , since genotype-specific sites are located in the gene's variable domains  vd <dig> and vd <dig>  however, all these approaches have been used in a rather pragmatic manner, i.e. with the aim of working out distinctive features of isolates for epidemiological purposes, while disregarding the scope of natural sequence variability and avoiding a molecular definition of individual genotypes at the nucleotide level.

in this situation, dna microarray technology can be expected to provide added value because of its highly parallel approach, which implies the potential to exploit minor sequence differences at multiple sites for discrimination among samples  <cit> . using the arraytube™ platform, we recently demonstrated that the performance parameters of an at microarray assay for species identification of chlamydiae were comparable to real-time pcr in terms of sensitivity and superior in specificity  <cit> . this prompted us to take further advantage of the at technology's high discriminatory capacity  <cit> , rapidity and relatively low cost by exploring its suitability for ompa genotyping analysis. however, we immediately realized that a comprehensive analysis of currently known ompa sequences was necessary before considering the definition of specific probes for each genotype.

in the present study, we report the results of an extensive investigation on sequence similarity among all available ompa sequences from species of the genus chlamydophila and describe the development of a dna microarray-based assay for ompa genotyping of c. psittaci.

RESULTS
analysis of ompa sequences of chlamydophila strains
the ncbi database was searched for ompa sequences by repeatedly running blast queries with sequences from already known entries. in the course of this process it became evident that some c. psittaci sequences were more similar to ompa of other chlamydophila spp. than to any genotype of c. psittaci, which is in line with earlier publications  <cit> . therefore, we extended our analysis to include all sequences from the genus chlamydophila.

comparison of all available genbank entries revealed  <dig> unique sequences of ompa genes. the alignment of these sequences was the basis for calculation of a sequence similarity matrix  and construction of a split network graph . these graphs are useful tools for presentation of sequence similarity-based relatedness, but are not designed to characterize phylogenetic relationships. we minimized distorting effects due to alignment of differently sized sequences by excluding the shortest items and selecting a 992-nt sequence window which contains all variable domains. the most striking feature of the split network graph is the great diversity among ompa variants of c. psittaci, which clearly exceeds variations among other species of the genus. while c. pneumoniae, c. abortus, c. pecorum, c. felis, and c. caviae each are located on a single branch, several genotypes of c. psittaci form their own separate branches. at least  <dig> distinct clades belonging to this species can be identified, of which only  <dig> can be directly attributed to currently accepted genotypes, i.e. c, d, f, m <dig>  and wc. another remarkable feature is the abe cluster, i.e. a grouping harboring the closely related genotypes a, b, e, and e/b. similarity of the underlying ompa sequences is above 98% within the cluster and higher than  <dig> % within the clade of genotypes b, e and e/b. to visualize these relationships, a magnified scale was used for presentation in fig. 1a.

the m <dig> and mat <dig> sequences represent less closely related side branches of the abe stembranch. strains of genotypes c, d and f are all located clearly separated from each other, and a number of strains not assigned to one of the accepted genotypes  are placed fairly isolated, forming their own branches at considerable genetic distances from the established genotypes. genotype f , as well as strains yp <dig> and r <dig>  were found to be side branches of the c. abortus branch.

as a result of this sequence analysis, we identified  <dig> individual type strains, each of which represents a unique ompa sequence. the findings are summarized in table  <dig>  in this classification, genotypes a, d and e/b can be further divided into subgroups, and the six strains at the bottom of the table represent untyped c. psittaci strains.

* provisional genotypes

all in all, the present sequence analysis has shown that the extent of intra-species variation goes beyond the area covered by currently accepted genotypes.

selection of hybridization probes
using the global alignment of ompa sequences , we selected a panel of  <dig> oligonucleotide probes for identification of c. psittaci genotypes, which are shown in table  <dig>  the probe binding sites are located in vd <dig> and vd <dig> of the ompa gene. a compilation showing the number of mismatches between targets of genotypes and hybridization probes is given in table  <dig>  these data can be used for two purposes: a) to identify the genotype of the target dna, and b) to predict signal intensities because perfect matches between probe and target will produce the strongest signals.

*the exact binding position is referenced by the uniform sequence address . this is the standard sequence notation scheme of the emboss software suite .

optimization of microarray hybridization
to ensure the availability of sufficient amounts of target dna for hybridization against a set of covalently bound oligonucleotide probes in a spatially accessible structure, amplification was conducted as duplex pcr. using primer pairs vd1-f/vd2-r and 201chomp/ompa-rev, two biotinylated fragments containing vds 1+ <dig> and vds 3+ <dig>  respectively, were produced. the resulting amplification products gave rise to hybridization signals at comparable intensity levels for vd <dig> and vd <dig> probes. in contrast, when pcr products comprising the entire ompa gene were hybridized, signals generated by binding to vd <dig> probes were significantly lower than those of vd <dig> probes . this bias was compensated by doubling molar concentrations of the second primer pair in the above duplex pcr. biotin labeling of target dna via the use of 5'-biotinylated primers was preferred over internal labeling using biotin-dutp because of higher sensitivity  and lower cost.

to optimize the specificity of microarray hybridization, we systematically studied the influence of hybridization temperature  and washing conditions. while hybridization patterns of the various genotypes were satisfactorily discernible at th = 60°c, stringency was insufficient as indicated by poor resolution between signals of perfect-match probes and one-mismatch probes . in contrast, the introduction of high-temperature  and low-salt buffer wash steps after both the hybridization reaction and incubation with the streptavidin-hrp conjugate led to high signal ratios of perfect-match vs. one-mismatch probes, so that single-nucleotide polymorphisms  could be detected . this high-stringency wash protocol even allowed th to be lowered to 50°c in order to gain sensitivity.

microarray hybridization of type strains
type strains of c. psittaci genotypes a, b, c, d, e, e/b, f, m <dig> and wc were examined using the at ompa genotyping array. barplots showing the distinct hybridization patterns are presented in fig.  <dig>  comparison with theoretically expected, i.e. calculated patterns, revealed excellent agreement  in all individual cases. notably, regarding type strain patterns in the light of matching parameters given in table  <dig>  it could be confirmed that signal intensities of completely matching probes were significantly higher than those pertaining to probes having one or two mismatches to the target. for instance, fig.  <dig>  illustrates that the signal of genotype b-specific probe vd2- <dig> with type b strain cp <dig> was more than  <dig> times stronger than with type e strain cpmn, which has a single mismatch in the target sequence. conversely, the same applies to genotype e-specific probe vd2- <dig>  hybridization duplexes of targets and probes differing in two nucleotides were more than  <dig> times weaker than their perfect-match counterparts .

microarray hybridization of field isolates
a group of  <dig> field strains of c. psittaci was examined using the present at microarray . genotypes were identified from the pattern of hybridization signals according to the matching scheme in table  <dig>  in addition, all strains were ompa sequenced, and genotypes were determined according to individual positions in the above global alignment. pcr-rflp results are also given for comparison in table  <dig>  the findings of at ompa genotyping are in complete agreement with the data of the other two tests.

* at hybridization signal pattern assigned according to table 3

discussion
the currently accepted system of genotyping for c. psittaci strains has evolved historically from its serological predecessor. the fact that serotypes have genotype equivalents  <cit> , which has also been reported for, e.g., e. coli  <cit> , proved to be helpful in the transition to the more accessible dna-based typing methods, which are easier to standardize. however, given the serological history, it is not surprising that the ompa sequence analysis has revealed two notable limitations of the present genotype classification, i.e. the lack of complete coverage of naturally occurring strains and a general imbalance resulting from significant variations in genetic distances between individual genotypes. the latter reflects an inherent bias since the ideal panel would include genotypes genetically equidistant from each other.

given the described deficiencies, the question about the usefulness of the present genotyping scheme inevitably arises. for instance, does the close genetic relatedness within the abe cluster justify its subdivision into the four genotypes a, b, e and e/b?

the authors are of the opinion that there are important arguments in favor of maintaining the present classification and nomenclature, provided it is amended by a few adjustments and extensions.

i) despite the amazing genetic heterogeneity displayed by ompa sequence database entries, it seems that the vast majority of field strains belong to the abe cluster. this is indicated by several published studies  <cit> , by the data presented in table  <dig> and also the long-term experience of the authors' laboratories . the small group of so far untyped isolates appears to represent only a small proportion of naturally occurring strains.

ii) each genotype should be defined by a representative reference strain and its complete ompa sequence. while a genotyping system based on a single gene may not appear sufficiently comprehensive in the age of genomics, it should be noted that ompa encodes the major protein antigen of chlamydiae, and even the minor sequence variations including snps are mostly translated into different amino acids . the fact that genotype-specific antigens can be distinguished by specific mabs indicates that these differences do matter in the context of immunogenicity, host preference, virulence and, thus, epidemiological importance. this is why we suggest maintaining the currently accepted genotypes, including the closely related ones of the abe cluster.

iii) to account for the natural variability of ompa sequences in c. psittaci strains, emerging branches of untyped isolates should become provisional genotypes until their epidemiological relevance and representative status are proven. to account for intra-genotype variability, we suggest that heterogeneous genotypes, such as a, e/b and d, should be further divided into subgroups named after a typical representative, e.g. a-vs <dig>  a-6bc, etc. . this approach will ensure openness and flexibility of the genotyping scheme.

iv) the amended genotyping scheme should be re-evaluated and overhauled when a sufficiently large number of complete genome sequences of c. psittaci strains becomes available.

if ompa genotyping of c. psittaci is to be conducted in the framework of surveillance and monitoring studies, the performance of pcr-rflp will be insufficient because of its limited sensitivity and inability to characterize atypical strains. as mentioned above, serological typing is limited to only six serotypes, but is not amenable to high-throughput examination and it lacks a strictly molecular basis. the real-time pcr procedure proposed by geens et al  can be very sensitive and specific for identification of seven of the established genotypes, but it is rather laborious and expensive because each sample has to be examined in seven individual runs. sequencing of the complete ompa gene should serve as the gold standard for genotyping of c. psittaci since the respective dna sequence contains all details necessary for genotype identification and the data can be stored in public databases to be easily accessible to researchers and diagnosticians. however, due to cost and labor intensiveness, it is not feasible at present to use dna sequencing of this 1212-bp gene as a routine procedure in all diagnostic laboratories.

being more rapid and economical, the at microarray assay developed in the present study represents a powerful tool for sequence-based, sensitive and reproducible high-throughput genotyping. in principle, the procedure consists in parallel probing of  <dig> different targets and, in view of the recognition of minor nucleotide sequence variations including snps, amounts to re-sequencing the discriminatory regions in vds  <dig> and  <dig> of the ompa gene. future use of the at ompa genotyping assay will enable diagnosticians in human and veterinary medicine to trace epidemiological chains, explore the dissemination of the various genotypes and other strains of c. psittaci, as well as identify new representatives of this amazing pathogen.

CONCLUSIONS
according to the data of ompa analysis, c. psittaci is genetically the most heterogeneous species of the genus chlamydophila. the traditional genotyping system should be amended and extended because it does not adequately reflect the extent of intra-species heterogeneity. serology, pcr-rflp and real-time pcr are unable to discriminate among all currently accepted genotypes and identify strains of new types. while genotyping based on complete ompa sequences should serve as gold standard, many of the smaller laboratories may not be able to use it in routine diagnosis. the results of the present study have demonstrated that the newly developed dna microarray-based ompa genotyping assay represents a promising diagnostic tool.

