BACKGROUND
most verbs describe events with one or more participants  <cit> . the verb's argument structure defines the number and relationships of participants needed for a complete event. for instance, a sentence like "peter gives jim a book" includes three participants with three thematic roles: the agent , the recipient  and the theme . for a verb like "give" the entry in the mental lexicon must comprise such information in addition to phonetic and orthographic information. neurolinguists have always been interested whether and how this feature of verbs is represented in the brain, the majority of studies employing entire sentences, wh-questions , or sentences including syntactic or semantic violations  and the inferior frontal gyrus  of the left hemisphere  <cit>  to be involved in the processing of the verb's argument structure. additional activity in the left ifg  was found, when grammatically complex sentences requiring working memory resources  <cit>  or when argument hierarchies  <cit>  were processed. whenever words were presented in the grammatically correct order in one, and out of order in another condition, activation of the left ifg and mtg was more pronounced to words in correct sentences  <cit> .

in a recent fmri study, thompson et al.  <cit>  compared nouns and verbs with increasingly more complex argument structure  during a lexical decision task. while the processing of all lexical items activated a large bilateral network including the occipito-temporal, superior-inferior parietal and superior temporal areas, only verbs activated left inferior frontal and middle temporal areas. the comparison of verbs revealed more pronounced activity mainly in the left inferior parietal cortex  for one-argument relative to two-argument verbs. additional right hemispheric ipc involvement was found, when one-argument verbs were compared to two- and three argument verbs. results were interpreted as reflecting the integration of semantic and syntactic information that are more pronounced for verbs that possess more complex argument structure.

in a previous magnetoencephalographic  study  <cit>  the argument structure of verbs was systematically varied between one and three, while subjects processed the verbs in a lexical decision task. verbs were presented either in isolation or together with a name, thus, in a minimal syntactic context. around  <dig> to  <dig> ms after stimulus onset isolated one-argument verbs induced the most pronounced activation in the left middle temporal gyrus, followed by two-argument verbs, while three argument verbs provoke the weakest activation. whenever the same verbs preceded by a proper name, specifying the subject, additional activation between  <dig> and  <dig> ms in the left inferior frontal gyrus was larger and peaked earlier for one-argument verbs, which require no further arguments to form a complete sentence. this suggests that the activated areas vary depending on the linguistic context.

on this background the present study aimed at specifying the cortical structures involved in the processing of verbs' argument structures exploiting the spatial resolution power of fmri. within a silent reading design the argument structure of verbs was varied between one and three, and maximum activation was expected to one-argument verbs in temporal areas of the left hemisphere. again, verbs were presented either in isolation or in the minimal syntactic context of a name that filled the first position of the argument structure. compared to designs employing entire sentences, this comparison should disclose, whether the crucial information about the relationship of participants and events was already retrieved with the verb and its argument structure or whether a minimal context was required. thereby, the present study should add to the specification of parsing and processing in the absence of full sentences. if the context was required to activate syntactic processing  <cit> , this condition should activate areas known to be involved in syntactic processing, that is, the left inferior frontal gyrus  <cit> . however, the previous meg study  <cit>  had suggested that already the minimal context of a proper name filling the first argument was sufficient to activate the ifg. thus, we hypothesized that even the minimal context of a name should automatically start the integration of the name and the verb to a sentence representation. therefore, we expected brain responses in the left ifg to distinguish the verb-categories in this condition, too.

RESULTS
results were obtained from  <dig> subjects.

basic contrasts 
the comparison of the four experimental conditions  with the fixation baseline revealed similar activity in bilateral primary and secondary occipital cortices and in the fusiform gyrus . the comparison of one-argument verbs presented in isolation and in context  and of three-argument verbs preceded by a name  disclosed additional activity in the middle temporal gyrus . mtg activity in response to three-argument verbs presented in isolation was only significant for an uncorrected cluster threshold . significant activity in the inferior frontal gyrus  was restricted to one-argument verbs preceded by a name, thus, creating a complete phrase .

specific contrasts
when comparing isolated one-argument with isolated three- argument verbs , more pronounced activity was found in the inferior frontal gyrus of the right hemisphere . in the left hemisphere, isolated one-argument verbs induced more activity than three-argument verbs the inferior temporal fusiform gyrus . no significant areas were found for the inverse contrast . when comparing one-argument verbs in context with three-argument verbs in context , activity was found only in one left hemispheric cluster  that comprised anterior superior temporal  and inferior frontal areas . again, no significant difference was found for the inverse contrast.

the comparison of verbs with and without context  did not disclose differences for one-argument verbs. however, three-argument verbs provoked activation in middle and inferior temporal areas  of the left hemisphere. irrespective of the number of arguments, verbs presented in context activated a large cluster that comprised superior/middle and inferior temporal areas  and a cluster in the right middle temporal gyrus  relative to verbs presented in isolation .

discussion
our previous meg study  <cit>  had suggested distinct patterns of cortical activity to verbs depending on their argument structure, therefore, the present study served to clarify the localization of involved cortical structures exploiting the enhanced spatial resolution power of fmri. confirming the previous results, verb-elicited activity varied with the number of obligatory arguments in the middle temporal gyrus and the inferior frontal gyrus: one-argument verbs "snores" led to stronger activity than three-argument verbs  in the inferior temporal fusiform gyrus  of the left hemisphere. when presented in context of a proper name, one-argument verbs  induced more pronounced activity than three-argument verbs in the inferior frontal gyrus  of the left hemisphere. these results support  that syntactic processing of the verb's argument structure is related to verb itself and does not require a complete sentence and  that the ifg is crucially involved in the processing of this syntactic information.

the present fmri study also confirmed our results of our previous meg-study in that less complex, one-argument verb's elicited more pronounced activity than more complex, three-argument verbs. this contrasts the intuitive expectation, that the structurally more complex three argument verbs would lead to stronger brain responses compared to less complex one argument verbs. as an explanation, it might be assumed that the brain response may not reflect the structural complexity of the argument structure but rather, as to what extent the verb describes a complete event: within the composition of words  into a sentence, the "completeness" of the compositional representation of words may vary across the parsing process, being accompanied by a sequence or cascade of activation. before the first word is presented, sentence processing  is 0% complete, and activation has not started. upon word/verb presentation, the representation of a corresponding situation may be activation, and retrieval of the verb describing the situation is of highest impact. while the recognition of simple events is 50% complete , the recognition of complex events may be less complete .

stromswold et al.,  <cit>  found increased regional cerebral blood flow  in broca's area  when subjects judged the semantic plausibility of syntactically more relative to less complex sentences. in line with this finding, name-verb-pairs with one-argument verbs in the present study were more likely to reflect a complete event than three argument verbs. posterior temporal activation has been demonstrated in verb generation tasks  <cit> . similarly, the argument structure of isolated verbs was represented in the inferior temporal fusiform gyrus  in the present study. this is in accordance to bornkessel's view that this area  has an enhanced sensitivity for morphological information and the syntactic realization of the verb-based argument hierarchy.

relative to the processing of isolated verbs, presentation of verbs in context of a proper name shifted the patter of activation to brodman's area  <dig>  this is in line with higher activation in ba  <dig> for subject- than for object-initial sentences  <cit> . in the present study the name preceding the verb might have been interpreted as the subject of the beginning of a sentence followed by a grammatically correct inflected verb.

in their seminal studies, petersen and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated the association between nouns and their related verbs: in a verb generation task, subjects articulated appropriate verbs to nouns that were presented either acoustically or visually. in a noun repetition task, subjects repeated acoustically presented nouns or articulated visually presented words. relative to noun repetition, the verb generation task produced significantly more activation in a left inferior prefrontal region located at or near brodmann area  <dig>  this design can be compared to the present study, in which a proper name  was followed by a verb. one might speculate that the correspondence of the verb and the subject translates into the activity of the ifg. this again supports the significance of ba  <dig> for the coordination of words reflecting the strength of their  connection.

moreover, kapur and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated that nouns were better recognized in a memory task when they were semantically processed, involving the activation of brodmann area  <dig> . kapur et al.  <cit>  conclude that "this finding suggests that the left inferior prefrontal cortex is the anatomical region involved in 'working with meaning', and that the activation does not reflect willed action, is not task-specific and is not attributable to the requirements of a spoken response."

the present study provides strong evidence that argument number dependent activation shifts from posterior, temporal areas to anterior, frontal areas when context is added. rappaport and colleagues  <cit>  assumed that a verb activates the semantic class as an intermediate representation. similarly, buckner et al.  <cit>  suggested that anterior regions maintain or control access to higher-level semantic information. we argue that this information may resemble the dynamic representation of the sentence which integrates the subject into the argument structure of the verb leading to the representation of an event. likewise, wagner et al.  <cit>  interpreted the left inferior prefrontal area as a semantic executive system that mediates on-line retrieval of long-term conceptual knowledge.

syntactic  <cit>  and semantic processing has consistently been found to activate left inferior frontal areas  <cit> . specifically, a region in the anterior and ventral aspect of the inferior frontal gyrus  has been identified as contributing to semantic processing, but also left middle temporal cortex  <cit>  which was also active in the present study.

thus, it is plausible that the ifg projects back to the temporal lobe to keep representations active. such a structure would allow for lexical items to interact when coming in sequentially: the activation of typical fillers  is supposed to facilitate on-line language processing. reading is speeded up, when thematic roles were saturated  during comprehension  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, visually presented verbs activate their argument structure in areas assigned to the biological lexicon. this information is used in the inferior frontal gyrus to integrate proceeding nouns into an event representation that is sequentially built up while new words come in. thus, static parts of the representation stay active in the temporal lobe while dynamic parts may be processed in the ifg.

