BACKGROUND
the promise of personalized medicine is that each patient receives customized treatment from a broad base of options rather than a single, generalized standard of care treatment  <cit> . this is especially important in cancer where each patient's cancer could be viewed as a separate disease caused by a unique set of aberrations. the rapidly decreasing cost of next generation sequencing  is rendering this personalized approach a reality. for diseases with relatively high treatment costs, such as cancer, it is now economically viable to obtain whole genome sequencing data for the affected individual as part of the treatment regimen, and with further decreases in cost more and more diseases will follow suit.

however, the genomic sequence of malignant cells only partially captures the abnormalities that lead to malignancy. other factors such as gene expression levels and epigenetic signals have to be taken into account when characterizing a specific cancer and deciding on an individual's treatment regimen. one prominent epigenetic signal for which a dysregulation in various types of cancer is already well established  <cit>  is the addition of methyl groups at the 5' carbon of cytosine nucleotides  <cit> .

there are several different methods to obtain genome-wide methylation information using ngs. the most reliable method is bisulfite conversion, where the genomic dna is treated with sodium bisulfite to convert unmethylated cytosines into uracils and subsequently thymines upon pcr amplification  <cit> . sequencing of the converted dna immediately reveals the degree of methylation at any genomic cytosine by counting the number of observed cytosines vs. thymines; however complete methylome profiling using this method requires sequencing depths far beyond what is feasible today on the scale of larger patient cohorts. the sequencing depth requirements can be significantly alleviated by focusing coverage in cpg-rich genomic regions , but this comes at the expense of greatly diminished genomic-wide coverage. the method used in our lab, methylcap-seq  <cit> , instead uses the methyl-binding domain of human mbd <dig> in order to enrich fragmented genomic dna based on methylation content. sequencing the fragments bound to the mbd <dig> domain provides a genome-wide view of methylation patterns at reasonable sequencing depths.

while the cost aspect of methylcap-seq is attractive, it has two limitations. first, resolution is at the level of the dna fragment size, i.e., about 150bp, rather than at the level of the individual cpg. this is not that problematic as long as one is only interested in characterizing the methylation status of extended genomic regions such as cpg islands, promoters, non-coding rnas, or gene bodies. second, the number of reads covering a genomic region is only a relative indicator of the amount of methylation in this region, relative to the sample genome as a whole, and thus data normalization is required to compare methylation between samples. this somewhat indirect nature of methylation status determination makes this method prone to data quality issues stemming from poorly prepared libraries. also, somewhat paradoxically, one of the first parameters one might be interested in knowing, namely the degree of overall methylation of the sample, cannot be directly extracted from the data since relative methylation is encoded in the relative number of reads covering different genomic regions, yet the total number of reads is fixed by the sequencing itself rather than by the actual level of overall methylation in the sample. here, we first perform a systematic study of the influence of sample quality and the contribution of additional reads  in methylcap-seq data. then, we show experimental evidence that a computational approach for determining overall methylation levels from methylcap-seq data we recently suggested  <cit>  approximates actual overall methylation levels. these studies underpin the usability of methylcap-seq as a reliable method to obtain genome-wide methylation information at reasonable cost.

methods
patient samples
tissue samples from an endometrial cohort including tumors from  <dig> endometrial patients and  <dig> nonmalignant endometrial samples were obtained from washington university. all studies involving human endometrial cancer samples were approved by the human studies committee at the washington university and at the ohio state university.

a subset of  <dig> ovarian cancer samples from a larger cohort was obtained from triservice general hospital, taipei, taiwan. all studies involving human ovarian cancer samples were approved by the institutional review boards of triservice general hospital and national defense medical center.

a subset of  <dig> bone marrow samples from a single-center phase ii trial of patients with acute myeloid leukemia  at the ohio state university was obtained for this investigation. the study design and the results of the trial for the entire cohort of patients have been reported elsewhere  <cit> . all studies involving these samples were approved by the ohio state university human studies committee.

methylated-dna capture 
enrichment of methylated dna was performed with the methyl miner kit  according to the manufacturer's protocol as previously described  <cit> . briefly, one microgram of sonicated dna was incubated at room temperature on a rotator mixer in a solution containing  <dig>  micrograms of mbd-biotin protein coupled to m- <dig> streptavidin dynabeads. non-captured dna was removed by collecting beads with bound methylated dna on a magnetic stand and washing three times with bind/wash buffer. enriched, methylated dna was eluted from the bead complex with 1m nacl and purified by ethanol precipitation. library generation and 36-bp single-ended sequencing were performed on the illumina genome analyzer iix according to the manufacturer's standard protocol.

methylcap-seq experimental quality control and exclusion criteria
the automated quality control  module was implemented as previously described  <cit> . pre-aligned sorted.txt files from the illumina casava  <dig>  pipeline were utilized in the interest of quick turnaround for our users. in brief, duplicate alignments were removed from the aligned sequencing file , and the resulting output was loaded into an r workspace. medips  <cit>  was utilized to perform cpg enrichment, saturation, and cpg coverage analyses.

sequencing lanes were identified for exclusion using the following thresholds: cpg enrichment <  <dig> , saturation <  <dig> , cpg 5x coverage <  <dig> . these criteria and corresponding thresholds were chosen based on their technical relevance and ability to stratify datasets with known technical issues without a salient bias towards biological groups. samples were excluded if any of the thresholds were not met. as cpg coverage was assessed qualitatively for analysis of the endometrial dataset, five lanes of data with borderline 5x cpg coverage were not excluded that would have qualified for exclusion due to this criterion.

for the dmr comparison , methylation signal was normalized for each lane and then averaged among replicate lanes for each sample. the "all" group thus contains samples with merged qc pass lanes, samples with merged qc fail lanes, and samples with merged qc pass and qc fail lanes.

for the reproducibility comparison , pearson r was calculated using  <dig> replicate lanes corresponding to each sample represented in the qc pass and qc fail groups. in the case that a sample had more than two replicate lanes in a single group, two lanes were randomly chosen for the analysis. samples lacking two replicate lanes in either the qc pass or qc fail group were excluded from this analysis. lanes corresponding to the same sample but generated using different library preparations were also excluded.

we routinely provide sequencing and qc summaries for our users, and the summaries corresponding to the datasets referenced in this manuscript can be viewed in additional files  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

standard sequence file processing and alignment
sequence files were processed and aligned as previously described  <cit> . briefly, qseq files from the illumina casava <dig>  pipeline were converted to fasta format, duplicate reads removed , and then uniquely aligned with bowtie to generate sam files using the following options: -f -t -p  <dig> -n  <dig> -l  <dig> -k  <dig> -m  <dig> -s -y --chunkmbs  <dig> -max -best  <cit> . duplicate alignments  were removed using samtools  <cit> .

standard global methylation analysis workflow
aligned sequence files in sam format were analyzed using our custom analysis workflow as previously described  <cit> . briefly, aligned reads were extended to the average fragment length  and counted in  <dig> bp bins genome-wide. the resulting count distribution was normalized against the total aligned reads by conversion to reads per million . these normalized genome-wide count files were then interrogated by genomic feature . differentially methylated regions were identified by summing rpm across the bins for each locus in the genomic feature, then performing a wilcoxon rank sum test to assess differences in these summed rpms between sample groups. results were then adjusted for multiple comparisons by setting a false discovery rate  cutoff of  <dig> .

calculation of noise in methylation signal
noise in methylation signal, representing extended reads falling in regions without cg dinucleotides, was quantified as the summation of reads falling into bins with zero cpg content. in the case that a sample in a given group had multiple lanes of data, noise was computed for each lane individually and averaged among replicate lanes in the group. as a single sample could have a lane that passed qc and a lane that failed qc, the number of samples in each group does not sum to the total number of samples in the study.

calculation of the global methylation indicator
to assess genome-wide changes in methylation patterns for each sample across a given experiment, a custom parameter termed the global methylation indicator  was calculated as previously described  <cit> . briefly, normalized read counts  were classified by cpg density and averaged to construct a methylation distribution. the average rpm were then summed across the distribution  to yield the gmi.

assessment of methylated fragment enrichment using an in vitro methylated construct
experimental procedure
the  <dig>  kb plasmid vector pires2-egfp, which contains three cpg islands, was chosen to empirically assess methylated fragment enrichment. the construct was linearized with nhe i and then in vitro methylated with m.sssi. the methylated spike-in dna was quantified by qubit high sensitivity assay and diluted. plasmid was spiked into genomic dna at a concentration of  <dig>  pg plasmid/ <dig> μg genomic dna  prior to sonication of genomic dna for library generation.

analysis
reads mapping to the construct were identified by converting qseq files to fasta format as described above, then aligning the files with bowtie using the following options: -q -t -p  <dig> -n  <dig> -l  <dig> -k  <dig> -s --chunkmbs  <dig> --max --best. duplicate reads were retained for this analysis. to control for variation in construct aligned read counts that might be attributable to fluctuations in lane yield, construct aligned read counts were normalized against the total raw read counts by conversion to reads per million .

RESULTS
quality control exclusion criteria reduce noise in methylation signal and improve analytical power
our automated quality control  module, which is based on medips  <cit> , was implemented to identify technical problems in the sequencing data and flag potentially spurious samples. one goal of the qc module was to provide rapid feedback to investigators regarding dataset quality, facilitating protocol optimization prior to committing resources to a larger scale sequencing project. a second goal was to identify samples that should be excluded from analyses due to data validity concerns. the validity of a methylcap-seq experiment is dependent on enrichment of methylated fragments prior to sequencing. a failure in enrichment invalidates any downstream data, and therefore identifying such failures is vital. also important is verifying the statistical reproducibility of the data for each sample. as it is often not cost-effective to generate replicate sequencing lanes for each sample to assess experimental reproducibility empirically, addressing this issue computationally is desirable. similarly, the confidence in methylation calls is related to the breadth and strength of signal at the cpgs in the genome. we assessed enrichment of methylated fragments using the cpg enrichment parameter, which compares the frequency of cpgs in the sequenced sample with the frequency of cpgs in the reference genome. statistical reproducibility was assessed by calculation of saturation, the pearson correlation of two random partitions of the sequenced sample  <cit> . breadth and strength of methylation signal was assessed using 5x cpg coverage, which represents the fraction of cpg loci that have five or more reads in the sample compared to the total number of cpgs in the reference genome. these qc parameters were calculated for each sample using medips  <cit> .

additional file  <dig> demonstrates the results of the qc module for the endometrial dataset.  <dig> lanes of sequencing data were generated for  <dig> unique samples.  <dig> lanes failed qc, representing  <dig> unique samples. to assess how lanes that pass qc might differ from lanes that failed qc, we computed the noise in methylation signal, representing percentage of uniquely aligned extended reads falling in  <dig> bp bins without cpg dinucleotides . median noise in samples that failed qc  was more than 3-fold greater than in samples that did not fail qc , and closely resembled noise in input . excluding qc failed lanes did not significantly decrease median noise levels , but did greatly decrease the variation in noise levels between samples. as the distribution of noise levels is positively skewed and not normal, a small number of outliers would not be expected to significantly shift the median noise level. to investigate whether the additional noise seen in qc failed samples impacted sequencing reproducibility, we computed the pearson correlation between replicate lanes of samples that passed qc vs. failed qc . replicates of samples that passed qc correlated much more highly than replicates of samples that failed qc . variation in replicate correlation between samples was also noticeably less in the qc pass group . we surmise that failures in methylation enrichment result in a more random sampling of the fragment distribution regardless of methylation status, resulting in increased signal in regions where methylation should not be detectable.

as the goal of many methylome profiling studies is to identify differentially methylated regions  between biological groups, we next assessed whether our qc exclusion criteria might improve our analytical power to detect dmrs. we compared dmrs between  <dig> endometrial tumors and  <dig> nonmalignant endometrial tissue samples across several genomic features. excluding sequencing lanes that failed qc  resulted in more dmrs in every genomic feature assessed . the greatest gains were seen in promoters and cpg shores, where the number of dmrs increased 22-fold and 2-fold, respectively, while gains in cpg islands and promoter-associated cpg islands were more modest . these results appear to trend inversely with cpg density, possibly reflecting greater benefit from qc exclusion in regions where coverage is lower. we speculate that the improvements in dmr detection resulting from exclusion of samples that fail qc would be even greater when working with smaller sample sizes or biological groups with more similar methylation patterns.

the effect of additional sequencing lanes on quality control metrics
as a sequencing core, we are frequently asked whether additional lanes of sequencing data are necessary or desirable for methylcap-seq experiments. to address this issue, we analyzed a large dataset of ovarian tumors, of which  <dig> samples had been resequenced , for a total of  <dig> lanes . before comparing the effect of additional lanes, the degree of correlation between the replicate lanes was analyzed to ensure that additional lanes of data would not introduce excessive variation. as shown in figure  <dig>  replicate lanes from sequencing the same library twice correlated highly . cpg enrichment, saturation, and 5x coverage were then evaluated for individual lanes and combined lanes . cpg enrichment varied somewhat between samples , but was extremely similar for replicate lanes . saturation improved modestly from a median of  <dig>  to a median of  <dig> . as saturation values for individual lanes of methylcap-seq data typically range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for single lanes in our hands, and we consider a saturation value of  <dig>  acceptable for analysis, this improvement may be inconsequential although it is statistically significant. 5x coverage improved noticeably from a median of  <dig>  to a median of  <dig> , representing an average 38% gain. as 5x coverage represents a minimum signal level needed to reliably differentiate a methylated locus from a locus with no methylation , we speculate that this increase could significantly increase the statistical power to detect dmrs, particularly in small or lightly methylated regions.

global methylation indicator correlates inversely with an in vitro methylated indicator sequence
we recently proposed a computational method to compare genome-wide changes in methylation patterns between samples in a given experiment  <cit> ). as methylcap-seq signal  is normalized by total aligned read counts to adjust for variability in lane yield, two samples with identically distributed methylation yet different absolute levels of methylation would be expected to yield identical normalized methylation signals at any given loci. the gmi method relies on the observation that in vitro methylated samples display characteristic changes in the methylation signal distribution as quantified in a methylcap-seq experiment, and these changes are cpg density dependent. methylation signal shifts from low cpg content regions to high cpg content regions, and this can be quantified by calculating the area under the curve of the average normalized methylation signal plotted across cpg density. the gmi calculation is a potentially powerful tool for capturing changes in global methylation between samples.

in an effort to validate the gmi as a surrogate for global methylation, we developed a complementary analysis utilizing an in vitro methylated construct. this methylated construct was spiked-in to the genomic dna in the aml samples prior to sonication at a defined concentration and subjected to methylated enrichment along with the genomic dna. the spike-in was originally intended to verify successful enrichment; if enrichment occurred, pcr for the methylated plasmid would show increased copy number after enrichment. however, this spike-in is also a way to determine global methylation levels since the methylated plasmid competes with the natively methylated genomic dna fragments for binding to the mbd protein. when the proportion of methylated to unmethylated genomic fragments is high prior to enrichment, the methylated plasmid gets enriched relatively less, and vice versa. indeed, we found that read counts aligned to the plasmid correlate inversely with gmi . this result provides empirical evidence that gmi can capture changes in absolute global methylation levels for methylcap-seq experiments. such a metric might be useful for gauging response to treatments that are known or expected to globally alter the methylome.

CONCLUSIONS
we show that post-sequencing qc metrics can be used to exclude poor quality samples from analysis, resulting in decreased noise in methylation signal and improved power to detect dmrs. furthermore, we show that resequenced lanes from the same library correlate very well, and that additional lanes of data have a small impact on saturation  and a large impact on 5x cpg coverage . finally, we demonstrate that our computational indicator of global methylation correlates with an unrelated method that utilizes spike-in of dna with known methylation status. these findings verify that with appropriate quality control methylcap-seq is a reliable tool that provides reproducible relative methylation information on a feature by feature basis, provides information about the global level of methylation, and can be applied to entire patient cohorts of hundreds of patients.

list of abbreviations used
ngs: next-generation sequencing; aml: acute myeloid leukemia; qc: quality control; rpm: reads per million; fdr: false discovery rate; gmi: global methylation indicator; dmr: differentially methylated region.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
mt, mm, df, rb, and py designed the study. mt and rb drafted the manuscript. mt, mm, df, and br analyzed the data. rb, py, and br critically reviewed the manuscript. py, br, and jc generated the data. gm procured samples. rb, py, and gm oversaw the project.

supplementary material
additional file 1
replicate lane correlation, endometrial qc passed vs. qc failed samples. a table showing pearson correlation of replicate lanes for samples that passed qc vs. failed qc. data is presented both as a group summary and for individual samples.

click here for file

 additional file 2
qc table for endometrial cancer study. a listing of cpg enrichment, saturation, 5x coverage, and read information for each sample lane in the endometrial dataset.

click here for file

 additional file 3
qc table for ovarian study. a listing of cpg enrichment, saturation, 5x coverage, and read information for each sample lane in the ovarian dataset.

click here for file

 additional file 4
qc, gmi, plasmid rpm table for aml study. a listing of cpg enrichment, saturation, 5x coverage, read information, global methylation indicator, and plasmid reads per million for each sample lane in the aml dataset.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by nci comprehensive cancer center support grant p <dig> ca <dig>  and ca <dig> ,  <dig> p <dig> ca140158- <dig> , national center for advancing translational sciences grant 8tl1tr000091- <dig> , and in part by an allocation of computing time from the ohio supercomputer center. we would also like to acknowledge yi-wen huang and tim h-m. huang for generating and sharing the endometrial dataset, and rita huang and hung-cheng lai for generating and sharing the ovarian dataset.

this article has been published as part of bmc genomics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2012: proceedings of the international conference on intelligent biology and medicine : genomics. the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcgenomics/supplements/13/s <dig> 
