BACKGROUND
the perpetuation of mosquito-borne diseases is dependent on the compatibility of the pathogen with its invertebrate and vertebrate hosts, as dictated by each respective genome. the failure of traditional mosquito-borne disease control efforts to reduce the burden of these diseases on public health has created an incentive to develop a more comprehensive understanding of molecular interactions between host and pathogen, in order to develop novel means to control disease transmission. innate immune responsiveness in the mosquito host is of particular interest in such explorations because extensive research efforts have shown that vector mosquito species produce robust humoral and cellular immune responses against invading pathogens  <cit> .

a vector species that employs a unique, robust immune response against an invading pathogen is the mosquito, armigeres subalbatus, a natural vector of the nematode parasites that cause lymphatic filariasis. this debilitating disease affects  <dig> million people annually, one third of who suffer gross pathology . ar. subalbatus is ideally suited for laboratory studies of immune responsiveness because it is a natural vector of the filarial worm, brugia pahangi, but it exhibits a refractory state to the microfilariae of brugia malayi by virtue of a strong melanotic encapsulation response; therefore, it is the ideal organism for studying molecular mechanisms of the anti-filarial worm response as a function of the broader innate immune capacity of the mosquito. in fact, ar. subalbatus is one of the few species of mosquito to effectively use melanotic encapsulation as a natural defense mechanism against metazoan pathogens  <cit> . ar. subalbatus also serves as a competent laboratory vector of plasmodium gallinaceum, the causative agent of avian malaria in asia , and also has been implicated in the transmission of japanese encephalitis virus in taiwan  <cit> .

experimental evidence has shown that humoral and cellular immune responses play a fundamental role in mosquito refractoriness to a particular pathogen; however, very little is known about their genetic control. as a result, our laboratory is using expressed sequence tags  as a tool to elucidate the function of known genes and assist in the discovery of previously unknown, "immunity"-related genes. in addition, this high-throughput molecular approach to gene discovery provides the capacity to tactically design oligonucleotide-based microarrays that can be further used to gain insight into vector-pathogen interactions. with no genome sequencing project on the horizon for ar. subalbatus, these est libraries and microarrays constitute the only tools currently available to gauge immune responsiveness in this medically important vector species.

we previously reported a comprehensive analysis of ests from complementary dna  libraries created from adult, female ar. subalbatus hemocytes  <cit> . experimental evidence has shown the importance of mosquito hemocytes  as both initiators and mediators of mosquito immune responses  <cit> ; therefore, material was collected from the perfusate  of micrococcus luteus and escherichia coli inoculated mosquitoes at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  &  <dig> hours post bacterial inoculation. these bacterial species have been extensively used to examine immune peptide production in mosquitoes  <cit> , and each activates a different arm of the innate immune response. the primary response of ar. subalbatus to e. coli is phagocytosis, whereas the primary response to m. luteus is melanization, and it has been determined that this is independent of gram type  <cit> .

in order to more completely represent the baseline physiology and innate immune capabilities of this mosquito, cdna libraries were created from adult, female ar. subalbatus mrna collected from whole body mosquitoes inoculated with the same mixture of bacteria. material also was collected from whole body ar. subalbatus exposed to filarial worm parasites. a blood meal containing b. malayi induces the melanization response in ar. subalbatus; therefore, whole body material was collected from female mosquitoes  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hours after an infective blood feed. intrathoracic injection of dirofilaria immitis microfilariae into the mosquito's hemocoel also induces a strong melanotic encapsulation response in ar. subalbatus and is a model system by which the immune response is stimulated without exposing the mosquito to both the parasite and a blood meal  <cit> . this model system for infection facilitates the uncoupling of two processes – namely blood meal digestion and ovarian development – that compete for biochemical resources  <cit> . whole body mosquitoes inoculated with d. immitis were collected at  <dig> and  <dig> hours post-inoculation. libraries also were constructed from 5– <dig> and 14– <dig> day old naïve whole body females to ensure representation of transcripts from non-immune activated, aging mosquitoes. an attempt to sequence clones from a library from blood-fed naïve females was not successful.

RESULTS
sequencing and clustering
non-normalized cdna libraries were constructed from newly emerged female mosquitoes inoculated with bacteria, inoculated or blood fed with filarial worm parasites, and from aging, naïve adult females. ests were sequenced from the 5' end by the university of wisconsin genome sequencing center, and the national yang-ming university core facility, and were assembled to collapse the entire dataset, reduce redundancy, and simplify downstream annotation . of the  <dig>  trace files generated by the two sequencing units,  <dig>  traces passed quality control  and were sent to assembly with an average high quality  length of  <dig> bases. the resulting collapsed data resulted in  <dig>  clusters, of which  <dig>  are composed of one trace . the deepest cluster contains  <dig> ests, with an average of  <dig>  ests per cluster.

the condition of mosquitoes/inocula used to generate the material for each cdna library is listed in the left-hand column. bacteria = mixture of e. coli and m. luteus.

functional annotation of est clusters and singletons
consensus sequences from clustering were output in fasta format and used in comparisons to the genbank non-redundant database, the d. melanogaster and an. gambiae genomes, and to the other ar. subalbatus est sets created during the project.

each est cluster/singleton and its corresponding sequence similarity data were uploaded into asap. within the asap interface, annotators assessed sequence alignments and followed intact hyperlinks to ncbi, the wellcome trust sanger institute , flybase, and orthologous sequences within asap and at national yang ming university, in order to ascribe a predicted gene product and/or function to each sequence. supporting evidence for each annotation is typically in the form of a hyperlink to a database and can be viewed in asap. these annotations then were reviewed and approved or rejected by a curator. annotation followed the controlled vocabulary established in a previous study, such that each est cluster was attributed with some functional information, and indication of quality of the blast hit used to attribute that information  <cit> . of the  <dig>  est clusters,  <dig>  were annotated as "unknown" , and  <dig> were annotated as "conserved unknown" with varying degrees of confidence. sequences were submitted to ncbi as annotated est clusters into the core nucleotide database and made available for public viewing through asap.

library to library comparison
an analysis of est clusters from the complete project was done by combining annotations and cluster composition  to provide insight into the molecular effort put forth by the mosquito in the face of different types of immunological challenge. within microsoft access, a table was built that contains est clusters according to asap id number, contig number , project  from which ests were contributed, and the number of ests contributed per project. queries were built to extract the number of est clusters unique to a particular library , or shared between projects  . shared are  <dig> clusters unique to a response to bacteria-inoculation,  <dig> unique to the response against filarial nematodes, and  <dig>  are represented in at least one of the  <dig> immune-activated projects. amongst those  <dig> ,  <dig> are represented in all  <dig> of those projects, perhaps indicative of the importance of these genes in immune responsiveness. included amongst these  <dig> is a clip domain serine protease , serpin 27a , and aslectin  – a ficolin-like pattern recognition molecule  <cit> . unique to the response against b. malayi infection is a protein-tyrosine kinase, involved in the jak-stat cascade, which is represented by  <dig> ests.

to examine the statistical likelihood that the numbers of ests in each cluster represent a true sampling of the biological variation between the six libraries, and to compare the results of clustering with microarray results  <cit> , cluster data were submitted to the ideg <dig> website for analysis  <cit> . the number of ests in each cluster was normalized based on the number of total ests collected and the total number of ests in each library. six statistics were compared, including audic and claverie  <cit> , greller and tobin  <cit> , stekel  <cit> , chi square  <dig> ×  <dig>  general chi square, and fisher's exact test, all corrected via a bonferroni method. the results of the entire test are included as a supplementary table . table  <dig> presents the  <dig> est clusters that show the highest significant difference between libraries . although significant increases in ests encoding immune-related products are observed , this is not always the case. several clusters that encode "house keeping" products are demonstrably enriched for ests from immune-challenged libraries  suggesting that these metabolic genes play essential roles in the physiology of an immune and/or stress response. in addition, many of the clusters that are significantly different between libraries encode gene products of completely unknown function. a comparison with microarray data from aliota, et al. <cit> , shows some overlap between the two methods. out of the  <dig> clusters that are significantly different ,  <dig> share significant changes when compared with microarray data from b. malayi infected females . combined, these est and microarray data provide several target sequences for further study in relation to mosquito innate immunity.

clusters and their constituent ests were analysed using ideg <dig>  <cit>  to find clusters where the number of ests were statistically different between the libraries. of  <dig>  clusters analysed,  <dig> showed a significantly differential number of ests collected from one or more of the libraries. each row represents the genbank accession number for cluster, and the columns are the number of ests from each of the six libraries that are a member of it. the libraries are: asuhem , diroinf , imacbac , brumal , n <dig> and n <dig> . the r value is the inverse log of the stekel r score  <cit> , and the chi value is a general chi square analysis.

gene ontology
to attribute more functional information to annotations in asap, gene ontology  classifications were migrated from flybase annotations to homologous ar. subalbatus clusters, because flybase contains the most complete dataset for a related species from which to draw. go annotations were attributed to  <dig>   est clusters. from the perspective of the entire dataset,  <dig>  clusters have annotations but lack a go annotation. data from go analyses are presented graphically, according to second tier categories within the top-level categories of biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. of particular interest for this dataset are those clusters related to innate immunity, so a more in-depth  view is presented .

because of the unique immune response capabilities of ar. subalbatus, est clusters were interrogated beyond the go analysis for clusters encoding immunity-related proteins. those clusters encoding proteins that have a documented role in ar. subalbatus immunity were sorted according to representation in different libraries . in addition, immunity related genes and proteins were subdivided into categories including: casps: caspases, cats: catalases, clips: clip-domain serine proteases, ctls: c-type lectins, freps: fibrinogen-related proteins, gales: galactoside-binding lectins, iaps: inhibitors of apoptosis, imdpaths: imd pathway members, jakstats: signal transduction, lyss: lysozymes, mls: md2-like receptors, pgrps: peptidoglycan recognition proteins, ppos: prophenoloxidases, prdxs: peroxidases, rel: relish-like proteins, scrs: scavenger receptors, sods: superoxide dismutatses, spzs: spaetzle-like proteins, srpns: serine protease inhibitors, teps: thio-ester containing proteins, tolls: toll-receptors, and tollpaths: toll pathway members. representatives of each of these subcategories can be found amongst the ests in these libraries . clusters identified as immunity-related according to homology to genes in immunodb  <cit>  were broken down into the number of ests represented per cluster from each library .

because of the unique, robust melanization response that is elicited when ar. subalbatus is infected with certain nematode parasites, several molecules related to melanogenesis have been the subject of comprehensive characterization. est clusters encoding these gene products are presented according to the number of ests in the following libraries: asuhem , diroinf , imacbac , brumal , n <dig> and n <dig> .

peptide sequences were harvested from immunodb  <cit>  for an. gambiae, ae. aegypti, and d. melanogaster for each of the following gene families: all  <dig>  est clusters were blasted against a database of these peptides using blastx . blast hits were parsed from output files using tcl_blast_parser_123_v <dig> tcl  <cit>  with a cut-off of 40% match, 1e- <dig> normalized e-value, and a minimum match length of  <dig> residues. top hits were taken for each significant match and verified manually. matches then were categorized by family and subfamily according to waterhouse et al.   and the composition  of est clusters were collated from the assembly according to the library from which ests came: asuhem , diroinf , imacbac , brumal , n <dig> and n <dig> . stekel r values  <cit>  were determined for the groupings using ideg <dig>  <cit>  and those having a score of  <dig>  or better were considered significantly differential, and are flagged with bolded and underlined text for the row.

this analysis underscores the degree to which immunity related ests are enriched in libraries from bacteria-inoculated mosquitoes. particularly from the hemocyte library, ests from all subcategories are represented in abundance . we expected to see some evidence of increased abundance of ests related to melanization, because published reports on the melanization response indicate that phenoloxidase is up-regulated as a result of immune-response activation  <cit> . however, few ests representing the biochemical pathway of melanogenesis were evident amongst the clusters . this limited representation could be a result of cloning bias inherent in library production, or introduced due to inoculation methodology, or even wound healing. or, up-regulation may not be necessary to affect the response that we know to be occurring in the mosquito at the time points chosen for library construction  <cit> .

comparisons with ae. aegypti, an. gambiae, and d. melanogaster
the family culicidae contains approximately  <dig>  species of mosquitoes, of which only a handful are capable of vectoring disease. much of the current effort to understand the molecular components of vector competence has focused on an. gambiae and ae. aegypti  <cit> , because these species transmit disease agents that have a tremendous impact on global public health . comparative genomics analysis between these mosquitoes and the ongoing genome project on culex pipiens quinquefasciatus, as compared to the fruit fly, have provided and will provide resources to bolster studies to systematically investigate common and mosquito species-specific gene function  <cit> . this includes gaining new insight into the molecular basis of insecticide resistance, host-seeking behaviour, blood feeding, and vector-parasite interactions that are unique to blood-feeding  vectors. the last of these is perhaps the most dramatic separation between the mosquitoes and fruit flies – hematophagy is intimately tied to a variety of physiologies including oogenesis and immunity, and therefore imposes unique demands on mosquitoes as compared to drosophila. in a microarray analysis of an. gambiae, 25% of the genes on the array changed transcript levels in response to blood-feeding  <cit> .

among the diptera, there is an evolutionary divergence of approximately  <dig> million years separating mosquitoes from d. melanogaster. the mosquitoes an. gambiae and ae. aegypti are separated by  <dig> million years  <cit> . an. gambiae is a member of the subfamily anophelinae, which contains the primary vectors of human malaria. in contrast, ae. aegypti is a member of the subfamily culicinae, which contains the majority of mosquito species that are of medical or veterinary importance, e.g., aedes, culex, armigeres, and mansonia. these two mosquito subfamilies differ significantly in genomic structure  <cit> , and in vector competence. broadly, anopheles species are most often incriminated as vectors of parasitic disease agents , and aedes and culex species are critically important in the transmission of arthropod-borne viruses as well as filarial worms.

ar. subalbatus is a competent vector of viruses and parasites, and is more closely related to ae. aegypti than to an gambiae; ae. aegypti and ar. subalbatus are phylogenetically linked at the level of tribe . therefore, comparisons between these two species of mosquito may provide unique insights into vector competence and innate immunity.

based on the evolutionary distance, vector status, and vector competence of the fly species for which we have genome data, we asked: of the  <dig>  est clusters or singletons, how many have homologs in the available databases for  <dig> fly genomes/transcriptomes? the output from blastx analysis of predicted peptide sequences was filtered to search for homologous sequences using an e-value cutoff of 1e- <dig>  a percent match of 40% , and a minimum match length of  <dig> for the high-scoring segment pair. a large number of clusters ) did not have a homolog in any database as defined by this screen.

those clusters that were homologous were subjected to venn analysis  to discover overlapping predicted peptides in  <dig> other mosquito species: ae. aegypti, , an. gambiae , and c.p. quinquefasciatus , and the fruit fly, d. melanogaster. the mosquito with the largest number of gene products that are uniquely homologous to ar. subalbatus is ae. aegypti, as would be predicted by the degree of relatedness of these two mosquitoes. in comparing ar. subalbatus to all available mosquito and drosophila homologous predicted peptides,  <dig> sequences are represented in all fly species. a significant number  of clusters from ar. subalbatus qualify as homologs to genes in other mosquito species, but have no homolog in the fruit fly .

taking this one step further, from quantity of hits to quality of hits, we looked at the frequency distribution of e-value hits for the homologous sequences . there is an obvious shift toward more significant e-values for homologs in ae. aegypti, a shift away from more significant e-values for homologs in drosophila and anopheles, and homologs in cx. pipiens display an intermediate shift, closer to that seen in ae. aegypti.

CONCLUSIONS
following recognition of any pathogen in a mosquito, a cascade of innate immune responses ensues that can include humoral responses , cellular  and cell-mediated events . because immunity-related genes function in concert to clear a pathogen  <cit> , it is informative to use a holistic approach when evaluating expression and/or regulation i.e. it is likely that most of these genes are not activated independent of other immune-response genes. for example, in ar. subalbatus, the biochemical pathway required for melanin biosynthesis is well characterized, but there is much to learn about the anti-filarial worm response as a whole in this mosquito species. what is readily apparent from the limited number of functional genomics studies that have investigated insect immunity, is that we really do not know very much about the mechanisms required to successfully eliminate an invading pathogen from a refractory mosquito , and the subsequent changes necessary for a successful return to homeostasis.

there are a large number of unknown genes found in this and many other est and microarray projects. we hypothesize that a large proportion of these unknowns are functionally linked to the unique and specific immune response of ar. subalbatus, because of the material used to construct the libraries from which ests were produced. the rapidly expanding bank of large est datasets and whole genome sequences for mosquitoes  <cit>  provide the capability to critically evaluate the unknowns in the context of the many characterized facets of innate immunity, simultaneously. a microarray platform based on this ar. subalbatus est dataset has been designed for this purpose, and was screened with material from immune-response activated mosquitoes .

for comparative purposes at the species level, this large dataset provides an important addition to the available sequence databases. dipterans exhibit extraordinary variation in morphology, behaviour and physiology, so these ests add to the ongoing and increasingly powerful comparisons of fly species  <cit> . by virtue of hematophagy, mosquitoes are presented with unique physiologic challenges as compared to fruit files; at a minimum, blood-feeding requires host-seeking, triggers oogenesis, and exposes mosquitoes to a variety of blood-borne pathogens. some of these challenges are shared with other vectors of disease agents. vector-borne diseases such as malaria, leishmaniasis, african and american trypanosomiasis, lyme disease and epidemic typhus, are caused by disease agents that are transmitted by mosquitoes, sandflies, tsetse, kissing bugs, ticks and body lice, respectively. there is a great deal of promise for enhancing our understanding of vector biology through genome sequencing and functional genomics analysis that will be increasingly available for a number of these species  <cit> .

