BACKGROUND
membrane intrinsic proteins  such as aquaporins  are molecular channels present from bacteria to humans that transport water and small molecular weight solutes across biological membranes  <cit> . these membrane proteins are classified into two groups: those that are water-selective, and those that also transport small neutral molecules, such as glycerol and urea, termed aquaporins. all known aqps have six transmembrane domains connected by five loops , in which both the n- and c-termini are cytoplasmic. their primary structure can be divided into two similar halves each of which bear the highly conserved asn-pro-ala  motif in loops b and e that are involved in the formation of the water pore, which is the hallmark of the mip family  <cit> . in higher vertebrates,  <dig> different aqps have been described, which differ in tissue expression, regulation and selectivity  <cit> .

recent studies have shown that, in mammals, aqp <dig> and aqp <dig> are essential for water resorption in the kidney  <cit> , aqp <dig> is involved in cerebral water balance, astrocyte migration and neural signal transduction  <cit> , and aqp <dig> and aqp <dig> seem to play important roles during skin hydration and metabolism of adipocytes, respectively  <cit> . however, there is little information on the functional properties and physiological functions of aqps in teleosts, vertebrates which form a highly diverse group of organisms adapted to living both in freshwater and seawater.

marine teleosts are thought to have colonized the oceans after a long freshwater ancestry, which is supported by the fossil record and by the hypo-osmotic condition and the presence of a glomerular kidney in extant marine species . the re-entry of teleosts into seawater, however, most likely required new molecular adaptations to maintain water homeostasis, which is especially important for gametes and early embryos that do not have osmoregulatory systems. the spawning of pelagic eggs by many marine teleosts , where water content may reach up to 95% in weight, has been proposed as a mechanism to provide a water reservoir in the embryo to compensate for the passive water efflux due to the hyper-osmotic effect of the seawater until osmoregulatory organs develop  <cit> . in addition, hydration of the egg contributes to buoyancy, thereby improving oxygen exchange and dispersal in the ocean.

egg hydration in marine fish occurs during the later stages of oogenesis, prior to ovulation . it is driven by the osmotic gradient created by the generation of a large pool of free amino acids  in the oocyte, produced from the hydrolysis of vitellogenin -derived yolk proteins, and the accumulation of inorganic ions , we recently showed that water influx into the oocyte is facilitated by a novel water-selective aqp, predominantly expressed in the ovary, which, being structurally and functionally similar to mammalian aqp <dig>  was named the s. aurata aquaporin- <dig> of the ovary   <cit> . this finding illustrates how marine teleosts have evolved novel molecular mechanisms to face life in the ocean. however, sea bream also expresses another water-selective, aqp1-related channel, termed saaqp <dig>  which is more similar to mammalian aqp <dig> and is ubiquitiously distributed in tissues, including osmoregulatory organs such as the kidney, gills and intestine  <cit> . water channels related to saaqp1o and saaqp <dig> have also been found in other teleosts  <cit> , but the phylogenetic and functional relationships between these two vertebrate aqps remain unclear.

now that the genome of several teleosts has been completely or partially sequenced, and there is an increasing number of expressed sequence tags  and cdnas available, the phylogeny and functional properties of teleost aqp1-like proteins can be investigated. using phylogenetic reconstruction and genomic analysis, we show here that the aqp1o gene  is teleost specific and probably originated by local duplication of a vertebrate aqp <dig> ancestor, while tetrapods have only a single aqp <dig> gene structurally more similar to teleost aqp <dig> . expression analyses and functional characterization in xenopus laevis oocytes suggest that teleost aqp1b represents a neofunctionalized water channel in the ovary and some osmoregulatory organs of marine species, which has evolved unique regulatory domains at the c-terminal cytoplasmic tail for the control of intracellular trafficking.

RESULTS
duplication of aqp <dig> in teleosts
aqp1-related, non-redundant amino acid sequences of teleosts were obtained by searching available genome and protein databases, and by cdna cloning. the teleost sequences were aligned with the amino acid sequence of tetrapod aqp <dig> and the phylogenetic analyses conducted using the neighbour-joining , maximum likelihood , and bayesian inference  methods . the phylogenetic tree obtained consistently separated tetrapod aqp <dig> from the teleost lineage , which appeared to have undergone a duplication event giving rise to the aqp1a and aqp1b subgroups . the length of the branches of aqp1b sequences were in general longer than those of aqp1a, specially that of the zebrafish aqp1b, suggesting a higher rate of residue mutations than members of the parent group, and hence a rapid evolution. zebrafish  aqp1b, however, clustered significantly outside the aqp1a and aqp1b subgroups, which may be a result of the well-known long-branch attraction effect that can pull long branches towards the outgroup . in the amphibian bufo marinus, two aqp <dig> sequences were found, termed bufo a and bufo b, that clustered together with the other amphibian aqp <dig>  confirming that neither was a homolog of the teleost aqp1b subgroup. these results confirmed the presence of two paralogous gene copies early in the actinopterygii  lineage, related to human aqp <dig>  that may have arisen after an early duplication event of an ancestral aqp <dig> gene. thus, the two paralogous genes were termed aqp1a and aqp1b according to the nomenclature established for zebrafish  <cit> . the cdnas encoding sea bream saaqp <dig> and saaqp1o, and senegalese sole  aqp1o, previously isolated  <cit> , correspond to the transcripts of aqp1a and aqp1b paralogs, respectively. the european eel  aqp1b cdna that we cloned here is 100% identical to that recently isolated from the same species and named aqp1dup  <cit> .

genomic organization of teleost aqp <dig> and aqp1b and primary structure of the encoded polypeptides
in the genome of pufferfish , zebrafish, stickleback  and fugu , aqp1a and aqp1b are located in the same chromosome . in all these species, both chromosome loci were found to be linked, aqp1b being downstream of aqp1a. based on this synteny, the corresponding genomic region in sea bream was obtained by pcr, employing cdna-based oligonucleotides, and sequenced, to compare the genomic organization of aqp1a and aqp1b between extant and more primitive teleosts . in zebrafish, aqp1a and aqp1b were separated by  <dig>  kb and were  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb in length, respectively, whereas in sea bream both loci were separated by approximately  <dig> kb and were  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb in length, respectively. in fugu and tetraodon, which have more compact genomes, aqp1a and aqp1b were  <dig> – <dig>  kb and  <dig> – <dig>  kb in length, respectively, both loci being separated by only  <dig> – <dig>  kb. however, in medaka  only the aqp1a loci could be found in available genome sequence databases and it was  <dig>  kb in length. in all teleosts analyzed, aqp1a and aqp1b were organized into  <dig> exons of 354– <dig> bp, 162– <dig> bp,  <dig> bp, and 177– <dig> bp in length, for exon  <dig>  exon  <dig>  exon  <dig>  and exon  <dig>  respectively. comparison of the nucleotide sequence of exon  <dig>  exon  <dig> and exon  <dig> between aqp1a and aqp1b within the same species showed 64–74% identity, while the sequence of exon  <dig>  which encodes the c-terminal amino acid sequence, was only 57–58% identical.

the deduced aqp1a amino acid sequence was slightly more similar to human aqp <dig>  than that of aqp1b . comparison of the primary structure of aqp1-like polypeptides between human and teleosts  indicated that aqp1a and aqp1b sequences have the six potential transmembrane domains and the two npa motifs, as well as the residues of the pore-forming region  that are conserved in water-selective aqps  <cit> . in addition, in both aqp1a and aqp1b amino acid sequences, the cys residue were before the second npa motif , which is the site in mammalian aqp <dig> potentially responsible for the inhibition of water permeability by mercurial compounds  <cit> . however, teleost aqp1a and aqp1b share only 61–64% identity, the lowest identity being at the level of the c-terminus . the amino acid sequence of aqp1a, including the c-terminus, among teleost species was relatively similar , while that of aqp1b appeared to be more divergent  especially at the c-terminus .

functional aqp1b is predominantly expressed in the ovary of marine and catadromous teleosts
previous studies have reported that sea bream aqp1b mrna is predominantly expressed in the ovary, whereas sea bream and eel aqp1a mrna is ubiquitously expressed  <cit> . we investigated the expression pattern of aqp1b in teleosts belonging to different taxonomic groups that also have different reproductive strategies, such as senegalese sole , european eel  and zebrafish . the rt-pcr analysis confirmed that in pelagophil species, such as sea bream, sole and eel, aqp1b transcripts were highly abundant in mature  ovaries, although it was also expressed in kidney, intestine and gills . in contrast, in zebrafish aqp1b transcripts were detected at lower and similar levels in brain, ovary and testis , thus showing a completely different expression pattern than in the other species. in zebrafish and sole, aqp1a mrna was detected in all adult tissues examined, similarly to that reported in sea bream and eel .

the highly conserved amino acid sequence of loops b and e of teleost aqp1a and aqp1b with respect to those of human aqp <dig> suggest that fish aqp1b paralogs might encode functional water channels. to test this, x. laevis oocytes injected with crnas encoding sea bream aqp1a or aqp1b, sole aqp1b, eel aqp1b or zebrafish aqp1b were compared with oocytes injected with  <dig> nl of water . coefficients of water osmotic permeability  were determined from rates of oocyte swelling after transfer to hypoosmotic mbs. water-injected oocytes exhibited low water permeability, whereas the pf of sea bream aqp1a oocytes was increased by 10-fold, sea bream aqp1b and eel aqp1b oocytes by 8-fold, sole aqp1b oocytes by 6-fold, and zebrafish aqp1b oocytes by 4-fold. the presence of  <dig>  mm hgcl <dig> reduced the pf of both aqp1a- and aqp1b-injected oocytes . the inhibition was partially recovered  by incubation of oocytes with  <dig> mm β-mercaptoethanol.

sea bream aqp1a and aqp1b are differentially translocated into the oocyte plasma membrane
previous functional analyses indicated that oocytes expressing sea bream aqp1a were more permeable than those expressing aqp1b. to investigate whether both aqps were differentially expressed or translocated in the oocyte cytoplasm, a series of dose-response experiments, injecting increasing amounts of aqp1a or aqp1b crna followed by western blot and immunocytochemical analyses, were carried out . at all doses tested , the pf of oocytes expressing aqp1b was lower than that of oocytes expressing aqp1a , while protein expression levels resulting from both crnas were similar . immunocytochemistry on sections of these oocytes revealed that aqp1a was present in the plasma membrane , whereas aqp1b was also detected just below the plasma membrane, possibly in vesicles . this staining was specific for aqp1b since control oocytes, not injected or injected with water, were unstained . western blots of protein extracts from total and plasma membranes of oocytes showed there was a higher proportion of aqp1a in the plasma membrane when compared with aqp1b , confirming that aqp1b was retained in the cytoplasm. however, immunoblots of total and plasma membrane of aqp1b-expressing oocytes revealed the presence of two reactive bands of approximately  <dig> and  <dig> kda after incubation with the aqp1b antisera . both bands were visible in total and plasma membrane fractions, although the 29-kda band was much weaker in the plasma membrane fraction. alkaline phosphatase treatment of total membrane proteins before sds-page prevented the detection of the 29-kda polypeptide, indicating that this band corresponded to a phophorylated form of aqp1b .

role of sea bream aqp1b c-terminus for aqp1b cell surface expression
as indicated, the most divergent region between the amino acid sequence of sea bream aqp1a and aqp1b was the c-terminus. since it is known that the cytoplasmic tail plays a role in the intracellular trafficking of some mammalian  <cit>  and amphibian  <cit>  aqps, we studied whether this region was involved in the control of aqp1b translocation into the oocyte plasma membrane. expression vectors were made in which either the c-terminal tail of aqp1a was exchanged with that of aqp1b , or the c-terminus of aqp1b with that of aqp1a , in both cases starting at pro <dig>  the two chimeras, as well as wild-type aqp1a and aqp1b, were expressed in oocytes and the pf and protein expression at the oocyte plasma membrane monitored . expression of aqp1a-ct1b reduced swelling by  <dig>  ±  <dig> % when compared with oocytes expressing wild-type aqp1a, whereas water permeability of oocytes expressing aqp1b-ct1a was increased by  <dig>  ±  <dig> % with respect to wild-type aqp1b-expressing oocytes . oocyte permeability positively correlated with accumulation of intact and chimera aqp in the plasma membrane, with both aqp1a and aqp1b-ct1a being exclusively localized at the membrane , whereas aqp1b and aqp1a-ct1b were also present in the cytoplasm . western blot of total and plasma membranes revealed the presence of a single 27-kda band in aqp1a and aqp1b-ct1a oocytes, while aqp1b and aqp1a-ct1b oocytes had the 28- and 29-kda bands or a smear band of  <dig> to  <dig> kda, respectively . these observations suggest that retention of aqp1b in the oocyte cytoplasm may be associated to phosphorylation at the level of the c-terminus.

in silico analysis of teleost aqp1b c-terminal amino acid sequence
the c-terminal amino acid sequence of aqp1a and aqp1b from different teleosts was searched for potential regulatory sites . unlike human aqp <dig>  both aqp1a and aqp1b sequences showed typical sorting and internalization motifs  in the cytoplasmic tail, common in transmembrane proteins  <cit> . these signals appeared to be highly conserved in fish aqp1a , whereas in aqp1b they were more variable, although all of them included a di-leu or leu-ile motif. teleost aqp1a and aqp1b also had a variable number of ser, tyr and thr residues with a high probability of being phosphorylated. among these residues, ser <dig> in sea bream aqp1b had a high phosphorylation score  and fulfilled the criteria for a pro-directed kinase phosphorylation site . the same consensus site was found in the c-terminus of fugu  and sole  aqp1b, but not in that of eel, stickleback or zebrafish aqp1b, although these sequences, except that of eel, had one or more ser residues with a high phosphorylation score . some of these residues matched a casein kinase  <dig>  phosphorylation site , or a ck <dig> site . in addition, a thr residue preceding the sorting signal appeared to be conserved only in teleost aqp1b sequences , except in fugu and zebrafish, where it was replaced by phe <dig> and lys <dig>  respectively. however, none of these thr residues gave a relevant phosphorylation score.

involvement of specific residues in sea bream aqp1b c-terminus in intracellular trafficking
to investigate the potential role of the semi-conserved c-terminal ser and thr residues in aqp1b intracellular trafficking, sea bream aqp1b ser <dig> and thr <dig> were independently mutated into ala or asp to mimic non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated states, respectively . the leu234leu <dig> motif in this sequence was also mutated into an ala pair. wild-type and mutated proteins were then expressed in oocytes to determine their permeability and subcellullar localization as indicated above . swelling assays showed that aqp1b-t229a and aqp1b-l234a/l235a mutants reduced water permeability by  <dig>  ±  <dig> % and  <dig>  ±  <dig> %, respectively, with respect to oocytes expressing wild-type aqp1b . for aqp1b-t229a mutant, reduced permeability was apparently caused by retention of the protein in cytoplasmic vesicles, although it did not affect the phosphorylation state of aqp1b . in contrast, as the mutant was predominantly localized surrounding the oocyte nucleus , the strong inhibition of water permeability showed by aqp1b-l234a/l235a was possibly caused by the accumulation of the protein in intracellular compartments, which could enhance protein-lysosomal targeting and degradation . the aqp1b-t229d mutant was less expressed than wild-type aqp1b , causing low accumulation of the protein in the plasma membrane, thereby reducing oocyte water permeation . however, water permeability was higher in oocytes expressing the aqp1b-s254a mutant than those expressing wild-type aqp1b , associated with the absence of a phosphorylated form of the protein and increased expression in the plasma membrane . conversely, aqp1b-s254d induced the retention of the protein in cytoplasmic vesicles as with aqp1b-t229a, thus inhibiting protein translocation into the plasma membrane and reducing water permeability  . other ser residues present in the c-terminal region of sea bream aqp1b, ser <dig>  ser <dig>  ser <dig> and ser <dig>  were also substituted by ala but these mutants had no effect on water permeability with respect to wild-type aqp1b . these data suggest that dephosphorylation of ser <dig> may enhance aqp1b shuttling into the plasma membrane, and that thr <dig> may also regulate this process through a phosphorylation-independent mechanism.

amino acid sequence of c termini of wt and aqp1b mutants from pro <dig> to terminal his <dig>  amino acid substitutions are shown in black boxes.

discussion
we present here strong evidence confirming the presence of two aqp isoforms in vertebrates that are structurally and functionally related to mammalian aqp <dig>  these isoforms, aqp1a and aqp1b, seem to coexist exclusively in teleost fish since aqp1b was not found in mammals, amphibians or birds. the main difference between aqp1a and aqp1b is in the c-terminal tail, which contains specific residues for regulation of intracellular trafficking in aqp1b.

previous sequence analyses of mips suggest that substrate selective modes  were acquired early in the history of the family by gene duplication and functional shift, with the highest level of diversification occurring in vertebrates and higher plants  <cit> . analysis of aqp1a and aqp1b distribution by searching currently available genome sequence information and by cdna cloning suggest that both isoforms are present exclusively in the teleost genome. phylogenetic reconstruction of vertebrate aqp1-like proteins indicates that aqp1a and aqp1b share a common origin and are likely to have evolved from duplication of a common ancestor. because both isoforms are present in fish species belonging to distant taxonomic groups, from basal  to more modern  groups  <cit> , this duplication must be ancient and is likely to have affected most teleosts. as suggested for many duplicated genes in teleosts, the origin of aqp1b might be the whole-genome duplication  event that occurred specifically in the ray-finned  lineage after splitting from the tetrapod lineage about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . however, as it has not been possible to identify aqp1b in most basal actinopterygians  with the genomic information available, it is not known whether the aqp <dig> duplication also affected these groups. in all teleosts examined, the aqp1a and aqp1b loci were found to be closely linked, indicating that aqp1b possibly arose by a gene duplication event at a local level rather than at the chromosome or genome level. local gene duplication has also been proposed, for instance, to explain the repertoire of teleost opsins  <cit>  and the generation of the xiphophorus xmrk oncogene  <cit> .

the radiation of teleosts in the ocean most likely required the evolution of new osmoregulatory mechanisms in eggs and early embryos to alleviate the passive water loss imposed by the hyper-osmotic environment  <cit> . in this scenario, it is plausible to hypothesize that duplication of aqp <dig> genes in teleosts allowed for one duplicate to encode a product with a new function through innovating mutations in regulatory and/or structural sequences . this seems to be the case for sea bream aqp1b which plays a specialized physiological role in the oocyte mediating water uptake during meiotic maturation  <cit> . in other marine and catadromous teleosts, such as sole and eel, respectively, that like sea bream also spawn highly hydrated eggs, we show here that aqp1b also encodes a functional water channel whose rna is predominantly accumulated in the ovary, suggesting a similar role of aqp1b during oocyte hydration. in other pelagophil teleosts  <cit> , as well as in some species of catfish, in which oocyte hydration may also occur despite having a freshwater life cycle , aqp1b-encoding ests have also been found in the ovary. in contrast, in zebrafish, a freshwater species where almost no oocyte hydration is observed  <cit> , we found a completely different aqp1b expression pattern, together with a higher mutation rate in the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein. based on these data, we argue that, in marine teleosts producing highly hydrated eggs, aqp1b possibly represents a neofunctionalized water channel adapted to oocytes to facilitate water transport. finn and kristoffersen  <cit>  recently proposed that neofunctionalization of duplicated vtg genes, which allowed one paralog to be proteolyzed into faas driving hydration of the maturing oocytes, was a key event in the evolution and success of the teleosts in the oceanic environment. the duplication and neofunctionalization of aqp1b may have occurred in parallel to this mechanism to facilitate oocyte water uptake in marine teleosts.

the aqp1b isoform found in freshwater teleosts that spawn non-hydrated eggs, such as zebrafish, might be inactivated by mutations, or be eventually lost in the genome. this hypothesis is supported by the absence of aqp1b in advanced freshwater species, such as medaka, while the synteny between the aqp1a chromosome loci and downstream genes  is conserved. however, in other extant freshwater teleosts that arose later in evolution, such as tetraodon, aqp1b is retained in the genome. the retention of aqp1b in freshwater pufferfishes is intriguing, given that there appears to have been a massive elimination of dna after wgd in most modern teleost genomes, resulting in the retention of only a subset of the duplicates  <cit> . it is possible to speculate, however, that the recent evolution of tetraodontiformes did not last long enough to allow specific divergence of the genome and hence of aqp1b. the relatively high amino acid sequence identity  between fugu, a marine pufferfish which produces hydrated eggs, and tetraodon aqp1b supports this conjecture. in any event, additional studies aiming at the characterization of aqp1b in more freshwater fish species, as well as the determination of sites of gene expression and protein accumulation, are required to better understand the driving force behind aqp1b isoform evolution.

in addition to the ovary, aqp1b mrna has been detected in the posterior intestine, kidney, gills and esophagus of marine fish . the intestine of marine teleosts has an important osmoregulatory role, as hypo-osmoregulating fish have long been known to drink seawater to replace water lost by diffusion to their environment . accordingly, aqp1a and aqp1b proteins have been reported to be localized in the intestinal epithelia of teleosts  <cit> . however, in the sea bream gastrointestinal tract aqp1a and aqp1b have a different distribution pattern. whereas aqp1a is localized in the apical and basolateral membrane of enterocytes in duodenum and hindgut, aqp1b is exclusively localized in the apical microvilli of rectal epithelial cells  <cit> . moreover, freshwater acclimation reduces the synthesis of aqp1a in all intestinal segments, and of aqp1b in rectum. conversely, seawater acclimation of eels increases aqp1a expression and protein synthesis in the intestine  <cit> . therefore, although the specific physiological functions of aqp1a and aqp1b in the teleost gastrointestinal tract remain unknown, these data may point to an additional role of aqp1b in water movement across the intestinal epithelia.

the primary structure of aqp1-like proteins corresponding to the tm <dig> and tm <dig> domains and connecting loops b and e, which are involved in the formation of the water-selective pore, is highly conserved between teleost and mammals. however, aqp1a and aqp1b show different permeability efficiencies when expressed in x. laevis oocytes, and teleost aqp1b isoforms also show a marked structural divergence at the c-terminal cytoplasmic tail with respect to aqp1a and mammalian aqp <dig>  functional experiments, using artificial expression in oocytes of sea bream wild-type aqp1a and aqp1b, and chimeric proteins in which the c-terminus of aqp1a was totally exchanged for that of aqp1b, or the reverse, revealed that the aqp1a tail drives constitutive targeting to the plasma membrane, unlike that of aqp1b which produces partial retention of the expressed proteins in intracelluar vesicles. these data strongly suggest that aqp1b independently acquired specific regulatory domains in the c-terminal region for the control of aqp1b intracellular trafficking.

to investigate the nature of putative regulatory sites in the aqp1b c-terminus, we analyzed its amino acid sequence in different teleosts. based on this analysis, selected residues of sea bream aqp1b were mutated into ala or asp and the resulting proteins were expressed in oocytes to determine their intracellular localization and permeability properties. in the aqp1b c-terminus, we found typical sorting and internalisation signals that are common in many mammalian transmembrane proteins for targeting from the trans-golgi network to the lysosomal-endosomal compartment  <cit> . these motifs, however, were also detected in the aqp1a c-terminal tail, although their sequence appeared to be different between the aqp1a and aqp1b isoforms. thus, in all six teleost aqp1b sequences analyzed, but not in aqp1a, a di-leu or leu-ile signals appear to be conserved. mutation of sea bream aqp1b leu234leu <dig> motif into ala234ala <dig> produced the retention of the protein in intracellular compartments and apparently increased its degradation, thereby reducing water permeability of these oocytes. these results are similar to those observed with the mammalian aqp <dig> mutant which has an altered and extended c-terminal tail, retained in late endosomes/lysosomes triggering degradation  <cit> . similarly, mutation of the c-terminal leu345leu <dig> motif in the human vasopressin v <dig> receptor produces mis-folding of the protein and abolishes receptor export  <cit> . it is possible therefore, that the di-leu motif in sea bream aqp1b also plays a role in conformation, ensuring correct routing to the plasma membrane. however, di-leu motifs are also involved in basolateral membrane targeting and microvilli anchoring of mammalian cell adhesion proteins, ion channels and receptors  <cit> , including aqp <dig>  <cit> , in polarized epithelial cells. further studies are needed to establish whether the di-leu motif has an additional function in the control of aqp1b expression on the cell surface.

most notably, functional analyses revealed that two residues in the sea bream aqp1b c-terminal sequence, thr <dig> and ser <dig>  were responsible for sea bream aqp1b translocation from intracellular vesicles to the oocyte plasma membrane. the probability of the thr <dig> residue being phosphorylated was low, and accordingly the aqp1b-t229a mutant did not affect the phosphorylation state of aqp1b, although it did inhibit aqp1b cell surface expression and oocyte water permeability. since thr <dig> did not match any kinase phosphorylation consensus site other than protein kinase c , the specific function of this residue is unknown and awaits further experimentation. nevertheless, it was observed that the aqp1b-s254a mutant prevented phosphorylation and increased aqp1b translocation into the plasma membrane and subsequent water permeability, whereas the aqp1b-s254d mutant, which mimicked the constitutively phosphorylated state of aqp1b, was predominantly located in intracellular vesicles. these results suggest that dephosphorylation of ser <dig> triggers aqp1b shuttling to the cell surface, while its phosphorylation may retain the protein in intracellular vesicles. this mechanism is thus apparently the opposite to that described so far for mammalian and amphibian aqps , where channel insertion in the plasma membrane of collecting duct cells or granular cells of the anuran urinary bladder is triggered by protein kinase a-mediated phosphorylation of specific ser residues in the c-terminal tail  <cit> . interestingly, the ser <dig> in sea bream aqp1b, a consensus site for a pro-directed kinase, seems to be conserved in modern marine teleosts which produce hydrated eggs . pro-directed kinases are a large family of mitogen-activated protein kinases  and cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinases, some of which  are involved in transduction pathways leading to the activation of the maturation promoting factor  during oocyte meiotic maturation  <cit> . in sea bream, aqp1b translocation into the oocyte plasma membrane is a tightly regulated process thought to occur transiently downstream of mpf activation during meiotic maturation, just before complete hydrolysis of yolk proteins and maximum k+ accumulation is reached in the oocyte  <cit> . therefore, it will be of interest to investigate the potential role of cell-cycle related kinases, or other kinases activated during oocyte maturation, in ser <dig> phosphorylation and regulation of aqp1b trafficking.

CONCLUSIONS
we provide phylogenetic and functional evidence for the teleost lineage-specific duplication of aqp <dig> channels and further divergence at the c-terminal tail. the generation and neofunctionalization of the aqp1b isoform in oocytes of marine teleosts most likely contributed with the production of highly hydrated eggs to ensure survival in seawater. the neofunctionalization of aqp1b has also been accompanied by the acquisition of regulatory domains in the cytoplasmic c-terminal tail for the specific control of aqp1b intracellular trafficking, which are currently being investigated. the elucidation of the biological functions of aqp1a and aqp1b in teleosts will contribute to our understanding of the evolution of phenotypic complexity, diversity and innovation in vertebrates.

