BACKGROUND
the chloroplast is an essential organelle in plants which performs photosynthesis. chloroplast contains independent genome derived from a cyanobacterial ancestor  <cit> . chloroplast genome typically consists of circular double-stranded dna molecules of 110– <dig> kb size, including 100– <dig> unique genes. most chloroplast genomes contain two large inverted repeats  of 6– <dig> kb which are highly conserved and divide the genomes into one large and one small single-copy region   <cit> . the chloroplast genomes contain important genes involved in photosystems and biosynthetic pathways. many coding and non-coding sequences of chloroplast genomes have been used for the phylogeny analysis of plants, including: rbcl, matk and psba-trnh <cit> . because of the conserved nature, appropriate size, persistent gene organization and potential ability for plant phylogenetic inference and transgenic expression, chloroplast genomes have been widely sequenced and used for the comparison and phylogeny analysis  <cit> .

as the number of sequenced chloroplast genomes increases rapidly, bioinformatics tools become more critical for the analysis of complete chloroplast genomes. genbank, embl and ddbj are the primary nucleotide sequences databases. the chloroplast genome database  and gobase  are specialized chloroplast repositories  <cit> . dual organelle genome annotator  is a web-based annotation tool for chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . geneorder  and badger  can be used for comparative analysis of gene arrangements in small genomes  <cit> . grappa  and mgr  perform phylogenetic analysis based on gene order changes  <cit> . several tools offer the option to create chloroplast genome maps   <cit> . however, there is no comprehensive platform or tool which can be used for the comparative and phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast genomes. we aim to construct a platform which integrates genome collection, visualization, comparison, phylogenetic analysis and annotation functions together. it will facilitate the comparative and phylogenetic analysis of complete chloroplast genomes.

implementation
cgap contains a built-in database and four web servers including visualization of genomes, comparison of genome features, phylogeny analysis and genome annotation. the architecture of the platform was showed in figure  <dig>  cgap was implemented using python programming language and web2py web framework . entire platform was constructed on a machine with  <dig> gb ram. the performances of the database and web servers were tested via a variety of web browsers . as of writing this article, cgap has been running for half a year.

RESULTS
cgap collected  <dig> complete chloroplast genomes from ncbi organelle genome resources . according to the annotation information stored in the genbank format file, cgap extracted all types of genome features including gene, cds, trna, rrna, exon, intron, promoter, repeatregion, stemloop, - <dig> signal and - <dig> signal. complete chloroplast genomes and all genome features were stored in cgap chloroplast database. you can view and download all genomes and features in fasta format online.

visualization of genomes
in order to better illustrate chloroplast genomes, cgap implemented three functions for the visualization of genomes, including the visualization of circular complete genomes and linear regional genomes, the visualization of modified published genomes, and the visualization of user unpublished genomes. complete and regional genome maps of populus trichocarpa  were showed in figure 2; all functions used perl modules  and ogdraw to create high quality genome maps  <cit> . in the genome maps, different features were indicated by different colors, and every feature was annotated using its name. for each genome map cgap provided five types of figures for viewing and downloading, including tiff, png, jpg, gif and ps. in order to create maps of the modified published genome, user needs to indicate the genome using its organism name or accession number, and submit a file which contains the modified items of the published genome. every line contains one modified item which has three fields separated by comma, including featurename, the start and end position. for maps of unpublished genomes, user needs to submit the annotation file of the genome. the first part of the annotation file contains the annotation items, one annotation item per line. every annotation item has four fields separated by comma, including featuretype, featurename, the start and end position. the second part of the annotation file contains the complete genome sequence in fasta format. model files for test can be found from the website where it is used.

comparison of genome features
the feature content of chloroplast genome gives detailed information about the composition of the genome. in general, chloroplast genomes differ from each other in feature content. cgap compared the similarities and differences of the feature content between different genomes, which was implemented based on text mining method and the annotated feature information of the genomes. cgap also visualized the comparison results in high quality, detailed circular layout using circos  <cit> . cgap implemented two functions for the comparison of feature content, including one by one and one by more comparison. figure  <dig> showed the comparison results between pinus thunbergii  and porphyra purpurea . figure  <dig> showed the comparison results of medicago truncatula  versus gossypium barbadense , nuphar advena , cuscuta reflexa , cuscuta gronovii , ephedra equisetina  and syntrichia ruralis . in both figures the internal annotations and lines between genome features indicated the same features between the genomes compared, and the external annotations indicated the different features. for both types of comparisons, you can submit your own draft genome and customize the chloroplast genomes used in your comparative analysis. for one by more comparison using only the published genomes, user needs to submit a file which contains the names of organisms or accession numbers of the genomes compared. all names are placed in the first line of the file and separated by comma. for one by more comparison using the user unpublished genome, all names are also placed in the first line and separated by comma, and the first name indicates the user unpublished genome. the second line describes the length of user genome. from the third line to the end of the file, each line contains one focused feature of the user genome. optionally, you can supply a range of the genome, and then cgap will compare the genomes and visualize the comparison results only on the focused range of the genome. results of the regional comparison of genomes can be seen in additional files  <dig> and  <dig> 

phylogeny analysis
traditional phylogeny analysis is based on multiple sequence alignment. sequence alignment methods meet huge challenge when dealing with large-scale complete genomes. thus, various alignment-free methods have been proposed  <cit> . cgap used a novel sequence feature called base-base correlation  to characterize the complete chloroplast genome. bbc was first proposed by liu et al.  <cit> . for each chloroplast genome cgap extracted one bbc feature vector, and then calculated the distance matrix of the feature vectors using one of the ten distance methods implemented in cgap. finally, cgap constructed the phylogenetic tree based on the distance matrix and neighbor-joining  method  <cit> . in order to compare the results of alignment-free method with traditional alignment-based method, cgap also implemented phylogenetic analysis based on whole genome sequence alignment. the alignment of whole genome sequences was performed using mummer, and the distance of genomes was calculated using following formula  <cit> . dab=−log2nmatlmax 

where, nmat denotes the number of nucleotides matched between genomes a and b, lmax is the max length of all genomes analyzed.

cgap saved the distance matrix of the genomes as three kinds of formats, including the standard nexus format and distance formats used in mega and phylip  <cit> . cgap also drew a tree map for the overview of the phylogenetic relationship , and saved the phylogeny tree as standard newick and nexus formats. optionally, you can supply your unpublished genomes and customize the chloroplast genomes used in your phylogeny analysis. in this situation, users need to submit a txt file, the first part of the file contains all names of organisms or accession numbers of the published genomes used in the analysis process, and the second part of the file contains the unpublished complete genomes in fasta format.

genome annotation
cgap annotated new chloroplast genomes based on feature sequences of the chloroplast genomes collected in cgap database and basic local alignment method   <cit> . cgap identified the potential elements of your genome according to the sequence similarities between the elements and the features in the database. then, cgap attached biological information to the elements identified based on the information of the most similar feature  <cit> . finally, cgap returned you a list of non-redundant annotated entries which described the potential features on your genome. every annotated entry for a segment sequence of your genome has  <dig> fields, including normalizedfeaturename, start, end, featurename or location, lengthratio, identity, score and expectation. the meaning of each field was described in table  <dig>  cgap also visualized the genome in high-quality circular map based on the annotations.

CONCLUSIONS
cgap was developed for the comparative analysis of complete chloroplast genomes. it integrated genome collection, visualization, content comparison, phylogeny analysis and annotation functions together. cgap implemented feature content comparison of chloroplast genomes and a novel alignment-free method for the phylogenetic analysis. users can customize the comparative and phylogenetic analysis using their own unpublished genomes. to our knowledge, cgap represents the first comprehensive platform for the comparative analysis of chloroplast genomes. it would facilitate the researches and applications of complete chloroplast genomes.

availability and requirements
project name: cgap

project home page: http://www.herbbol.org:8000/chloroplast

operating system: linux for the distributed source code and operating system independent for the web servers

programming language: python  <dig> 

license: free for academic use

abbreviations
cgap: chloroplast genome analysis platform; irs: inverted repeats; lsc: large single-copy; ssc: small single-copy; bbc: base-base correlation; nj: neighbor-joining

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
jc implemented the programs, and wrote the initial manuscript draft. xz supplied constructive suggestions for the functions of the platform. gr set up the frame work for the web server. zl designed the whole study, proposed the alignment-free method and revised the manuscript extensively. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
one by one regional comparison results of genomes.

click here for file

 additional file 2
one by more regional comparison results of genomes.

click here for file

 additional file 3
overview of the phylogenetic tree constructed in phylogeny analysis.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by national natural science foundation of china , beijing natural science foundation , special foundation of china postdoctoral science , china postdoctoral science foundation funded project , scientific research foundation of the state human resource ministry and the education ministry for returned chinese scholars, pumc youth fund, the fundamental research funds for the central universities, the research fund for the doctoral program of higher education , “major drug discovery” major science and technology research “12nd five-year plan” , basic scientific research operation cost of state-leveled public welfare scientific research courtyard , china medical board of new york , program for new century excellent talents in university  granted to zhihua liu.
