BACKGROUND
microsporidia are obligate intracellular parasites that comprise over  <dig>  described species belonging to  <dig> genera and infect members of almost all animal phyla  <cit> . until recently, microsporidia were regarded as primitive amitochondriate protozoa, because they do not possess typical eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria, peroxisomes, and classical stacked golgi apparati. in addition, ribosomal rnas of microsporidia present some prokaryote-like features by harboring 16s and 23s rrna genes and lacking the  <dig> s rrna in their large ribosomal subunit that is characteristic of eukaryotes  <cit> . however, this putatively ancient origin of microsporidia has been contested and redefined. recent data has shown the presence of a mitosome, a mitochondrion-derived organelle  <cit> , and genes encoding proteins of mitochondrial origin such as heat shock protein  <dig> in microsporidia  <cit> . this suggests that microsporidia once had mitochondria and lost them through the course of evolution. based on the aforementioned factors, in conjunction with their possession of characteristic traits of closed mitosis and spores that contain chitin and trehalose, as fungi do  <cit> , microsporidia have been classified as the earliest diverging clade of sequenced fungi  <cit>  that underwent substantial genetic changes during adaptive evolution.

nosema apis and n. ceranae  are two microsporidia species that infect honey bees. like other microsporidia, the infective form of the nosema is the resistant spore, which is surrounded by an outer layer consisting of an electron-dense glycoprotein exospore and an electron-lucent chitinous endospore layer separated from the cell by a thin plasma membrane. the spore possesses a polar tubule which is considered to be a specialized product of the golgi apparatus and the posterior vacuole at the posterior pole of the spore has been postulated to function as a peroxisome  <cit> . in the midgut of the host, the spore germinates and extrudes its polar tubule and injects the infective sporoplasm into the host intestinal epithelium. inside the host cell cytoplasm, the sporoplasm undergoes divisions by binary fission  or multiple fission  and spore production by formation of a thick wall around the spore . repeated multiplication results in the host cell becoming completely filled with spores and eventually rupturing to release the spores into surroundings cells  <cit>  and to spread to other tissues  <cit> . mature spores excreted in feces can also infect other hosts, providing new sources of the infection in bee colonies  <cit> . parasitism by nosema impairs the host’s metabolism and reproduction, and causes a destructive disease known as nosemosis, a digestive disorder that shortens honey bee lifespan, retards colony development, decimates bee populations, and causes colony queen supersedure  <cit> . n. ceranae as a destructive intracellular parasite not only directly causes a serious disease in honey bees but also has the potential to compromise the physical and immunological barriers of honey bees toward disease, leaving bees more susceptible to other pathogens and senescence  <cit> . new evidence shows that interactions between n. ceranae and neuro-active pesticides, neonicotinoids which have been used for controlling pests in the ipm system, could synergistically and negatively affect honey bee survival and significantly contribute to colony depopulation  <cit> . so far, the only registered treatment for nosema disease is fumagillin, whose use is forbidden in europe because it has no established maximun residue level . with prolonged use of fumagillin, disease resistance to treatment has become an issue  <cit> . as a result, additional therapeutic options are urgently needed.

european honey bees, apis mellifera, are the most important insect pollinator and are responsible for the pollination of one third of agricultural food crops in the world with an estimated value of $216/€ <dig> billion per year  <cit> . for decades, nosema disease was exclusively attributed to n. apis, first described in  <dig>  <cit> . in  <dig>  a natural infection of another microsporidia species, n. ceranae, which was first found in the asian honey bee apis cerana <cit> , was identified in a. mellifera colonies  <cit> . subsequently, n. ceranae has become the predominant infection of two bee species  <cit>  and has been implicated in honey bee colony collapse disorder   <cit> , a malady that has decimated honey bee colonies across the u.s. and around the world  <cit> . the emergence of n. ceranae has changed the epidemiological pattern of honey bee nosemosis, resulting in an urgent need for elucidating the genetic basis that defines the epidemiology and pathogenicity of the nosema species.

microsporidia genomes are highly reduced and compact in nature. the size of microsporidia genomes has been determined for sixteen microsporidia species mostly based on karyotyping analysis and est surveys and varies considerably, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> mbp . the first full genome sequence of a microsporidia species, encephalitozoon cuniculi, marked a significant milestone in the study of microsporidia biology  <cit> . the genome organization and gene content of e. cuniculi represents the first evidence of microsporidia genomic reduction  and has provided considerable functional insight on the evolution of microsporidia-host relationships at the biochemical and molecular levels. since then, seven additional microsporidia genomes have been sequenced  <cit> .

in  <dig>  using the whole-genome shotgun  sequencing approach, we sequenced, annotated, and analyzed the complete genome of n. ceranae at 25x coverage  <cit> , which represents a second full genome sequence of microsporidia. like many microsporidia, n. ceranae has a highly reduced and compact genome with a draft assembly of  <dig>  mbp. a total of  <dig>  putative protein-coding genes were identified based on computational analysis of the n. ceranae genome sequences. by comparing the n. ceranae putative protein-coding genes with those of fully sequenced e. cuniculi as well as with yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae, about 50% of n. ceranae genes appeared to be conserved among microsporidia. these microsporidia specific genes are of special interest for identification of potential virulence factors and elucidation of molecular mechanisms of intracellular invasion of these obligate intracellular parasites. we have now extended our efforts for genome-wide analysis of insect microsporidia to a second species, n. apis which is the first described microsporidia species of honey bees. in this report, we present a draft sequence of the n. apis genome and an annotation of the n. apis genome at the nucleotide and protein levels. we undertake comparative analyses of n. apis with its sympatric congener n. ceranae in order to identify candidates of species-specific coding sequences that may be associated with adaptation and virulence of the intracellular parasites. we hope that our genomic studies of honey bee microsporidia parasites will lead to greater understanding of the biology and pathogenesis of these difficult-to-treat fungal pathogens and contribute to the worldwide efforts to manage honey bee diseases and improve pollination services provided by honey bees.

RESULTS
species specificity of n. apis
light microscopy revealed that fresh n. apis spores were oval shaped and varied in size, with a minimum of  <dig>  μm and maximum of  <dig>  μm in length, and a minimum of  <dig>  μm and maximum of  <dig>  μm in width  . a single specific band was produced from the genomic dna isolated from purified spores after pcr amplification with n. apis specific primers, and the sequence analysis confirmed the species specificity of the pcr fragment. no pcr product was generated when n. ceranae specific primers were added to the pcr mixture .

general features of n. apis genome assembly
this whole genome shotgun project has been deposited at ddbj/embl/genbank under the accession# anph <dig>  the version described in this paper is the first version, anph <dig>  the raw reads were submitted to the sequence read archive  database with accession # sra <dig>  there are  <dig> , <dig> nucleotides grouped in  <dig>  contigs, with an n <dig> contig size of  <dig>  bp, and a mean contig size of  <dig>  bp. these  <dig>  contigs were placed into  <dig> scaffolds linked through paired reads with an n <dig> scaffold size of  <dig> . the average number of contigs per scaffold was  <dig>  with a minimum of  <dig> contig in a scaffold and maximum of  <dig> contigs in a scaffold. the scaffolds contain  <dig> intra-scaffold, or sequence, gaps with an estimated average length of only 74 bp. this large number of short gaps is consistent with the limitations of sequencing high-at content genomes. of the  <dig>  contigs,  <dig> are larger than  <dig> kbp and cover 63% of the genome. the average depth of coverage for non-repetitive contigs is 15x. because of the surrogate-placement repeat handling of the celera assembler, the average coverage of all contigs, including repetitive regions of the genome, is 22x. including both the total contig length and estimated gap lengths based on paired-reads, the genome of n. apis is estimated to be  <dig>  megabases . sequencing and assembly statistics are summarized in table  <dig> 

contents of the n. apis genome
the main features of the n. apis genome in comparison with n. ceranae are summarized in table  <dig>  the comparison of the size and contents of genomes indicated that the overall genetic structure, contents, coding capacity, and proteome complexity are very similar, reflecting the shared evolutionary history of both species. the search of the n. apis genome sequence assembly for repetitive dna showed that the simple repeats and low complexity cover about  <dig> % of the total sequence data. there were  <dig>  tandem repeats identified with dinucleotide “at” having the most abundant repeats dispersed in the n. apis genome. three long terminal repeats  were identified. three piggyback and three gypsy transposable elements were identified in the genome.

the n. apis genome is very at rich, with an overall gc content of  <dig> %,  <dig> % lower than that of n. ceranae. the protein coding regions have significantly higher gc content  compared to the overall gc content for the entire genome, indicating that gc content is not uniformly distributed across the genome and supporting the notion that gc content is higher in coding regions than in non-coding regions. the gc content also varies by codon position, with the 1st and 2nd positions of the coding regions having greater gc content than the third  position.

n. apis displays bias in its codon usage and has a pattern similar to that of n. ceranae. both n. apis and n. ceranae have similarly preferred or optimal codons that have an a or t ending. however, codons ending with a or t are used more frequently in n. apis while codons ending with c or g are used more frequently in n. ceranae . the maximum-likelihood codon bias  analysis showed that n. apis has a relatively lower level of correlation between gc content at the third position and the mcb , compared to n. ceranae  .

the merged gene sets from the different programs resulted in a mixture of  <dig> predicted protein coding regions  made up of  <dig>   intact and  <dig>  intron interrupted protein-coding genes. the introns were inserted in random places within the genes and the genes containing introns fell into different functional groups. the consensus sequences “agt” at the donor site and “a” at the acceptor site were identified in most of the intron-containing genes . the density of genes across the genome is  <dig> , which is similar to that for n. ceranae. however, no significant correlation between the length of scaffolds and the level of gene density was identified . among the predicted cdss, there are  <dig>  complete genes and  <dig> partial genes that lack either a start or stop codon, or both. the length of cdss averaged  <dig>  amino acid residues per cds.

of these  <dig>  cdss,  <dig>   had matches to the nr protein database . most of the sequences have an e-value between  <dig> e- <dig> and  <dig> e- <dig> . among the  <dig>  cdss,  <dig>  were assigned as conserved hypothetical proteins,  <dig>  were assigned with go terms,  <dig>  were unannotated proteins and  <dig>  had no match to the databases . the sequences without positive blast hits may be explained by a low similarity of the genes to those functionally similar genes in the database, or new genes that possess new functions in the parasite. the sequence similarity of n. apis within the database by blast search ranges from 35% to approx 98% and peaks at 52% . the sequences of n. apis genes showed the most significant similarity to the sequences of n. ceranae followed by sequences of e. intestinalis and e. cuniculi . the majority of functional prediction of the coding sequences are obtained from the uniprot knowledge base , a nonredundant protein database that includes pds, uniprot, swiss-prot, trembl, and tair . the n. apis reference names, gene prediction sources, the gene locations, coding strand, and conceptual translations are shown in a gene-finding file  formatted dataset . table s <dig> also lists blast-hit annotation, enzyme code , interpro motifs, signal peptide and transmembrane motifs.

a search for motifs in the 100-bp upstream regions of start codons of n. apis genes showed an enrichment of tata box motifs in the upstream of genes and also yielded three distinct meme motifs. of the three over-represented motifs, the “accctt” motif conserved in n. ceranae and e. cuniculi <cit>  was particularly prominent , and was present in 37% of the predicted genes. the motif shows a preference for occurring predominantly at the ~15 bp upstream position of the start codon. the “accctt” sequence logo and representative upstream sequences of start codon of n. apis genes are shown in figure  <dig> 

the predictions by signalp and tmhmm showed that  <dig> proteins contained putative signal peptides with over 70% of the probability and significantly high c, s and y scores and that  <dig> proteins contained putative transmembrane segments of some form with a score of equal or more than  <dig> . of  <dig> proteins that had membrane-spanning domains,  <dig> were predicted to contain an amino-terminal signal peptide. the signal peptides, and transmembrane motifs are also included in the dataset .

the combination of noncoding rna  prediction programs and blast similarity search algorithms identified trna genes, rrna gene clusters , and small nuclear rna  genes. both aragorn and trnascan-se yielded similar results for trna prediction and showed a diversity of trna genes in the n. apis genome. there were  <dig> trna genes from aragorn and  <dig> genes from trnascan-se as well as  <dig> trna-derived pseudogenes in trnascan-se. by combining predictions from two trna prediction programs, there were  <dig> overlapping trnas with  <dig> distinct anticodons and gene lengths of  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides. the 16s, 23s, and 5s rrna genes were organized as a typical co-transcribed operon and arranged in order of 16s-23s-5s separated by two internal transcribed spacers  in a tandemly repeated manner. the 16s, 23s, and 5s genes were identified in twenty-six scaffolds and four scaffolds contain a complete locus of 16s, 23s, and 5s genes. the sequence comparisons revealed polymorphisms among copies of rrna genes and itss with the majority of polymorphisms found in the igs region. the degree of intragenomic variability observed in 23s rrna genes was greater than in 16s and 5s rrna genes. while both 16s and 5s genes displayed 2% intragenomic variability, the average intragenomic variability observed it the 23s genes was about 10% with one 23s rrna gene showing extreme divergence and sharing only 82% nucleotide sequence homology with the other 23s rrna genes. while sequence alignment identified short conserved sequence motifs in itss, the intragenomic variability observed in itss was demonstrated not only by nucleotide substitutions but also by length variance across the genome.

the comparison of the  <dig>  putative n. apis proteins with the  <dig>  n. ceranae proteins revealed a broadly similar gene set shared between n. apis and n. ceranae. the reciprocal best blast search comparing the n. apis gene set and n. ceranae gene set yielded  <dig>  one-to-one orthologs that were each other’s mutual best matches; thus, the orthologs corresponded to 49% of n. apis genes and 52% of n. ceranae gene sets. of  <dig>  ortholog pairs for both n. apis and n. ceranae,  <dig> orthologs had multiple hits in n. apis, suggesting the presence of paralogous proteins. the list of ortholog pairs in the genome of n. apis and n. ceranae can been found in additional file 5: table s <dig> 

functional annotation of protein coding genes
among sequences that were assigned with gene ontology  functional classification terms,  <dig> out of  <dig> sequences were further annotated with enzyme commission  codes. annotated sequences were further mapped to  <dig> different biological pathways. the kegg pathway map revealed the presence of a large number of n. apis sequences involved in nucleotide metabolism including purine metabolism and pyrimidine metabolism. genes encoded all key enzymes involved in glycolysis, the pentose-phosphate pathway, and the trehalose pathway identified in n. ceranae were also found in n. apis, indicating that carbohydrate metabolism is the main process responsible for energy generation in nosema . n. apis also contained enzymes participating in amino acid and lipid metabolism. it was not unexpected that n. apis lacked genes encoding enzymes involved in electron transfer chains and the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, which corroborates previous findings in other microsporidia and indicate a strong host dependence for energy production. the kegg pathway map also revealed that n. apis harbored genes for aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis, a process that is essential for accurate translation of genetic information, and genes required for biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and microbial metabolism that are involved in the parasite’s growth, survival, and fecundity.

of protein sequences with assigned go terms, most sequences have between  <dig> and  <dig> go terms annotated. annotation results and distribution, go-level distribution, number of go-terms for n. apis sequences with length , annotation score distribution; and percentage of n. apis sequences with length  annotated are shown in additional file 6: figure s4a, 4b, 4c, 4d, 4e and 4d. of the proteins that had matches to the nr protein database, the most abundant protein class is the binding proteins. other highly abundant proteins include intracellular transport proteins, ribosomal proteins, and proteins involved in major functional categories such as rna processing, transcription and translation initiation and regulation, post-traslational modification and energy production. among go terms of molecular function, “binding” was the most predominant group. of go terms identified for biological process, “metabolic”, was the most dominant term with  <dig> subcategories related to the metabolic process. of categories enriched in the cellular component, protein complex, intracellular membrane-bounded and non-membrane bounded organelles were the largest groups .

functional analysis showed that n. apis harbored a highly reduced mitochondrial homologue, the mitosome, and encoded a number of putative proteins that are candidate constituents of this mitosome. in total, seventeen genes encoding mitosomal proteins including atp-binding cassette  transporter complex, sulfate transporter family protein, nadph oxidoreductase, iscu, hydrolase, heat shock protein  <dig>  cation efflux protein zinc transporter, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, exportin, and pyruvate dehydrogenase e <dig>  were identified from the complete genome sequence of n. apis. consistent with the finding in e. cuniculi, the genes encoding pdh el alpha and beta subunits were found in n. apis. however, pdh e <dig> and e <dig>  which are components of the pdh complex, are absent. this suggests that while pdh provides evidence of mitochondria-derived metabolic activity, the function of pdh in microsporidia may be different from that in other eukaryotes, where it catalyzes the decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-coa and co <dig>  the identified mitosomal proteins clustered into different functional groups, including iron-sulfur  cluster assembly and export, transporter, chaperones and co-chaperones, tubulin and motor proteins, metabolic processes and anti-oxidative stress. the proteins involved in fe-s cluster assembly are essential to mitochondrial function under oxygen-limiting conditions and are the most prominent functional group within the predicted mitosomal proteins. the putative mitosomal proteins identified in n. apis are listed in table  <dig> 

virulence factors are molecules expressed and secreted by parasites that are keys for causing disease in the host as the parasites enter into and exit out of host cells, and inhibit certain host functions. genome analysis of n. apis has identified genes encoding a wide array of potential virulence determinants. these potential virulence factors of n. apis include genes encoding 1) polar tube proteins defining structure and invasion mechanisms; 2) spore wall and anchoring proteins involved in host tissue recognition and the initiation of host cell invasion; 3) endochitinase and chitin synthase involved in spore-host cell attachment; 4) proteins involved in pathogenicity regulations and energy parasitism, 5) components of the spliceosome machinery that plays a major role in the generation of proteomic diversity and proteins regulating splicing activity, and 6) putative secretive proteins that are involved in interactions with the host and are essential for modulation of host immunity towards successful completion of the parasite lifestyle in the host .

functional conservation and divergence of protein sequences between n. apis and n. ceranae
while putative proteins of n. apis share significant sequence homology and functional similarity for enriched go terms with n. ceranae, the comparison of the go terms based on fisher’s exact test after a false discovery rate correction  displayed some differences between the two species. comparison of biological processes  showed that genes involved in the developmental process, organismal development, signaling, kinase activity, translational activity were on the same level of abundance for both species. however, genes that are functionally linked to cell amino acid derivative metabolic process and reproduction were significantly more common in n. apis than in n. ceranae. in contrast, genes involved in metabolic processes and stress response were greatly expanded in n. ceranae. the protein transport genes were also found to have greater representation in n. ceranae than in n. apis. n. apis and n. ceranae also displayed different protein profiles responsive to stress and stimuli. genes responsive to stress were over represented in n. ceranae compared to n. apis, while n. apis contained a slightly greater number of genes responding to abiotic stimuli. both species had about the same number of genes related to responses to endogenous stimuli. while cell homeostasis and response to external stimulus genes were only identified in n. ceranae, symbiosis and encompassing, mutualism through parasitism genes were unique to n. apis. the genes related to response to external stimuli were present only in n. ceranae and absent in n. apis. these gene families may therefore represent species-specific proteins. for molecular function go terms, a number of differences were observed between the two nosema species . structure molecule activity proteins that contribute to the structural integrity of a complex or assembly within or outside a cell were found significantly reduced in n. ceranae, compared to n. apis. the calcium binding protein that was not in n. apis was present in n. ceranae. an enrichment test of cellular components showed that genes encoding nucleolus, golgi apparatus, cytosol, nuclear chromosome, mitochondrion and plasma membrane were at approximately similar levels of abundance for both species. however, intracellular membrane-bounded organelles including mitochondrion and endoplasmic reticulum were overrepresented in n. ceranae relative to n. apis. in contrast, nucleoplasm was significantly more common in n. apis than in n. ceranae. the ribosome was also found to be more represented in n. ceranae in relation to n. apis. the vacuole and vesicle proteins were present in n. ceranae but absent in n. apis, suggesting species-specific genes involved in structure and function of cellular components.

CONCLUSIONS
nosema disease is regarded as one of the most destructive and widespread adult honey bee diseases in existence and has become a serious problem in the beekeeping industry worldwide because of an alarming increase in the disease’s prevalence as well as its association with the widespread collapse of honey bee colonies. the sequencing and annotation of the n. apis genome provide a comprehensive overview of genetic content, structure and organization of the parasite and give some interesting insights into the complex biological and molecular processes of the parasite. the comparison of the n. apis genome to its sympatric congener, n. ceranae, provides an opportunity to define a subset of genes and their associated pathways that may be responsible for the pathogenesis of nosema disease and identify potential virulence factors that could be used as potential drug targets and for the development of novel antimicrobial agents. the identification of an overrepresented  motif in the upstream promoter regions of 37% of n. apis genes led us to wonder if these genes have similar patterns of promoter activity and are regulated by the same transcriptional factors. post-genomic experimental investigations are warranted to identify possible transcriptional factors and to determine the roles of the motif in the gene expression profile of nosema, parasitic processes of development and host invasion. the transcription factors may offer an attractive opportunity to exploit rnai-based targets for therapeutic intervention of nosema disease.

genomic data of n. apis and n. ceranae showed that overall genetic structure, contents, coding capacity and proteome complexity of n. apis and n. ceranae are similar, suggesting a shared evolutionary history for the two species. previous studies have shown that variability in codon usage is correlated strongly with gc content, particularly at the third codon position , and also that highly expressed genes exhibit very high levels of codon bias. the evolution and functional significance of the genome variation in gc content and codon usage bias have been widely reported between organisms and also within a genome; however, the underlying causes of these variations remain poorly elucidated and there has been a long debate over whether these variations are selected or neutral traits  <cit> . it is hard to define whether selection plays a role in codon usage bias in n. apis with observed weak correlation between codon usage bias and the gc content at the third site . the slight difference in correlation of genomic gc content and codon usage between n. apis and n. ceranae may reflect an evolutionary divergence or may simply be due to gene length effects of the two species.

the large number of orthologous protein groups shared by n. apis and n. ceranae and similar biochemical pathways encoded by n. apis and n. ceranae suggests that the core genes and their associated functions have been retained in the genus nosema. the inferences of biological process, molecular function and cellular component categorizations based on predicted gene products, however, distinguish the two species. although n. apis and n. ceranae lack the sophisticated biosynthetic pathways that are necessary for energy production, biochemical analyses showed that atp transporter proteins are enriched in both parasites, largely reflecting their host-dependent intracellular lifestyle. the key enzymes involved in energy transporter activity and metabolic process are more represented in n. ceranae than n. apis, suggesting that n. ceranae may have a greater capacity for biosynthesis and better ability to obtain energy from its host, compared with n. apis. although n. ceranae is a comparatively recent introduction into populations of european honey bees, n. ceranae is the more prevalent of the two nosema species in honey bees and appears to be replacing n. apis in some populations of a. mellifera <cit> . the high survival capacity of n. ceranae would allow the parasite to consume the host for its own growth and multiplication and therefore reduce the host’s fitness over time but generally not kill it. in contrast to the distinctive disease symptoms caused by n. apis, such as dysentery and crawling behavior, n. ceranae infection is generally not associated with external symptoms. instead, infected colonies have been found to decline gradually and collapse over a period of time. the differences in host pathogenicity between n. apis and n. ceranae may be, in part, a result of their differences in molecular function and biological process. the novel sequences of n. apis without detectable homologs in n. ceranae and vice versa suggests that there has been gene shuffling along the evolutionary pathway separating n. apis and n. ceranae from their common ancestor.

the success of the parasite also relates to its ability to respond to stress and endogenous stimuli within hosts. the result that proteins involved in response to stress and endogenous stimulus were more represented in n. ceranae than n. apis suggests that n. ceranae may have a better ability to survive under stressful conditions such as host immune functions. alternatively, n. apis may be able to sense and respond rapidly to abiotic stimuli such as environmental changes, as categories related to the response to abiotic stimuli were more represented in n. apis than in n. ceranae. this assumption is supported by recent findings that n. ceranae and n. apis responded differently to decreasing fumagillin levels  <cit>  and that n. apis was more resistant to cold temperatures than n. ceranae <cit> .

discovering virulence factors is a key to understanding microsporidia pathogenesis and their interactions with their host and for identifying targets of novel drugs. the data from the genome sequences of n. apis as well as n. ceranae have allowed us to identify a number of putative virulence factors. for example, host tissue recognition and polar tube extrusion for initiating cell invasion are important factors in the pathogenesis of microsporidia parasites. parasite spore wall and polar tube proteins that are essential for host cell specificity and cell invasion processes therefore could be potential targets for development of antigen-based diagnostic tests, antimicrobials and sirna molecules. the proteins secreted from cells into the extracellular space mediate important parasite-host interactions and therefore are also interesting targets for innovative therapeutics. future experimental evaluation of these virulence factors of microsporidia through molecular manipulations such as rna interference   <cit>  should provide valuable insight into their usefulness in drug development.

although they share some morphological, biological and genetic features, as well as invasive strategies, the genome sequences of n. apis and n. ceranae revealed that these microsporidia species are highly diversified and that not all microsporidia genomes are characterized by reductions in size and complexity. nosema genomes appear to be much less compact than the smallest microsporidia genomes, such as e. cuniculi, providing new insight into the adaptive evolution caused by the host-parasite relationship across the microsporidan groups. the availability of draft sequences of the n. apis genome is a significant addition to the rapidly expanding body of microsprodian genomic data which has been improving our understanding of eukaryotic genome diversity and evolution in a broad sense.

