BACKGROUND
single-cell experiments have shown gene expression to fluctuate randomly under constant conditions , which can have key consequences for the fidelity of signal propagation  <cit> , cell fate decisions  <cit> , and fitness . noise in gene expression is often quantified by the observed cell-to-cell variability in the production rate or concentration of a protein when observing many cells in an isogenic population  <cit> . fluctuations in gene expression can be caused by many local and global factors such as random binding events of rna polymerase  <cit> , fluctuating concentration of ribosomes, or availability of amino acids  <cit> . the cell cycle has been suggested as a general source of gene expression noise  <cit> , meaning that, in a snapshot of a population, two cells can differ in protein production rate or concentration because they are in different phases of their cell cycle. alternatively, two cells at the same cell cycle phase can differ because of cell cycle-independent effects. the key aim of this study is to quantify and disentangle these effects in escherichia coli, and to mechanistically understand cell cycle contributions.

eukaryotes exhibit distinct cell cycle phases that display different levels of growth activity and of dna replication, which in turn can result in varying expression levels as the cell cycle progresses. single-cell investigations of saccharomyces cerevisiae have indeed shown quasi-periodic fluctuations of protein expression rates  <cit>  and concentrations  <cit>  in synchrony with the cell cycle. the prokaryotic cell cycle does not display such distinct replication and growth phases. e. coli, for instance, grows and replicates dna continuously throughout its cell cycle, though for slow growth there are periods without replication activity  <cit> . expression activity can be dependent on the cell cycle nonetheless, for example because the replication of a gene may double the transcriptional activity at a specific moment in time, as suggested by recent single-cell studies  <cit> . that doubling would then in turn affect enzyme concentration and could cause quasi-periodic fluctuations. however, at the same time, cells may exploit specific regulatory mechanisms to filter such perturbations  <cit> . direct experimental investigations of the impact of the bacterial cell cycle on expression variability are lacking. elucidating this question is important to understand the origins of gene expression noise, modeling of genetic circuits, and resulting impact on growth variability  <cit>  as well as other forms of cellular heterogeneity  <cit> .

to address these questions, we followed a single-cell approach. we imaged e. coli cells as they grew into micro-colonies and measured gene expression as the fluorescence signal of chromosomally encoded fluorescent proteins . as shown herein, understanding the temporal dynamics requires detailed information on cellular volume increases in time, as protein concentrations are affected both by time-dependent expression and dilution. thus, we accurately determined protein expression and cell size at sub-cell cycle resolution. we further developed a model to predict the cell cycle dependence and amplitude of these quasi-periodic fluctuations in expression rate and concentration. the model predicted their dependence on chromosomal position, which we tested with genetic constructs.

RESULTS
the protein production rate fluctuates quasi-periodically
to measure the effect of the cell cycle on protein expression, we first determined protein production rate as quantified by the time derivative of the total cellular fluorescence . taking the data for all cells with a completed cell cycle  over all cell cycle phases, the protein expression rate displayed a total noise intensity  of  <dig>   <cit> . when plotting the production rate versus cell cycle phase ϕ  and averaging over all cells , it displayed the following trend: it was approximately constant in the first half, after which it rose to about two-fold at the end of the cycle . an initially constant rate and two-fold increase is consistent with the known chromosome replication pattern for the observed mean growth rate : a single chromosome copy in the first period of the cell cycle, after which replication occurs in the second period that produces two copies  <cit> . each chromosome copy then yields a fixed expression rate. this is not unreasonable, as other components required for expression, such as rna polymerases and ribosomes, also double throughout the cell cycle. at faster growth, replication occurs throughout the cell cycle for multiple nested chromosome copies  <cit> . consistently, we found that the production rate was not initially flat, but instead rose continuously throughout the cell cycle when growing on a different medium that supported a higher mean growth rate of  <dig>  dbl/h . the total increase remained two-fold, in agreement with an expected doubling of the number of gene copies. overall, these data indicate that the mean protein expression rate is likely proportional to the gene copy number and hence doubles during chromosome replication. this variation is more continuous at high growth rate because of the nested replication and overall higher gene copy numbers.fig.  <dig> dependence of protein production rate , protein concentration  and cell length  on cell cycle phase. observables are normalized by the respective population average and therefore unitless.  data for  <dig> cells  with three example traces and the binned colony average . histograms display the total frequency of production rate or concentration values summed over all phases. to convey the differences in noise intensity, a bar of size  <dig>  times the population mean is displayed.  phase-dependence of the binned data. in  an exponential function  is fitted to the averaged cell length. error bars are obtained by bootstrapping. for cell length, error bars are plotted but are smaller than the line thickness. growth was on minimal medium supporting a growth rate of  <dig>  dbl/h



deterministic cell cycle variations contribute to expression noise
to quantify the contribution of the mean cell cycle fluctuations  to protein production noise we split the single-cell production rate  p into the population averaged rate pc¯ϕ and individual deviations δp, which together capture all cell-to-cell variability : pϕx=pc¯ϕ+δpϕx. here, ϕ denotes the cell cycle phase and x all other causes of cell-to-cell variability; c refers to cell cycle dependence, which here is redundant because it is implied by the ϕ dependence but used for notation consistency. pc¯ϕ can be estimated by the curve in fig. 1b, and subtracted from individual traces to obtain an estimate for δp. the noise intensity caused by the deterministic cell cycle fluctuation pc¯ϕ is  <dig> , which was obtained by considering the phase ϕ as a random variable and then calculating the variance of the trace. noise of the individual expression traces δp, averaged over all cells and ϕ, was  <dig>  . these values are consistent with a scenario in which population mean trace pc¯ϕ and deviation traces δp are independent and thus their variances  can be added up:  <dig>  ≈  <dig>  +  <dig> . this population-average cell cycle contribution towards production rate noise does not include cell cycle stochasticity of individual cells and we will consider that below.

concentration fluctuations are buffered by dilution
fluctuating production rates can cause noise in the protein concentration. to determine the latter, we quantified the mean fluorescence per unit area of the cell. the noise intensity of  <dig>  , which was obtained by taking the data of all cells and at all cell cycle phases, was consistent with previous reports  <cit> . after ordering by cell cycle phase and averaging , the concentration also showed systematic variations : it increased slightly right after cell birth, then decreased and finally rose again. the amplitude of these variations was 4 % of the mean. this low value  and the initial increase seemed inconsistent with the large amplitude of variations in production rate caused by the cell cycle, as well as with the initially constant value of production rate   <cit> .

to get a more intuitive understanding of these differences, we formulated a minimal cell cycle model based on the measured cell cycle dependency of production rate . the concentration cannot be determined by simply integrating the production rate, as this would ignore dilution due to volume growth. to quantify the volume growth, we determined for each cell its length and its dependence on the cell cycle phase   <cit> . the population mean cell length l¯ϕ was well described by an exponential function  , and not by bi-linear or linear functions , as suggested previously . therefore, an exponential function for cell size was used as input for the minimal model . with a mean protein production p¯ϕ at phase ϕ , the concentration e¯ϕ can then be written as: e¯ϕ=f0¯+∫0ϕp¯ϕ'dϕ'/l¯ϕ, where f0¯ is the total amount of protein at cell birth.fig.  <dig> model for cell cycle dependence of protein concentration. a average protein production rate normalized by the mean. b exponential length increase normalized to a mean of one . population average protein production rate integrated in time, or the population average total fluorescence . c determined cellular protein concentration, given by the green signal divided by the black line in panel b



by design, e¯ϕ  reproduced the measured data  and provided an explanation for the observed functional form, including the counterintuitive increase in concentration at the beginning of the cell cycle, before duplication occurs. as e¯ϕ is periodic, we know that increases  are balanced by decreases . in cases where duplication occurs late, the expression rate is essentially constant because there is only one gene copy, while the dilution rate changes. thus, dilution is then comparatively weak at the beginning of the cell cycle, resulting in an increasing concentration, while dilution is comparatively strong further into the cell cycle, resulting in decreasing concentrations. this rationale also explains why concentration fluctuations are small: the functional form of the total fluorescence  is almost identical to that of the volume .

stochastic replication timing contributes to expression noise
the single cell data also suggested that stochasticity in replication timing is a source of protein production noise, which is supported by previous studies  <cit>  . in other words, δp would be the sum of fluctuations caused by cell cycle stochasticity δpc and of fluctuations δpnc unrelated to the cell cycle . here, v is the cell cycle phase at which the gene of interest is replicated and v varies from cell to cell. thus, the sum of δpc and the population-average pc¯ϕ yield all the fluctuations pc caused by the cell cycle. to determine the stochastic contribution of the cell cycle to the expression noise, one needs to quantify δpc. however, it is not trivial to distinguish δpc from the other stochastic, non-cell cycle variations in the experimental single-cell traces.fig.  <dig> production rates of single cells. a description of variables used for noise decomposition. the protein production rate p  is the sum of three contributions:  the population-average cell cycle fluctuations pc¯ϕ ,  the contribution due to stochastic replication timing ), and  stochasticity resulting from other, unknown, noise sources ). the sum of δp
c and δp
nc represents all of the stochastic contributions δp. the phase at which replication occurs is denoted by v. b experimental traces of three different cells  and fitted step functions . see additional file  <dig> for definition of step function. initial value was set to  <dig> and data is slightly vertically shifted for clarity. c histogram of v. data is from  <dig> cells in which a step-function could be discerned from the rest of the noise . d comparison of experimental average production rate curve  and mean of ideal step functions . experimental curve is the same as in fig. 1b, which was obtained from binning the data according to cell cycle phase and averaging over n =  <dig> cells



to overcome this problem, we started with pc and followed a variance decomposition approach using the law of total variance  <cit> . the variance of the full cell cycle fluctuations can be decomposed as follows:  <dig> varpcϕν=varpcϕν|ϕ+varpcϕν|ϕ 

here, angular brackets denote averaging, and the notations var and 〈 … |ϕ〉 indicate, respectively, the variance and the average for a given phase ϕ . in the second term, the brackets thus indicate an averaging over the stochastic variable v, which yields pc¯ϕ. next, the variance is taken. this variance was in fact calculated previously, and found to be  <dig> . thus, the second term indicates the deterministic contribution to the cell cycle induced noise.

in the first term, the variance of pc is determined conditionally on ϕ, and then averaged. this term thus denotes the stochastic contribution to the cell cycle-induced noise. the data does not directly provide an estimate of this variance, because the cell cycle-induced noise and noise from other sources are confounded in the measured single-cell traces of the production rate . indeed, in these traces, other noise sources, such as metabolism  <cit>  and fluctuating transcription factors  <cit> , are substantial and can mask the quick two-fold increase expected from gene replication events. however, in a subset of traces, the two-fold increase was clear . fitting each of these traces with a step-function  provided a distribution of the step-moment, v. we obtained a wide distribution for v with a mean  <dig>  and a standard deviation of  <dig>  . to check whether this distribution was consistent with the full dataset, we compared the average of the fitted step-functions to the average of all measured traces , and found that they were similar . these findings suggested that gene duplication events with stochastic timing in individual cells underlie the smooth shape of the population average production rate .

the distribution of v  now allowed us to estimate the first term in eq. , by first determining the variance of the step-functions at fixed phase, and then averaging over all phases . we obtained a value of  <dig> for this stochastic contribution of the cell cycle to expression noise, which is comparable in magnitude to the deterministic contribution denoted by the second term  <dig>  additional file 2: table s1). thus, variability in initiation timing contributes substantially to the cell cycle-induced noise. the deterministic and stochastic contributions together ) thus caused a variance of 2 + 2 =  <dig>  which is about half  of the protein production variance .

to estimate how the protein concentration noise is affected by the cell cycle, we computed the concentration traces resulting from the step-like production rate functions . for each pc of the set  the corresponding concentration curve was computed, considering that proteins are diluted due to volume growth . we found that the quasi-periodic concentration fluctuations caused by the cell cycle  contributed less than  <dig>  % to the variance in protein concentration . note that one can distinguish contributions from the population average trend  and the stochastic deviations around it due to variability in replication timing .

location on the chromosome affects expression fluctuations
chromosome replication is initiated at the origin of replication  from which two replication forks then progress simultaneously and bi-directionally along the two strands of dna  <cit> . this raises two expectations: first, genes located at opposite sides but at the same distance from oric should be duplicated at the same time and thus show the same cell cycle dependence of protein production and concentration. second, if one gene is located upstream of the other, the increase in protein production should occur earlier. to test the first prediction, we investigated a cfp gene positioned symmetrical to the yfp gene studied so far, at the opposite strand at the same distance from oric . we indeed found that both reporters displayed a similar dependence of production rate and concentration on cell cycle phase .fig.  <dig> influence of chromosomal position. production rate  and concentration  for genes at equidistant and symmetric positions with respect to the origin of replication. observables were normalized by the population mean.  locations of fluorescent genes and origin of replication oric on the dna. different replication times  and their predicted influence on the concentration . production rates are slightly vertically shifted for clarity.  production rate  and concentration  of gfp  compared to yfp . gfp data is from  <dig> cells with complete cell cycle that have on average seven data points/cell cycle.  location of gfp compared to other fluorescent genes. error bars are obtained by bootstrapping



to change the position we studied a gfp gene under plac control closer to oric than yfp or cfp . as expected from the earlier replication, the gfp production rate indeed increased earlier than the previous yfp signal . it started comparatively low, then increased more than two-fold and subsequently decreased again to end at twice the initial rate . the cause of the high fold-change and decrease is unknown, but changes in chromosome structure or transient improvement in competition for rna polymerases for this promoter  could play a role. as predicted by the model , the dip in gfp concentration occurred earlier and the initial increase disappeared . the magnitude of fluctuations remained at around 4 %. overall, these data show that gene position on the chromosome affects cell cycle-related noise.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we found that the cell cycle can be a major causal factor of observed noise in the rate of gene expression , with the rest coming from other sources such as metabolism  <cit> , transcription factors  <cit> , or expression machinery  <cit>  . within the cell cycle contribution, the data suggests two components: a deterministic mean determined by the cell phase , and a stochastic contribution caused by variability in the timing of replication  . the initially flat production rate suggested gene copy number is the main factor in cell cycle-induced expression rate variations, though alternative factors, such as cell cycle-induced variations in transcription factor concentrations, could also contribute.fig.  <dig> summary of observed contributions to gene expression noise. a the cell cycle causes fluctuations in the protein production rate, through deterministic and stochastic contributions. other non-cell cycle-related sources contribute as well. the fluctuations in protein concentration are determined by protein production noise and dilution due to growth. b contributions of the different noise sources, as described in panel a, as fractions of the total observed variance in gene expression 



the analysis indicated a noise-cancelling mechanism: even sudden two-fold production rate increases caused by replication of the gene are effectively compensated for by an acceleration of dilution due to exponential growth  <cit>  . the observed minor effect of the cell cycle on the protein concentration is thus due to a passive homeostasis mechanism that exploits the balance between synthesis and dilution. when proteins are actively degraded, this noise cancelling mechanism would be less efficient. we note that a similar, but likely active, balancing between synthesis and dilution was observed in mammalian cells where transcription rate is adjusted to cell size  <cit> . the homeostatic mechanism we observed does not necessarily act on noise from other sources, such as fluctuations in rna polymerase availability  <cit>  or transcription factors  <cit> , if they are not synchronized with exponential volume growth. indeed, concentrations do display significant noise intensities . we note that other cancelling mechanisms can act on non-cell cycle expression noise. for instance, metabolic noise that causes expression noise is partially compensated for by increased growth  <cit> .

our findings provide insight into how elementary processes, such as gene replication events and volume growth, can cause and filter noise in bacterial cells. elucidating the sources of gene expression noise is important to obtaining a bottom-up understanding of cellular heterogeneity, cellular homeostasis, and cell cycle regulation, and to providing input for mathematical models of gene expression networks. our results confirm previous demonstrations that variance decomposition can be a useful tool in disentangling different noise sources within cells.

