BACKGROUND
mechanisms by which biological information is encoded in living systems are incredibly diverse, and the resulting biological diversity is no less astounding. the relative contribution of different mechanisms to adaptive phenotypic variation has been the focus of many recent evolutionary and developmental studies and the subject of much debate  <cit> . one outstanding question is the relative preponderance of coding versus regulatory mutations in generating phenotypic change. numerous studies have shown rapid evolution of protein coding regions of genes, for example in hominid lineages  <cit> . for other vertebrates, frequently cited examples of morphological variation controlled by amino acid changes include repeated involvement of melanocortin- <dig> receptor  mutations in mice, birds, and reptiles in adaptive melanic pigmentation  <cit> .

increasingly, the importance of cis-regulatory elements  as the "creative" force in evolution has assumed center stage  <cit> . the theoretical basis for this hypothesis is that every gene possesses a modular arrangement of 5' cres that control temporal and spatial patterns of expression, and that these regions are less subject to the negative pleiotropic effects constraining coding changes, allowing adaptive evolution to proceed at a higher rate  <cit> . oft-cited examples of cis-regulatory change as the molecular basis for phenotypic variation come from drosophila, notably studies of the genetic control of yellow pigmentation patterning in adult wings of drosophila biarmipes  <cit> . other well-examined morphological changes include the pelvic spine and armoured plate in sticklebacks and bristles in drosophila larvae  <cit> .

the heliconius radiation presents an excellent opportunity to test these competing hypotheses in evolutionary genetics. these mimetic, aposematic butterflies are highly phenotypically varied and complex, yet patterns are under simple genetic control. patterning variation exists on multiple levels, from inter-specific, through geographic variation within species to intra-population polymorphism, and can be attributed to strong selection for mimicry that also drives adaptive radiation  <cit> . most importantly, the variation observed represents several cases of adaptive divergence and convergence, providing multiple sets of comparisons to test whether evolution recruits the same genetic pathways to produce similar phenotypic traits.

joron et al. identified, through linkage mapping, a conserved locus responsible for control of wing patterning in three heliconius species, suggesting that a conserved region controls pattern evolution across the genus  <cit> . in heliconius melpomene, hmyb and hmb loci are two major regions known to control the hindwing bar element and the red forewing band, respectively. the corresponding loci in heliconius erato, the co-mimic of h. melpomene, have been mapped to the same genomic regions as hmyb and hmb, suggesting the genetic mechanisms giving rise to shared phenotypes across co-mimicking races may be similar. furthermore, these loci are characterised by multiple alleles responsible for many different phenotypes, such that we might expect the genes responsible to have undergone multiple rounds of strong positive selection. hmyb and hmb have recently been annotated, and between  <dig> and  <dig> genes have been predicted in each locus  <cit> .

it is currently unknown whether coding or regulatory regions within these loci are primarily responsible for wing pattern diversity. in parallel studies we have been examining gene expression differences between races of heliconius melpomene. to complement this approach, we here examine signatures of evolution in coding regions by estimating the ratio  of nonsynonymous  to synonymous changes  in  <dig> and  <dig> putative patterning genes within the hmyb and hmb loci, respectively  <cit> . we first analysed bac sequences, expressed sequence tag  transcripts, and  <dig> transcriptome sequences, most of which are available for three focal species  and two races of h. melpomene . three selected genes from each locus were then sequenced for the entire coding region in several lineages of heliconius and a closely related genus when possible. the results identify clusters of three or four genes with elevated rates of evolution, but fail to provide strong statistical evidence for diversifying selection. nonetheless, genes highlighted here as having high rates of protein coding evolution are good candidates for further investigation into their role in wing patterning, as has been recently found for the uv opsins and their role in heliconius vision  <cit> .

RESULTS
initial pairwise and lineage-wide estimates of dn and ds suggest candidate patterning genes
using available sequences of three heliconius species and two races, we estimated the substitution rate for genes within the two patterning locus regions through 1) pairwise analyses with the yn <dig> program and 2) one-ratio branch model with codeml in the paml suite  <cit> . since the only intra-specific comparison in these analyses is between the trans-andean races, h. m. malleti and h. m. cyrbia, we consider recent recombination within sequences to be unlikely. hence, we have explicitly accounted for recombination only in subsequent analyses with larger numbers of intra-specific comparisons. generally low pairwise dn and ds values suggest that the majority of genes in the hmyb and hmb loci are slow evolving and highly constrained . furthermore, no pairwise or background  ω values of any gene in either locus exceeded one, which is the hallmark signature of positive selection. conventionally, neutrality is inferred when ω =  <dig>  purifying or negative selection when ω <  <dig>  and positive or directional selection when ω >  <dig>  however, the average ω value across sites in a gene is unlikely to be above  <dig> unless a large proportion of sites in the gene are under diversifying selection  <cit> .

analysis of the  <dig> genes annotated within the hmyb region highlights three genes on the reverse strand and in close proximity to one another that show the highest average pairwise and background ω values: hm <dig>  lrr , and fizzy-like    <cit> . analysis of background ω values calculated across a phylogeny of available bac sequences using the one-ratio model also pinpointed these same three genes, as well as hm <dig>  as having elevated values . of these genes, fzl yielded the highest lineage-wide ratio , which is also reflected in its highest average pairwise value . all pairwise alignments of both hm <dig> and fzl reveal more nonsynonymous changes than synonymous changes, while the number of nonsynonymous changes never exceeded synonymous changes for analyses of hm <dig>  previous studies suggest ω >  <dig>  to be the threshold at which adaptive evolution can be reasonably suspected  <cit> . therefore, based on their ω estimates, genes hm <dig>  lrr and fzl were selected for further analyses using expanded datasets to explore possible adaptive evolution within the heliconius radiation. these genes are clustered together along the hmyb bac walk on the reverse strand .

1g#: unique gene number used in original annotation and in the bac walk in fig.  <dig>  here truncated from original format "hm <dig> .."

2total bps: total length, in basepairs, of the annotated gene.

3lineage-based: heliconius lineage-based background ω estimates  using bac sequences of three species . entire length of each gene was used for this analysis.

4pairwise: results of pairwise analyses  between two h. melpomene races and between three heliconius species are presented. the number of changes between two sequences for each gene was calculated by taking the product of the substitution rate per site  and the number of sites . bps indicate the length of the nucleotide sequences used for each pairwise analysis.

5n: n*dn or the number of nonsynonymous changes

6s: s*ds or the number of synonymous changes

bold formatting indicates genes with ω >  <dig>  . ω values were not estimated for base changes of three or fewer.

in the hmb locus no pairwise, lineage-wide, or specific branch model tests estimated ω values that exceeded one, though dalr , kinesin , hm <dig>  and epoxide hydrolase , exhibited pairwise ω values approaching  <dig>  and high background ω values . however, epoxide hydrolase , has been slow evolving within h. melpomene, with no nonsynonymous changes and only three synonymous changes between h. m. malleti and h. m. cythera, which is insufficient to accurately estimate ω . hm <dig> and dalr show stronger signatures of selection in more recently diverged taxa, with the number of nonsynonymous changes exceeding synonymous changes between the two h. melpomene races . similar to the trend observed in hmyb, genes possessing high ω values in hmb are found on the same strand and are located in close proximity to each other along the locus, albeit interspersed with genes showing lower ω values .

1g#: unique gene number used in original annotation and in the bac walk in fig.  <dig>  here truncated from original format "hm <dig> .."

bold formatting indicates ω >  <dig> . other details are as indicated for table  <dig> 

the kinesin gene, in addition to yielding the highest background ω value  and second highest average pairwise ω value , is the only gene to possess more nonsynonymous changes than synonymous changes across all pairwise analyses . it is important to note that kinesin is an unusually large gene, and most pairwise analyses only encompassed  <dig> kilobases at the 3' end, since  <dig> contigs of h. m. malleti, h. m. cythera, and h. numata only span this region . smart  functional domain searches located a conserved kinesin motor domain at the 5' end, with the 3' end likely conferring protein binding specificity   <cit> . thus, our analyses do at least include the region in which functionally significant changes are most likely to occur. due to an abundance of insertions and deletions in exon  <dig> between h. melpomene and h. erato, the amino acid sequences were aligned with clustalw and only nucleotides of aligning amino acids were used in tests of selection .

tests of selection across closely and distantly related heliconiini in selected candidate genes
genes singled out from preliminary analyses were further examined by amplifying sequences across other heliconiini lineages. in addition to hm <dig> and lrr, trehalase 1a  was included in further analyses since its gene expression was found to be associated with wing patterning . unfortunately, we were unable to amplify fzl sequences from other races and species, precluding further investigation. for the hmb locus, mad  was included in these expanded analyses due to its potentially important role as a mitotic checkpoint protein, suggesting potential interactions with fzl in the hmyb locus  <cit> . mad had been excluded from preliminary analyses due to a lack of  <dig> raw reads for the gene, and we were unable to amplify dalr from other races and species.

since genealogical topologies may differ from published heliconius phylogenies, trees for each of the candidate genes were reconstructed by maximum likelihood using the dnadist program in phylip  <dig> . results show that all six candidate genes produce an overall topology similar to a recent heliconius phylogeny  <cit> . the only discrepancy was placement of h. charithonia, a monomorphic species, within h. erato for mad. however, because the bootstrap value for the branch grouping h. charithonia with h. erato cyrbia was low , the published phylogeny was used for analysis.

hmyb candidate genes show signatures of accelerated evolution
the estimated background ω value for hm <dig> across  <dig> heliconius taxa  was comparable to the preliminary estimate that included only the three focal heliconius taxa . nucleotide sequence alignments of exon  <dig> revealed several indels, some across many lineages, others specific between two species . however, indels were removed within reading frame from sequences used in all preliminary and expanded paml analyses. most notably, there is a  <dig> nucleotide insertion in h. charithonia, h. doris, h. numata, and h. m. malleti relative to the h. melpomene and h. erato bac sequences . the amino acid alignments of exon  <dig> suggest that h. doris is an outgroup to the main heliconius clades at this gene .

since phylogeny-based methods of detecting positive selection do not take into consideration the effects of recombination on sequence evolution, gene alignments were analyzed using gard  to estimate recombining breakage points  <cit> . trees generated from the six recombinant fragments for hm <dig> were then used in fel  tests for positive selection . following previous analyses, we take p <  <dig>  as indicative of positive selection  <cit> . fel analyses of gard trees and the one neighbour joining tree found one codon with a signature of positive selection at  <dig>  > p >  <dig>  . the inclusion or exclusion of race sequences did not affect detection of sites under directional selection .

1races included: hyphy analyses were performed using interspecific and intraspecific sequences.

2races excluded: hyphy analyses were performed using only interspecific sequences.

3bp: number of recombinant breakage points predicted by gard.

4Δaicc: the difference in aicc score of the best gard model that allows changing tree topologies for predicted partitions and the aicc score for the null model in which one tree is inferred.

5kh p ≤  <dig> : number of gard predicted breakpoints that show significant topological incongruence by the kuchibhatla and hart  test at p ≤  <dig> .

6fel : fixed effects likelihood  analysis detected codons showing signatures of positive selection at p ≤  <dig>  using topologies inferred by gard recombinant partitions.

7fel : fixed effects likelihood  analysis detected codons showing signatures of positive selection  at p ≤  <dig>  using a single neighbour joining  tree.

due to the difficulty of amplifying the entire lrr gene  in h. erato and other species in the pupal mating clade, analyses included only h. charithonia , three races of h. melpomene , and bac sequences of h. erato and h. numata. the background ω  across this topology is similar to that of the preliminary background analysis . three breakage points were detected by gard analyses, and fel tests of selection using these recombinant partitions found no sites undergoing positive selection . phylogeny-wide analyses reveal a low background ω value for trehalase 1a , and fel tests of selection provided no evidence for selection.

hmb genes
due to difficulty in amplifying the entire length of kinesin from many species, analysis of kinesin was limited to exon  <dig> , the largest exon and also the region that includes the predicted "binding domain" of the protein. because exon  <dig> contained an abundance of non-frame-shifting indels, amino acid sequences for all races were first aligned with clustalw and nucleotide sequences of only overlapping amino acid positions were included in the paml, gard, and fel analyses. the h. doris kinesin sequence is again highly divergent from the other heliconius species sampled .

kinesin ω values are the highest estimated across all genes . background, h. melpomene branch , and h. erato branch  ω values are similar:  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively . gard analyses generated eight predicted breakage points, two of which showed statistically significant topological incongruence at p =  <dig>  . one codon was found to show evidence for positive selection when accounting for recombination, while two codons were identified when a single nj tree was used for analysis .

hm <dig> showed no evidence for recombination , but also did not show any support for positive selection. estimated dn/ds ratios for mad are low, suggesting that the gene is also highly constrained . background ω was  <dig>  and branch ω values for h. melpomene  and h. erato were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . accounting for recombination did not alter findings that there is no evidence for positive selection in hm <dig> or mad .

discussion
the genetic basis of adaptation in natural populations is an area of considerable current interest in evolutionary biology. one major area of debate is the relative importance of protein-coding versus regulatory change in morphological adaptation. the heliconius butterflies show both divergence and convergence in wing pattern, making them an interesting system to test these opposing hypotheses. here, we explore protein-coding change across two genomic regions controlling wing pattern variation across multiple species of heliconius. the role of these regions in wing pattern evolution across multiple species of heliconius makes this a promising system to search for signatures of rapid evolution. however, our results provide little convincing evidence for accelerated protein-coding evolution by conventional interpretation. although statistical support is mixed and ω values are never significantly greater than  <dig>  a handful of genes do show evidence for adaptive evolution based on conservative estimates of ω ≈  <dig> . nonetheless, both genomic regions studied provide some evidence for a clustering of genes with elevated ω, suggesting the influence of selection on the region. furthermore, there is intriguing concordance between the genes highlighted here as having signatures of rapid evolution, and those already identified by gene expression and population genetic surveys.

fast evolving genes are clustered in candidate regions
of the  <dig> genes analyzed for signatures of positive selection in the hmyb locus, only three genes, hm <dig>  lrr, and fizzy-like, consistently showed accelerated rates of evolution. and of the  <dig> examined genes in the hmb locus, dalr, hm <dig>  and kinesin yielded the highest ω values from several pairwise and lineage-wide tests of selection. it is striking that these candidate genes group together along the bac walk: at the 5' end of the hmb locus and at the 3' of the hmyb locus, suggesting that in both cases a specific region in each locus may have undergone selection. while hm <dig> is also found proximally to these genes along the same strand in hmyb, its ω values are relatively much lower. since hm <dig> codes for a protein that serves a known important function , it may have experienced greater selective pressure to be functionally constrained compared to other genes discussed here  <cit> . these high ω values may indicate selection on the protein sequence of several functionally important genes, but perhaps more likely also indicate fixation of "nearly neutral mutations" rather than positive selection  <cit> . genetic hitch-hiking due to repeated selective sweeps, perhaps on neighbouring cis-regulatory regions or untranslated regions , could have locally reduced the effective population size, leading to fixation of nearly neutral coding changes  <cit> . thus, repeated selective sweeps in close proximity to these genes would be expected to give a pattern of elevated ω values as observed. regions of low recombination also experience a higher rate of nonsynonymous polymorphism and greater rate of accumulation of nonsynonymous substitutions over time that better reflect effective population size effects rather than positive selection  <cit> . higher ω values could also therefore result from lower rates of recombination in these gene regions.

the problem of polymorphism
the general assumption of the analyses performed in this present study is that differences between sequences are fixed differences between the populations studied. of course, this will not be true in many cases, and in particular, closely related races will share polymorphisms. thus, what tests of positive selection assume to be substitutions reflecting fixed changes may actually be "pre-fixations"  <cit> . taking this into consideration, kryazhimskiy and plotkin suggest that ω values below one may in fact still be a signature of strong or weak positive selection, and this is supported by studies finding statistical evidence for adaptive evolution when ω >  <dig>  with limited sequence comparisons  <cit> . in some cases single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified in the sequences between h. m. cythera and h. m. malleti, in which case the shared base was chosen for sequence analyses . this may lead to either artificially high or low ω estimates depending on whether polymorphic sites account for silent or non-silent variation. hm <dig>  was the only gene for which high polymorphism observed in  <dig> sequence reads was of concern. the potential consequences of "majority-rule" or "minority-rule" selection of polymorphic sites was addressed by running analyses on many possible combinations of polymorphic sites, with no strong effect on estimated ω values.

candidates in the hmyb locus
the ranges of many heliconius species are broken up into divergent wing pattern races separated by narrow hybrid zones. analysis of population differentiation for the hmyb locus between such wing pattern races showed a striking peak of population differentiation around the lrr gene in several pairwise comparisons  <cit> . here, we have also highlighted this region, with hm <dig>  lrr , and fizzy-like  being relatively fast evolving.

in the hmyb locus, the only gene with tentative evidence for positive selection was hm <dig>  its analyzed data set is more robust as it includes broad representation of closely related species outside of the h. melpomene and h. erato branches. yet, estimated rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitutions are likely a conservative estimate of the true degree of sequence divergence, since alignments revealed several indels in the fifth and last exon of hm <dig> . while the majority of indels exist between species, a conspicuous  <dig> base-pair insertion in  <dig> contigs of h. m. malleti was found in exon  <dig> relative to the h. melpomene and h. erato bac sequences . the method by which ω is estimated fails to capture and quantify the effects of insertions and deletions as part and parcel of "protein-coding" mutations, as they are theoretically equally capable as point mutations in affecting phenotype. while detailed examination of the distribution of synonymous and nonsynonmyous substitution sites in hm <dig> revealed no discernable pattern, indels are notably only found in exon  <dig>  however, little more can be inferred about hm00021's candidacy as a hindwing pattern switch gene since it shows no homology to any known gene and does not contain recognisable protein motifs. amplified sequences that contain indels maintain an open reading frame until the predicted 3' stop codon, suggesting that hm <dig> is functionally active.

though we were unable to successfully amplify sequences of fizzy-like from related species and races, initial ω estimates for fzl are amongst the highest, identifying it as a promising candidate gene. furthermore, the gene shows highly complex patterns of alternative splicing between races of h. melpomene that correlate with hindwing phenotype . strong 5' utr divergence in fzl has been observed between races of h. melpomene, perhaps hinting at 5' utr involvement in regulation of alternative splicing . while a great diversity of regulatory mechanisms for alternative splicing exist, including usage of regulatory modules that have been found in exons and introns, recent studies point to alternative 5' utrs as important mechanisms in differential, complex, and highly targeted gene regulation  <cit> . such findings, in conjunction with results in this present study, suggest that this gene may be a target for selection, either within the coding region, or on neighbouring non-coding regions that regulate splicing in fzl.

candidates in the hmb locus
in population genetic surveys between two peruvian races of h. melpomene, a region of the hmb locus surrounding the kinesin gene was shown to be highly differentiated  <cit> . even more compelling, gene expression studies showed parallel expression changes between races of h. melpomene and h. erato in exon  <dig> of the kinesin gene and in-situ hybridization experiments suggest consistent spatial and temporal patterns of gene expression on the forewing  <cit> . at kinesin, rates of evolution are relatively high along both the h. erato and h. melpomene branches, though ω values do not significantly differ from each other or from the background ratio . alignments of kinesin sequences amplified from many species and races revealed not only an abundance of snps, but also a profusion of indels that maintained open reading frames, suggesting that rapid sequence evolution had not simply resulted in non-functional proteins. between the bac sequences of h. erato and h. melpomene across exon  <dig>  there are at least nine indels ranging in size from one to eight amino acids . surprisingly, indel patterns do not agree with overall sequence divergence patterns in that h. melpomene and h. charithonia, species belonging to each of the two main clades, appear to share many of the amino acid indels . together, the evidence supports kinesin's strong candidacy as a potential hmb switch gene.

not surprisingly, these very genes of interest identified in preliminary bac analyses as the most "fast evolving," such as fzl, dalr, and kinesin, were difficult to amplify across species for further phylogeny-based analyses. thus, in some ways our methods are biased against the most interesting genes. fortunately however, analyses using bac sequences available for three heliconius species include all genes in the region, so are not biased in this way.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study did not find strong support for protein-coding changes, at least those detectable through codon-based analyses, to be responsible for the control of major wing pattern elements in heliconius. however, these analyses have been valuable in highlighting regions within each locus that show some signature of selection. such patterns hint at the possibility of selection primarily acting on non-coding or regulatory regions found between or proximal to those genes, which have reduced effective population sizes in surrounding genomic regions. interestingly, the identification of these gene regions corroborates the findings of related research efforts.

over recent years, a paradigm has emerged for the origin of novel morphological adaptations that involves co-option of genes with conserved functions through novel regulatory interactions. however, this paradigm has arisen from studies using methods that are inherently biased towards discovering roles for conserved genes, such as the use of cross-staining antibodies. here, we have found higher rates of sequence evolution in genes showing little or no homology to known proteins. the strong candidate gene for the yellow band , fizzy-like  shares at most only 26% amino-acid identity with other members of the fizzy-family. findings from this present study raise the suspicion that some genes involved in wing colour patterning of heliconius may be evolving so rapidly that homology cannot be easily established.

