BACKGROUND
organisms that engage in an obligate mutualistic lifestyle often experience a drastic change in environmental conditions. well known examples are symbiotic bacteria in the rumen of ungulates and the mitochondria in eukaryotic cells, which function under quite different growth conditions than free-living bacteria, and have genomes that became modified or reduced in response to these specialized dependent life styles  <cit> . however, the expression of derived symbiotic traits is difficult to study in endosymbiotic bacteria, because they can normally not be grown on artificial media  <cit>  or otherwise be studied separately from the host. this is easier in obligate ectosymbioses where hosts and symbionts can often survive and function without their partner-mutualist for at least a short period, and where relatively pure samples of symbiont biomass can often be obtained and analyzed.

attine ants live in obligate mutualistic association with specific fungi that they rear for food in underground gardens. the cultivated fungi mostly belong to the tribe leucocoprini   <cit>  which primarily consists of free-living saprotrophic genera that grow in the lower litter layer of forest floors, usually characterized by high ph levels  <cit>  the ants supply their mutualistic fungi with substrate and protect their gardens from infections  <cit> . one of the defense mechanisms to control diseases is the secretion of the ant's metapleural glands  <cit> , which generates acidic conditions in fungus gardens, discouraging microbial growth relative to the surrounding soil with higher ph. acetic acid is being produced in the fungus gardens, but this has to be tightly regulated as it has the potential to inflict more harm to the symbiont than to alien fungi  <cit> . the domestication of fungal symbionts by the ants may therefore have required specific adaptations for growing under lower but more controlled ph conditions, both in terms of ph buffering and with regard to the activity optima of the extracellular enzymes that are produced to degrade the substrate that the ants collect.

nitrogen is a limiting factor for growth and maintenance in many organisms, particularly those living on a herbivorous diet as the attine ants indirectly do. recent findings show that leaf-cutting ants partly overcome nitrogen limitation by living in association with n2-fixing bacteria that may supply as much as 50% of a colony's nitrogen requirements  <cit> . such bacterial nitrogen will be incorporated into proteins, so that the fungal symbionts of the ants must secrete proteinases to digest these into amino acids that can be assimilated. the fungal symbiont is also likely to compete for nitrogen with other, non mutualistic microorganisms living in the fungus garden  <cit> , imposing further selection for effective protein degradation by the fungal symbiont. finally, proteolytic enzymes are known to be strongly ph dependent, so in order to have effective protein degradation the ph optimum of the proteolytic enzymes should ideally match the ph of the fungus garden.

several studies have been devoted to the role of ph in controlling in vitro proteolytic enzyme secretion in fungi  <cit> , but to our knowledge in vivo studies of ph-dependent proteolytic enzyme activities in fungi have not been done. the objective of our present study was thus threefold:  <dig>  to use the unique growth form of ant fungus gardens to determine the feasibility of ph buffering studies in fungi,  <dig>  to determine the ph activity optima of different classes of extracellular proteinases across a series of genera and species of fungus-growing ants, and  <dig>  to map the observed differences on an independently obtained phylogenetic tree of the fungal symbionts to obtain insight in the evolutionary pathways that may have generated differences in ph-dependent activities of proteinases.

RESULTS
the ph conditions of fungus gardens and their buffering capacity
all  <dig> attine ant colonies used in this study  displayed the same ph  for 1: <dig> water extracts taken from the middle layer of the fungus gardens. adding acid/alkaline solutions to the fungus garden extracts did not noticeable change the color of ph paper compared to controls  indicating that all tested fungus gardens exhibited approximately the same buffering strength.

one unit of relative proteolytic activity  corresponds to 1* <dig> difference between treatment and control absorbance . the mean activity values are presented as u* <dig> ± se.

approximate buffering capacities for attine symbionts and non-symbiotic basidiomycetous fungi  showed that fungus garden symbionts and plated l. gongylophorus  tended to have higher buffering capacities than free-living fungi  . the buffering capacity of plated fungi did not depend on the composition of the cultivation media. the relationship between the ph and the amount of added base was approximately linear  suggesting that all measurements were performed in the ph zone close to the buffer point of the tested solutions where they exhibit their maximal buffering capacity  <cit> .

* buffering was observed on ph test papers only, but was comparable to the other fungal garden symbionts.

** this colony of sericomyrmex amabilis  had an unusually solid and humid garden structure compared to all other fungus gardens examined.

differential production of proteinase classes across fungus gardens
all tested colonies displayed significant proteinase activity . the mean total activity values ± se were  <dig> ±  <dig>   <dig> ±  <dig> and  <dig> ±  <dig> u· <dig>  for lower attine, higher attine and leaf-cutting ant gardens, respectively, which implies that total proteinase activity increases with the degree of evolutionary "advancement" of the symbiosis. however, the garden of apterostigma collare was an exception to this rule, expressing relatively high total proteinase activity compared to the other lower attine ants. this is remarkable as these ants rear a phylogenetically distant fungus, belonging to the family pterulaceae, while all other attines cultivate fungi belonging to the leucocoprini tribe of the family agaricaceae  <cit> .

inhibition analyses revealed that proteinases belonging to all four catalytic classes could be detected in the fungus gardens , but the activity of aspartic and cysteine proteinases was very low compared to the activity of serine- and metalloproteinases. this result was not unexpected as cysteine and aspartic proteinases are rarely produced by fungi  <cit> . the serine proteinases belonged to the subtilase-like superfamily as they were inhibited by pmsf, but not by tlck and tpck  <cit> , and they displayed activity towards the chromogenic substrates glp-aal-pna and suc-aapf-pna, but not to n-benzoyl-arg-pna  <cit> . the metalloproteinases could not be further identified.

the activities of the two dominant classes of proteinases varied considerably between fungus gardens , with lower attine symbionts having low activities for both classes and the basal higher attine- and leaf-cutting symbionts specializing in producing mostly only one class. leaf-cutting ant gardens were characterized by high activity of metalloproteinases, similar  to the lower attine gardens, whereas the gardens of basal higher attine ants, with one exception, primarily showed serine proteinase activity .

mapping proteolytic activity profiles on the phylogenetic tree of the fungal symbionts
mapping the ph optima curves of proteinase activity on the phylogenetic tree of the fungal symbionts  showed distinct correlations between symbiont clades and the classes of proteinases that were primarily active. high serine proteinase activity was typical for the symbionts of sericomyrmex amabilis, trachymyrmex sp <dig>  and t. cf. zeteki, which formed a monophyletic group. in contrast, the symbionts of t. cornetzi had a proteinase profile resembling that of the acromyrmex and atta leaf-cutting ants, and formed a sister group to the remaining trachymyrmex and sericomyrmex symbionts. the only exception to this pattern was one of the four symbionts of t. cornetzi , which had an intermediate proteinase profile with almost equal serine- and metalloproteinase activity, and which formed the most basal branch of the t. cornetzi clade of symbionts .

the ph optimum of total proteinase activity in the gardens reared by lower attines averaged  <dig>  ±  <dig> , while the peak of proteinase activity in basal higher attines and leaf-cutting ants colonies was closer to the ph levels  in the fungus gardens  , as one would expect when the higher attine fungus gardens would have become adapted to growing under more acidic conditions. however, in three of the four clades of higher attine and leaf-cutting symbionts, the total proteinases activity profiles between ph  <dig> and  <dig> were remarkably flat, as serine proteinases became increasingly active at higher phs . for example, the serine proteinases in sericomyrmex amabilis colonies were most active at ph conditions of  <dig>  ±  <dig> , similar to lower attine gardens  where serine proteinase activity is rarely seen, whereas an additional peak of serine proteinase activity at ph  <dig>  ±  <dig>   was observed for the symbionts of trachymyrmex sp <dig> and t. cf. zeteki, but not for sericomyrmex symbionts . similar patterns were observed for metalloproteinases. the relatively low amounts produced in the symbionts of lower attine ants were most active under slightly acidic ph conditions  and shifts towards more acidic optima were detected for the symbionts of trachymyrmex cornetzi   and the leaf-cutting ants mutualists   .

discussion
fungus-garden ph buffering capacity is remarkably high
acidification of the environment increases the difference between the extracellular surroundings and the intracellular milieu, so that compensating metabolic activities are required to maintain the ph within cells at the approximately neutral values that normally optimize growth and survival of fungal hyphae  <cit> . in vitro, these metabolic activities include the synthesis of ph regulating compounds and the modification of excreted compounds so they can function under acidic conditions  <cit> . this is particularly important for the extracellular proteolytic enzymes secreted by the fungal symbiont of the leaf-cutting ants, because these enzymes secure the decomposition of proteins that ultimately supply nitrogen to the ant colony  <cit> .

fungi are known to modify the environmental ph in vitro  <cit>  and to regulate ph in vivo by secreting weak organic acids  <cit>  with buffering properties  <cit> . however, fungi normally avoid natural habitats with unsuitable ph  <cit> , possibly because of the metabolic costs of this type of adjustments in competition with more specifically ph-adapted microorganisms. this may explain why there are only few documented examples of active ph adjustment by organic acid production in free-living fungi  <cit>  and to our knowledge no active ph regulation by alkaline production has ever been observed in fungi. this implies that the ph-buffering characteristics of attine fungus gardens are relatively unique. although the chemistry of the garden buffering mechanism is unknown, its value of ca.  <dig> mekv/l is comparable to the ph buffering capacity of human blood  and much higher than any value observed outside metazoan bodies - cf. ocean water with  <dig>  mekv/l  <cit>  or soil with  <dig>  mekv/l  <cit> .

although the production and secretion of buffering agents may impose significant metabolic costs, this may be sustainable because domestication implies that the ants provision the fungus with ad libitum resources. the benefits of buffering at a constant ph of ca.  <dig>  might then be that this value represents a compromise between enhancing efficiency of degradation enzymes and discouraging the growth of parasitic microorganisms that infect fungus gardens  <cit> . if such dynamic equilibrium would exist, it might imply that acidification by the ants and/or the symbiont can be maintained continuously because ph-buffering ensures the necessary stability required for vital fungus garden functions. it seems unlikely that fungal buffering compounds are primarily targeted towards neutralizing the antimicrobial metapleural gland secretions of ph  <dig>   <cit> , as a recent study has shown that the ants apply these secretions in very small portions and with great care  <cit> . the main cause of fungus gardens acidification thus remains unknown, but may be based on a combination of fungal secretions and contributions from other glands of the farming ants.

the evolution of proteinase activity in the fungal symbionts
fungi normally produce a wide range of proteolytic enzymes to degrade substrate proteins. the fungal symbionts of lower attines that we investigated  had almost exclusively metalloproteinase activity, and virtually no serine proteinase activity. the known phylogenies of attine symbionts  <cit>   indicate that the lower attine ants rear a paraphyletic group of symbionts that also includes closely related free-living fungi. this implies that we expect these symbionts to have similar enzyme profiles as free-living fungi, which was recently confirmed over a wide range of garden symbionts by de fine licht et al.  <cit> . our observations thus indicate that the production of metalloproteinases may be an ancestral trait among the attine ant symbionts and suggest that metalloproteinase activity has been evolutionarily conserved while the ph optimum has shifted  from values of ca.  <dig>  for the lower attine ant symbionts to values of ca.  <dig>  in the higher attine ant and leaf-cutting ant symbionts, which coincide with the acid ph that these ants maintain in their gardens  <cit> . the most parsimonious explanation for these findings is that the free-living relatives of the fungal symbionts would also have proteinases with ph optima of ca.  <dig>  as there seems to be no reason to assume that initial fungus domestication events happened in very acid forest soils. if anything, the average free-living lepiotaceous fungi prefer mull soils with ph values of at least  <dig>   <cit> . however, the symbionts of higher attine and leaf-cutting-ants, which have a long evolutionary history as domesticated symbionts, the symbionts of lower attine ants are repeatedly acquired from free-living populations and would thus have had much less time to evolve proteinases with adjusted activity profiles at lower ph.

while metalloproteinase activity appears to be conserved throughout, it appears not to have been upregulated in garden symbionts of basal higher attine ants. the monophyletic group of fungal symbionts reared by s. amabilis, t. cf. zeteki and t. sp <dig>  had reduced metalloproteinase activity and significantly enhanced serine proteinase activity . it has previously been shown that the enzymatic profiles of attine ant symbionts may have a certain amount of plasticity in response to the plant substrate that they grow on  <cit> . however, differences in the properties of proteinases found in fungal gardens were unlikely to be caused by variations in food substrate composition, as all lab colonies used in the present study were provided with the same leaf material. it seems likely therefore, that the proteinase activity profiles that we obtained have a significant genetic component. phylogenies of attine ants show that s. amabilis is more closely related to t. cf. zeteki than to t. cornetzi , which together with our present results suggests that these ants may have co-evolved with the proteinase activity profiles of their cultivars.

our quantitative analyses showed that the respective activities of metallo- and serine proteinases in gardens of higher attine ants  tend to be negatively correlated . in most symbionts, the split is very pronounced, with almost complete specialization on one of the two classes of proteinases, although the symbiont of t. cornetzi colony  <dig> is an exception showing almost equal, intermediate activities of the two proteinase classes. this suggests that there may be a trade-off in the expression of proteinases and that there may be adaptive reasons of substrate processing that make the production of either serine- or metalloproteinases most appropriate. both serine proteinases and metalloproteinases are very widespread in nature and are involved in a wide variety of biological processes. enzymes belonging to these classes vary significantly in substrate specificity which may correspond to the requirements of fungal ecological niches  <cit> . one explanation for the shift towards almost exclusive serine proteinase activity might therefore be that the ants that rear these symbionts forage for leaf and flower material that can be more effectively degraded by serine proteinases  <cit> .

recent studies by mikheyev et al.  <cit>  have shown that north american trachymyrmex rear at least four different species of fungal symbiont, whereas virtually all leaf-cutting ants throughout latin america appear to rear a single species  , which has likely been derived secondarily no longer than 2- <dig> million years ago and swept horizontally through most if not all species of acromyrmex and atta leaf-cutting ants, who themselves had their last common ancestor 8- <dig> million years ago  <cit> . whether this selective sweep had any connection with the symbiont being a strain with upregulated activity of metalloproteinases is presently unknown, but it would be of interest if rare leaf-cutting ants could be found that rear gardens that are more closely related to the serine protease producing trachymyrmex and sericomyrmex symbionts.

we have so far assumed that the measured proteinase activities originate from enzymes produced by the fungal symbiont of the ants. they could also possibly originate from the additional microorganisms found in the fungus gardens of attine ants  <cit> . however, as earlier mentioned  <cit> , the fungal symbiont comprises by far the largest microbial biomass fraction of gardens, so that contributions from other microorganisms should be quantitatively negligible unless they would be specialized symbionts selected for specific enzyme production . furthermore, we find consistent patterns of proteinase activity among fungus gardens of the same strain, but differences between strains, which would imply that fungal strains should be obligatorily associated with specific microbial floras if these were to be the predictable sources of the proteinase activities that we measured. also this would only make sense if these microbial floras would have coevolved symbiont adaptations with specific functions. we cannot exclude that such additional symbionts might exist, but find it hard to base our discussion on such assumption in the absence of any evidence.

do leaf-cutting ants suffer from proteinase inhibitors in the leaves that they cut?
plants produce substantial amounts of proteinase inhibitors to reduce their nutritional value for herbivores  <cit> , who in turn have evolved various mechanisms to circumvent such proteinase inhibitors. as herbivory in attine ants is indirect, it would seem most likely that the ants have come to rely on their fungal symbiont to evolve compensatory measures against proteinase inhibitors, but this may not have been an easy process as the ancestral leucocoprinous fungi that the ants domesticated are leaf litter saprotrophs  <cit>  rather than plant pathogens, and can thus not be expected to have possessed pre-adaptations that enabled them to easily overcome the defense mechanisms present in live plant material.

putative symbiont adaptations to tackle proteinase inhibitors are unlikely to have arisen in trachymyrmex or sericomyrmex symbionts as these ants mostly use shed flowers and fragments of fallen leaves that are unlikely to be actively defended  <cit> . only the most evolutionary advanced leaf-cutting ants, and in particular the genus atta, cut fresh leaves at a large enough scale of defoliation to encounter significant plant defenses by proteinase inhibitors. it would thus be interesting to measure proteinase inhibition in naturally obtained live plant material that trachymyrmex, sericomyrmex, acromyrmex and atta workers provide to their symbionts, to see whether any of these might be specifically targeted towards either serine- or metalloproteinases.

CONCLUSIONS
we have obtained clear indications that the ph optima of proteinases produced by the fungal symbionts of higher attine ants and leaf-cutting ants have become adapted to the acid ph conditions of fungus gardens relative to the surrounding soil. we have also shown that fungus gardens in general have very high ph buffering capacities, and that the production of serine- and metalloproteinases has a distinct phylogenetic pattern, suggesting at least some form of coevolution with the ant farmers. our data further suggest that trade-offs may exist with respect to the simultaneous production of serine and metalloproteinases across the different species of fungal symbionts. these results are consistent with the symbiosis being constrained by nitrogen availability, due to the low n/c ratio of the plant substrates of fungus gardens  <cit> .

