BACKGROUND
contagious bovine pleuropneumonia  caused by mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides  type)  is considered as the main plague of cattle in africa since the eradication of rinderpest . in recent years, cbpp re-emerged from where it had persisted and has spread to areas from which it had previously been eradicated, thus stimulating new, large-scale efforts to contain or possibly eradicate epidemics . the pathogen is considered highly contagious and often there is only a slow development of clinical signs. current vaccines against cbpp confer only partial and short-lived protection and there is some concern regarding their biosafety . hence, rapid and reliable diagnosis of cbpp combined with traditional control measures including reduction of animal movement and isolation or stamping-out of affected animals, remains the most efficient way to control the disease. serological methods are generally used for determining the cbpp status at herd level . bacterial isolation is still the reference method for detection of the pathogen. however, bacterial cultivation of mycoplasma species in general and subsequent identification is cumbersome due to the fastidious growth requirements of these bacteria.

during the last two decades, several conventional and real-time pcr methods  for rapid diagnosis of cbpp and early outbreak warning have been developed . although such methods are specific and sensitive they depend on a laboratory infrastructure with sophisticated equipment and highly trained personnel. most pcr protocols for cbpp diagnosis rely on the samples being pre-enriched for mycoplasmas and/or require expensive and laborious extraction methods. such methods are not generally available in the rural areas of africa where cbpp is possibly endemic and rapid diagnosis of the disease is essential. another issue is that transportation of infected samples over long distances drastically affects the viability of the bacteria rendering them unfit for culturing and/or resulting in spoilage of the nucleic acid. to address the need for an in-the-field diagnostic method for cbpp, an isothermal loop-mediated amplification  has been developed . this is based on autocycling dna synthesis under isothermal conditions in the presence of a thermophilic strand-displacing dna polymerase that contains the 5’ → 3’ polymerase activity but lacks 5’ → 3’ exonuclease activity . the technique uses four specific primers recognizing six distinct regions on the dna template . the cbpp lamp developed is fulfilling most of the criteria for an affordable, sensitive, specific, user-friendly, robust and rapid, equipment free and deliverable to the end user  diagnostic system .

methods
mycoplasma strains and dna extraction
in this study,  <dig> strains of mycoplasmas representing  <dig> different species or subspecies including  <dig> isolates of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides were used . mycoplasmas were grown in a standard medium  at 37°c to a density of 108– <dig> colony-forming units  per ml or on solid mycoplasma agar medium . handling of live m. mycoides subsp. mycoides was performed in a biological safety laboratory fulfilling the bl <dig> containment safety standards. lysis of mycoplasmas with ges buffer  and extraction of genomic dna were performed as previously described .

clinical samples
to allow for the use of the lamp for diagnosis in the field, the amplification should effectively work without the need to extract dna. this was studied using clinical samples of pleural fluid and bronchial lavage. sequential bronchial lavage fluids were collected from cattle during an earlier experimental infection trial . in addition, simulated clinical samples consisting of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides suspension supplemented with blood or squeezed liver tissues were prepared. the samples from inoculated cattle from cameroun were from a vaccination trial .

sample preparation
samples  were added to 25 μl of lamp buffer 2so <dig>  16 mm mgcl <dig>   <dig> %  tween 20) and heated for five minutes at 95°c , followed by immediate chilling and pulse centrifugation to sediment precipitates. chilling was necessary before addition to the lamp master mix to avoid damaging the strand displacement polymerase.

lamp primer design
the gene sequence encoding a putative pro-lipoprotein of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides, locus tag msc_ <dig>  was selected for primer design. since the initial primer design with primerexplorer  <dig>   did not yield a performing primer set , we first designed the outer primers msc <dig> -f <dig> and msc <dig> -b <dig>  with primer express  <dig>   according to the heat map profile. these colder sequences were then applied to primerexplorer  <dig>  for the design of the inner primers msc <dig> -fip and msc <dig> -bip . the melting temperatures  of the resulting primer sequences were all in the range of 56°c. primers were then tested for hairpin structures, extensible primer hybrids and specificity by netprimer  and primer-blast .

lamp reaction conditions
the total volume of the lamp assays was 25 μl i.e. 15 μl of lamp buffer including the sample and 10 μl of master mix for final concentrations of 460 mm trehalose ,  <dig>  mm dntp,  <dig>  μm of each of the inner primers  and  <dig>  μm of each of the outer primers . the reaction mix also contained  <dig> u bsm polymerase  and  <dig>  × evagreen® dye . standard reactions were run for 60 min at 58°c in an esequant tube scanner ts <dig>  recording fluorescence from dna bound evagreen once per minute. the optimal reaction temperature was predetermined on a gradient real-time cycler .

quality assurance
to allow for a quality assurance protocol, the standard procedure for real-time pcr, melting curve analysis  and an alternatively re-association curve analysis was tested on a real-time platform . after the lamp process, for mca samples were heated from 65°c to 90°c in 1°c/min steps with consecutive measurement at each step. for re-association of melted dna , reactions were cooled down from 90°c to 65°c in the same fashion. the amplicon inherent tm was assessed with oligo calc  and poland .

lamp result evaluation
lamp is a continuous process, unlike pcr, with parallel amplification and strand separation. thus, only a “quasi” exponential function can be expected in short time increments and only the measurement of fluorescence in intervals of 1 minute or longer presents a continuous sigmoidal curve. for this exercise, we chose 1 min increments to evaluate the curve and defined an increase of > 30 mv/minute as a significant increase . this algorithm was implemented in the tube scanner software and has the following limiting factors: the baseline starts after the third measurement and ends after the seventh, whereas the mean of the mv values represents the baseline value . the curve is classified as positive if the increase of signal  above the mean of the baseline is > 30 mv for a minimum of  <dig> measurements . the absolute time-point of detection td  is determined when the slope increase is > 30 mv for the first time at a tube scanner excitation intensity of 36%.

RESULTS
evaluation of analytical sensitivity and specificity
to evaluate the specificity of the cbpp lamp reaction, templates of purified dna samples corresponding to approximately  <dig> genome equivalents or suspensions of mycoplasmal cultures corresponding to approximately  <dig> cells from  <dig> different strains of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides and from  <dig> strains of  <dig> other related mycoplasma species or subspecies  were examined in the cbpp lamp. the cbpp lamp gave positive signals for all  <dig> strains of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides, but not for any of the other  <dig> mycoplasma species. the lamp reactions for the negative control remained negative, even when the reactions extended to 90 minutes.

to assess the limit of detection, a series of  <dig> fold dilutions of a suspension culture of m. mycoides subsp. mycoides strain afadé were used as template. as shown in figure  <dig>  the method detects  <dig> cells per reaction at a time of detection  of 45 minutes, while the detection of  <dig> cells requires an extended analysis time of td = 67 minutes.

quality assurance
for pathogen diagnosis, a quality assurance protocol is necessary. we performed mca, the standard for qpcr and compared the result with the tm for our cbpp amplicon calculated using two methods . interestingly, the calculated tm  did not correspond to the values measured  . the analysis of the inverse protocol, re-association curve analysis  gave values matching the calculated ones thus allowing a reliable qa for cbpp lamp diagnosis.

analysis of clinical samples
the assessment of the test performance for the crude samples gave for the spiked samples a td of around 45 minutes . pleural fluid samples from two cows, with bacteriologically confirmed cbpp taken at necropsy, resulted in td values ranging between  <dig> and 35 minutes .

lamp analyses of bronchial lavage samples taken sequentially from in-contact animals  gave very similar results to the highly sensitive nested pcr based on p <dig> gene encoding the lipoprotein lppa , showing that the cbpp lamp was suitable for both clinical samples from necropsy and from live animals. the afade  <dig> samples gave identical results. the lamp was additionally positive  <dig> times and the n-pcr was positive once more. for the l <dig> strain,  <dig> samples corresponded and additionally  <dig> times only lamp was positive.

* nested pcr results  <cit> .

* nested pcr results  <cit> .

samples collected from a challenge trial in cameroun revealed that not only were pulmonary samples and pleural fluids suitable for mmm detection by lamp, but the serum also gave valid results .

nd: not determined.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
sensitive, reliable and time-saving molecular diagnostic tests, vital for the successful control of cbpp, mostly rely on taqman®-based real-time pcr for the detection of the pathogen m. mycoides subsp. mycoides in extracted and often pre-cultured clinical samples . whilst these are broadly accepted as the most specific and sensitive method and as reference tests in control and surveillance programs, they depend on an elaborate and expensive laboratory infrastructure; sophisticated equipment and personnel with advanced molecular diagnostic knowledge hence, are not applicable to field conditions where cbpp is endemic and where on-site diagnosis is vital to provide confirmation of disease. a new and highly efficient isothermal amplification protocol for the detection of cbpp was developed that offers the same advantages of specificity and sensitivity of the real-time pcr methodology, but does not need the sophisticated laboratory-based equipment and is thus applicable to field conditions. this was accomplished through the design of a specific lamp primer set for an already optimized master mix. to make the test suitable for the field, the master and the primer mix were lyophilized and are thus thermostable for a longer period  and when rehydrated for at least one week on the bench. additionally, the ready mixes allow the test to be carried out in only two pipetting steps  thus avoiding errors and reducing training needs of operators.

because the sample preparation and the amplification steps are run in a battery-driven instrument, the test can easily be performed at any location. the continuous reading of the fluorescence during amplification allows a real-time analysis of the results by the introduction of a minimum absolute increase value for positivity thus avoiding background problems usually faced with threshold values. the interpretation of results simply consists of monitoring the fluorescence increase of more than 30 mv for a minimum of two consecutive readings, which corresponds to a positive sample. furthermore, these evaluation parameters can be programmed and therefore only the results are displayed on the instrument.

a qa procedure was established corresponding to the published tm prediction models . despite the wide application of melting curve analysis , the re-association analysis in our setup gives the advantage of a direct correspondence to the established prediction calculations  and does not require integration of surrogate parameters such as enhancers or dye factors. to perform the re-association analysis, specific software for the tube scanner  was developed together with the producer based on the savitzky-golay filter algorithm . false positive results due to random amplification of non-specific target dna or contamination were excluded through the re-association analysis carried directly after amplification step without opening the vessel.

the analytical sensitivity  of our test was comparable to the diagnostic sensitivity  better than, the real-time pcr or nested pcr. as in real-time pcr, heat-inactivated samples, after amplification, are kept in the closed tubes to avoid cross-contamination and to facilitate further analysis in a laboratory.

regarding the assured parameters published by mabey the test fulfils all criteria with the exception of freedom from instrumentation. we believe that for a quality assured field result quantitative parameters which can be transmitted instantly to a reference laboratory are important thus allowing an immediate response which might be rather expensive.

the developed cbpp lamp is an ideal, simple, robust and precise method to diagnose m. mycoides subsp. mycoides in an outbreak situation or during regular slaughterhouse inspections in monitoring programs for cbpp prevalence assessment.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
hu and gm contributed equally to the study design and in drafting the manuscript. gm took the lead on the assay development and initial testing. jf designed the evaluation procedure and emv performed the evaluation of the test performance. aw carried out the field evaluation. gm and hu developed the result evaluation. jf and emv provided critical feedback on the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplement.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we would like to thank the staff of lanavet for their help in collection of the samples. a. wade was supported by an iaea crp grant  and g. mair by an iaea technical contract .
