BACKGROUND
skeletal muscle exhibits organisation and uniformity in anatomical structure between vertebrate species whilst displaying characteristic differences between muscle types as a functional requirement. this structural organisation is due to the sarcomere, the basic contractile unit and core structural component responsible for the striated appearance of skeletal and cardiac muscle fibres  <cit> . sarcomeres overlap longitudinally  and are joined transversely  into bundles known as myofibrils. myofibrils join transversely to the sarcolemma via the costamere, which has been suggested to exist as a skeletal muscle specific extension of the focal adhesions expressed in non-muscle cells and essentially forms the interface between the intracellular and extra-cellular spaces of muscle cells  <cit> .

myogenesis is an ordered process whereby mono-nucleated muscle precursor cells  fuse into multi-nucleated myotubes that mature into the different classes of myofibre  <cit> . successful skeletal muscle development relies upon the correct cyto-architectural arrangement of the various muscle components and abnormal arrangements can result in devastating effects on muscle function. indeed, mutations in the genes encoding these components are often associated with muscular diseases including dystrophies  <cit> . one of the major challenges in muscle research is to understand how a muscle precursor cell with a very different organisation develops the highly organised structure responsible for the sophisticated mechanics of muscle. understanding this fundamental process is of high interest to medical science for treatment of muscle diseases and also animal science for exploring body growth and meat quality determinants. although muscle development is well-studied, the molecular mechanisms underlying this developmental process remain mostly unknown. gene expression profiles of myogenesis have primarily focused on the up-regulation of muscle specific genes, for example, genes coding the filamin proteins change from non-muscle-specific to muscle-specific  <cit> . however, restricting analyses to muscle-specific or dynamically changing gene expression sets does not provide an integrated model for understanding the overall function of muscle structural proteins. this is especially true for understanding the transition of broadly expressed to structurally restricted proteins which needs to be underpinned by an understanding of their structure-function relationship.

we have developed the virtual muscle , an animated 3d computer graphics model to visualise the relative locations of the products of muscle gene expression which characterises striated muscle structure at molecular resolution. to test the novelty of the vmus3d in terms of its ability to contribute to the understanding of myogenesis, we have used it to analyse a number of publicly available muscle gene expression datasets.

RESULTS
gene expression spatial visualisation of muscle differentiation using virtual muscle and a generic set of costamere, z-disk and filament proteins
the set of generic mammalian genes encoding the costamere, z-disk and filament system proteins and their paralogs was built using the published literature and protein-protein interaction databases including bind  and hprd . the paralogs were included to enable the analysis and address the issue of paralog swapping. gene expression data for this set of genes was obtained from a mouse c2c <dig> in vitro muscle cell line before and after differentiation from the ncbi geo  database  <cit> .

vmus3d, a database-driven 3d muscle browser of the structural proteins and their arrangements of skeletal muscle , was developed to enable the visualisation of gene expression levels and differences in the relative spatial locations of the proteins encoded by their relevant transcripts. these representative structural arrangements of the vmus3d were compiled from protein-protein interaction data, published experimental localisation data, structural protein data and previously published diagrammatic representations of the contractile apparatus  <cit> . overall differences in the gene expression between myoblasts and myotubes in the mouse c2c <dig> cell line were shown to have striking concordance with the spatial locations of their protein products . using vmus3d, the genes that demonstrated the most dynamic up-regulation of gene expression  encode proteins located in the thick and thin filament systems of the myofibril. in contrast, genes encoding proteins located at the costamere and within the z-disk were expressed less dynamically across the differentiation time-course  .

gene expression profiles of costamere, filament system and z-disk
the limited change in gene expression for the majority of costamere proteins and some z-disk proteins may have been due to an already increased expression of these genes in the c2c <dig> myoblasts rather than a genuine consistency of expression level between muscle and undifferentiated cells. to address this question the skeletal muscle specificity  of the expression of each of the genes was ascertained by interrogating the symatlas mouse gnf1m dataset which contains a tissue survey of mouse gene expression . the expression profiles of the genes encoding the components of the costamere, filament system and z-disk of muscle, as well as their functionally related paralogs  were plotted in three dimensions to include  the expression level of myoblasts,  the expression level of myotubes and  muscle specificity . in general, those genes with increased gene expression from myoblast to myotube were also highly muscle specific. the distribution of expression patterns of the genes encoding costamere proteins  remained distinct from those of the z-disk and the filament systems of muscle. this analysis confirmed that the genes encoding the majority of costamere proteins were not expressed in a muscle-specific manner.

we next superimposed the tissue specificity data onto the vmus3d in comparison to the myoblast to myotube profiles  to look for additional structural-expression relationships. again, a clear separation of the costamere gene expression profile from the rest of the myofibril was observed. the proteins of the z-disc exhibited mixed skeletal muscle specificity. this analysis further revealed a number of genes encoding myofibril proteins that did not show large changes in gene expression across the differentiation time course, and these appeared to be encoded by genes that could be considered muscle-specific . examples of these genes included tpm <dig> in the filament system and sync of the costamere. these genes may have already been switched on in myoblasts relative to generic cells, poising the myoblasts for differentiation, or be switched on later in muscle development. the relatively high level of expression of these genes in the myoblasts suggests that the first explanation is more likely.

further examples of developmentally controlled genes were also observed as non-linear outliers when comparing skeletal muscle specificity with myoblast versus myotube gene expression . for example, myl <dig> increased expression substantially from myoblast to myotube but had a low adult skeletal muscle specificity index , as it is not expressed in adult skeletal muscle  <cit> . in addition, myl <dig> and tmod <dig>  which both demonstrated little change in expression from myoblast to myotube, but which had a large skeletal muscle index could be considered to not be expressed in myoblasts or myotubes, possibly representing genes that are switched on later in muscle development . another non-linear group was also observed that could be regarded intermediate of these observations; containing myot, actn <dig> and myh <dig> . although these genes demonstrated increased expression from myoblast to myotube, judging from their skeletal muscle specificity it can be assumed that they are actually only fully switched on during later muscle development events.

two-component mixture model
to further interrogate the observed results, a two-component mixture of bi-variate normal distributions was fitted to the data. the mixture model allowed us to identify the clusters, or components in the mixture, that encapsulated those genes that were simultaneously differentially expressed from myoblasts to myotubes and/or showed skeletal muscle specificity. the two component mixture model analysis successfully defined two distinct clusters , where clusters  <dig> and  <dig> included  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively of the  <dig> genes analysed. cluster  <dig> represented genes that were dynamically expressed from myoblast to myotube and demonstrated muscle specificity whereas cluster  <dig> did not represent these features. furthermore, each structural location could then be categorised as having a probability of belonging to each cluster. the filament genes had a  <dig> % and  <dig> % probability of belonging to cluster  <dig> and  <dig> respectively, the costamere genes had a  <dig> % and  <dig> % probability of belonging to cluster  <dig> and  <dig> respectively, while the z-disk genes had a  <dig> % and  <dig> % probability of belonging to cluster  <dig> and  <dig> respectively.

to further enhance the resolution of the boundary defining these two clusters a simulation analysis was performed using  <dig>  elements that were generated from a mixture distribution with parameters as estimated from the  <dig> original data points . from this simulated data, an additional  <dig> genes that were incomplete for either skeletal muscle specificity or myoblast to myotube data could be assigned a probability of belonging to each cluster and a gene expression value could be estimated . simulation of  <dig>  elements and filtering of very low expression values followed by two component analysis permitted the separation of the two observed profiles with greater resolution. visualising this data using vmus3d provided a clear definition of the clusters relative to their protein spatial locations whilst also establishing that the genes encoding integrin 1-beta binding proteins  <dig> and  <dig> , sarcolgycan alpha and gamma , caveolin- <dig>  and syncoilin  were not conforming to the same cluster as the rest of the components of the costamere . unlike most costamere genes, these were induced during differentiation and had a high muscle specificity index.

paralog exchange during differentiation
inclusion of paralogs into the structural-based gene expression analysis revealed that down-regulation of a gene often coincided with the up-regulation of expression of another paralog from the same family of genes. numerous examples of such exchanges were observed in the data and these were often located in the group of genes that were muscle-specific and up-regulated from myoblasts to myotube c2c <dig> cells. an example is shown in figure  <dig>  where non-muscle specific filamins  are down-regulated while muscle-specific flnc is up-regulated during differentiation. although this has previously been observed in chickens during myogenesis, the striking concordance of this gene exchange in mouse cells illustrates the similarly of the muscle differentiation process between morphologically distinct vertebrates at this stage of development  <cit> . interestingly, paralog exchange was not observed in the group of genes encoding costamere proteins that were not substantially up-regulated during differentiation, a clear example being lamb1- <dig> . this could have been the consequence of earlier paralog exchange  if these gene families also display paralog exchanges; or alternative transcripts could be variably expressed in a similar manner but hidden by 'whole gene' expression measurements, that is, measurement of whole gene transcripts irrespective of exon usage.

discussion
gene expression profile and skeletal muscle specificity of costamere, filament system and z-disk during myogenesis
clustering of gene expression data followed by grouping on the basis of gene ontology terms or functional annotation is a standard process in the analysis of gene expression data. however this approach tends to neglect those genes that are not differentially expressed and typically categorised as being unimportant, although they may be functionally relevant to the particular biological process under investigation. in our approach we have first grouped genes on the basis of function, in this case on the basis of the complexes which the proteins encoded by the genes are components of, and subsequently analysed changes in gene expression of the muscle system within the context of wider gene expression profiles. our visualisation of myoblast to myotube differentiation gene expression data using the vmus3d tool resulted in the visualisation of gene expression as a function of time and space during the development of muscle and its relationship to tissue specificity. by observing spatial changes of gene expression during myogenesis, two predominant expression profiles were observed: one profile for which sub-components of the z-disk and the majority of the costamere did not undergo major changes from myoblast to myotube; and another profile for which the majority of myofibril filament system proteins were substantially up-regulated .

incorporation of multiple tissue gene expression data into the analysis demonstrated an association of tissue specificity with changes of gene expression from myoblast to myotube. this was supported and refined by a two-component analysis of these genes and their paralogs which demonstrated that two clusters were clearly present as a function of myogenesis and skeletal muscle tissue specificity . by including all available functionally related paralogs for each structural gene in the two-component analysis, this not only improved the statistical power, but also put a biologically relevant level of variance into each of the possible gene states, thus accounting for temporal gene variation whilst enhancing the boundaries of this clustering approach. this inclusion also demonstrated the variability between the different systems and the costamere demonstrated a general lack of this paralog exchange mechanism.

connectivity model of muscle development
many of the costamere proteins have been described as components of the non-muscle specific dystroglycan/sarcoglycan, spectrin and focal adhesion complexes. the z-disk also appears to form as an early z-body  promoting the development of organised sarcomeres, which later integrate muscle-specific proteins to structurally support expanding and contracting myofibres  <cit> . our observations suggest that although the encoded proteins are incorporated into different structures in muscle, the induction of the muscle differentiation process has limited impact on the expression program of many of the genes encoding these proteins. this recruitment of non-muscle specific structures into muscle-specific roles could be coordinated by the presence of the muscle specific components of the costamere which demonstrated up-regulation of gene expression upon differentiation observed herein ; caveolin- <dig>  syncoilin, sarcolgycans alpha/gamma and the beta <dig> integrin binding proteins  <dig> and  <dig>  each of these components have already been independently recognised as having some involvement in muscle development due to their gene expression profiles  <cit> , but have not been connected simultaneously to a probable role in the development of the costamere. it is proposed that these genes could represent an initial group of structural proteins bordering intrinsic/extrinsic capability during myotube formation. evidence has already suggested that the development of pre-myofibril z-bodies originate from the cell membrane of spreading cardiomyocytes, and that these z-bodies are aligned to eventually organise into mature z-discs  <cit> . therefore, following on in support of previous models, the "connectivity model of muscle development" is proposed: whereby the closer to the myofibril core  of muscle cells, the greater the gene expression changes during muscle differentiation and the greater the muscle specificity index. in addition, the remainder of the genes coding for the costamere proteins that did not demonstrate these activities  leading to the hypothesis that the transcriptome state of the costamere genes in the myoblast may not be different from many other cells in the body.

there are four major mechanisms for the modification of the structures of multi-subunit complexes:  recruitment of entirely new proteins;  paralog exchange;  alternative splice variants; and  modification of existing proteins . construction of the costamere and z-disk clearly involves the first process, and in some cases the second, although this is most strongly associated with the filament proteins. the relationship of paralog exchange with location also occurs in developed muscle, whereby the filament system also uses paralog exchange as a fundamental mechanism for altering muscle characteristics and hence function; for example via differential incorporation of myosin heavy/light chains and other proteins to drive fibre type changes. in some circumstances, these paralogs maybe co-expressed within an adult cell during fibre type transitions  but the repertoire of paralogs is reduced compared to those expressed and selected for or against during the transition of cell state during early development, as observed herein  <cit> . in addition, the microarray platform used in these experiments does not enable the resolution of alternative splice variants due to the difficulty in deconvulution of probe sets with regards to individual oligo variances and gene coverage of these oligos in this circumstance being undesirable. nonetheless, alternative splicing could be contributing to the lack of overall gene expression change if underpinned by changes in splicing patterns during myogenesis. this appears to be a likely explanation for the lack of large differential expression observed for the alpha and beta integrins, which are known to have developmentally regulated alternative splice variants expressed during myogenesis  <cit> . finally, gene expression data resulting from microarray hybridizations does not allow exploration of the potential role of protein modification in the structure of multi-subunit complexes.

CONCLUSIONS
in general, the construction of the costamere and to a lesser extent the z-disk, during muscle differentiation involves the recruitment of broadly expressed proteins. however a small number of genes encoding costamere proteins and more z-disks proteins are induced during differentiation and these proteins may serve to nucleate the construction of muscle specific structures. our approach using vmus3d and combining gene expression datasets provides a spatial method of gene expression analysis at molecular resolution in the context of the core structural components of a skeletal muscle cell and these findings highlight the utility of this approach.

