BACKGROUND
since their inception in the early nineties  <cit> , microarrays have become widely used in research and are increasingly translating to clinical practice because of their low cost and high-throughput analysis of gene expression  <cit> . indeed, expression analysis arrays have been employed to predict clinical survival  <cit> , calculate prognosis indexes and determine molecular signatures  <cit> . snp arrays  <cit>  are being used to study allelic variants of disease  <cit> . similarly, comparative genomic hybridization arrays have been employed extensively in investigating cancer tumors  <cit> . assuming oligo arrays can achieve high sensitivity and specificity, their application for diagnosis of an infectious agent is valuable for the following reasons:  the increase need for multiplexing to monitor in emerging zoonoses,  rapid, unbiased, and cost effective detection of infectious diseases. indeed, the state of the art in viral diagnosis is based on the antibody response and may take up to two weeks to be detected in the blood. in contrast, oligonucleotide arrays measure the viral rna and allows for early detection within hours. additionally, a large number of acute viral infections share common clinical signs and symptoms. furthermore, clinicians currently have to ponder the additional cost and benefits of investigating infrequent infectious for which the hospital is not equipped to assay and require significant time and effort to elucidate.

researchers have thus developed pan-viral and pan-microbial oligonucleotide arrays  <cit>  for use with clinical specimens. among them, the greenechip is currently the most comprehensive multiplex array for detection infectious agents, comprising about  <dig>  probes designed to detect  <dig> vertebrate viruses,  <dig> bacteria,  <dig> fungal and  <dig> parasite genera  <cit> .  <dig> marked the year of an important proof-of-concept: two documented case reports of multiplexed arrays detecting an infectious agent when traditional methods of investigation had failed .

analyzing accurately the data from the hybridization patterns from these arrays is of utmost clinical importance and remains challenging for the following reasons:  species' strains are represented by multiple probes targeted in distinct genes for increased precision,  thresholds where an array probe can be considered positive or negative are somewhat arbitrary, and  non specific cross-hybridization patterns can lead to false positive rates,  detention of microbes must allow for identifying multiple co-infections . initially, previous studies addressed this issue by comparing the total count of hybridized probes with probe sets designed for different agents to identify the correct agent, but this approach was found limited in precision  <cit> . recently, more comprehensive methods for interpreting the hybridization patterns have been developed:  an energy-profile based prediction program, which requires a training microarray set to train the program first  <cit> ;  a log-transformed analysis of microarrays using p-values   <cit> ; and  high-density resequencing microarray using much longer length probes  <cit> .

in this study, we provide a description and an evaluation of a statistical method we developed to accurately predict the species on a pan-virual oligonucleotide arrays.

RESULTS
in this study, we evaluated six different methods over a pan-virus array  designed to detect  <dig>  vertebrate viruses. although we attempted to include other methods  <cit>  in the evaluation, we found several to be non-applicable to oligonucleotide microarrays  <cit>  or impractical to implement   <cit> . figure  <dig> illustrates the distribution of the probes on the chip to each of the virus species. some viruses such as hiv and influenza are significantly more heavily sequenced. as a result, more probes on the chip are designed to these species to cover different mutations on their dna sequences. on the other hand, some viruses contain limited sequence information, sometimes only a partial single genomic sequence is available and are thus represented by a limited number of probes.

each method was applied to the hybridization results composed of four west nile virus samples. as described in the methods, three different pools of probes were selected based on the rank of the intensity of hybridizing probes, representing  <dig> %, 1%, and 5% of the total probes on the chip. the virus species predicted by these methods were ranked and compared with the correct virus tested on the chip. the ranks are listed on the supplementary t  <dig> . according to the ranks derived by these methods, the hypergeometric method performs the best out of the six methods and the ltrm method is only slightly behind in identifying the correct agent.

to illustrate the cutoffs of top probes in intensity at the  <dig> %, 1% and 5% thresholds, we plot the distribution of the intensity of hybridized probes of a chip tested against west nile virus chip  <dig> . the dots highlighted in red denote the probes that are designed to hybridize to the west nile virus. though some probes designed for the west nile virus have the highest intensity level, some are not hybridized to the virus dna at all. it also demonstrates that there is a certain level of cross hybridization . the p-values calculated using the hypergeometric method are also shown. in our preliminary results over other assays  and in the presented assay , the sensitivity  of every method was comparable, and specificity was high, however the ltrm had significantly better positive predicting values than all methods, with the exception of the proposed hypergeometric method outperforming the ltrm. though other approaches can also identify the correct agent though a ranking system, the hypergeometric method is able to significantly enhance the hybridization signal of target agents and reduce the noise due to cross-hybridization.

average value and standard deviation for all samples are shown. best values are bolded. * examples of species' predictions by all methods are provided in supplementary t  <dig>  and clarify the positive predictive value scores below.

average value and standard deviation for all samples are shown. best values of accuracy scores are bolded in each category.

we also combined the hybridization results from chip pairs to improve predictive accuracy. results are shown in supplementary t  <dig> . comparing the ranking and accuracy scores between the single chips and the grouped chips , the accuracy scores for the paired chips show improvement over those than those of the single chips, especially in terms of positive predicting values. for example, the ltrm method has an increase in the positive predicting value from  <dig> % to  <dig> %. overall, comparing both their ranking and accuracy scores , the hypergeometric method performs better at the predicting positive value and is better or equivalent to other methods on other accuracy scores. its positive predicting value is approximately 2~ <dig> fold better than those of the other methods.

limitations
while the simple probe count method can, in principle, detect species with as few as one probe, the cost of confirming the predictions likely to become prohibitive due to the large number of false positives. this is demonstrated in supplementary t  <dig>  where selecting the  <dig> topmost hybridized probes may lead to dozens of false positive predicted species, and the number of false positive predictions rapidly increases with the number of probes considered. in addition, viruses with close phylogeny could also cause problems due to cross-hybridization on the chip, substantially confounding the detection process.

future studies
the ltrm method which also outperformed most methods is based on the log transform of expression level, while our method is based on the direct ranking of the expression levels. there is a theoretical advantage to pool the two methods together in repeated essays where the log normalization associated with the error rate could together better rank the significant probe sets than the expression level alone. we are currently exploring the joint use of the log transform and the hypergeometric distribution. the methods outlined in this study are focused on using probe-level hybridization to determine the significance of each detectable, however future studies should also address the gene level . indeed, cross-hybridization of probes designed for the same genes in different strains or for orthologs in different species, could cross-hybridize when mutations affect the region in a given strain of virus even if the probes were originally designed with sufficient differences in the sequence of nucleic acid base pairs. as data becomes publicly available, we will establish the scalability of our method to these arrays as well.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that, for the prediction of pathogens, high specificity and sensitivity can be achieved with a broad range of analytical methods. only two prediction methods correctly ranked the tested pathogen in all tests, the hypergeometric and the ltrm method. to our knowledge, we conducted the first hypergeometric model of probe hybridization for interpretation of arrays with multiplexed species-probes. it differs conceptually of every other method because it provides an adjusted p-value below which no predictions are made. in contrast, previous methods do not provide an objective threshold in their stratification of species, and such threshold is established arbitrarily, leading to poor positive predicting value. as hypothesized, the method based on the hypergeometric distribution provides a significant advantage in terms of positive predicting value. when experiments are repeated with the same sample on additional arrays, the method also performs significantly better than the other methods. beyond oligonucleotide arrays, the hypergeometric-based method is scalable and could be applied to other or newly developed multiplexed technologies for characterizing pathogens.

