BACKGROUND
chromatin insulation accounts for the formation of independent transcriptional units on eukaryote chromosomes . chromatin insulation is mediated by insulator binding proteins , which insulate transcriptional units either by acting as chromatin barriers  or as enhancer blockers . due to their large-scale effects on transcription and on the regulation of fundamental developmental processes, ibps can significantly impact body plan formation . consequently, ibps may play an important role in the evolution of body plans and biological diversity. following this line of reasoning, studying the evolution of ibps in insects <dig> appears rewarding. in the common fruit fly, drosophila melanogaster, twelve different ibps have been identified . however, the taxonomic distribution of ibps in insects and the ibps’ possible correlation with biological diversity has only been studied in a small number of species  <cit> . in the present investigation, we therefore exploit information in recently published transcriptome and genome sequence data to trace the evolution of ibps in insects and show that the evolution of ibps in  <dig> insect species is more complex than previously anticipated.table  <dig> summary of all currently known insulator binding proteins  in drosophila melanogaster, with information on the pfam symbol of the conserved protein domain families found in the respective proteins with the corresponding references

the number of repeats of each conserved domain in the respective protein is given in square brackets




transcriptional units comprise groups of genes and associated regulatory elements, such as enhancers, silencers, and promoters, that can be brought into close spatial proximity to each other by folding of chromatin fibers  <cit> . it has been shown that transcriptionally active units can be immediately adjacent to inactive genomic regions  <cit> . such a spatial arrangement can result in inadvertent genic interactions. experiments show that ibps are capable of effectively impeding such interactions  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, the protein cut acts as a chromatin barrier insulator, like the homologous protein cdp of humans that binds to a similar target region  <cit> . as chromatin barriers, cut and cdp inhibit interactions between heterochromatin and actively transcribed euchromatin  <cit> . in general, when heterochromatin comes into spatial proximity of transcribed euchromatin, it can spread along the chromatin fiber into adjacent euchromatin regions and repress transcription. chromatin barrier ibps seem to be ancient proteins in eukaryotes since it has also been demonstrated by the interaction between tfiiic and trna genes found in yeast and humans . the taxonomically wide distribution of chromatin-barring ibps  implies that chromatin barring is essential for chromosomal organization in eukaryotes  <cit> .

enhancer blocking ibps apparently evolved later than chromatin barrier ibps and are possibly restricted to bilaterians  <cit> . enhancers are regulatory elements that can bind to a promoter and thereby enhance transcription of the associated gene. the switch between a euchromatic and a heterochromatic state of adjacent chromosome regions can result in unfavorable alignments of enhancers in spatial proximity of otherwise distant promoters. consequently, enhancers could interact with off-target promoters. such interactions can be prevented by enhancer-blocking ibps  <cit> . su  was the first enhancer blocker to be functionally characterized in d. melanogaster. su was discovered due to its ability to protect dna of transgenic flies from the phenotypic effect of the transposable element gypsy, which induces mutations affecting transcription by inserting itself into splice sites and sequences necessary for initiating transcription  <cit> . su seems to be restricted to arthropods  <cit> . bell and colleagues  <cit>  described a second enhancer blocker, called ctcf , in birds and mammals. in contrast to su, ctcf was shown to be taxonomically widespread and has been found in all bilaterian lineages studied  <cit> .

as of yet ctcf is the only enhancer-blocking ibp known in vertebrates. however, b <dig> and b <dig> type sines , which are transposable elements, can also encode for enhancer blocking peptides  <cit> . additionally, trna genes have been shown to exhibit enhancer-blocking or chromatin barring properties  <cit> . furthermore, a homolog of the gaga factor  has been identified in vertebrates, where it might function as an enhancer blocking ibp  <cit> . so far, twelve ibps with enhancer-blocking properties have been identified in d. melanogaster, including ctcf and su . all ibps contain dna-binding domains. the most common are zinc-finger domains, or domains with a zinc-finger core, such as zf-c2h <dig>  zf-bed, gaga and flywch. the elba  protein complex and a specific isoform of mod  use ben domains to bind dna instead  <cit> . three ibps, cp <dig> , gaf, and mod, additionally have a btb domain , which is assumed to mediate dna binding and protein binding  <cit> . mod and cp <dig> often interact with ctcf  <cit>  and su  <cit>  and are shown to form complexes in d. melanogaster. these interactions might possibly be mediated through the btb domain. other domains are a zf-ad  found in pita and a bess domain , suvar <dig>  and stonewall ) found in beaf- <dig> 

in d. melanogaster, ibps exhibiting enhancer-blocking function actively regulate larval development. for example, individual deletion of ctcf, cp <dig>  beaf- <dig>  and gaf alters the expression of hox genes, resulting in lethal homeotic transformations . deletion of su induces sterility in female d. melanogaster due to changes in the expression of oogenesis-related genes  <cit> . these experiments demonstrate the importance of ibp-mediated transcriptional regulation for proper larval development and oogenesis in d. melanogaster and raise the intriguing question of when and how these important ibps evolved in arthropods.

schoborg and labrador  <cit>  as well as heger and colleagues  <cit>  screened publicly available transcriptomes as well as draft genomes of insects for genes orthologous to d. melanogaster ibps. they inferred that ctcf likely evolved in the stem lineage of bilateria. su possibly evolved in the stem lineage of arthropods and cp <dig> possibly evolved in the stem lineage of the pancrustacea . the ibp gaf likely evolved in the last common ancestor of holometabola and hemiptera, and mod likely emerged in the last common ancestor of aparaglossata . finally, zw <dig> and beaf- <dig> are possibly unique to the dipteran family drosophilidae. because gaf and mod apparently emerged during the diversification of holometabola, we suggest that ibps may have played a key role for the tremendous diversification of holometabolous insects.

we therefore analyzed whole-body transcriptomes sampled across all described insect orders, which were compiled in the international 1kite project  <cit> . we additionally considered sequence data of other panarthropod lineages, including rnaseq data of onychophorans and a tardigrade. additionally, we screened the genome of a nematode . we screened for all twelve enhancer-blocking ibps that have previously been identified in insects . we assessed the orthology of all identified candidate transcripts of ibps by using the best reciprocal hit criterion, inferred the phylogeny of each gene from the assembled transcripts and studied selective forces that might have acted on these genes. our data and results furthermore set the stage for future comparative and experimental studies on this intriguing group of proteins.

RESULTS
we used profile hidden markov models  in order to search for orthologous sequences of twelve enhancer-blocking ibps known from d. melanogaster in transcriptome data sets from  <dig> insect species and in transcriptomes and genomes of ten outgroup species, including crustaceans, chelicerates, myriapods, onychophorans , a tardigrade, and a nematode . we found that three ibps are particularly widespread across insect orders and outgroups:  ctcf was found in the transcript libraries of  <dig> species, including the nematode, trichinella spiralis;  su occurs in the transcript libraries of  <dig> species, including crustaceans, chelicerates, and myriapods  cp <dig> was found in the transcript libraries of  <dig> species, including crustaceans. ancestral state reconstruction corroborates the idea that ctcf was already present in the last common ancestor of panarthropoda , su was already present in the last common ancestor of arthropoda , and cp <dig> in the last common ancestor of pancrustacea .fig.  <dig> evolution of enhancer-blocking insulator proteins  in arthropods. gains of ibps are indicated by blue stars, potential losses by red crosses. blue circles in the table indicate the presence of transcripts of a given ibp in transcriptomes. multiple blue circles indicate the number of copies found. transparent circles indicate the putative absence of transcripts of an ibp. the backbone tree topology is adopted from  <cit> . the phylogenetic relationships among outgroup taxa  are according to  <cit> 




in contrast, we detected gaf exclusively in insects, including coneheads , but not in all species studied. in fact, only  <dig> screened insect transcriptome assemblies included putative transcripts of gaf. we did not find any gaf transcripts in the screened transcriptomes of butterflies and moths , caddisflies , scorpionflies , fleas , and springtails . in addition, we did not find gaf in the draft genomes of bombyx mori , limnephilus lunatus , machilis hrabei , and catajapyx aquilonaris . ancestral state reconstruction for gaf reveals multiple losses of this protein . a search for the vertebrate gaf homolog in the insect transcriptomes yielded several positive hits, which however did not fulfill the best reciprocal hit criterion.

transcripts of mod were exclusively detected in species of neopteran insects . we also searched an early draft genome of a bristletail , a mayfly , and a dragonfly  for possible orthologs of mod. we identified a flywch zinc finger domain  when searching the m. hrabei genome. however, since other proteins, such as su   <cit> , are known to also contain flywch domains, we deem these hits as insufficient evidence for the occurrence of mod in bristletails.

we found orthologs of pita only in transcript assemblies of holometabolous insects , and ancestral state reconstruction of pita suggests that this ibp was present in the last common ancestor of holometabola .

we identified transcripts encoding the ibp zw <dig> only in two species of diptera .

we could not find evidence for the presence of orthologs of zipic , beaf- <dig>  ibf <dig> , ibf <dig>   and the genes encoding the elba complex in any of the investigated species when searching all available transcriptomes. we did find such evidence, however, in the genome of d. willistoni . note that ibf <dig>  ibf <dig>  zipic, beaf- <dig>  and the proteins of the elba complex have only been identified in drosophila to date.

finally, we conducted a branch-specific analysis of dn/ds-ratios to test for positive selective pressure . we found no statistically significant evidence for positive selection in ctcf in onychophora . pita showed evidence for positive selection in hymenoptera .table  <dig> results from analyzing dn/ds ratios in genes encoding insulator proteins in insects

shown are the gene name and the branch, along which the respective selection model was tested, the log-likelihood for the neutral model  and for positive selection , the likelihood ratio test statistic , and the associated p-value. branches on which the positive selection model fits significantly better than the neutral selection model are indicated by *. bonferroni corrected significance threshold was α =  <dig> . the degree of freedom  was  <dig> for all tests




completeness of the transcriptomes was assessed by using the busco  pipeline  <cit> . the transcriptome completeness ranges from  <dig>  %  to  <dig>  % . results of the analysis are summarised in table  <dig>  absolute values for all used 1kite transcriptomes can be found in additional file 2: table s <dig> table  <dig> busco assessment for completeness of the  <dig> 1kite transcriptomes

given are the proportions of complete, fragmented and missing busco genes




none of the phylogenetic analyses of the transcripts of the above genes and proteins provided evidence for gene duplication events .

discussion
we traced the evolutionary origin of all twelve enhancer-blocking insulator proteins  known from d. melanogaster. we searched for transcripts of these ibps in  <dig> different species of panarthropods by applying profile hidden markov models  and the best reciprocal hit criterion. this procedure proved necessary to account for the fact that some ibps are comprised of multiple zinc finger domains. these domains are found in various chromatin binding proteins  <cit>  and are not specific to ibps.

since our phmms were constructed from ibp amino acid sequences of primarily dipteran species, we can expect a taxonomic bias in the analysis. however, this caveat was unavoidable, since many of these proteins have not been detected in other insect species yet.

since the ibp ctcf is expected to occur in all bilateria, we used it to assess the sensitivity of our search strategy and the quality of the analyzed transcript libraries. as expected, we identified transcripts of ctcf in almost all analyzed transcript assemblies, confirming the ubiquitous occurrence of this ibp in arthropods. we also found the zinc finger protein su in all major investigated arthropod lineages. ancestral state reconstruction suggests that su evolved in the last common ancestor of euarthropoda. we further inferred that the btb domain protein cp <dig> evolved either in the last common ancestor, or during the early radiation of pancrustacea. consequently, the sequences encoding for ctcf, su, and cp <dig> must have been part of the ancestral gene repertoire of insects, which is in accordance with the current knowledge on the evolution of ibps  <cit> .

the btb domain protein gaf was assumed to be unique to holometabolous insects and hemiptera and was lost secondarily in moths and butterflies  <cit> . in contrast, we recovered gaf orthologs in nearly all insect orders, except for moths and butterflies , caddisflies , scorpionflies , fleas , twisted wing parasites , bark lice and true lice , two-pronged bristletails , jumping bristletails  and springtails . thus, this pattern suggests that gaf most likely evolved in the last common ancestor of insects and was secondarily lost in some insect lineages. since gaf was found to play an important role in early embryonic development of d. melanogaster  <cit> , it is possible that its expression is down-regulated in adult individuals of the above lineages . however, we confirmed the absence of gaf in the publicly available draft genome assemblies of b. mori , l. lunatus , m. hrabei , and c. aquilonaris  . therefore the absence of gaf in the transcriptomes of the aforementioned insect orders corroborates the likely secondary loss of gaf in these insect orders. the ibp gaf must have evolved during the ordovician ;  <cit> ), between 106– <dig> million years earlier than previously thought  <cit> . while ancestral state reconstruction inferred separate gains of gaf within insects, we deem this scenario highly unlikely. we furthermore investigated the transcriptomes for the vertebrate gaf sequence, but were unable to infer an orthologous relationship between the best hits in insects and the vertebrate sequences.

the occurrence of the zinc finger protein pita in holometabolous insects, previously only known from d. melanogaster, suggests that it was already present in the last common ancestor of holometabola. since pita has previously been investigated only in diptera  <cit> , our data represent the first evidence for a much older evolutionary origin  and a wider taxonomic distribution of this gene in insects.

mod is another example of an ibp that shows a much wider taxonomic distribution than previously thought. the data available to heger and colleagues  <cit>  led the authors to the conclusion that mod likely evolved in the last common ancestor of aparaglossata . the presence of mod transcripts in various polyneopteran insect lineages suggests, however, that mod must have evolved in the stem lineage of neoptera , whose origin was in the devonian   <cit> . the occurrence of the flywch domain in sections of coding sequences in the early draft genome of the bristletail m. hrabei  suggests that mod might have evolved even earlier, within primarily apterygote insects. however, the presence of the flywch domain alone is insufficient to draw solid conclusions, as the domain has also been found in other proteins, such as su  <cit> .

while most previously discussed ibps, except for pita, have already been found in species other than d. melanogaster, zw <dig> and the proteins discussed in the following section are only known from d. melanogaster  <cit> . our search for zw <dig> in the 1kite data revealed orthologous transcripts in two additional species of diptera, lipara lucens  and triarthria setipennis . both belong to the lineage schizophora, which uses an eversible front pouch to escape from their puparium. this lineage comprises one-third of all extant dipteran species, including those of the genus drosophila. schizophora diverged from the remaining diptera in the early tertiary . this distribution is in accordance with the results obtained by heger and colleagues  <cit> , who found zw <dig> already in another schizophoran fly, glossina morsitans. when searching for zw <dig> transcripts in the 1kite transcriptome assemblies, we consistently received also transcripts of the protein “meiotic central spindle”  as promising hits. both proteins share a similar domain configuration, with zw <dig> differing from meics by having one fewer zinc finger domain. this led us to speculate that zw <dig> could be a paralog of the meics gene that evolved within diptera. we tested this hypothesis by inferring a gene tree from amino acid sequences of zw <dig> and meics, including representatives of diptera and holometabolous insects. however, in the inferred gene tree , zw <dig> does not group with the meics protein subtree. we therefore conclude that zw <dig> is unlikely to be the result of a duplication of meics in diptera.

the ibps beaf- <dig>  zipic, ibf <dig>  ibf <dig> as well as the proteins of the elba protein complex are known only from d. melanogaster. we were unable to identify transcripts of these ibps in any of the analyzed transcriptomes. since beaf- <dig> contains the bess domain only known from drosophila , chances of finding the gene in non-dipterans seem to be low, and previous reports already concluded that beaf- <dig> is likely being restricted to species of the genus drosophila  <cit> . elba <dig> and elba <dig> of the tripartite protein complex elba, each contain a chromatin-binding ben domain, which is known to occur in invertebrates, vertebrates, and viral proteins  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, expression of genes of the elba complex is restricted to embryonic development  <cit> . thus, the transcriptomes from the 1kite project, which primarily represent tissue samples from adult insects, may be unsuitable to trace back the evolution of this gene, since they do not cover the appropriate developmental stages. the same might hold true for the zinc finger ibps zipic, ibf <dig>  and ibf <dig>  since our searches for the corresponding coding sequences in the draft genomes of d. willistoni, aedes aegypti and anopheles gambiae  only revealed significant hits in d. wilistoni. this finding corroborates the idea that the absence of transcripts of these ibps in the screened 1kite transcriptomes indeed reflects the actual distribution of these proteins in insect transcriptomes.

we found possible evidence for positive selection in the genes encoding for ctcf and pita. ctcf was seemingly underlying positive selection in the onychophoran branch. this might be an artifact of the dn/ds.ratio test however. long divergence times lead to a saturation of ds  <cit> . this results in an increase of ω , which means that positive selection is more likely to be erroneously detected, as could be the case for ctcf, for which we analyzed sequence data spanning the entire range of arthropoda. evidence for positive selection in pita corresponds with the branch lengths in the pita gene tree  and suggests that the gene is rapidly evolving. identification of pita orthologs consequently proved to be difficult. this opens the possibility that the gene could have evolved even earlier and occurs also in hemimetabolous insects. we might have been unable to identify it properly due to its high amino acid sequence divergence.

the occurrence of ibps in a wide range of species, or restricted to particular taxa, may provide clues about evolutionarily conserved and evolutionarily labile autonomous transcriptional units. both phylogenetically older and younger ibps have been shown to actively insulate regions of the same gene complex. the bithorax complex in d. melanogaster, for example, contains binding sites of ctcf, gaf and also of elba  <cit> . it is possible that the presence of ctcf, su, cp <dig>  and gaf across insects most likely ensures proper transcription of genes in rather conserved units and regions . likewise, we hypothesize that the restricted occurrence of mod, pita and, in particular, of zw <dig>  beaf- <dig>  zipic and the elba complex may be the result of recent evolutionary changes in the architecture or transcription of genomic regions in the respective insect lineages.

CONCLUSIONS
the exceptionally broad taxonomic sampling of whole-body transcriptomes and the sequencing depth of the analyzed transcriptomes of insects from the 1kite project proved to be useful for screening and delineating the occurrence of ibps in arthropods. our search for and identification of ibps in all currently recognized extant insect orders implies that the enhancer-blocking ibps ctcf, su, cp <dig>  and gaf were already present in the last common ancestor of insects. the evolution of two insect-specific ibps is associated with the origin of two major insect lineages: mod with evolution of neoptera  and pita with the evolution of holometabola . finally, the ibps zw <dig>  beaf- <dig>  and zipic as well as the ibps of the elba complex are apparently restricted to diptera, with beaf- <dig>  zipic, and elba possibly being unique to drosophilids. considering the likely fundamental importance of ibps for maintaining proper transcription of genes in a frequently altering genomic environment, the currently known diversity of ibps in d. melanogaster likely still represents a lower estimate of the actual diversity of ibps in flies. the large number of ibps that are seemingly unique to drosophilids furthermore implies that, if ibp diversity in drosophilids is representative for a given insect lineage with a given age, a plethora of ibps is yet to be discovered in other insect lineages.

