BACKGROUND
although gene duplication has been widely considered as the main source of evolutionary novelties
 <cit> , the issue of duplicate gene preservation remains a subject of hot debate, i.e., how duplicate copies can escape from being pseudogenized and then evolve from an initial state of complete redundancy to a steady-stable state that both functionally divergent copies are maintained by purifying selection. as one of plausible hypotheses, rapid expression divergence between duplicate genes may be the first step that is fundamental for the preservation of redundant duplicates
 <cit> . there are three recognized types involved in expression regulatory mechanism:  cis-regulation of transcription mediated by promoters, enhancers, silencers, etc.;  trans-regulation mediated by regulatory proteins binding to cis elements, such as transcription factors ; and  epigenetic regulation, such as dna methylation, specific histone modification pattern of genes . many studies have addressed the effect of cis- and trans- regulatory mechanisms on the expression divergence after gene duplication, e.g., cis-regulatory motif, tf-binding interaction, trans-acting expression quantitative trait loci 
 <cit> . though there is increasing evidence that epigenetic changes may play important roles in the initial expression divergence between duplicate genes
 <cit> , little study has been done about how regulatory network between duplicate genes evolve at epigenetic level.

epigenetic regulation on gene expression is a highly complex process. in a broad sense, it includes dna methylation, histone modification, nucleosome occupancy, as well as microrna
 <cit> . moreover, these epigenetic elements can interact with each other, for instance, the reciprocity between dna methylation and histone modification
 <cit> . the complexity of epigenetic regulation has made it difficult to explore its role in regulatory divergence between duplicates. nevertheless, we have recognized budding yeast  as an ideal organism for our purpose, because its epigenetic regulation is relatively simple: dna cytosine methylation and microrna were not detected
 <cit> . in other words, histone modification is the main representation for epigenetic modification in the budding yeast, less affected by other epigenetic modification types. therefore, in the present study, we focus on the evolution of histone modification  between yeast duplicate genes.

eukaryotic dna with a unit of 146 bp wound around a histone octamer  is assembled into chromatin. histone n-terminal tails are subject to multiple covalent post-translational modifications, including lysine  acetylation, lysine or arginine  methylation, serine  phosphorylation, and so on
 <cit> . enormous possible combinations and interactions of histone modification types constitute histone code. the ‘histone code’ hypothesis claims that a specific pattern of hisone modification code can produce a specific effect on local chromatin structure, modulating dna accessibility, and consequently regulating transcription and other dna-based biological processes
 <cit> .

our goal is to investigate the pattern of yeast histone modification  code divergence between duplicates. our hypothesis claims  that, when a gene is duplicated, the gene-specific histone modification profile is also duplicated, so on average duplicate pairs tend to have a higher degree of hm code similarity than randomly selected singleton gene pairs; and  that since duplication, hm-code profile between duplicate copies become divergent with evolutionary time. we test these two predictions by conducting genome-wide analyses, as well as genes involved in different biological functions. moreover, we are particularly interested in whether genetic regulatory elements, including cis-motifs  and transcription factors, and epigenetic hm-code profile co-diverge during the evolution since gene duplication. to this end, time-dependent confounding factors in both genetic and epigenetic factors need to be ruled out. finally, the significance of our study for having a better understanding of regulatory evolution after gene duplication is discussed.

RESULTS
combinational interactions of histone-modifying enzymes  to histone n-tail produce numerous types of post-translational modification of histones , such as methylation, acetylation
 <cit> . moreover, the same modification site can be affected by different modifying enzymes, and vice versa, generating different histone modification combinations, like h3k4me <dig> and h3k4ac , or h4k8ac . in this study, histone modification  code of a gene represents the combined profile of different hm sites, hm types and hm states in gene promoter and open reading frame  regions, respectively . we believe that the hm code of a gene reveals the pattern of hm mediated regulatory network of that gene.

functional redundancy in histone modification  between yeast duplicate genes
because of evolutionary relatedness, duplicate pairs may have a higher similarity of histone modification  code than two randomly selected single-copy genes . to test this hypothesis, we compared the distance of hm code between duplicate pair and randomized singleton pair. to be simple we choose one minus pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient, i.e., dhm = 1-r, to define the distance of hm code. the larger the value of dhm, the higher divergence of histone modification code between duplicate genes. specifically, denote the distance of hm code associated in promoter and orf regions by dhm-p and dhm-o, respectively. randomized pairs were selected from single copy genes with  <dig> repeats. as expected, we observed that both dhm-p and dhm-o measures show a lower divergence degree of histone modification code between duplicate genes than that of randomized singleton pairs .

generally speaking, local chromatin environment around genes is one of important components leading to different histone modification code of each gene. while chromatin environment differs in different chromosomes, duplicate genes locating in different chromosomes may be under different chromatin environment, possessing the chromosome-specific hm profile. following this argument, we classified all yeast gene pairs  under study into two groups: they are located in the same chromosome, or different chromosomes, and tested the relationship between histone modification pattern and chromosome condition. we observed that though the hm profile divergence is not significantly correlated with location distance of gene pairs in the same chromosome , gene pairs locating in the same chromosome share more common hm code than that in different chromosomes .

the chromosome effect on the hm-code divergence between duplicate genes may suggest an alternative interpretation about a higher similarity of hm distance between duplicate genes than random pairs. that is, duplicate pairs tend to be located in the same chromosome because of tandem gene duplications, compared to randomized singleton pairs . to rule out this possibility, we chose duplicate pairs and randomized singleton pairs where both copies are belonging to different chromosomes, and observed the similar result to figure 
1a . hence, we conclude that duplicate genes represent their functional redundancy at the level of histone modification mediated regulatory network.

the evolution of hm is coupled with coding sequence divergence after gene duplication
we further expect that functional redundancy in histone modification code of duplicate genes as shown in figure 
1a would maintain a high degree in recently duplicated genes, and low in ancient duplicates. to verify this claim, we investigated the relationship between the distance of hm code  and coding sequence divergence . considering the statistically unreliable estimation of synonymous or nonsynonymous substitution distance when ks or ka becomes larger because of repeated substitutions at the same site, we selected duplicate pairs with ks <  <dig>  and ka <  <dig>  for this analysis. we observed that both dhm-p and dhm-o are positively correlated with ks or ka , suggesting that the divergence of hm code is coupled with the coding sequence divergence between duplicate genes. to avoid correlated data points bringing the bias, we selected independent pairs of duplicate genes using the method from zou et al.
 <cit>  and reanalyzed. the similar result remains hold .

considering ks or ka as a proxy to evolutionary time since gene duplication, we suggest that the correlation between the hm-code divergence and the coding sequence divergence has been mainly driven by mutations accumulated with evolutionary time. our interpretation is based on two reasons: first, we observed a weak negative correlation between the hm divergence and the ka/ks ratio of duplicate genes . as the ka/ks ratio is an indicator of sequence conservation in coding region, our finding implies that duplicate genes with stringent functional constraints on coding sequence may have greater divergence in the hm code, but the effect is marginal. second, promoter hm code of duplicate genes diverges much quicker than that of orf hm code , while significant but weak difference of dhm-p and dhm-o in randomized singleton pairs . some factors may be involved to accelerate the divergence of promoter hm code between duplicate genes, such as the evolution of transcription factors  shared by duplicate genes.

co-evolution of the hm-code divergence between duplicates with several genetic regulatory elements
the interaction between epigenetic and genetic elements in gene regulation has been increasingly acknowledged
 <cit> , raising an interesting question whether the divergence of histone modification code between duplicate genes co-evolves with some trans-acting factors binding to those duplicate genes. we first studied the relationship between the distance of promoter hm code  and the distance of transcription factors  and trans-acting expression quantitative trait loci   between duplicate genes. trans-acting eqtls of one gene represent all trans-regulatory proteins for its transcription, not limited to transcription factors. two distance measures dtf and dt-eqtl were determined by czekanowski-dice formula . we found that they are significantly correlated . similar results were obtained in the case of orf hm code .

as both dhm-p and dhm-o, as well as dt-eqtl and dtf, increase with evolutionary time  [figure 
2; 9], it is reasonable to suspect that ks or ka may underlie these statistically significant correlations between the hm code and genetic regulatory elements. we conducted the partial correlation in dhm-p-dtf and dhm-p-dt-eqtl of duplicate genes under the controlling of ks and ka variables , and still observed the significant relationship , though they are relatively weak. in short, our analysis provides the evidence that the histone modification code and trans-regulators shared by duplicate genes may have co-evolved since gene duplication.

moreover, we design the following analysis to further explore the co-evolution between the hm code and trans-regulators , by dividing yeast genes into two categories, trans-targeted genes and controlling genes. trans-targeted genes are genes that are targeted by transcription factors  or have at least one trans-acting eqtl  and the rest of genes are controlling genes . we totally obtained  <dig> trans-targeted genes and  <dig> controlling genes . interestingly, both promoter and orf hm code distances of duplicates in the group of trans-targeted genes are, on average, significantly higher than those in the group of controlling genes  . it should be noticed that the pattern we observed in figure 
4b would not be affected by the strong correlation between the hm divergence and evolutionary time  of duplicate genes, because the distribution of ks has been found no significant difference between trans-targeted genes and controlling genes .

the hm-code divergence and tata-box regulation
tata box is the core promoter element for gene regulation responding to environmental stresses
 <cit> . to examine the role of tata box in the hm-code divergence between duplicate genes, we divided all yeast duplicate pairs into three groups, tata-containing , tata-less , and tata_diverge . we compared the hm-code distance in promoter  and orf  region between duplicate genes in these groups. interestingly, both dhm-p and dhm-o show the highest degree in the tata-diverge group, and the lowest in the tata-containing group  .

our explanation is as follows. note that tata-containing genes may interact with some specific chromatin modification factors to regulate gene expression
 <cit> . in the tata_diverge group, only one duplicate with tata-box has such interaction, resulting in a higher hm-code divergence between them. by contrast, in the case of tata-containing group, both duplicates with tata-box have similar interactions, resulting in a higher hm-code similarity between them.

biological functions and the hm-code divergence between duplicate genes
do different biological functions affect the level of the hm-code divergence between duplicate genes? we used go  slim  to address the issue. we analyzed dhm-p and dhm-o of duplicate genes in each go category and compared dhm-p and dhm-o among these go groups by one-way analysis of variance . our finding is that duplicate pairs with different biological processes differ significantly in dhm-p and dhm-o . use dhm-p for an example, duplicate genes involved in cofactor metabolic process, cellular amino acid and derivative metabolic process, cell cycle and cytoskeleton organization may have greater hm-code divergence, i.e., a higher dhm-p , while duplicate genes involved in translation, dna metabolic process, pseudohyphal growth and transcription may have lower divergence of the promoter hm code. moreover, we conducted a similar analysis on  <dig> cellular components , and observed that duplicate genes in different subcellular localization also undergo the different evolutionary rate of histone modification code after gene duplication . it is possible that duplicate genes in some biological processes or subcellular localization are young  while others are old . since dhm-p and dhm-o are positively correlated with ks , we have to remove the confounding effect caused by ks. we used the analysis of covariance   + ks:t) and the result remains statistically highly significant , suggesting ks is not a confounding factor that may affect our analyses.

a: s.e. denotes the standard error.

the expression divergence under genetic, epigenetic and stressful perturbations
it is well-documented that gene expression divergence of duplicate genes increases with evolutionary time, but the underlying mechanism remains a subject of debate
 <cit> . the analysis we describe below is to know whether the divergence of hm-mediated regulatory network affects the expression divergence between duplicate genes. we compared the interrelation between the histone modification pattern distance  and the expression distance  between duplicate genes, and found that they are significantly correlated .

we further divided yeast expression profiles into four types from different perturbation conditions: 1) normal developmental or physiological conditions, defined as ‘normal’ treatment; 2) a set of conditions where expression changes attribute to environmental stresses, denoted as ‘stress’ treatment; 3) conditions where single gene coding chromatin modifiers  like swi/snf, hdacs, hats, etc. was deleted, denoted as ‘cm_del’ treatment; 4) conditions where single gene coding transcription factors  was deleted, denoted as ‘tf_del’ treatment. the latter two types are able to test the effect of chromatin modification related proteins and transcription factors on other genes, respectively. we then calculated the expression divergence between duplicate genes under these four types of conditions, denoted by enormal, estress, ecm_del, etf_del, respectively. we observed that the expression distance between duplicate genes in ‘cm_del’ condition  is significantly greater than that in ‘normal’ condition  , but much lower than that in ‘stress’ and ‘tf_del’ conditions  . results imply that histone modification related enzymes and gene associated histone modification profile may indeed influence the expression evolution of duplicate genes, though the relative contribution to the expression divergence between duplicate genes is highly lower than genetic related factors like transcription factors, even externally environmental stresses.

tata-containing genes are usually enriched in stress-related genes
 <cit> , and represent high expression variability
 <cit> . in our study, we detected that in four disturbed conditions , the expression divergence in tata-diverge and tata-containing groups are significantly larger than that in tata-less duplicate genes . the discrepancies between expression change and the histone modification divergence in these duplicate gene types  are observed.

discussion
the divergence of hm profile between duplicate genes
our detailed analyses on yeast whole-genome histone modification  code profile have shown that duplicate genes share more common hm-code patterns than randomized singleton pairs in their promoter and orf regions, and the hm-code divergence between duplicates in both regions increase with the sequence divergence. this finding supports the notation that epigenetic divergence between duplicate genes may have been driven by the accumulation of mutations with the duplication time in both their promoter and orf regions, because it has been shown that the divergence of coding sequence such as ks between yeast duplicates is a proxy to evolutionary time. in other words, no external driving force is needed to explain the hm profile divergence between duplicates, though it remains possible of neofunctionalization based upon divergent hm profile through some positive selection mechanisms.

hypothesis-based genomic correlation analysis
genome-wide functional analysis of duplicate genes is in attempt to reveal functional correlation between genetic and epigenetic factors during the process of functional innovation through gene duplication. however, the universal confounding effect of the sequence divergence  has complicated the practical analyses. consequently, the controversy about the cause-effect interpretation has been inevitable, because genome-wide analysis of duplicate genes has been viewed as an exploration rather than a hypothesis-testing approach.

since the correlation between the hm profile divergence and the sequence divergence actually reflects the fundamental evolutionary process driven by the accumulation of mutations, we view this as a null hypothesis in the genome-wide functional analysis of duplicate genes. that is, any meaningful inference about the functional correlation within or between genetic and epigenetic elements needs to reject this null hypothesis, as we have shown in this study.

interaction between genetic and epigenetic elements: who is the driver?
the interaction between epigenetic and genetic elements in gene regulation has been increasingly acknowledged. for instance, the establishment of the histone modification code may partially involve the recruitment of specific histone modifying enzymes such as hats, hdacs, hmts by transcription factors 
 <cit> . meanwhile, the distinctly combinatory histone modification code associated with gene may also provide specific binding code that is read by other transcription factors
 <cit> . these observations raise an interesting question whether the divergence of histone modification code between duplicate genes may co-evolve with trans-acting factors binding to those duplicate genes, e.g., transcription factors, histone modifying enzymes.

we have observed a higher divergence for hm code of duplicate genes in the category of trans-targeted genes than that of controlling genes, suggesting that the change of trans-regulators binding to duplicate genes may affect the pattern of hm code in both promoter and orf regions, and thus accelerating the divergence of histone modification code between duplicate genes. yet, it remains unclear about the cause-effect relationship. for instance, does the divergence of trans-regulators to duplicate genes facilitate the divergence of histone modification between duplicate genes, or vice versa? our further study will address this issue.

functional preference in the hm code divergence between duplicate genes
we observed the functional bias on the hm-code divergence after gene duplication. one possibility is that histone proteins associated with genes in different biological functions may be subject to differentially post-translational modification, leading to different divergence rate of histone modification code between duplicate genes. since histone modification process of one gene largely depends on its chromatin environment and dna sequence interacted by histone modifying enzymes
 <cit> , functionally selective constraints may also be imposed on histone modification evolution associated with that gene, a situation similar to dna sequence evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we unveiled the evolution of yeast histone modification code since gene duplication. though duplicate genes represent functional redundancy at histone modification level compared with single-copy genes, the histone modification divergence occurred along with evolutionary time , which possibly due to the coding sequence evolution after gene duplication. moreover, the histone modification code in orf region evolves slower than that in promoter region, indicative of functionally selective constraints on protein sequences. going further, after controlling the confounding effect of the coding sequence divergence , the histone modification code co-evolves with cis-  and trans-  regulatory factors, confirmed by the fact that the histone modification code is shaped by the combined interaction among histone-modifying enzymes, trans-acting elements and cis-regulatory motif. in addition, histone modification makes contribution to the expression divergence between duplicate genes, despite the minor effect compared to transcription factors and environmental stresses. taking together, we provided the evidence of the co-evolution between genetic and epigenetic elements since gene duplication, together contributing to the expression divergence between duplicate genes.

