BACKGROUND
pseudomonas tolaasii is a gram-negative, naturally soil-dwelling bacterial pathogen that causes brown blotch disease in several varieties of cultivated mushrooms  <cit> . the disease is characterised by brown lesions on the outer layers  of the mushroom pileus and stipe, which range from small, light brown spots to larger, dark, sunken and wet lesions, depending on disease severity. this brown discolouration results from mushroom production of melanin, which is a defence response induced in this case by p. tolaasii producing the toxin tolaasin. tolaasin is an 18-amino acid lipodepsipeptidide that forms ion channels and also acts as a biosurfactant to disrupt the plasma membrane of mushroom cells, allowing p. tolaasii access to cell-nutrients  <cit> . infection is also reported to result in slower development of the mushroom crop with a lower yield  <cit> . the economic impact of the disease is significant, resulting in loss of visual appeal to consumers and regular crop reductions of 5–10% in the uk  <cit> . the disease is found worldwide: p. tolaasii mushroom infection has been documented in several countries, including the usa, spain, serbia, the netherlands, japan and korea  <cit> .

a major obstacle in the control of p. tolaasii infection that contributes to its broad prevalence is that some of the bacterial species present in the casing soil around mushrooms, such as pseudomonas putida, are necessary for promoting the initial stages of mushroom growth  <cit> . this means that the casing soil cannot be sterile, and broad range antibiotic and antiseptic treatments cannot be used in the mushroom-growing process; consequently, p. tolaasii may become endemic in the casing soil and compost used in mushroom cultivation  <cit> .

p. tolaasii survives well in nutrient-poor environments, such as the casing soil prior to mushroom growth, by altering the production of various enzymes, thus switching between pathogenic non-fluorescent  and non-pathogenic fluorescent  forms  <cit> . p. tolaasii also uses flagellar-mediated chemotaxis in the wet casing soil to move towards nutrient ‘signals’ produced by the mushroom; once on the pileus surface, they attach and initiate disease rapidly  <cit> . symptoms can appear on mushrooms at all stages of development; some apparently unaffected mushrooms also develop symptoms after harvesting, making it difficult to immediately identify and target p. tolaasii infections  <cit> . furthermore, the pathogen is spread easily on the hands of mushroom pickers, and epidemics can occur between multiple mushroom houses  <cit> .

due to the adaptability and persistence of p. tolaasii, and the limitations on treatment options, there are very few effective methods for controlling p. tolaasii infection that are also safe to use on crops intended for human consumption. the current best methods of disease prevention are addition of chlorinated compounds such as calcium hypochlorite to irrigation water, and careful control of growth conditions; for example, the surface moisture of mushrooms and water level in the casing soil to minimize p. tolaasii chemotaxis and motility; however, the success of disease prevention is highly variable, and not guaranteed  <cit> .other disinfectants and antibiotic compounds such as chloramine t and bronopol have been suggested as potential treatments  <cit> , as well as natural plant extracts from salvia miltiorrhiza <cit> , and the white line inducing principle  produced by pseudomonas reactans, which reacts with tolaasin produced by p. tolaasii <cit> . other pseudomonads that are antagonistic to p. tolaasii, such as pseudomonas flourescens, have also been investigated as biocontrol strains  <cit> . most recently, the application of a p. tolaasii-specific bacteriophage has been proposed as a novel method of controlling p. tolaasii infection  <cit> , but to our knowledge none of these alternative disease prevention methods have been tested or used commercially.

the gram-negative predatory bacterium bdellovibrio bacteriovorus has been discussed as a potential ‘living antibiotic’ for bacterial pathogens of humans and animals. bdellovibrio attach to, invade and replicate inside diverse gram-negative bacterial prey, killing the prey cell in the process . bdellovibrio was isolated from soil, and thus evolved to kill bacterial prey in soil and water  <cit> . it is highly motile in liquid, using flagellar swimming  <cit> , and it also ‘glides’ slowly on solid surfaces  <cit> , and uses chemotaxis to locate regions rich in prey  <cit> . despite thus being an ideal candidate for the treatment of crop pathogens, the influence of bdellovibrio predation on gram-negative disease outbreaks in the soil environment remains largely unknown. the effect of bdellovibrio on gram-negative bacterial pathogen populations has previously been studied in live chickens and on soybean plant leaves rubbed into scratches made artificially on leaf tissue  <cit> . the supply of bdellovibrio bacteriovorus hd <dig> orally to live chickens showed that, while they did reduce pathogen numbers and alter the gut microbiota, there were not any harmful effects of ingestion of bdellovibrio, which is important in a food-related setting  <cit> .

in this current study, we investigated whether bdellovibrio can be used to control the soil-borne mushroom pathogen p. tolaasii in the natural environment of the surface of the cultivated button mushroom agaricus bisporus post-harvest. we measured the effect of bdellovibrio bacteriovorus hd <dig> application on the extent of brown blotch lesion symptoms resulting from pseudomonas tolaasii 2192t inoculation onto mushroom pilei, and compared these with p. tolaasii cell counts recovered from inoculated mushrooms. we also monitored the interaction between b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> and p. tolaasii 2192t on the mushroom pileus surface to confirm bdellovibrio predation of the pathogen in funga. bacterial-fungal interactions have been the subject of recent reviews  <cit>  as they involve interesting cross kingdom biology, but also affect crop productivity and thus global food security. in this study, a bacterial-bacterial interaction on a fungal surface prevents a pathogenic bacterial-mushroom interaction through an active, predatory process, rather than displacement by competition, which is the first time this has been documented.

RESULTS
bdellovibrio inhibits p. tolaasii population growth in vitro
to begin to test bdellovibrio as a possible biocontrol agent against p. tolaasii, we first aimed to assess the impact of their co-incubation on p. tolaasii survival in vitro. as figure  <dig> shows, the optical density  of p. tolaasii 2192t samples in the presence of live b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> did not increase compared to a heat-killed b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> control, measured over 24 hours in the bmg plate-reader. . in the presence of b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> at both 4 ×  <dig> cells/well and  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells/well, the od600nm of p. tolaasii 2192t did not increase from the starting value  over 24 hours. however, when live b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> were substituted with heat-killed b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  the od600nm value increased from  <dig>  to a final value of  <dig> , corresponding to an increase from  <dig>  ×  <dig> to  <dig>  × 108 cfu over 24 hours, . this indicates that bdellovibrio effectively suppressed the population growth of p. tolaasii, most likely due to killing by predation.

brown blotch lesion intensity was reduced by bdellovibrio application onto mushrooms
given b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was observed to suppress p. tolaasii 2192t growth in vitro, we reasoned that this effect might be replicated in a more natural environment. we first aimed to determine whether symptoms of p. tolaasii infection, a function of bacterial metabolism and growth, were reduced with bdellovibrio treatment in a natural context. the intensity of lesions formed by p. tolaasii 2192t on the post-harvest pileus surface of the cultivated button mushroom agaricus bisporus was measured in the presence and absence of b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  mushroom pilei inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t alone, in the absence of any treatment with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  formed dark, wet surface lesions, the primary symptom of brown blotch disease, after 48 hours at 29°c . in contrast, pilei treated with a king’s medium b control  did not form these dark lesions ; similarly, those treated with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> alone, and not inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t, also did not form dark lesions , so bdellovibrio application itself did not have a significant adverse effect on the appearance of mushroom pilei.

post-harvest mushrooms treated with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> either 30 minutes before or 30 minutes after p. tolaasii 2192t inoculation developed significantly lighter lesions than those inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t alone . this demonstrates that bdellovibrio effectively reduces the dark lesions of brown blotch disease caused by p. tolaasii, and that this reduction is slightly greater where bdellovibrio is added before p. tolaasii. the significance of the difference in lesion intensities between b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> treated and untreated, p. tolaasii 2192t inoculated mushrooms was greater when bdellovibrio was added before p. tolaasii 2192t than when added after . bdellovibrio application may therefore be more effective as a preventative measure to protect mushrooms against brown blotch disease, rather than a treatment for an already infected mushroom crop, and could be explored as a background addition to mushroom compost or casing layers to maintain “health”.

scanning electron microscope images show b. bacteriovorus attachment and bdelloplast formation in p. tolaasii cells
to confirm whether the reduction in p. tolaasii 2192t numbers and brown blotch lesion intensity was due to b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> predation in funga or another competition for resources, the interaction between p. tolaasii and bdellovibrio was monitored in samples from the surface of the post-harvest a. bisporus , 48 hours after mushroom treatments, using scanning electron microscopy . p. tolaasii 2192t added alone to the mushroom pileus accumulated together, in an arrangement parallel to the pileus surface, in the pits present between chitin fibres . fibrillar structures attached to the p. tolaasii 2192t cells were frequently observed, which have also been documented in previous microscopic studies  <cit> . these resemble pili, with extracellular polymeric substances laid down on them, and may allow p. tolaasii to adhere tightly to the mushroom surface and to each other in a biofilm, to rapidly initiate disease . b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> added alone to the mushroom surface survived after 48 hours and also accumulated in the small pits between chitin fibres .

where b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was added to the mushroom surface both before  and after p. tolaasii 2192t , b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> attachment to p. tolaasii 2192t cells was observed: a crucial first step in the predatory process. in addition, bdelloplasts, the rounded, dead p. tolaasii structures in which bdellovibrio establish, grow and replicate after attachment and invasion, were also observed where b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was added before or after p. tolaasii 2192t. although a valid statistical survey is not possible in these sem samples, bdelloplasts were most clearly visible on the mushroom surface where b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was added before p. tolaasii 2192t . this correlates with the greater reduction in lesion intensity measurements on mushrooms where b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was added before p. tolaasii 2192t : bdellovibrio attachment to prey and subsequent bdelloplast formation may be easier, and occur more rapidly, where p. tolaasii cells have not had time to accumulate, adapt and adhere to the mushroom surface, preventing p. tolaasii from producing as much tolaasin, and thus reducing the extent of the characteristic brown blotch symptoms.

a king’s medium b control addition to the pileus resulted in the growth of different types of bacterial cells, with different morphologies that were distinct from that of p. tolaasii 2192t & b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> ; however, typically, no bacterial cells were observed on untreated mushroom tissue . this indicates that the supermarket mushrooms carry a small, indigenous bacterial microflora that replicates readily in added growth medium, which may impact upon p. tolaasii cfu numbers recovered from experimentally inoculated tissue, as described below.

application of bdellovibrio before inoculation with p. tolaasii reduced the number of p. tolaasii in infected mushroom tissue
to determine whether the reduction in lesion intensity after treatment with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> correlated with a reduction in p. tolaasii 2192t cell numbers, cfu were recovered and enumerated from mushroom tissue that had been inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t and pre-treated with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  compared with a p. tolaasii 2192t inoculated, non-b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> treated control . a mean number of  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  × 107 cfu were recovered from mushrooms pre-treated with  <dig>  ×  <dig> or  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu live b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> respectively, which were both significantly lower than the mean  <dig>  × 108 cfu recovered from mushrooms inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t alone ; these observations correlated with a significant reduction in lesion intensity  on mushrooms treated with  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  compared with mushrooms inoculated with p. tolaasii 2192t alone . despite this significant reduction in lesion intensity, the total number of cfu recovered from b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> treated mushrooms onto king’s medium b was high, suggesting that the bacteria recovered from seemingly similar, beige-coloured colonies on the king’s medium b plates were not solely pathogenic p. tolaasii 2192t, but might include other species indigenous to the mushroom pileus surface that are not well preyed upon by b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  as observed in sem images of mushroom tissue to which king’s medium b broth was added alone.

enterobacter species are present on the surface of some commercially produced supermarket mushrooms
the number of cfu recovered from the mushrooms that were treated with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> after inoculation with p. tolaasii was relatively high compared to mushrooms inoculated with p. tolaasii alone. to confirm the identity of the bacteria seen in figures 3d and e and recovered from supermarket mushroom tissue pre-treated with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> before p. tolaasii 2192t at both  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu ml− <dig>   <dig> colonies taken from the king’s medium b agar plates used to enumerate bacterial cfu, recovered from the treated mushroom tissue of two mushrooms in each group, were grown on coliform chromogenic agar . this agar contains two chromogenic substrates that turn purple when cleaved by the enzymes glucorinidase and galactosidase, which are both present in coliforms such as e. coli, and absent from pseudomonads ; all  <dig> colonies were pigmented purple indicating them as coliform, closely related to e. coli, and therefore as indigenous species to the mushroom pileus, and distinctly different to p. tolaasii 2192t, which produced straw coloured colonies on the agar. three of these coliform isolates were identified by 16 s rdna sequencing as members of the enterobacter genus using the blast online tool , which showed that the isolates were most closely related to enterobacter sp. lb <dig>  matching 99% identity. this explains the relatively high number of total bacterial colonies recovered from mushroom tissue treated with bdellovibrio, despite the reduction in the dark lesions characteristic of p. tolaasii infection: bdellovibrio predation rapidly reduces p. tolaasii population numbers on the mushroom surface, but does not necessarily reduce those of other non-disease causing, likely mushroom-indigenous species, such as the enterobacter isolated in this study. the king’s medium b in which p. tolaasii 2192t and b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> were added to the surface of the mushroom during test inoculations, and the cell-lysate debris left behind after p. tolaasii death due to predation, may then allow these indigenous enterobacter to occupy the niche caused by bdellovibrio predation of p. tolaasii.

discussion
we showed that b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> is a predator of p. tolaasii 2192tin vitro and in vivo , suppressing population growth of the strain over a 24-hour period where 4 ×  <dig> or  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> were added to pathogen on post-harvest mushrooms . p. tolaasii is a difficult pathogen to control in mushroom grow-houses due to its ability to persist in nutrient-poor soils and the ease with which it spreads through mushroom compost, through flagellar swimming, and via the hands of pickers during the manual harvesting process  <cit> . furthermore, commensal bacterial species in the mushroom casing soil play a key role in mushroom growth initiation, and therefore any treatment to prevent or treat p. tolaasii infection must not result in a completely sterile growth environment, which may result from broad antibiotic or antiseptic treatment. thus it is beneficial to explore post-harvest anti- p. tolaasii treatments, such as this study with b. bacteriovorus.

our sem images confirmed that b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> survived on the post-harvest supermarket mushroom surfaces after 48 hours, and was therefore unaffected by any pre-treatment of those mushrooms for commercial purposes to promote growth and extend shelf-life in the film-covered plastic trays they were sold in . b. bacteriovorus is therefore a viable treatment for bacterial diseases of mushrooms, such as brown blotch disease. previous studies of mushroom infections have found that a ‘threshold’ number of p. tolaasii cells are required for the initiation of infection, which includes production of tolaasin, the chemical mediator of the brown blotch symptom development  <cit> . we found that when b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> was applied to the surface of post-harvest, commercially grown mushrooms before or after inoculation with p. tolaasii, both the intensity of the brown blotch symptoms of disease and the number of p. tolaasii 2192t present the mushroom surface were significantly reduced , supporting the threshold hypothesis. our sem images also showed that b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> attached to, invaded and killed p. tolaasii 2192t cells by forming bdelloplasts on the pileus surface, when added both before or after p. tolaasii 2192t inoculation ; thus, reduction in p. tolaasii 2192t numbers and disease symptoms was due to predatory activity by b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  as the consumer preference is for white, clean-looking mushrooms with minimal surface damage, the reduction in brown blotch tissue damage by b. bacteriovorus application could increase the yield and possibly the shelf life of high-quality, marketable mushrooms. this study investigated the survival of b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> and its predatory activity against p. tolaasii on the surface of post-harvest mushrooms up to 48 hours, sufficient time for brown blotch disease to develop on untreated mushrooms. thus studies over longer time points, covering time from transportation to the sell-by date, would need to be investigated, in future work, if bdellovibrio was to be applied as a treatment to extend shelf-life.

in addition to reducing the population of p. tolaasii on the mushroom surface, bdellovibrio are natural soil dwellers and so their application to casing soil could also prevent spread of brown blotch between mushrooms in the growth environment and between grow houses. in this way, the fast swimming motility of bdellovibrio <cit>  would allow efficient location of p. tolaasii prey, using chemotaxis, in the wet casing soil prior to mushroom growth initiation, and translocation by gliding along the mushroom pileus surface after mushroom fruiting bodies have formed, preventing p. tolaasii infection establishment at multiple stages of mushroom growth; previously, the possibility of infection throughout the mushroom growth period has been an obstacle in brown blotch disease control. further pre-harvest studies could investigate the longevity and protective effect of bdellovibrio inoculated into the casing soil around mushroom mycelium, before and after fruiting body initiation, on growing a. bisporus. as bdellovibrio preys efficiently upon some, but not all, species of pseudomonas , and some pseudomonads in the casing soil such as p. putida are important in fruiting body initiation; further studies would additionally investigate the predatory activity of b. bacteriovorus hd <dig> against such commensal strains in vitro and in the casing soil to ensure that there are no effects that would have an adverse impact on mushroom fruiting body production.

as host-dependent bdellovibrio require prey cells to survive, the post-harvest treatment could also be self-limiting, as bdellovibrio would die once p. tolaasii prey had been eradicated; further studies could quantify this. furthermore, these in vitro and in vivo predation studies suggest that b. bacteriovorus may be able to survive the action of the toxins produced by p. tolaasii and other members of the pseudomonas genus, including tolaasin and other lipases and peptidases, which cause the damage to the mushroom pileus  <cit> . this suggests that bdellovibrio species may be effective against other crop pathogenic bacterial species, even if they produce biologically active secreted compounds. this could be followed up with studies of the pure compounds themselves versus b. bacteriovorus.

we infrequently isolated enterobacter species in our experiments from supermarket mushrooms, likely being commensals growing in number after pre-treatment with b. bacteriovorus hd <dig>  suggesting that these enterobacter isolates are not susceptible to bdellovibrio predation. a plant growth promoting  enterobacter species, enterobacter cloacae, has been described previously, which colonises rice root surfaces and competes with other species in the soil microbiota for nutrients  <cit> . enterobacter species have also previously been isolated from spent mushroom compost  <cit> , where they might associate with the mushroom surface in a similar way, competing with other mushroom-indigenous bacteria as commensal species. as bdellovibrio has previously been shown to prey upon diverse enterobacter species  <cit> , it was unexpected that numbers seemed unaffected by bdellovibrio predation; inhibition of predation in this case may be due to a factor such as the presence of a protective s-layer, which may prevent bdellovibrio from attaching to and invading enterobacter prey cells  <cit> , but confirming s-layer presence was beyond the scope of this study. the enterobacter species in this study were isolated from bdellovibrio-treated mushroom tissue, unaffected by any brown blotch disease symptoms; and so the species are unlikely to be pathogenic, and may be commensals. it could therefore be beneficial that bdellovibrio are unable to prey upon the enterobacter species isolated in this study, preserving any beneficial commensal effect they might have, while still protecting against p. tolaasii infection.

CONCLUSIONS
bdellovibrio bacteriovorus hd <dig> are terrestrial bacteria which show natural control of pseudomonas tolaasii, a spoilage pathogen of mushroom crops, on the non-sterile, biotic surface of the mushroom pileus. these terrestrial bacteria therefore have a natural ability to act as “food security guards” against gram-negative crop pathogens.

