BACKGROUND
helicobacter pylori , a gram-negative microaerophilic spiral bacterium, is known as the major pathogenic agent in a wide range of gastroenteric diseases exemplified by chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer and gastric adeno-carcinoma  <cit> . increasing evidence suggests that h. pylori has adapted particularly to the niche of human stomach. genetic diversity is widespread among the clinical isolates  <cit> . this polymorphism can be attributed mainly to the consequence of adaptive changes during colonization, which in turn imply that h. pylori has a specialized adaptation mechanism  <cit> .

in our earlier study, we harvested several clinical strains of h. pylori, which initially grew weakly in mongolian gerbils but subsequently adapted after  <dig> serial passages in vivo  <cit> . to elucidate the adaptive colonizing mechanisms of h. pylori in mongolian gerbils further, we applied proteomic approaches to one representative h. pylori isolate. fortunately, four adaptive colonization-associated proteins were identified, among which hugz  was implicated in adaptive colonization by h. pylori for the first time  <cit> . however, the exact physiological role of hugz remains elusive.

iron is regarded as an essential trace element in living organisms, including pathogenic bacteria. it has been suggested that acquisition of iron by h. pylori from the host environment is required for colonization, infection and resulting disease  <cit> . nevertheless, intracellular bacterial iron is precisely regulated and maintained at an appropriate level. most of the free iron ion in the host is complexed with high-affinity binding proteins such as transferrin in the serum and lactoferrin on mucosal surfaces, so the level of extracellular iron available in the host is extremely low. consequently, bacterial pathogens including h. pylori must have developed some mechanism to compete for the limited host iron for their survival and infection cycle  <cit> .

as we know, the siderophore is a common iron acquisition apparatus/system in many pathogens; it obtains iron from transferrin or lactoferrin in the host  <cit> . other bacteria are also capable of utilizing heme complexes as iron sources. acquisition can be described as comprising the following steps: binding, uptake and degradation of heme  <cit> . some pathogens , vibrio cholerae and yersinia entercolitica) have developed iron-dependent outer membrane receptors specific for heme  <cit> . heme is transported through such receptors via a tonb-mediated gated pore mechanism  <cit> , then a periplasmic heme binding protein transports it to the cytoplasmic membrane, where a classical permease/atpase is thought to transport it actively into the cytoplasm. once the heme is located within the cytoplasm, a heme oxygenase protein  can utilize it. heme oxygenase is rate-limiting in the degradation process, catalyzing the nadph-reductase-dependent cleavage of heme to biliverdin with the release of iron and carbon monoxide  <cit> . in h. pylori, the mechanism of utilization of heme iron is not yet completely clear. although several heme iron-repressible outer membrane proteins  might be involved in heme binding and/or uptake  <cit>  by h. pylori, we still do not know which component functions as the heme oxygenase. in this report, we present the functional identification of hugz as a heme oxygenase activity in h. pylori. our data imply that the release of iron from heme by hugz may play a crucial role in the pathogenicity of h. pylori.

RESULTS
production and evaluation of homogeneous h. pylori hugz
bioinformatics analysis suggested that a hugz homologue exists in h. pylori, which is very similar to that in c. jejuni . to test its activity in iron acquisition, we prepared homogeneous h. pylori hugz protein in vitro. initially, soluble  <dig> × his-tagged hugz protein was expressed in a prokaryotic expression system; expression in escherichia coli  turned the lb medium green , implying the presence of a reductase. this observation supports the hypothesis that catalytic turnover of heme-hugz triggers the accumulation of biliverdin, which is consistent with the expression profiles of prokaryotic/eukaryotic heme oxygenases  <cit> . the recombinant hugz protein purified by a chelating fastflow xk <dig> column  yielded  <dig> mg/liter and showed about 95% purity on 15% sds-page , indicating high homogeneity. pmf-based sequencing showed that h. pylori hugz is  <dig> amino acids long and shares 100% similarity to hp <dig>  protein in atcc  <dig> 

to determine whether it is a functional member of the heme oxygenase family, two kinds of heme binding assay were performed. hugz binding to hemin-agarose beads strongly indicated that it has heme-binding activity . similarly, in vitro absorption spectroscopy suggested that hugz is able to bind heme. as we expected, when hugz was mixed with hemin, the spectrum of the complex showed a typical spectrographic curve with a prominent soret peak at  <dig> nm, and a shoulder at  <dig> nm and a smaller peak at  <dig> nm, corresponding to the β- and α-porphyrin bands of the heme-hugz complex respectively . to quantify heme binding, hugz solution  was titrated with increasing amounts of hemin . the increase in absorption leveled off at approximately  <dig> μm heme, showing a 1: <dig> stoichiometry of heme to hugz .

hugz catalyzes the degradation of heme
it has been suggested that some heme binding proteins can degrade heme by so-called coupled oxidation, a non-enzymatic mechanism  <cit> . coupled oxidation involves the generation of peroxide by the heme protein and is prevented if catalase is present. heme oxygenases catalyze the opening of the heme macro-cycle in the presence of an electron donor. purified heme oxygenase has been shown not to release the product biliverdin readily in the absence of biliverdin reductase  <cit> . thus, most studies involve single turnover assays, as was done here. in addition, the in vivo electron donor for bacterial heme oxygenases is not known, but ascorbate or nadph-cytochrome p <dig> reductase may be used for catalysis by the pure enzyme  <cit> . in the first experiment, heme degradation catalyzed by hugz was measured spectrophotometrically using human nadph-cpr as the electron donor . nadph was added to the reaction mixture in  <dig> μm increments and the mixture was scanned from  <dig> to  <dig> nm after each addition. the soret band decreased successively after addition of nadph. finally, the hugz substrate-hemin was exhausted and the nadph was not oxidized completely, so there was absorption at  <dig> nm due to nadph. heme degradation did not occur if hugz, nadph or cpr was omitted from the reaction mixture .

in the second experiment, the hugz-dependent disappearance of heme was measured using  <dig> mm ascorbate as the reductant . heme was degraded more rapidly with ascorbate than with human nadph-cpr, and most of the decrease was complete by  <dig> min after the ascorbate was added. no degradation of heme was observed in the absence of hugz or ascorbate . collectively, these findings showed that hugz catalyzes the enzymatic degradation of heme.

biliverdin and co produced by hugz-catalyzed heme degradation
biliverdin is the final product of heme degradation by heme oxygenases. when heme was degraded by hugz, a broad absorbance peak in the 660-nm region became prominent, implying is the presence of biliverdin. to determine the kind of biliverdin formed, we subjected this product to hplc analysis. hplc chromatography of all four possible biliverdin isomers is shown for comparison . the hplc profiles of the products formed during hugz-catalyzed heme degradation with ascorbate and nadph gave a retention time and absorption spectrum identical to that of biliverdin ixδ.

the much higher affinity of myoglobin for co than for oxygen allows the co produced by oxidative cleavage of the heme to be detected  <cit> . difference absorption spectroscopy in the presence of myoglobin confirmed co as a product of the oxidative cleavage of heme by hugz. the myoglobin absorption spectrum was recorded at 2-min intervals in order to monitor the characteristic spectral changes of a myoglobin-co complex . the transition of ferrous-dioxygen myoglobin to the ferrous-co myoglobin complex was associated with a shift in the soret band from  <dig> to  <dig> nm as well as the appearance of bands at  <dig> and  <dig> nm. control reactions in the absence of the heme-hugz complex showed no shift in the soret band. the complete conversion indicated that carbon monoxide as well as biliverdin was generated as a product of oxidative heme cleavage in h. pylori.

hugz is a cytoplasmic protein
to determine the cellular location of hugz, immunoelectron microscopy  was performed. frozen sectioned samples of h. pylori  <dig> strains were treated with anti-hugz antibodies and gold-labeled secondary antibodies. analysis of the positions of the gold particles  revealed that hugz was predominantly located in the cytoplasm in h. pylori cells.

the hugz mutant fails to utilize heme iron for normal growth
in order to elucidate the role of hugz, the mutant Δhugz was obtained from more than  <dig> h. pylori transformants. the correct genotype of Δhugz was systemically confirmed by pcr , rt-pcr  and direct dna sequencing .

the hugz deletion mutant  grew normally in liquid bbf and on bbf blood agar plates, indicating that hugz is not required for bacterial growth under iron-replete conditions. subsequently, we tested its growth in the presence of different iron sources. Δhugz strains showed poor growth in iron-restricted conditions while the wild type grew well . these data suggest that the hugz mutant cannot utilize heme iron for normal growth.

regulation of hugz expression by iron
merrell et al. reported that hugz  was one of the genes induced by iron starvation  <cit> . to test whether hugz is regulated by iron, real-time quantitative pcr was performed. the effects of different iron levels on hugz transcription varied . transcription was suppressed by fecl <dig> ) and stimulated under iron-restricted conditions ). these results indicated that hugz  is down-regulated by iron.

discussion
a wide array of metal ions including iron, copper and nickel are known to be closely related to h. pylori colonization and infection  <cit> . iron metabolism-related proteins play important roles in h. pylori infections. however, the iron-specific metabolic mechanism in h. pylori is still not well understood. bacteria require iron to complete their life cycles and in particular for growth and infection. the limited availability of extra-cellular iron in the host, which is partly due to iron insolubility, restricts microbial growth greatly, so iron acquisition seems to be crucial for the survival of pathogens. actually, it has been suggested that bacteria evolve sophisticated systems to compete for iron with their hosts. in general, heme is an important iron source in hosts and it can be utilized by most pathogens. heme is degraded by heme oxygenase in the bacterial cytoplasm, releasing the iron.

heme oxygenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in heme degradation; it catalyzes reduction system-dependent cleavage of heme to biliverdin with the release of iron and carbon monoxide. it is reasonable to suppose that bacterial heme oxygenase releases the iron from heme for subsequent use by the invading pathogen  <cit> . heme oxygenases are widespread among pathogenic bacteria such as c. jejuni and y. pestis and play key roles in the growth and colonization of those pathogens  <cit> . heme oxygenase mutants of corynebacterium diphtheriae and neisseria meningitidis were unable to utilize heme or hemoglobin as an iron source  <cit> . similarly, it has been suggested that heme oxygenase  is necessary for growth in c. jejuni  <cit> . for h. pylori, the role of heme degradation in iron metabolism is relatively obscure. in this study, we identified a heme oxygenase called hugz that is responsible for heme iron utilization in h. pylori. the heme oxygenase activity of hugz was confirmed by the appearance of characteristic spectral changes following addition of ascorbic acid or a nadph-cpr system as electron donor. hugz binds to hemin in vitro at 1: <dig> and produces absorbance bands at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nm, which are similar to those reported for other heme oxygenases such as chus  <cit>  and cj1613c  <cit> . the formation of a broad absorbance band at  <dig> and  <dig> nm suggests that the end product of heme degradation is iron-free biliverdin rather than ferric biliverdin  <cit> .

we demonstrated that the products of hugz cleave heme to carbon monoxide and biliverdin ixδ, which shows that the δ-meso carbon bridge position in the heme precursor is eliminated by hugz. as with various eukaryotic and prokaryotic heme oxygenases, overexpression of hugz in e. coli can make the culture medium green owing to the accumulation of biliverdin. it is presumed that during the expression of those exogenous heme oxygenases in e. coli, reducing systems in the bacterium support the catalytic turnover of heme  <cit> . furthermore, several reduction systems including human cpr and ascorbic acid can support biliverdin production by purified recombinant hugz in vitro. these results suggest that h. pylori probably has the same reduction partners for hugz-heme oxygenase activity.

further experiments showed that the h. pylori hugz mutant exhibited poor growth, though wild type strains grew well when heme was added to iron-restricted bbf, indicating that the hugz mutant cannot effectively utilize hemoglobin as a heme iron source, which confirmed that hugz is a heme oxygenase.

in mammals, the primary function of heme oxygenases is to maintain iron homeostasis, whereas prokaryotic heme oxygenases help bacteria to take in iron from heme. most bacterial heme oxygenases are regulated by the ferric uptake repressor . fur requires iron to bind to target dna sequences  and controls the expression of iron-regulated genes  <cit> . merrell and gancz et al. used a microarray to analyze the expression of iron-regulated genes in h. pylori and reported that hp <dig>  is one of the genes induced by iron starvation; they presumed that a hypothetical fur box located before hp <dig> controls hp <dig> expression  <cit> . our real-time quantitative rt pcr results also support that the view that hugz  is down-regulated by iron. however, further studies are needed to determine whether the presumed fur box controls the transcription of hugz.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these findings confirm that h. pylori hp <dig>  is a heme oxygenase. our data imply that hugz may play a crucial role in the acquisition of heme iron by h. pylori.

