BACKGROUND
insect pests that cause damage to agricultural crops and livestock are responsible for billions of dollars of annual losses in production to industrialized and developing countries  <cit> . integrated pest management strategies aim to suppress insect pest populations below levels that are harmful to the economy through a combination of the use of chemical insecticides, biological control, land use rotation, and monitoring  <cit> . this strategy keeps the use of insecticides to a minimum, which is desirable considering their adverse effects on the environment, where they suppress a whole range of non-target insects and, when used inadequately, cause insect pests to develop resistance, rendering them ineffective. in this scenario, a species-specific and ecologically friendly method of control is the sterile insect technique , which consists of rearing large numbers of insects, sterilizing them by irradiation and releasing them in the field, where they compete with fertile insects for mates without producing any offspring  <cit> . this method was first developed with the aim of suppressing populations of the new world screwworm  <cit>  and has since been used for several decades for the control of a variety of insect pests with results that range from population control to complete eradication  <cit> .

the new world screwworm, cochliomyia hominivorax, is an insect pest that parasitizes warm-blooded animals in tropical and subtropical regions of the western hemisphere. females lay their eggs, often near wounds, on the animal’s skin and after the larvae hatch, they feed on the animals’ live tissues, enlarging the wound, which can cause death  <cit> . this insect was responsible for the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars annually to the livestock industry of several countries and great efforts were made to control it  <cit> . during the 1950s the u.s. government began an eradication program based on sit that succeeded in eliminating c. hominivorax from the whole country, and later, in collaboration with other countries, the fly was eradicated from all of north and central america . currently, the comisión panamá–estados unidos para la erradicación y prevención del gusano barrenador del ganado  operates a biosecure facility dedicated to the mass rearing, sterilization, and dispersal of millions of sterile insects every week in the barrier zone between panama and colombia, preventing the re-introduction of screwworms from south america, where it still plagues all warm-blooded animals.

although very successful, the current eradication program releases both sterile males and females into the field. the development and integration of a male-only strain of c. hominivorax is desirable because it could increase the efficiency of population suppression, as the sterile males would directly search for wild females without being distracted by co-released sterile females. indeed, male-only sterile releases increased the efficiency of population suppression of the mediterranean fruit fly in large field cages by 3- to 5-fold relative to bisexual releases  <cit> . thus, a male-only strain could lead to considerable savings in production costs, as fewer insects should be needed to maintain the barrier zone. a more efficient control program increases both the potential to respond to insect outbreaks in regions that are now free of the pest and the probability that the technology will be transported into areas where the screwworm remains a hazard to humans and livestock.

here, we report on the development of transgenic male-only strains of c. hominivorax suitable for introduction to a sit program. our transgenic lines carry a conditional female lethal trait such that, under permissive conditions, both sexes can be efficiently reared and under restrictive conditions only males are produced. we achieve this using the auto-regulated tetracycline transactivator  transgene, which is inhibited by addition of tetracycline to the diet  <cit> . overexpression of tta is lethal and interruption of the tta gene with the sex-specific intron from the transformer gene assures that only females overexpress tta protein as a consequence of sex-specific rna splicing  <cit> . the transgenic strains have been evaluated within the mass rearing facility for a variety of characteristics that are important for production, field performance, and risk assessment for a future open field release.

RESULTS
tetracycline-repressible female lethal transgenic lines
the fl <dig> and fl <dig> gene constructs were previously assembled containing the sex-specific intron from the c. hominivorax tra gene  <cit>  inserted immediately 3’ of the tta translation start codon   <cit> . these gene constructs were used as they were available before the components of an early female lethal system had been isolated and evaluated  <cit> . further, we reasoned that single insertion of a transgene could have better fitness and be easier to breed to homozygosity within the biosecure mass rearing facility. upon induction of transcription in strains carrying the fl11/fl <dig> transgenes, the male tta transcripts will retain the male-specific tra exon, which contains several in-frame translation stop codons. as this exon is excised in females, only the female transcript will code for the full-length tta protein. the enhancer-promoter for the tta gene contains  <dig> copies of the tta binding site upstream of a core promoter and 5’ untranslated region from the l. cuprina hsp <dig> gene  <cit> . the core promoter in fl <dig> is slightly longer than in fl <dig> and contains the predicted binding sites for the hsf <dig> transcription factor. in transgenic l. cuprina, both fl <dig> and fl <dig> are functional  <cit> , but it is possible that the longer promoter in fl <dig> may have a higher basal activity at the temperatures that are used to rear c. hominivorax larvae . another difference between fl <dig> and fl <dig> is in the choice of selective marker. in fl <dig>  the tta gene cassette was inserted into a piggybac vector that contained the zsgreen marker driven by the strong constitutive lchsp <dig> gene promoter and in fl <dig> it was inserted into a piggybac vector containing the lchsp83-dsred express  <dig> marker. germ-line transformation of c. hominivorax embryos with these constructs and the piggybac transposase resulted in the isolation of nine fl <dig> and  <dig> fl <dig> independent transgenic lines . a preliminary analysis identified four fl <dig> and six fl <dig> lines with high female lethality on standard diet without tetracycline . these lines were reared to homozygosity and used for subsequent experiments.fig.  <dig> female-specific lethal constructs. a the fl <dig> and fl <dig> constructs contain a conditional female-specific lethal gene and a fluorescent marker gene flanked by the ends of the piggybac transposon . b fluorescent phenotypes of new world screwworm transgenic lines. insects were observed under fluorescent  and bright field illumination . fl <dig> transgenic larvae and newly emerged adults  show bright red fluorescence in the whole body and fl <dig> larvae and adults  show strong constitutive green fluorescence. fluorescence in adults cannot be seen within a few hours of eclosion due to darkening of the cuticle. consequently, transgenic lines are identified and bred to homozygosity by screening for fluorescence at the larval stages



nine homozygous transgenic lines produce only males  when reared in diet that lacks tetracycline and this effect is dominant . indeed, the female lethal construct shows a high degree of penetrance across all  <dig> transgenic lines, which produce very low numbers of females when heterozygous individuals are reared in diet without tetracycline. further, three transgenic lines, fl11-2b, fl11- <dig>  and fl11-18b produce no heterozygous females and thus would be suitable for a fertile-release program . in these assays, flies were counted in hundreds and with typically six or seven replicates for each transgenic line . all lines showed a significant decrease in female viability on diet without tetracycline . a dose response assay was performed to evaluate the minimal concentration of tetracycline required to rear both males and females under permissive conditions . at  <dig> and 100 μg/ml, females and males were equally viable. however, at lower levels of  <dig> and 3 μg/ml tetracycline, female viability decreased significantly , with few females surviving on diet with 3 μg/ml tetracycline. an alternative larval diet for screwworms is based on soy protein instead of fishmeal protein, which has the benefit of being more reproducible from batch to batch, more economic, and easier to obtain  <cit> . a tetracycline dose response assay is presented also for soy meal diet with similar results, observing a significant decrease in female viability on diet that contained tetracycline at  <dig>   <dig>  or 10 μg/ml  .fig.  <dig> new world screwworm transgenic lines are dominant female lethal. embryos from homozygous  or heterozygous  individuals were raised in larval diet containing  or without  tetracycline and total number of adult males and females obtained was counted. the female lethal construct shows a high degree of dominance across all of our transgenic lines. the average percentage of total flies that were female is shown and mean ± standard deviation is expressed for three or more independent experiments



general fitness of transgenic sexing strains
as this study was performed within the new world screwworm biosecurity facility in panama, all the transgenic lines were evaluated for parameters that impact mass rearing of a potential strain. in the majority of the transgenic lines, we observed a high level of productivity relative to the control strain  when insects were reared in diet containing tetracycline . for egg/pupae survival , hatching rate , adult emergence , and sex ratio  there were no significant differences between any of the transgenic lines and the control strain j <dig>  lines fl11-18b and fl12-33a produced pupae that were significantly heavier than j <dig> . line fl12- <dig> produced significantly fewer eggs per female than j <dig> . the fact that the sex ratios of the emerged adults did not differ significantly from those of the parental j <dig> strain , indicates the addition of tetracycline to the diet is permissive for rearing both sexes. female lethality in non-permissive conditions was at the late larval/pupal stage; as in most lines, only half of the number of pupae emerged as adults and all of them were male . in fl11-18b, fl12- <dig>  and fl12- <dig> some female lethality occurs earlier, as 67–69 % of pupae emerged as an adult all male population.fig.  <dig> fitness parameters of transgenic new world screwworm lines. transgenic lines raised in diet containing tetracycline were evaluated for biological parameters important for mass rearing in a production facility: a percentage of embryos that develop into pupae, b percentage of first instars that hatch from embryos, c average weight of the pupae, d average number of eggs laid per female, e percentage of adults that emerge from pupae, and f sex ratio of emerged adults. each experiment was performed three times for each transgenic line. mean ± standard deviation are shown



male mating success and male sexual competition
the transgenic lines with production and mass rearing parameters comparable to j <dig> were then evaluated for male mating success and sexual competitiveness in controlled mating arenas. the mating success of transgenic males was evaluated by comparing the number of females mated to males from each transgenic line and to the j <dig> wild type strain within a given amount of time. generally, mating success of males was high across transgenic lines and similar to the level of success observed in the j <dig> strain . males from the fl11- <dig>  fl12- <dig>  and fl12- <dig> transgenic lines were the most successful in mating with females, with over 50 % of the females being inseminated within 8 hours in laboratory conditions . for all the experiments, non-irradiated males reared in diet without tetracycline were used, as we operated under the assumption that the performance of non-irradiated males predicts the performance of irradiated males, that is, that irradiation will not differentially affect wild type and transgenic males.fig.  <dig> male mating success and male sexual competitiveness. the mating success of homozygous transgenic males and that of parental j <dig> males  was evaluated in experiments with  <dig> males and  <dig> females allowed to mate for 8 h. the percentage of females that mated was determined by examining dissected spermatecae for the presence of sperm. the sexual performance of transgenic males was evaluated in competition experiments  containing equal numbers of mature transgenic males, wild type males, and wild type females  in a cage for 20 h. the offspring of individual females was examined with a fluorescence microscope to determine paternity as fluorescent larvae are obtained from females mating to transgenic males and non-fluorescent larvae resulted from mating to j <dig> males. the mean male competitiveness index  ± standard deviation are shown for three independent experiments. an mci of  <dig>  indicates that the transgenic strain males are equally competitive with the control strain



focusing on the six transgenic lines that performed best in mating success assays, we studied male sexual competitiveness by presenting females with equal numbers of transgenic and j <dig> males, and assessing the paternity of the progeny after allowing the insects to mate for a limited period of time. male sexual competitiveness was quantified by calculating the male competitiveness index , where an index of  <dig>  indicates that transgenic and wild type males are equally competitive. we observed transgenic males from several lines competed equally well for matings in direct mating trials with the j <dig> strain . males from three lines in particular, fl12- <dig>  fl11-18b, and fl12- <dig>  competed well against j <dig> males for matings with j <dig> females. line fl11- <dig>  in contrast, was significantly less competitive than j <dig> but only marginally so , whereas fl12- <dig> and fl11-2b were out-competed for mates by j <dig> .

preliminary risk analysis
for any planned transgenic release, the potential for outcrossing to closely related species in the field is a concern. within panama, cochliomyia macellaria is the most closely related species of calliphorid. this species is broadly sympatric with c. hominivorax across central and south america  <cit> . although the two species have not been reported to hybridize in the wild and previous studies showed that they mate very rarely in caged settings, producing no hybrid offspring  <cit> , we studied the potential for transgenic c. hominivorax males to mate with wild type c. macellaria females in the laboratory. for this study, we selected one of the best performing transgenic strains in mating success assays. in six independent assays with the fl12- <dig> line, we found no evidence of cross mating . control experiments, using wild type c. macellaria males, resulted in over 80 % of mated females. likewise, fl12- <dig> males mated successfully with wild type c. hominivorax j <dig> females under the same experimental conditions.fig.  <dig> risk analysis studies to evaluate the use of transgenic males for sit. a to test the potential for outcrossing to a related species, the percentage of inseminated females is shown after mating c. macellaria or fl12- <dig> males with c. macellaria females. as a control, fl12- <dig> males were also mated with the parental j <dig> females. at least six replicate experiments were performed. b the penetrance of the female lethal construct was evaluated in different genetic backgrounds. the number of males  and females  that developed from crosses of fl11-18b males with females from the indicated wild type strains are shown. c study of longevity of the sexing strains at standard and cooler temperatures. longevity at 25 °c  and 19 °c  of males from the j <dig> parental strain, the fl12- <dig> and fl11- <dig> transgenic lines. two replicates of longevity tests with  <dig> males were combined and kaplan–meier survival curves were estimated for each combination of temperature and strain



as the natural populations of c. hominivorax in south america and the caribbean may present some degree of genetic variability, it is worthwhile to investigate the penetrance of the female killing system in different genetic backgrounds . we selected a dominant lethal transgenic strain to study penetrance of the female lethal transgene, as this characteristic is of vital importance for a potential future release of fertile transgenic insects in the field. males of the fl11-18b sexing strain were crossed to wild type females collected from different locations in central and south america, including jamaica , colombia , brazil, and panama . the offspring of these crosses were reared in diet without tetracycline and adults were sexed and counted. no females were obtained from crosses with brazil or p- <dig> strains, as we had observed in j <dig>  however, some females survived from the crosses with j <dig> and valledupar strains. the association between sex and strain was significant . that is, the proportion of female survivors did differ significantly across different genetic backgrounds, suggesting that there is standing genetic variation within screwworms that influenced the degree of dominant female lethality.

as the new world screwworm is a tropical insect, it is not expected to be able to disperse to or survive in colder or dryer climates in south america, particularly during winter. to evaluate the potential for our transgenic strains to thrive at lower temperatures and perhaps colonize new areas of north and south america, we studied the longevity of males from the fl12- <dig> and fl11- <dig> transgenic strains and the j <dig> parental strain at 25 °c and 19 °c in the laboratory . these transgenic strains were selected because they hold promise for mass rearing and field release due to their female lethality and fitness characteristics. results from two independent assays showed that, although males from both j <dig> and the two transgenic lines live longer at the lower temperature, there was no statistically significant relative difference between the two transgenic lines and j <dig> at 19 °c .

discussion
the new world screwworm eradication program is a landmark for sit, as it was the first coordinated effort that used this technique to successfully eradicate an insect pest on a continental scale. from the outset of this program almost 60 years ago, scientists recognized the benefits of a male-only strain for population suppression of insects in the field  <cit> . however, a sexing strain of this insect was not available and the screwworm eradication program continued to release both males and females in their field operations. in this study, we have developed the first c. hominivorax sexing strains, which carry a repressible female-specific lethal transgenic system  <cit> . in addition to producing only males when reared on diet without tetracycline, the results from a battery of fitness tests suggest that some of the transgenic sexing strains could replace the j <dig> parental wild type strain currently used for the sit program in panama. the majority of the transgenic lines were comparable across several fitness parameters, such as development from eggs to pupae, egg production, and average pupae weight, to the wild type line currently in mass production. further, three of the most promising lines were comparable to j <dig> in male mating success and male competition, suggesting they would be sexually competitive in the field with wild type males.

our findings have several direct benefits to the existing sit program for the control of the new world screwworm in panama. firstly, by removing females, the costs of rearing would be reduced since fewer insects would be required to maintain the barrier zone in the panama-colombia border. indeed, releasing only males is expected to improve the efficiency of population suppression in the field compared to a bisexual release  <cit> , thus reducing the number of insects required for regular field releases. secondly, lower doses of irradiation are required to sterilize males compared to females  <cit> . since the output from implementation of an efficient fl <dig> or fl <dig> line into the production facility would consist of only males, lower irradiation doses could be used. exposure of the mass reared c. hominivorax to lower doses of radiation would improve the fitness of the released males  <cit> . an estimation of the weekly costs of producing  <dig> million sterile insects for the regular operations of the copeg mass rearing facility is shown in additional file  <dig>  production costs represent about 20 % of the total costs of the new world screwworm control program. current weekly production costs for the j <dig> strain are compared to the potential use of the fl12- <dig> strain, a dominant lethal male-only strain and an embryonic lethal male-only strain. assuming that the increased efficiency of population suppression of fl12- <dig> males is at least twice that of j <dig> males and females, a reduction of four times the number of insects required for field release is achieved with important savings in diet, consumable, and operational costs. in total, weekly production costs are reduced by half . further, a space four times smaller would be enough to mass-rear the number of insects required to maintain the barrier zone in the panama–colombia border. further savings could be introduced by a dominant lethal strain that would not require irradiation and an embryonic lethal strain would allow for greater savings in larval diet. with these strains it may be possible to release fewer males than indicated, if omitting the radiation treatment does lead to a significant increase in fitness. dispersal costs are not expected to change with any of the strains as the routes flown and planes used for dispersal would not change. the calculations offered here are hypothetical and based on the behavior of the transgenic sexing strains in the laboratory. each premise and assumption presented will be tested by mass rearing and performance in the field and validated in the future to determine actual savings. while these efficiency gains have been calculated for maintenance of the barrier zone, they would also be applicable to any future eradication program. thus, the strains developed in this study could make it possible to extend the program to regions where this insect remains a pest.

on a regional level, the new world screwworm remains endemic in south america and some of the caribbean islands, notably cuba and jamaica. although sit has been considered for eradication of screwworm in these regions  <cit> , particularly the caribbean islands and along the west coast of south america, the costs of developing an eradication program in these regions has prevented implementation. the development of sexing strains and the prospect of more efficient population suppression from male-only releases would reduce the costs of an sit program for these areas, making this technique more accessible to developing countries. indeed, in order to undertake the eradication of screwworms in a large caribbean island such as cuba, the mass production of insects required at the copeg facility is estimated at approximately  <dig> million insects per week. the introduction of a male-only transgenic strain could reduce this number of insects by at least four times, considerably reducing the costs of mass-rearing at this scale. further, the higher efficiency of field population suppression derived from a male-only strain could also increase the relative maximal production capacity of the mass-rearing facility, which is currently estimated at  <dig> million insects per week. if a male-only strain were released in the field at a scale that is saturating, eradication of the insect could potentially be achieved in less time, leading to substantial savings in dispersal and field operation costs. most of the transgenic lines evaluated show high penetrance of the female lethal gene construct, producing very low numbers of heterozygous females when reared in diet without tetracycline. further, in the fl11- <dig> and fl11-18b lines, this effect is fully dominant making them potentially attractive candidates for a fertile male release, as their fitness and behavioral characteristics are similar to the j <dig> wild type strain used for the new world screwworm eradication program in panama. sterilization of these strains would not be needed for population suppression, as fertile transgenic males would pass on the female-lethal gene to their offspring, which would also be a male-only population. a strain carrying multiple dominant female lethal genes on different chromosomes is predicted to be particularly efficient for population suppression  <cit> . potentially fewer flies of a fertile dominant lethal strain may be needed for an eradication campaign compared to a sterile male-only release due to increased fitness of the non-irradiated males. furthermore, avoiding the use of irradiation would introduce savings in irradiator maintenance and replacement and would eliminate the need of a highly regulated irradiation department . one consideration for releasing fertile transgenic c. hominivorax males is that tetracycline or its derivatives are used to treat infected wounds and can be added as a supplement to feed for livestock. consequently, there is the potential for female offspring of released males to survive. although there is little published information on the level of tetracycline in plasma of cattle in panama, the maximum residue limits for tetracycline, oxytetracycline, or chlortetracycline in cattle liver and muscle are  <dig> and 200 μg/kg, respectively  <cit> . this is more than an order of a magnitude below the lowest tetracycline dose we tested , which was not sufficient for female survival. thus, it would appear unlikely that the female offspring of a dominant lethal strain would survive in the field. therefore, the economic savings involved in avoiding the use of an irradiator for the production routine of a sit program, coupled with eliminating the potential health risk to employees, would allow for smaller, healthier, and less costly regional mass facilities to be built, which could promote the development of an eradication program for new world screwworm in south america and the caribbean.

although transgenic sexing strains carrying the auto-regulated tta system have been developed for other insects of economic importance  <cit> , our study is unique in that it was completely performed within the new world screwworm biosecure facility in panama, where the research focus was to develop a sexing strain that would be directly applied to their regular operations. indeed, the strains were evaluated for fitness parameters commonly used within the production facility as quality controls to assess a strain for mass rearing. the sexing strains of c. hominivorax showed high productivity in all of these fitness parameters as well as a high degree of competitiveness in sexual behavior assays, suggesting that the most promising strains would perform well in mass rearing and be competitive in field trials with wild type males. moreover, although several research laboratories have created transgenic sexing strains in various pest insects, none of these sexing strains have been incorporated yet into an operational sit or fertile-release program. currently, the only open field trials using transgenic insects have been conducted with an ae. aegypti strain that carries a dominant auto-regulated tta gene that is not sex-specific  <cit> . from this perspective, an advantage of our program is that the transgenic male-only strains have been developed within the biosecure c. hominivorax mass-rearing facility in panama, where they have the potential to transition from research and development to mass rearing and, eventually, field testing very effectively because they would be integrated to an ongoing sit program in which the infrastructure and expertise is already routine.

another novel aspect of this work is a preliminary risk analysis performed as a first step towards addressing potential environmental concerns of a future field release. we show that transgenic c. hominivorax males do not mate with wild type c. macellaria females, the most closely related species that share its geographic distribution, suggesting that the hybridization of transgenic c. hominivorax to other related species in the field would be highly unlikely. we also performed male longevity assays at different temperatures and found that, although both transgenic and wild type males live longer at lower temperatures, there is no evidence for relative increased survival of transgenic males with respect to j <dig> wild type males at lower temperatures, which could give them an advantage to establish in cooler climates non-endemic to their actual distribution. finally, we studied the penetrance of the female lethal system in different genetic backgrounds and found that the fl11-18b strain was 100 % dominant female lethal in some, but not all, genetic backgrounds. this suggests that, in some locations, a small percentage of the female offspring of released transgenic males could survive and reproduce. however, only a small number of females were observed in these crosses, suggesting that population suppression would still be very effective. indeed, the transgenic ae. aegypti strain that has been evaluated in open field trials  <cit>  is not fully dominant with 3–5 % of offspring surviving when reared on diet without tetracycline  <cit> . nevertheless, releases of the transgenic strain have effectively suppressed local populations of ae. aegypti  <cit> . from an environmental perspective, a potential concern would be that the locus or loci responsible for “rescuing” females could sweep to fixation under a sustained fertile release program, similar to the rapid evolution of resistance in the over application of insecticides . consequently, before any fertile field release, it will be necessary to evaluate screwworm from the target population by crossing with a transgenic strain to determine the degree of heterozygous female lethality. with this knowledge, a viable release program can be designed that maximizes population suppression.

considering the extensive testing of the sexing strains developed in this study and their promising characteristics, copeg has chosen to evaluate the fl12- <dig> transgenic strain under mass-rearing conditions. further, an application for conducting open field trials with radiation sterilized transgenic males has been submitted to the panamanian government. the new world screwworm eradication program was the first and is arguably the most successful biological control program targeted against a specific insect pest. given the highly successful history of the program, we would think it is appropriate that one of the transgenic lines developed in this study would be among the first to be evaluated in open field testing.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed the first sexing strains of the new world screwworm within the biosecure mass-rearing facility of the new world screwworm program in panama. the fitness characteristics of several transgenic lines, as well as their mating competitiveness suggest a strong potential for application in the current sit control program. a preliminary risk analysis also shows promise for the use of the sexing strains in the field. we therefore propose that the development of the fl <dig> and fl <dig> strains will help promote a more efficient and sustainable sit control program against this devastating insect pest.

