BACKGROUND
many biopharmaceutical drugs, such as peptides and proteins, are currently in or close to entering clinical trials  <cit> . they hold promise in being effective in the prevention and cure of numerous diseases. unfortunately, protein therapeutics display many stability problems, such as inactivation and aggregation during manufacturing and storage  <cit> . of particular interest is the solid-state stability of proteins since lyophilization is frequently employed to enhanced the product shell-life and offers superior strategies to formulate inhalation drugs and delivery systems  <cit> . however, exposure of lyophilized proteins to excess moisture causes undesirable physical and chemical changes  <cit> . the residual water bound at the surface to charged and polar groups and to the peptide backbone groups can cause the protein to be unstable and degrade  <cit> . these drawbacks highlight the need for the development of rational formulation strategies to improve overall protein stability within multiple applications  <cit> .

profound changes are observed in protein structure and conformational dynamics depending on the hydration level that directly affect solid-phase stability  <cit> . it is commonly assumed that the hydration of solid proteins leads to increased rates of deleterious processes due to increased structural dynamics and higher mobility of reactive species  <cit> . upon storage, proteins may absorb moisture and detrimental moisture- induced aggregation is observed. more importantly, there are also applications in which proteins are partially hydrated, for example in sustained release applications when lyophilized proteins are embedded in a polymer matrix and are slowly hydrated upon polymer swelling and erosion during release. 

the extent of protein aggregation has been related to the amount of water sorbed by the protein  <cit>  and to residual water bound to charged and polar protein surface groups and the peptide backbone  <cit> . these aggregates cause lower activity and increased immunogenicity  <cit> .

many strategies are available to increase the long-term stability for solid-state protein formulations such as, co-dissolving additives or introducing mutations. amongst them covalent chemical modification represents one of the most promising approaches for the stabilization of proteins in industrial and pharmaceutical applications  <cit> . in his context, chemical glycosylation has been used to increase physical protein stability  <cit> . glycosylation consists in the modification of one or more protein surface residues  with chemically activated glycans, which leads to chemically stable conjugates that can be stored lyophilized  <cit> . solá et al. demonstrated that increasing the size and amount of chemically attached glycans did not alter the original structural fold of the model protein α-chymotrypsin  employed and that a substantial decrease in protein structural dynamics was induced by glycosylation and as a result increased thermodynamic and colloidal stability was observed  <cit> . similar data were obtained for the structurally unrelated serine protease subtilisin carlsberg  <cit>  supporting the view that the phenomenon of protein stabilization by chemical glycosylation is likely of a general nature  <cit> . building up on those data in the present study we further employed α-ct as model enzyme. the studies performed in this paper consume rather large amounts of protein and a first study is probably best performed using an inexpensive model enzyme rather than an expensive protein drug or drug candidate. however, chymotrypsin also has a wide range of applications as biocatalyst and is used or has been suggested as therapeutic agent in anti-inflammatory treatment by injection, for cleaning of nectrotic wounds, and even as anti-cancer drug  <cit> . anaphylactic shock has been reported after intramuscular injection of lyophilized α-chymotrypsin  <cit> . since protein aggregates are highly suspicious in this context  <cit> , strategies avoiding aggregation of α-chymotrypsin are necessary.

RESULTS
moisture-induced aggregation
α-ct was chosen as the model protein since it has been employed prior to this investigation by us in solid-phase stability studies and also as model protein to test drug- delivery systems  <cit> . α-ct is prone to undergo aggregation and thus is an excellent sensor for aggregation-related instability events. our experimental approach was to expose solid α-ct formulations to accelerated storage conditions  under controlled humidity conditions as it is common in the field  <cit> . we then monitored various stability related parameters as a function of time, i.e., loss in monomer concentration , residual specific activity of soluble α-ct, formation of buffer-insoluble aggregates, tertiary structure intactness of soluble α-ct , and structural dynamics .

to investigate the aggregation of α-ct at different rh, formation of insoluble aggregates was measured by solution-depletion experiments after incubation at 50°c and at 11%, 51%, 75%, 81%, and 96% rh for up to  <dig> weeks. water-sorption isotherms demonstrated that all samples were completely equilibrated after  <dig> h . all α-ct samples exhibited significant solubility loss during incubation due to aggregation . in contrast, α-ct stored at -20°c remained completely soluble in buffer. a control stored at 0% rh and 50°c did not form more than  <dig> % aggregates. thus, the detrimental process occurred during the high temperature/humidity incubation of solid α-ct, and not during lyophilization. long-term storage of the protein at increasing levels of rh increased the formation of aggregates with this effect also increasing with storage time . its aqueous solubility plummeted in particular after various days of incubation at 96% rh.

more than 90% of the aggregates were dissolved in  <dig> m urea which indicates that the α-ct molecules in the aggregates were held together by non-covalent interactions.

the kruskall-wallis test was employed to statistically investigate whether aggregate formation was significantly different at the various rh employed. the analysis revealed that there are marked differences in the amount of aggregates formed at the various rh employed . to compare the effect of the rh on aggregate formation quantitatively, we performed a post hoc test . this test revealed that aggregation was markedly different at rh of 11% and 51% rh when compared to 75%, 81%, and 96% rh and at 75% rh when compared to 96% rh. furthermore, statistical analysis revealed that there was a significant difference in the formation of aggregates at various incubation times at each rh. aggregation was markedly different after  <dig> h of incubation when compared to the samples stored for  <dig> and  <dig> weeks at rh of 51%, 75%, 81%, and 96%.

to study the kinetics of α-ct monomer loss, we investigated the water soluble fraction after dissolving the solid samples in buffer by sec-hplc. the amount of monomeric α-ct was measured based on the area of the corresponding hplc peak  and the fraction of residual soluble monomer was plotted as a function of time . two degradation pathways were identified: formation of soluble aggregates and fragmentation of the enzyme into subunits  <cit> . the kinetics of the monomer loss can be modeled using the following equation:

  x=a1exp+a <dig> 

where x is the fraction of residual soluble monomer and a <dig> represents the population of protein undergoing aggregation or fragmentation with the rate k <dig>  and a <dig> is the population that remains unaffected.

the data obtained reveal that monomer loss was not as pronounced at 11% and 51% rh as at higher rh . between 51% and 95% rh monomer loss increased at increasing rh level. the differences observed when compared to formation of buffer-insoluble aggregates at the various rh were more pronounced. this can be understood because more than one off-pathway leads to monomer loss and in particular at high rh values fragmentation becomes a significant degradation pathway.

in general, the instability data parallel the water-sorption at the various rh . water sorption becomes significant at 51% rh and then steadily increases.

effect of moisture on the tertiary structure of α-chymotrypsin
to determine protein structural changes induced during incubation, near-uv-cd spectroscopy was employed to examine the tertiary structure of the soluble fraction of the protein. after incubation the protein was redissolved in  <dig> mm phosphate buffer at ph  <dig>  and 25°c and the solution was filtered to obtain the soluble fraction. the cd spectrum of α-ct displays two maxima at  <dig> and  <dig> nm  which completely disappear upon thermal unfolding. the data compiled demonstrate that structural changes were significant for almost all rh after a short period of storage . this effect increased markedly at increasing rh, being most significant for the samples stored at 96% rh. after  <dig> week of incubation only the samples stored at 11% and 51% rh retained more than 60% of native structure. the data parallel those obtained with sec- hplc on monomer loss.

effect of moisture on the secondary structure
non-invasive ftir microscopy was conducted to investigate the secondary structure of the samples during incubation using diamond windows  <cit>  rather than pressing the powders into kbr pellets which is usually done to investigate the structure of lyophilized proteins  <cit> . ftir analysis was performed in the amide iii spectral region because water and water vapor have an insignificant contribution in this spectral area  <cit> . the amide iii spectral region has the advantage that structural transitions can be monitored easily without spectral deconvolution because the absorptions of α-helix , other, and β-sheet  secondary structure are well separated  <cit> . first, we obtained ftir spectra of the lyophilized powder using the usual kbr-pellet method  <cit>  and by ftir microscopy  <cit> . the spectra obtained were very similar and demonstrate that the method of ftir spectral acquisition and sample preparation did not influence the result substantially in agreement with literature data  <cit> .

qualitative analysis of the spectra revealed that some spectral changes occurred in the amide iii region after incubation of all powders under the rh conditions described. the shape of the spectra obtained even at 11% rh is somewhat different from those obtained without incubation. a slight increase in ftir absorption is visible in the region corresponding to α-helix structure , while β-sheet structure contributions to the spectra  decreased. there is also more non- repetitive secondary structure present as indicated by the relative increase of the component around  <dig> cm- <dig>  we can conclude from this that some structural changes occur to αct powder upon exposure to even low levels of moisture. incubation of the samples for  <dig> h at different rh resulted in marked spectral changes characterized by an increase in the components around  <dig> cm- <dig> indicating an increase in the β-sheet content while the α-helix content suffered a drastic decrease even for the samples incubated at the lowest rh . quantitative analysis by calculation of the spectral correlation coefficient  also demonstrated that moisture sorption induced structural changes in αct even at low rh . a value of  <dig> demonstrates spectral and thus structural identity while lower values indicate spectral and thus structural changes. again, as in all other tests, the magnitude of structural changes increased at increasing rh.

a a value of  <dig> demosntrates that the spectral are identical ; values < <dig> show perturbations in the secondary structure.

structural dynamics of solid proteins exposed to moisture
from the results presented thus far it is evident that structural changes occur to the solid protein formulations even when exposed to low rh levels and that structural changes become more pronounced at increasing rh levels. this leads to the hypothesis that moisture sorption increases structural dynamics in the lyophilized formulation.

amide h/d exchange measurements have been used for over four decades to investigate protein dynamics. despite of the compact folded structure of most proteins, there are solvent exposed amide bonds that exchange rapidly, but the amide bonds that are inaccessible to the solvent or are participating in stable hydrogen bonds must undergo temporary structural distortion to allow for hydrogen exchange and thus have significantly slower exchange rates. this decrease in the exchange rates of buried amide bonds in a folded protein makes h/d exchange an excellent and sensitive probe for monitoring protein conformational dynamics processes  <cit> .

in order to study the global structural dynamics, h/d exchange kinetics were measured by ftir spectroscopy by following changes in the amplitude of the amide ii band. the amount of amide hydrogen exchange  was plotted in the form of hx decay plots where the fraction of unchanged amide hydrogen atoms  decreases over time due to the exchange process . visual inspection of the figure  <dig> demonstrates that at increasing rh level a decrease in the fraction of slowly exchanging amide bonds is observed. this demonstrates reduced structural rigidity of the enzyme at increasing rh values. a quantitative analysis of the exchange kinetics was attempted but led to insufficient fitting results because the fast exchange component could not be described appropriately.

residual activity of α-chymotrypsin after incubation at different rh
activity of α-ct after incubation at different rh was determined using n- succinyl-ala-ala-pro-phe-p-nitroanilide as the substrate  <cit> . the activity of α-ct was reduced depending on the rh and the time the protein was exposed to it. exposure to increased rh caused a more pronounced activity decrease . the activity decrease parallels the loss of native-like structure observed by cd spectroscopy.

time
combining all data obtained thus far reveals the following likely scenario compatible with all observations: moisture sorption increases the structural dynamics of the protein which in turn enables structural changes leading to protein fragmentation, inactivation, and aggregation as the end result. all detrimental events increase at increasing rh during incubation and reach their maximum at the highest rh tested, namely 96% rh. based on this we developed the following working-hypothesis: if it were possible to prevent water-protein interactions by shielding the protein surface and thus prevent an increase in structural dynamics, it should be possible to minimize or prevent the subsequent detrimental events. one method previously found to accomplish this goal is through the chemical glycosylation of the protein surface  <cit> . solá et al. found through experimental and computational studies that chemically bound glycans can locally shield the protein surface from the interaction with the solvent  electrostatics thus reducing structural dynamics and increasing protein thermodynamic and colloidal stability  <cit> . these effects were mainly related to a reduction of solvent dielectric shielding effects within the proteins internal core  <cit> .

stabilization of α-chymotrypsin by chemical glycosylation
based on the developed working hypothesis, we next performed chemical glycosylation using chemically-activated glycans as previously described by solá et al.  <cit> . glycans of differing length  were employed since it was previously found that for different instabilities both the amount and the length of glycosylation had impacts on stability. for example, while thermodynamics effects were found to depend only on the amount of glycosylation, colloidal stabilization effects were also found to depend on the size of the glycans.

glycans were covalently attached to α-ct via the reactivity afforded by the surface lysine residues  towards a succinimidyl functionalized linker. synthesis conditions were adjusted to achieve an average number of glycan molecules bound to the protein between  <dig> and  <dig> since maximum thermodynamic and colloidal stabilization effects in solution were previously reported for these constructs by solá et al.  <cit> . since the protein has  <dig> lysine residues, these modifications correspond to 30% and 50% of the total glycan content that can theoretically be attached.

to test the efficiency of the glycoconjugates, they were than incubated at 75% and 96% rh were most detrimental changes were observed. it was found that glycosylation was efficient in reducing the moisture-induced aggregation of α-ct . it is evident that this effect was more pronounced at 75% rh  than at 96% rh . overall both sugars were similarly efficient in preventing aggregation despite of the major difference in molecular weight. similarly, glycosylation was also efficient in preventing activity loss .

time
amolar ratio of dextran-to-α-ct

time
amolar ratio of lactose-to-α-ct

since it is evident from the results that stability was imparted regardless of the size of the glycan attached to the protein, stability improvements were probably not due to the glycans working as molecular spacers preventing aggregation by keeping  protein molecules at a distance. in contrast to liquid storage stability under accelerated conditions in which dextran conjugates were much more efficiently protected from aggregation than lactose conjugates  <cit> , no difference was found in the improvement of solid-phase storage stability herein.

however, glycans interact with the protein surface and this interaction is limited to a small portion of the glycan molecule close to the protein surface  <cit> . the glycan- protein interaction leads to a shielding of protein surface area from water and thus the protein dynamics and structure becomes more conformationally restricted  <cit> . the most likely mechanism by which glycans improve the solid-state stability of lyophilized α-ct involves this mechanism. in this work, we have presented evidence to support that moisture sorption leads to an increase in protein structural dynamics which causes structural changes of the protein in the lyophilized state. these structural changes then trigger partial/complete unfolding and aggregation of the protein. reduction in the structural dynamics by glycosylation should therefore reduce these deleterious pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work it is demonstrated that moisture causes increased structural dynamics, structural changes, aggregation, and inactivation of α-ct in the solid-state. in general, the higher the rh was during incubation, the more pronounced these detrimental events were. moreover, it was demonstrated that chemical glycosylation with lactose and dextran reduced and/or prevent these deleterious processes to occur in α-ct in the solid state. these results provide experimental evidence which suggest that the use of chemically attached glycans could be very useful in the development of solid-phase protein formulations to improve their stability during long-term storage even under accelerated conditions. the exact mechanism is at present not clear and theoretical studies might be needed, but water exclusion from the protein surface causing rigidification should be among the most favorite hypothesis.

