BACKGROUND
the human fallopian tube is lined by a simple columnar epithelium consisting of both ciliated and secretory epithelial cells. fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells  are of particular interest given their proposed role as a precursor tissue for high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancers, which is the most common ovarian cancer histological subtype  <cit> . however, the biology of ftsecs remains poorly understood. this is partly due to difficulties in accessing normal primary ftsecs and in the subsequent development of in vitro models of this tissue type. primary ftsecs have proved challenging to culture, reportedly loosing expression of differentiated markers when propagated in vitro. this indicates a cellular plasticity that is strongly influenced by culture conditions  <cit> . recent advances in ex vivo culture of fallopian epithelia have been achieved by plating the cells onto collagen matrices  <cit> . under these conditions lineage and differentiation markers are maintained, but unfortunately the cells have an limited capacity for proliferation and cannot be sub-cultured without being immortalized or transformed  <cit> .

current evidence suggests that ftsecs are a likely origin of high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancers   <cit> . the biological characteristics of the cell-of -origin for different cancers are likely to influence the etiology of the malignant disease  <cit> , including the somatic genetic events that occur during neoplastic development. gaining a better understanding of the initiation and early stage development of hgsocs is likely to be of clinical importance. the majority of epithelial ovarian tumors are diagnosed at the late stages  when 5-year survival rates are only ~30%. in contrast, patients diagnosed with stage i disease have survival rates of over 90%, and are often cured by surgical intervention. the ability to detect hgsocs in the earliest stages would represent a realistic approach to reducing mortality and a better understanding of the role of ftsecs in the initiation of hgsocs may be key to the discovery of novel biomarkers associated with early stage disease.

although the basic functions of all epithelia are the same, there are many fundamental differences in cell morphology, cell function and gene expression across the epithelial cells of different organs. regardless of cell type, classical cell culture techniques typically involve culturing cells on plastic surfaces that bear limited resemblance to the organs from which the cells originate. traditional two-dimensional  in vitro techniques loose the architecture and geometrical features of tissues in vivo, as well as the gradients of nutrients, oxygen, carbon dioxide and other factors that characterize these tissues. seminal work in three-dimensional  modeling by bissell and colleagues has shown that culturing normal breast epithelial cells in 3d can induce gland formation, restore cellular polarity and induce upregulated expression of biologically active molecules, thereby simulating the in vivo environment  <cit> . similar approaches have since been used for other epithelial cell types. in most instances, 3d cultures display histological features and differentiated phenotypes that are rarely achieved in 2d cultures  <cit> . the aim of the current study was to establish new 3d models of ftsecs, and to investigate whether 3d ftsec cultures are more biologically relevant models than monolayer cultures. we developed in vitro 3d cultures of ftsecs that mimic features of fallopian tube epithelia in vivo; the characteristics of these models suggests that they are suitable for studying both the biology of normal fallopian tube epithelial cells and the early-stage development of hgsocs.

RESULTS
isolation of fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells
fallopian tube epithelial cells were isolated from disease-free fallopian tubes of women undergoing partial salpingectomy or total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingoophorectomy . epithelial cells were harvested from the ampullary regions of fallopian tube samples. primary cell cultures were confirmed as epithelial by immunofluorescent staining to analyze expression of cytokeratin . two of five ftsec cultures also expressed the gynecological epithelial cell marker ca <dig>  the absence of stromal contaminants was shown by absence of staining for von willenbrand factor viii, which is expressed by endothelial cells, and the fibroblastic marker fibroblast surface protein . almost all cells in ftsec cultures expressed the lineage-specific marker pax <dig> in the nucleus , indicating that the cell culture protocol enriched for fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells   <cit> . ftsecs also expressed vimentin and laminin . ftsecs could be successfully subcultured but had a limited lifespan in culture, which is typical of primary cells. primary ftsecs proliferated for 34–60 days   at which point cells acquired senescent morphologies and expressed senescence-associated β-galactosidase . the modal karyotype for 5/ <dig> cell lines was  <dig> xx ; one cell line  displayed an abnormal karyotype of  <dig>  xx, t  in all of the  <dig> cells analyzed, and was therefore excluded from further analyses.

ftsec cell lines were collected from patients aged between  <dig> and 65 years of age. for all patients, fallopian tube tissues were confirmed to be histologically normal. for the pre-menopausal patient the phase of the menstrual cycle was not known. nk = not known.

three-dimensional culturing of ftsecs
three-dimensional  cultures of ftsecs were established by inoculating cells into polyhema-coated tissue culture plastics as previously described for normal and transformed ovarian epithelial cells  <cit> . within 24 hours of culture, ftsecs aggregated and spontaneously formed multicellular spheroids. after 14 days, ftsec spheroids were fixed, paraffin-embedded and sectioned, and the histological features examined by hematoxylin and eosin  staining. all five primary lines grew as spheroids and revealed a similar cellular architecture. a monolayer of epithelial-like cells typically surrounded each spheroid and in some instances there was also multi-layering of the epithelium. ftsec spheroids commonly displayed a crescent-shaped cellular cap structure, which we have previously described for primary normal ovarian epithelial cell cultures in 3d  <cit> . the centre of the spheroids comprised a hyaline matrix that resembled the extracellular matrix present in the in vivo tissue in composition . we observed some viable cells amongst abundant karyorrhectic debri  within the matrix core of the spheroids. many of the viable cells within spheroid cores  exhibited nuclear and cellular pleomorphism, suggesting these cells undergo apoptosis and degenerate ). in doing so, these cells contribute to the matrix material that makes up the structure of the core of ftsec spheroids. the internal structure and sub-cellular features of three-dimensional spheroid cultures of ftsecs, examined by transmission electron microscopy revealed features of epithelial cells, including microvilli ), tight junctions ) and adherens junctions ).

we compared molecular features between 2d and 3d ftsec cultures using immunohistochemistry for series of biomarkers either known to be expressed in normal fallopian tube epithelia or relevant to the biology of ftsecs in serous carcinogenesis . ftsecs are not highly proliferative in vivo, but have high proliferative indices when cultured as a monolayer . mib <dig>  which is expressed during g <dig>  s, g <dig> and m phases of the cell cycle, and p <dig>  which is expressed at the g2/m cell cycle checkpoint both showed marked reductions in expression in 3d cultured ftsecs compared to 2d cultures, suggesting that ftsecs are less proliferative in 3d compared to 2d . this is consistent with the expression of these markers in vivo. pax <dig> and e-cadherin showed no reproducible changes in expression in 2d compared to 3d cultures. vimentin showed higher expression in 2d cultured cells and in primary tissue, but showed a modest reduction in expression in 3d for all cell lines examined. the basement membrane protein laminin was expressed at high levels in both 2d and 3d cultures. fibronectin and collagen i were expressed at high levels by epithelial cells of the fallopian tube; these markers were expressed at low levels in 2d ftsec cultures and were then upregulated in 3d. collagen iv expression was restricted to the basal lamina and stroma of human fallopian tube tissues but was ectopically expressed at high levels in 2d cultures and then reduced in 3d cultures, which is more reflective of human tissues. one cell line  showed increased expression of mucins  in 3d cultures, but for the other cell lines these mucins were either expressed at low levels  or not all .

immunohistochemistry was performed on five ftsec cultures grown as 2d monolayers and as 3d spheroids, and compared to two fresh tissue specimens. staining of pan-cytokeratin , mucin- <dig>  ca <dig>  pax <dig> and e-cadherin showed no significant changes in 2d versus 3d cultured cells. laminin showed high levels of expression in all samples and expression along the basement membrane of fallopian tube epithelial cells in vivo. tp <dig> and mib <dig> expression were high in 2d cultured cells, but low in 3d cultured cells and in vivo.

whole transcriptome analyses of ftsecs
we profiled the genes and pathways differentially expressed when ftsecs transition from a 2d to 3d microenvironment. three ftsec lines were cultured as 2d monolayers and 3d spheroids for 4 days and whole transcriptome profiling performed using the illumina ht <dig> beadchip microarrays. in total,  <dig> probes were differentially expressed between 2d and 3d cultures . figure  <dig> shows a heatmap of the top  <dig> significantly changing genes between 2d and 3d cultures . among the most significantly down-regulated genes were those coding for membrane proteins   <dig> ; tmem106c, fc =  <dig> ), dna repair proteins  and rho signaling proteins . genes that were up-regulated in 3d cultured cells included those coding for atp-binding cassette transporters  and trans-membrane proteins  . hierarchical clustering of elucidean distances between samples showed that the differences were greater between 2d and 3d culture conditions than for ftsecs from different patients . the three most significantly up- and down-regulated genes were validated by qpcr . march <dig> and diaph <dig> were significantly downregulated in 3d cultured cells compared to 2d cultures . gins <dig> showed a similar trend although changes in expression in 2d versus 3d were not statistically significant . c11orf <dig>  olfm2a and lrrk <dig> were consistently overexpressed in 3d cultured cells compared to the same cells cultured in 2d .

 <dig> terms were over-represented in the genes that were underexpressed in 3d and  <dig> go term was significantly over-represented in genes upregulated when ftsecs were transitioned to a 3d microenvironment. the majority of these terms were associated with cell cycle progression, mitosis and dna replication.

we performed gene ontology  analyses using the top  <dig> probes representing  <dig> unique entrez identifiers. for a sub-set of  <dig> identifiers that were significantly downregulated in 3d cultures,  <dig> go terms were significantly over-represented; 75% of these were associated with cell division, mitosis, telomere maintenance, dna replication and repair . the most significantly over-represented term was organelle fission . positive regulation of transcription from rna polymerase ii promotor was the only go term significantly over-represented in the  <dig> identifiers that were overexpressed in 3d cultures , which is likely to reflect the widespread changes in gene expression observed when ftsecs transition from a 2d to 3d microenvironment. no go terms were found to be under-represented in the  <dig> probes that significantly different in the comparison of 2d and 3d ftsec cultures.

we took two approaches to examine whether 3d culturing of ftsecs affects functional differentiation. firstly we examined expression of genes that encode proteins known to be secreted by ftsecs in vivo: oviduct specific glycoprotein  <dig> , pregnancy-associated plasma protein a  and tissue factor pathway inhibitor  <dig> . ovgp <dig> and pappa were significantly upregulated by all  <dig> ftsec cultures following the transition to 3d . tfpi <dig> was also significantly upregulated in 2/ <dig> 3d cultures . secondly, we compared gene expression profiles of 2d and 3d ftsec cultures with profiles of fresh human fallopian tube tissue specimens. datasets representing fallopian tube epithelial tissues harvested at different points of the menstrual cycle were selected . we used cluster analysis to examine the similarities between global transcriptomic profiles of 2d cultured ftsecs, 3d cultured ftsecs, luteal phase fallopian tube epithelial cells and follicular phase fallopian tube epithelial cells. regardless of the clustering method used , profiles from 2d cultures clustered with fallopian tube epithelial tissues collected during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, whilst 3d-cultured cells consistently clustered with luteal phase fallopian tube epithelium .

discussion
here, we describe a novel approach to model normal primary fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells  in an in vitro three-dimensional  spheroid system. culturing ftsecs as spheroids restores the 3d architecture of the tissue in vivo, as well as gradients of nutrients, oxygen, carbon dioxide and other macromolecules. we observed molecular and cellular features of ftsecs cultured in 3d more closely resembled fresh ftsec tissue samples than monolayer cultured fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells. one striking change associated with the transition to 3d was the reduced proliferation rate of cells in 3d compared to 2d, as demonstrated by mib <dig> and p <dig> staining. cells in 3d were less proliferative which was also reflected in the changing patterns of gene expression following transition from 2d to 3d. this is consistent with a previous study of normal ovarian surface epithelial cells cultured in 3d cultures  <cit> , and is also true for normal breast cells  <cit> . since proliferation of the fallopian tube mucosa occurs in pre-malignant or malignant lesions  <cit> , these data suggest that these 3d models more closely reflect the quiescent status of normal ftsecs in vivo and are more biologically relevant models of normal ftsecs than 2d monolayers for studying normal fallopian tube biology and tumorigenesis. furthermore, 3d culturing enhanced the production of secretory products by ftsecs. oviduct specific glycoprotein  <dig> , also known as mucin  <dig>  is normally secreted by non-cilated tubal epithelia and improves in vitro fertilization rates by reducing polyspermy and increasing blastocyst formation rates  <cit> . we found ovgp <dig> to be upregulated ~2- <dig> fold in ftsecs cultured in 3d. similarly, a second glycoprotein, pregnancy associated plasma protein a  was also significantly upregulated in 3d. increased expression of these bioactive glycoprotein molecules suggests ftsecs grown in 3d have enhanced functional differentiation compared to their 2d counterparts.

we compared global expression profiles of 2d and 3d cultured cells with biomarker expression in primary fresh fallopian tube tissue samples. we showed that gene profiles in 2d cultured cells cluster with follicular phase fallopian epithelial tissue, whereas 3d cultured cells cluster with luteal phase fallopian tube samples. this result may also be driven by the proliferative signature of the 2d cultured cells, as the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle is the proliferative phase, when raised levels of estradiol stimulate proliferation of the epithelia lining the endometrium and fallopian tube  <cit> . we found that gene expression profiles of 3d cultured ftsecs cluster with those of luteal phase fallopian tube tissues. this phase of the cell cycle is the secretory phase, which may indicate a commitment to secretory differentiation ftsecs cultured in 3d. consistent with this, we observed upregulation of an secreted proteins as well as an ftsec marker  when one ftsec line was cultured in 3d. these data strongly suggest that culturing in 3d enhances functional differentiation of ftsecs to a secretory phenotype.

previous studies have reported culture of human fallopian tube epithelia ex vivo, on collagen gel and alginate matrices  <cit> . these models have significantly advanced our ability to model human and murine polarized fallopian tube epithelia in vitro. however, one limitation of ex vivo models is the restricted ability to sub-culture the cells. using a growth factor rich media we were able to subculture the fallopian tube epithelial cells we isolated. we then selected a spheroid culture method to establish 3d cultures because this approach offers flexibility for downstream molecular analysis, and can be scaled up or down to perform high-throughput molecular screening or large-scale mass cultures. although we did not supply matrix proteins in the cultures, fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells produced a matrix of which laminin was a major component. laminin is the major protein in the basal lamina, the aspect of the basement membrane to which epithelial cells are adhered in vivo via integrin-mediated interactions. we hypothesize that altered cell-matrix interactions may contribute to the altered gene expression patterns we observed. while the 3d ftsec cultures presented here do not recreate the complex convoluted architecture of the lumen of a fallopian tube in vivo, in ftsec spheroids the epithelial cell-basement membrane interaction is restored. we observed that the outer surface of the spheroid is reminiscent of the lumen of the fallopian tube in that cells are in contact with other mucosal epithelia throughout the lateral domains of the cell, and basal domains of the cells are in contact with a basement membrane-type matrix. in contrast, cells trapped within the spheroid cores are surrounded by matrix, which is an ectopic microenvironment for normal epithelial cells. we hypothesize that this may induce programmed cell death, resulting in the high frequency of apoptotic cell debris observed within the cores but not at the periphery of ftsec spheroids. alternatively the physiological conditions within spheroids could have contributed to the changes survival of cells at the centre of the multicellular aggregates, since mathematical modeling suggests that deficiencies in atp  <cit> , glucose, hydrogen and oxygen  <cit>  may all induce necrotic cell death of cells within spheroid cores.

many key cellular processes are now known to be differently regulated between 2d and 3d cultures, and various factors can induce differential gene expression in 3d, including altered cell-cell and/or cell-matrix communications, nutrient and oxygen gradients, and reduced rates of proliferation. we propose that the 3d models are more biologically relevant tools of ftsecs than traditional 2d monolayers with which to study fallopian tube epithelial cell biology and pathogenesis. perhaps the greatest potential for clinical impact of these models will come from their use in studies of tumor initiation. this has become particularly significant since it was established recently that the epithelia lining of the fallopian tube likely represents the cell of origin for a proportion of hgsocs. hgsocs bear morphological resemblance to müllerian epithelia and over 80% of this tumor type overexpress pax <dig>  <cit> , an ftsec marker that can be used to distinguish ovarian serous tumors from other, morphologically similar neoplasms  <cit> . we identified additional ftsec biomarkers that represent novel candidate hgsoc biomarkers. these include lrrk <dig>  a gene that encodes a kinase involved in parkinsons disease  <cit> . lrrk <dig> has not previously been implicated in ovarian cancer development but analyses of the cancer genome atlas  data suggests ~3% of primary hgsocs harbor somatic mutations in this gene  <cit> . other novel ftsec biomarkers that are overexpressed in hgsocs include celsr <dig>  an atypical cadherin; abcc <dig>  an abc transport protein implicated in drug resistance  <cit> ; and cthrc <dig>  a secreted protein shown to be a candidate biomarker for breast and pancreatic cancer  <cit> . analyses of primary hgsoc specimens and sera collected from ovarian cancer patients will be required to determine whether any of these novel biomarkers have clinical utility in the early detection of hgsoc.

while it is now widely accepted that a proportion of hgsocs originate in the fallopian tube, the early stages of disease development are poorly understood and many questions remain to be answered. reports show differences in the proportions of ciliated and secretory epithelial cells, marker expression and hormone responsiveness between the epithelia found in fimbrial and ampullary regions of the fallopian tube  <cit> . however, as yet we do not yet know why ftsecs in the fimbrial region of the fallopian tube are more prone to neoplastic transformation. one hypothesis is that the proximity to the mitogenic environment of the ovarian stroma may influence the phenotype of fimbrial ftsecs. alternatively the region of transition between ftsecs and ovarian mesothelial-type epithelial cells is inherently more prone to neoplastic transformation. in the future, these 3d models of ftsec transformation that incorporate common somatic genetic alterations characteristic of hgsoc  or even recently discovered susceptibility alleles that confer low-risk of eoc in the general population  <cit>  will be vital tools in answering some of the key questions regarding eoc initiation and development.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion we have developed a novel 3d in vitro culture model of fallopian tube secretory cells that represent a precursor tissue of high-grade serous ovarian cancer. the greatest potential clinical use for these models is likely to come from molecular and phenotypic studies of the initiation and early stage development of ovarian cancer leading to the discovery of novel biomarkers for early stage disease detection. these models may also have applications beyond the study of ovarian carcinogenesis, for example for studying the interactions between the fallopian tube epithelium and oocytes or zygotes. co-culture of fallopian tube epithelial cells has been shown to promote the in vitro development of embryos. in future, novel 3d co-culture methodologies, in which glycoprotein secretion is enhanced, may improve in vitro embryogenesis. models of benign fallopian tube diseases that are commonly associated with female infertility, such as salpingitis and pelvic inflammatory disease, are also few in number; but the models we describe here could be used to mimic such conditions in vitro and help to improve their diagnosis and treatment. ultimately, it is hoped that these models will lead to much needed insights into the biology and pathogenesis of fallopian secretory epithelial cells and that this knowledge with be invaluable in increasing our ability to diagnose and treat benign and malignant disease arising in the fallopian tubes.

