BACKGROUND
recent phylogeographical works indicate expansion of south american seasonally dry forests  across quaternary glaciations  <cit> , agreeing with the idea of a unique and continuously distributed sdtf bordering amazon basin and northern andes during glacial phases, a scenario also known as the pleistocene arc hypothesis . the alternative scenario of range expansion towards the interior of amazon basin  is also supported by phylogeographical patterns of other species, like the widely distributed tabebuia impetiginosa  <cit> . both hypotheses predict that the current disjunct distribution of sdtfs across south america is the result of vicariance  of a formerly more widespread and continuously distributed dry forest during the last glacial maximum , which is known as the dry forest refugia hypothesis  <cit> .

however, the response of south american sdtf species to quaternary climate change is still poorly understood, as revealed by contrasting phylogeographical patterns and multiple distribution dynamic response of species to quaternary climate changes  <cit> . actually, an increasing body of evidence does not support the generalized dry forest refugia hypothesis as originally proposed  <cit> . for instance, the bolivian chiquitano dry forest was established only during the holocene as a consequence of population expansions from southern amazon rain forest  <cit> . in northeast brazil, in caatinga biome, the fossil records indicate that current climatic and vegetation conditions have been established only after  <dig>  ka   <cit> , reaching as late as  <dig>  ka in some regions  <cit> . studies using ecological niche modelling  also show species-specific responses to the quaternary climate changes  <cit> . phylogenetic studies show an ancient origin of sdtfs in mesoamerica, dated from  <dig> to 30 ma   <cit> , and to ~17 ma in brazilian caatinga  <cit> , whereas the fossil records suggest that sdtfs have originated around  <dig> to 12 ma, at least in some part of its distribution  <cit> . dated phylogenies indicate a more ancient origin for neotropical rain forests in the cretaceous  <cit> , although fossil records do not show evidence for neotropical rain forests before the early tertiary   <cit> . such contrasting information reinforces the need for comprehensive studies about the dynamics of sdtf as an important source of evidence for the effect of climate change on species distribution.

sdtfs are one of the most threatened ecosystems in the world  <cit> . although they originally occupied ~ 42 % of the tropical and subtropical forest regions  <cit> , currently most of their remaining areas are in south america , mainly in northeast and central brazil and in southeast bolivia, paraguay and northern argentina , representing ~ 22 % of the forested area in south america  <cit> . in brazil, the sdtfs are distributed from the northeast, in caatinga , towards the southwest in misiones nucleus , and also are scattered throughout other vegetation types such as amazon rain forest and savannas in central brazil  <cit>  in areas of eutrophic and oligotrophic soils with neutral or quasi-neutral ph values and low levels of aluminium  <cit> . most remaining areas of sdtfs in brazil are threatened mainly by agricultural expansion, harvesting for wood products and the increase of fire frequency due to agricultural practices  <cit> .

the distribution of sdtf species and the contrasting palaeoscenarios raise questions about the long-term stability and dynamics of the sdtf communities and the role of the quaternary climate oscillations in the current patterns of genetic diversity and geographical distribution of plant species, that may be answered using multi-model inference approach , as we address here for the widely distributed neotropical tree tabebuia serratifolia  nichols. . tabebuia serratifolia has a disjunct distribution and local low abundance throughout the sdtfs of south america . it occurs from the fragments of sdtfs in northeast brazil, in the caatinga biome, towards the misiones nucleus , paraguay and peru, and in sdtfs of amazon basin and of atlantic forest. it is also scattered throughout the fragments of sdtfs in central brazil and the east slopes of andes. tabebuia serratifolia and t. impetiginosa are the most logged species in brazil and the second most expensive timber, popularly known as ‘pau d’arco’  <cit> .

here we studied the phylogeography of t. serratifolia and tested the dry forest refugia hypothesis concerning specific climatic oscillations during the last glacial cycle. our analyses followed the framework proposed by collevatti et al.  <cit> , which is based on coalescence simulations of alternative demographical hypotheses based on biogeographical a priori hypotheses  and other two demographical expectations predicted by the ecological niche models . hypotheses from the enms include the combined dynamics of both plah and ppph hypotheses and range retraction at the lgm . these hypotheses were tested elsewhere for t. impetiginosa  <cit> .

RESULTS
genetic diversity and population structure
the sequencing of the chloroplast intergenic spacers psba-trnh, trnc-ycf <dig> and trns-trng generated combined data with  <dig>  bp sites ,  <dig> polymorphic sites and  <dig> different haplotypes for the  <dig> individuals of t. serratifolia. for its1 +  <dig> s + its <dig>  we obtained a fragment of 518 bp with  <dig> polymorphic sites and  <dig> different haplotypes.

chloroplast genome showed higher haplotype diversity  than nuclear its , but nucleotide diversity at cpdna  was lower than for nuclear genome . higher genetic diversity was found for populations alt, cra, pni and sab.table  <dig> genetic diversity based on arlequin ver  <dig>  software and demographical parameters based on coalescent analysis performed with lamarc  <dig> . <dig> software for  <dig> populations of tabebuia serratifolia


n
k
h
π
k
h
π
θ
θ - 95 % ci
ne
ne - 95 % ci

n sample size, k - number of haplotypes, h haplotype diversity, π nucleotide diversity, sd standard deviation, θ coalescent or mutation parameter, ne effective population size; 95 % ci is the credibility interval at 95 %. Θ and ne were estimated for combined cpdna and its data




nuclear its showed four widespread haplotypes shared by populations from the northeast and the central brazil  and cpdna showed only two widespread haplotypes. haplotype h <dig>  and h <dig>  were shared by populations cra, sec, ccm, pof, from northeast, pna and ara, from central and pot and bod, from central-west brazil . despite haplotype sharing, the network showed evidence of genetic structure with high differentiation between populations from northeast and southeast brazil .fig.  <dig> geographical distribution of haplotypes of tabebuia serratifolia and bayesian clustering for  its and  cpdna, based on the sequencing of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations. different colours were assigned for each haplotype according to the figure legend. the circle size represents the sample size in each population and the circle sections represent the haplotype frequency in each sampled population. for details on population codes and localities see additional file 2: table s <dig>  for baps clustering, each colour represents an inferred cluster 




analysis of molecular variance also showed a high differentiation among populations for both chloroplast  and its . pairwise ϕ
st was high between almost all population pairs for both cpdna and its .

bayesian clustering for cpdna indicated an optimal partition of  <dig> groups for cpdna and  <dig> groups for its . for cpdna , populations from northeast and central-west were clustered together in one group  with population pni from southeast. populations from southeast and central-east formed other cluster  with some individual from population alt and cra, from the northeast. the third cluster  was formed mainly by a population from the northeast  and individuals from alt, pni, pot and pna. its bayesian clustering  split the cpdna cluster  <dig>  in two. the first cluster comprised populations from north–northeast and central-west . the second cluster was formed by populations from central-west brazil . populations from the southeast were grouped in one cluster  with some individuals from populations of central-west . population luz, from central-west formed one cluster  with individuals from populations ara, sec and sum. another cluster  was formed by individuals from different populations from the three geographical regions .

demographical history and time to most recent common ancestor
extended bayesian skyline plot  analysis showed a demographical expansion of t. serratifolia at c. 130 ka  steadying after the lgm. we also found low values of mutation parameter θ for all populations  and overall population . most populations had high effective population sizes . gene flow among all population pairs was negligible .fig.  <dig> demographical and evolutionary history of tabebuia serratifolia lineages, based on concatenated sequences of cpdna and its nrdna. a extended bayesian skyline plot showing effective population size increase at c. 150 ka. b coalescent tree showing that most lineage divergences occurred after the lower pleistocene. tip section colour corresponds to population, following the figure legend. the section size corresponds to the number of haplotypes in each population in each clade. grey bar corresponds to 95 % credibility interval of the mean time to the moat common ancestor; numbers above the branches are the support to the node ; numbers below the branches are the node dating . time scale is in millions of years  before present




haplotypes of t. serratifolia showed an ancient time to most recent common ancestor , ~ <dig>  ma , which coincides with the coalescence of haplotypes from populations alt and mim with all other haplotypes. most divergences occurred after c.  <dig>  ma  and resulted in incomplete lineage sorting, with geographically distant populations sharing haplotypes and common ancestors.

setting-up demographical hypotheses
species palaeodistribution modelling
the enm showed that the range size of t. serratifolia at the lgm  was greater than at the mid-holocene , but similar to the present-day . during the lgm, the species was predicted to occur across the amazon basin, brazilian cerrado and western caatinga. a range shift towards the atlantic coast at the northeast and the southeast was predicted from the lgm to the mid-holocene . in the present-day, t. serratifolia remained in the atlantic forest, but expanded its distribution towards the west brazil, bolivia and peru, mainly bordering the amazon basin . the ensemble predicted a historical refugium extending from amazon basin towards  the central and southeast brazil.fig.  <dig> maps of consensus of the  <dig> models expressing the ensemble potential distribution for tabebuia serratifolia, based on ecological niche modelling. potential distribution across the neotropics during the  lgm ,  mid-holocene ,  present-day  historical refugium through time 




the analysis of uncertainty using hierarchical anova showed lower proportional variance through time than among model methods . however, variation was highly spatially structured  with higher proportion of variation from time component and low from enm and aogcms  within the geographical range of t. serratifolia, indicating that the enms were able to detect the effects of climate changes on the distribution dynamics of t. serratifolia through the last glaciation, despite the aogcm variation .

inferring demographical hypotheses and model selection
among the  <dig> palaeodistribution maps the pattern supported was ppph , followed by “both” hypothesis  with 15 % of maps, and “range retraction” . no enm prediction supported the scenario expected by plah hypothesis  and 8 % of the maps matched none of the hypotheses.

similarly, the coalescent simulations of alternative demographical hypotheses suggested that the hypothesis ppph  was the most likely scenario explaining the current pattern of genetic diversity at the chloroplast genome of t. serratifolia compared to the other competing hypotheses, using either two-tailed probability or akaike criteria . for its, although hypothesis ppph was the most likely for haplotype and nucleotide diversities , hypotheses “both” and “range retraction” could not be rejected for haplotype diversity .table  <dig> comparison of the demographical hypotheses in retrieve the haplotype  and nucleotide  diversities observed

p
Δ aic
aicw
p
Δ aic
aicw

h
π
data obtained from  <dig>  simulations using the software bayessc.  two-tailed probability. ∆
aic and aicw akaike information criterion delta and weights. plah, pleistocene arc hypothesis, ppph, amazon sdf hypothesis; both, pattern matching both hypotheses plah + ppph; retraction, pattern matching a strong range retraction. see fig.  <dig> for details about the demographical scenarios. h haplotype diversity, π nucleotide diversity




spatial patterns of genetic diversity
genetic differentiation among populations and geographical distance were not significantly correlated for cpdna  but significantly correlated for its .

quantile regressions showed effects of climate changes on the genetic diversity for its. populations in more climatically suitable areas and closer to the centroid of the distribution during the lgm showed higher haplotype  diversity . however, opposite relationships were observed for the mutation parameter θ . in addition, populations in more unstable areas showed lower genetic diversity and lower θ . relationships for chloroplast genome were not significant.fig.  <dig> spatial distribution of genetic diversity for its nuclear ribosomal dna for tabebuia serratifolia, in relation to the potential palaeodistribution at 21 ka. a distribution of the haplotype diversity . b distribution of the mutation parameter theta . circumference sizes are proportional to the value of genetic parameter, following the figure legends. the maps represent the consensus of the  <dig> models expressing the ensemble potential distribution for tabebuia serratifolia, based on ecological niche modelling




discussion
our findings from palaeodistribution modelling, phylogeographical analyses and coalescent simulations supported the hypothesis of dry forest refugia in south america for t. serratifolia. the pattern of genetic diversity is consistent with a demographical scenario of range expansion at the lgm, also supported by enm, which predicted the scenario ppph as the most likely; i.e. a range expansion and shift towards the amazon basin. thus, the current disjunct distribution of t. serratifolia is most likely due to the range contraction of an ancient wider distribution, representing a climatic relict of drier and colder ice ages in central-southeast brazil and amazon basin.

in fact, our results suggest that t. serratifolia was distributed northeastward during the lgm. some typical species of sdtf are now widely distributed in amazon basin, occurring at low frequency in areas of more fertile soils  <cit> , like t. serratifolia . the expansion of sdtfs throughout the amazon basin may have been favoured by the reduction in the sea level during the pleistocene glaciations causing a decrease in the level of the amazon basin rivers, exposing areas for the colonization by sdtf species  <cit> . in addition, t. serratifolia is a more generalist species, currently occurring in forests of amazon basin, sdtfs and riparian forests of the cerrado and caatinga biomes and in atlantic forest. the suitable climatic conditions for t. serratifolia at present-day clearly show its preference for hot climates but with high variation in precipitation. such climatic conditions were less available during the lgm at the central brazil  than during the mid-holocene and the present-day. the temperature decrease during the lgm potentially lead to a range shift and expansion towards the amazon basin in response to the decreasing availability of suitable conditions in certain regions, such as the southeast brazil. in addition, although amazon basin remained forested during the lgm, the forest structure and species composition might have changed due to the lower temperatures, precipitation and atmospheric co <dig> concentrations  <cit> . the southern amazon forest became more seasonal, opening the opportunity for seasonally dry forest species colonization.

despite the geographic and demographical expansion during glaciations, some populations had low haplotype and nucleotide diversity, contrary to the expected for a species with wide and continuous distribution during the lgm and with high effective population sizes. this is most likely due to the cycles of range shifts towards the amazon basin during recurrent glaciations that may have caused the extinction of haplotypes in some populations and a spatial assortment decreasing genetic diversity . indeed, quantile regressions showed a cline variation in the genetic diversity for its, because populations in more stable areas through time and with higher suitability had higher genetic diversity. postglacial range shift towards the southeast and east may have led to spatial genome assortment due to leading edge colonization, as the species tracked suitable environments  <cit> . the leading edge colonization may have triggered the lower genetic diversity in populations at higher distance from the centroid of the geographical distribution at 21 ka, i.e. areas with lower climatic stability. the spreading from the leading edge may lead to bottlenecks of the colonizing genome, decreasing genetic diversity in some new colonizing areas  <cit> . in addition, allele surfing, i.e. the spread and frequency increase of a low-frequency allele that migrates on the wave of advance of a population in expansion  <cit> , and density-dependent processes due to the fast colonization and founder events may also cause patches and sectoring in genetic diversity  <cit> .


tabebuia serratifolia showed slightly lower genetic diversity than t. impetiginosa, most likely due to different response to quaternary climate changes. tabebuia impetiginosa, showed a larger range expansion  during glacial periods  as compared to t. serratifolia that showed a range shift towards the amazon basin . despite differences in effective population size and inheritance, chloroplast genome showed higher diversity than its nrdna, which has four times the effective size of chloroplast genome and higher mutation rates. this may be due to concerted evolution in nrdna that may homogenize copies decreasing genetic variation  <cit> . in addition, different genetic diversity signatures for its and chloroplast may be also due to different evolutionary rates corresponding to different time slices in the species evolution. the differences may also be due to the sequences sizes  because nucleotide diversity, which is corrected for sequence size, was slightly higher for its than for cpdna.

genetic diversity and number of haplotypes were higher in central brazil, in sdtfs from cerrado biome , although some populations at atlantic forest also presented high genetic diversity . in fact, the results on enm and quantile regressions showed that populations in more climatically suitable areas during the lgm presented higher genetic diversity  suggesting that stable areas at the central brazil were important refugia for t. serratifolia. haplotype sharing between populations from northeast brazil  and populations in atlantic forest in southeast brazil and in cerrado biome, and the bayesian clustering of populations from these biomes  show the past connection between caatinga and cerrado and atlantic forest. indeed, baps showed a more shallow genetic structure for cpdna than for its, that may reflect differences in seed and pollen dispersal. in fact, genetic differentiation was higher for its  than for cpdna , showing that restriction in pollen dispersal contributes more to differentiation than seed dispersal. baps showed almost the same result for both sequences for the southeast cluster  except for population cra in northeast, that was not included in its red cluster. the pollen fossil record shows warmer and wetter climatic periods in the late pleistocene that may have caused the expansion of riparian forests in cerrado biome connecting atlantic and amazon rainforests  <cit> . indeed, the enm predictions for t. serratifolia show a high connection between the atlantic forest, caatinga and cerrado. however, the connection through the sdtf of the ‘dry diagonal’ may also have occurred . in northeast brazil, wet periods occurred during the last 210 ka, due to a southward displacement of the intertropical convergence zone  <cit>  and may have affected rainforest distribution  <cit> . the fossil record shows a forest expansion during the intermittent wet intervals that may have linked amazon and atlantic rainforests  <cit> . in addition, there are evidences of a drier climate in atlantic forest domain, in southeast brazil, c. 20 ka to 14 ka with establishment of species from atlantic forest only after that  <cit> . in other localities in southeast brazil, drier and colder climate may have persisted c.  <dig> – 18 ka  <cit> .


tabebuia serratifolia lineages from central brazil  started to diverge first, in the pliocene c.  <dig>  ma. however, major divergences occurred in the lower pleistocene . we hypothesize that favourable climatic conditions for t. serratifolia  were spatially more restricted before the pleistocene leading to smaller effective population sizes as predicted by ebsp. because the probability of coalescence is inversely related to the number of gene copies  <cit> , most coalescence may occur just before demographical expansion, when populations have smaller effective population sizes . in fact, most coalescence occurred before the last glaciation coinciding with low population sizes showed by ebsp. thus, the range expansion during the lgm, indicated by the palaeodistribution modelling and by the simulation of demographical hypotheses, matches the regional process of differentiation indicated by the coalescent tree with no later secondary contact. this result suggests an ancient process of incomplete lineage sorting due to expansion followed by a more regional population demographical expansion circumventing secondary contact and haplotype sharing, most likely due to restriction in soil suitability  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our analyses based on coalescent simulation and ecological niche modelling strongly support a demographical and a geographical range expansion of t. serratifolia during the lgm as expected by dry forest refugia hypothesis. we also found a range shift towards the amazon basin, as expected by the prediction of ppph scenario, with an important effect on the spatial pattern of genetic diversity. finally, we showed here that phylogeographical analyses coupled with ecological niche modelling and coalescent simulations can be a very powerful framework for evaluating alternative hypotheses and potentially useful for disentangling mechanisms involved in the origin of the disjunct distribution of sdtfs.

