BACKGROUND
quantification of gene expression levels is a fundamental step in virtually all aspects of molecular biological research. it is particularly important when genes that are expressed specifically under certain growth conditions are to be compared. common experimental techniques used to evaluate gene expression levels include northern blot hybridization and reverse transcription -mediated pcr ; both techniques are practical for analyzing expression of a small set of genes and are complemented by microarray analysis, which is routinely employed for large-scale, global expression profilings. in recent years, the qrt-pcr has been the method of choice for measuring gene expression levels in multiple samples involving a limited number of genes. it provides accurate and sensitive quantification of gene transcript levels, even for those genes with fairly low transcript levels are  <cit> .

the popularity of the qrt-pcr method reflects the need for ways to quantitatively analyze gene expression data in the fields of molecular medicine, biotechnology, microbiology, and molecular diagnostics  <cit>  as well as to accurately quantify mrna levels in plants  <cit> . however, to avoid experimental deviations or the errors that inevitably occur during sample preparation procedures and data analysis, all of which make quantitation of gene transcripts unreliable, normalization of the qrt-pcr data is essential. the most common way to normalize the data is to use appropriate internal reference genes. an ideal reference gene is expressed at a constant level in all plant tissues under various growth conditions. its expression should not be influenced by environmental changes or by exogenous application of growth hormones.

commonly used reference genes in plant molecular biology, frequently called housekeeping genes, play a general role in basic cellular processes, such as cell structure maintenance and primary cellular metabolism, and thus are usually unaffected by external factors. for example, genes encoding tubulins, actins, or elongation factors are widely used in gene expression studies in arabidopsis thaliana  and oryza sativa .

brachypodium is a temperate wild grass species. its morphological, genomic, and molecular genetic characteristics and simple growth requirements make it an ideal model system for grass biology  <cit> . its genome size  is smaller than that of rice. it also has a short growth cycle. a single plant life cycle can be completed within 6– <dig> weeks. self-fertility, the availability of several diploid accessions, and its intrinsic resistance to diverse biotic and abiotic stress conditions are additional attributes.

arabidopsis is widely used as a model system for all flowering plants. rice has been used as a model for genomics research for all temperate grass species, including major cereals, such as barley and wheat. however, recent genomic analyses have revealed that the brachypodium genome is phylogenetically closer to the genomes of economically important crops, such as wheat and barley, and several potential biofuel grasses, including switch grasses  <cit> . brachypodium exhibits many agricultural traits similar to these grass crops. furthermore, a protocol has recently been established for infecting brachypodium with magnaporthe grisea  in order to explore its potential as a model system in which to study host-pathogen interactions  <cit> . to date, such molecular assays have routinely been carried out using rice or related monocots.

the rapidly growing interest in brachypodium triggered the establishment of a series of genomic resources; these include the collecting of nuclear genomic sequences and bacterial artificial chromosome /est-based libraries in addition to the characterization of individual genetic resources  <cit> . furthermore, the brachypodium genome project is currently underway, and the full genomic sequence will be released to the public in the near future  <cit> . several groups have also reported the existence of efficient agrobacterium-mediated brachypodium transformation systems  <cit> , which are essential for functional genomics studies in brachypodium. such technological progress in brachypodium research can help realize its potential as a new model system for biofuel grass biology, provided that stable reference genes are identified for gene expression studies in this plant species.

in this study, we report on reference genes that can potentially be used to normalize the results of gene expression studies in brachypodium. nine candidate genes, including those encoding actin , elongation factor 1-alpha , rubisco activase , samdc, alpha-tubulin , ubc <dig>  ubi <dig>  and ubi <dig>  were chosen, and partial gene sequences were extracted from the available brachypodium databases . brachypodium was either grown under various stress conditions or treated with an array of growth hormones. different plant tissues and plants at different developmental stages were also included in the assays. our data showed that while expression of the ubc <dig> gene was the most stable among all the plant samples examined, the ubi <dig> and ubi <dig> genes would be appropriate for analysis of gene expression studies in different plant tissues. their expressions were also stable under the growth hormone treatments. in the meantime, the samdc gene showed the most stable expression patterns in plants grown under diverse abiotic stress conditions. this work will certainly facilitate our future work on gene expression studies in biofuel grass crops as well as in brachypodium.

RESULTS
selection of potential reference genes in brachypodium
a handful of reference genes, including those encoding tubulins, actins, and elongation factors, are regularly used to normalize the rt-pcr or qrt-pcr data in arabidopsis and rice. additional genes, such as elongation initiation factor 4a , are sometimes employed to further standardize the data on plant samples grown under specific growth conditions. however, because none of the reference genes currently used in arabidopsis and rice provides a stable expression under all the examined conditions, multiple reference genes must be included to ensure the normalization of the data in some molecular analyses.

although genomic, cellular, and morphological aspects of brachypodium have been widely explored in recent years, little information is available about molecular genetic analyses, and thus no systematic efforts have been made to identify its stable reference genes. extensive literature searches have revealed that genes encoding various types of proteins, including enzymes and structural proteins, are widely used as internal controls for studies of plant gene expression through rt-pcr, qrt-pcr, and gene chip assays  <cit> . analyzing these reference genes in other plant species led us to choose nine candidate reference genes in brachypodium; act <dig>  rca, ef1α, gapdh, samdc, tua <dig>  ubc <dig>  ubi <dig>  and ubi <dig>  using the sequence information deposited in the harvest  under the genbank accession numbers listed in table  <dig>  a series of qrt-pcr primers was designed which the sizes of the pcr products were approximately  <dig> –  <dig> bp .

the brachypodium gene accession numbers refer to the dbest division of genbank  <cit> . the arabidopsis genome initiative  codes and the tigr rice genome locus identifiers of the gene homologues are also listed.

rna integrity and amplification specificity
for qrt-pcr analyses, we included  <dig> different total rna samples extracted from various plant materials. the plant materials analyzed included  <dig> different plant tissues , plants at  <dig> different developmental stages , and plants exposed to  <dig> different abiotic stress conditions, such as high salinity , cold , heat , and drought . brachypodium seedlings were also treated with  <dig> different growth hormones; indole-3-acetic acid , brassinolide , zeatin , abscisic acid , gibberellic acid , 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid , salicylic acid , and methyl jasmonic acid .

prior to carrying out qrt-pcr reactions, the viability of all rna samples was examined using rt-pcr to evaluate the expression of the gapdh gene. all the rt-pcr reactions produced a single gapdh-specific band with a predicted molecular size  on a  <dig> % agarose gel visualized with ethidium bromide staining , confirming the hypothesis that the rna samples extracted from brachypodium plant materials are appropriate for transcript level analysis. the integrity and quality of rna samples were further evaluated by electrophoretic analysis using the labwork image acquisition and analysis software  .

the results showed that the gapdh gene was stably expressed under various abiotic stress conditions and not discernibly affected by diverse growth hormones, although it exhibited less stability in some plant tissues .

to examine the stability of reference gene expressions, transcript levels were measured by qrt-pcr. aliquots of the primary cdna synthesis reaction mixture were used in qrt-pcr to amplify gene-specific primer pairs of each of the nine candidate reference genes. primer dimer formation and nonspecific amplification can falsely increase gene transcript levels and thus must be avoided, especially when qrt-pcr is carried out using the sybr green dyes. gene-specific amplification of each of the nine candidate genes was confirmed by the appearance of a single, dominant peak in the qrt-pcr dissociation curve analyses .

identification of marker genes for growth hormone treatments
a set of marker genes that are regulated specifically by growth hormones and environmental factors is a prerequisite for determining reference gene expression stability under various experimental conditions. since there is no information on marker genes available in brachypodium, we screened potential marker genes in the brachypodium databases that are homologous to those well characterized in arabidopsis.

transcript levels of the selected marker genes were compared by qrt-pcr in brachypodium plants treated either with various growth hormones or with abiotic stresses . we found that brachypodium genes, which are homologous to iaa <dig>  arr <dig>  bas <dig>  npr <dig>  cbf <dig>  and hsc <dig>  were significantly induced by the relevant treatments. in contrast, genes that are homologous to ga3ox2- <dig>  rd <dig>  and chitinase <dig> were repressed under the conditions examined . these observations indicate that treating brachypodium seedlings with growth hormones or growing seedlings under abiotic stress conditions conferred regulatory effects on the selected marker genes similar to those found in arabidopsis.

expression data analysis
a simple, widely used way to identify stably expressed genes is to calculate cycle threshold  values in the qrt-pcr reactions. the ct value represents the cycle at which a significant increase of the pcr product, which is measured by an increase in fluorescence, occurs; this cycle is generally marked by the middle of the exponential phase of amplification. gene expression analyses of the nine reference genes exhibited a narrow mean ct value range across all the experimental samples . the ct values ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  while most of the values were distributed between  <dig> and  <dig>  ubi <dig> was the most abundantly transcribed, reaching the threshold fluorescence peak after  <dig> amplification cycles. the ct average of all other genes was approximately  <dig> cycles. as a result, the ubi <dig> transcript level was approximately  <dig> times more abundant than the average of the data set. the least abundant transcripts were those of ubc <dig> having a ct value of  <dig> or higher. most of the reference genes had relatively smaller variations in gene expression  except for rca.

the genorm software was employed as a means of determining the expression stability of the selected reference genes  <cit> . this program automatically calculates the average expression stability value  as the average pairwise variation  of a particular gene with all other control genes and determines the v values with all other control genes as the standard deviation of the logarithmically transformed expression ratios.

examining all the expression data examined revealed that ubc <dig> and act <dig> are the most stable genes that might be widely used for multiple purposes . in contrast, rca was the least stable among the genes examined.

to determine the optimal number of reference genes required for accurate normalization, the genorm software was used to calculate the pairwise variation  between the sequential normalization factors   . in the original publication describing genorm  <cit> , a threshold of  <dig>  or lower for the pairwise variation was proposed to indicate that inclusion of an additional reference gene is unnecessary. however,  <dig>  is not a strict cut-off value but an ideal value. therefore, the graph displayed in figure  <dig> is intended only to provide guidance for determining the optimal number of reference genes. in addition, the observed trend of changing v values when using additional genes can be equally informative. therefore, in most cases, the use of three reference genes results in much more accurate and reliable normalization than only one gene and is thus considered to be a valid normalization strategy. we therefore decided to take the threshold of  <dig>  as a cut-off value for the inclusion of our reference genes.

analysis of the data obtained from different plant tissues using the genorm software produced a plot displaying the average expression stability values of the candidate reference genes in each round of the analysis, ranking them from the least stable gene at the far left to the two most stable genes at the far right . evaluation of different plant tissues revealed a significant decrease in the pairwise variation with the inclusion of a fourth gene . the pairwise variation at the v3/ <dig> value was  <dig> , which is below the threshold of  <dig> , indicating that the normalization factor should preferably contain at least three reference genes. therefore, it would be ideal to include ubi <dig>  ubi <dig>  and ef1α as reference genes to normalize gene expression data in plant tissues.

analysis of the pairwise variation in the growth hormone-treated samples revealed that a v score of  <dig>  is achieved with two reference genes , indicating that the average of the top two reference genes, gapdh and ubc <dig>  is the optimal normalization factor for gene expression studies in the growth hormone-treated brachypodium plant materials. in the heat- and cold-treated plant samples, samdc and ef1α were the most stable reference genes . as in the growth hormone-treated samples, the pairwise variation at v2/ <dig> was below the threshold of  <dig> , and thus two reference genes, samdc and ef1α, would be sufficient .

in the meantime, evaluation of the salt- and drought-treated samples did not exhibit any discernible difference in the pairwise variation with the inclusion of a third gene . it is apparent that the average of the top two reference genes, samdc and ubc <dig>  is the optimal normalization factor for gene expression studies in the salt- and drought-treated samples.

to further confirm the results obtained by the genorm program, we also employed the normfinder software , an algorithm for identifying the optimal normalization gene among a set of candidate genes. this software ranks the set of candidate normalization genes according to the stability of their expression patterns in a given sample set analyzed in a given experimental design  <cit> . the results of the normfinder analysis applied to our data sets are summarized in table  <dig>  the ranking of the reference genes was almost identical to that determined by the genorm software. the ubi <dig> and ubi <dig> genes still ranked highest for different plant tissues and growth hormone-treated plant samples, while the gapdh or samdc genes appeared to be the highest reliable controls for plant samples exposed to abiotic stress.

in each column, a low stability value as an estimate of the combined intra- and intergroup variation of the respective gene represents a high gene expression stability of the respective gene between the matched samples.

discussion
the qrt-pcr is broadly accepted as the method of choice for accurate and sensitive quantification of gene transcript levels, even for those genes whose transcript levels are low. for valid qrt-pcr analysis, accurate normalization of gene expression against an appropriate internal control is required. most gene expression studies in the literature generally use a single internal control for normalization  <cit> , and the validity of the conclusion depends highly on the control applied. therefore, it is necessary to validate the expression stability of the control gene under specific experimental conditions prior to its use for normalization.

the most commonly used reference genes in the pre-genomic era were chosen primarily for their known or suspected housekeeping roles in basic cellular processes. the actin gene, one such reference gene, is used in normalizing the quantification of gene expression levels  <cit> . genes encoding gapdh, actin, and ef1α have been used as the most relevant reference genes for berry development  <cit> . however, the actin gene was found to be inappropriate for use as a reference gene, since some variations of the transcript levels were observed in different plant tissues and plants grown under different growth conditions.

our study showed that the polyubiquitin genes  and the ubc <dig> gene encoding an ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme exhibited the most stable expression in different plant tissues or in plants treated with various growth hormones. these results are also supported by the previous observation in which ubi <dig> showed a highly stable expression pattern in arabidopsis  <cit> . an ubiquitin gene  and a tua gene are the most stably expressed in plant tissue samples from poplar  <cit> . notably, the ubq gene is the most stably expressed in the parasitic plant orobanche ramose  <cit> . on the other hand, the expression of ubq <dig> and ef1α was the most stable among all the plant tissues of rice  <cit> . in potato, ef1α is also the most stably expressed in plants grown under biotic and abiotic stress conditions  <cit> . in addition, gapdh exhibited the most stable expression in different plant tissues of sugarcane  <cit> . although genes encoding ubiquitins and polyubiquitins are stably expressed in different plant tissues in several plant species, these genes may not be stably expressed in other plant species. the reference genes appear to be regulated differentially in different plant species and cell types or under different experimental conditions. therefore, no single reference gene with stable expression is suitable for normalizing all expression data obtained from various experimental conditions.

our data demonstrate that ubc <dig> and samdc are a reliable set of reference genes for normalizing gene expression data when multiple brachypodium samples are analyzed . in particular, ubc <dig> showed acceptable expression stability in all the plant samples examined. accumulation of the samdc transcripts is ubiquitous in different plant organs in brachypodium, including the callus, spike, root, leaf, and sheath. therefore, it is not surprising that samdc seems to be essential for embryo development in arabidopsis  <cit> . it is likely that gapdh and samdc play a housekeeping role in brachypodium growth and development.

while the genorm software is used to identify not only the most stable gene but also the optimum pair of genes with least variation in their expression ratios, the normfinder software is able to identify the gene with the most stable expression. our results lead us to propose that the mean data rendered by ubc <dig>  samdc, ubi <dig>  and ubi <dig> be used to normalize gene expression values in brachypodium more accurately. to our knowledge, this is the first systematic attempt to identify reference genes in brachypodium.

the brachypodium genome project is currently underway under the auspices of the us department of energy. a draft genomic sequence is expected to be released in the near future, which will trigger diverse molecular genetic studies on brachypodium as well as on related grass species. of particular interest is how the plant responds to environmental stresses. however, there is no report so far on the stress-responsive genes or those involved in growth hormone signaling in brachypodium. in this work, we searched for potential marker genes mediating stress responses and growth hormone signaling. most of the selected marker genes exhibited responses to abiotic stresses and growth hormones that were similar to those of the arabidopsis gene homologues, suggesting that the known stress-responsive genes and underlying molecular mechanisms in arabidopsis are conserved in brachypodium. one exception is the brachypodium rd <dig> gene. while the arabidopsis rd <dig> gene  is induced by aba and abiotic stresses, the brachypodium rd <dig> gene is repressed by aba, high salt, and drought . at least some brachypodium genes, such as rd <dig>  likely play a role that is characterized by molecular mechanisms distinct from those exerted by the arabidopsis gene homologues.

CONCLUSIONS
we identified several reference genes that are suitable for qrt-pcr data normalization in brachypodium. this is the first systematic exploration of valid reference genes in this plant species. although most of the selected candidate genes exhibited stable expression patterns acceptable for reference genes, different genes showed the highest stability in different plant samples. while expression of ubi <dig> and ubi <dig> was most stable in different plant tissues and growth hormone-treated plant samples, that of samdc was most stable under different environmental conditions. overall, ubc <dig> is our reference gene of choice for analyzing multiple brachypodium samples.

