BACKGROUND
given the inherent mutability of methylated cytosine, the human genome has only a fraction  of the cpg dinucleotides expected on the basis of its g+c content  <cit> . however, the resulting scarcity of cpgs is not uniform throughout the chromosome: there are many dna tracts , totaling 1% of the genome, where cpgs are abundant  <cit> . the lack of methylation at cgis, together with their elevated g+c content relative to the genome average, results in a frequency of cpg dinucleotides that is about 10-fold higher than in bulk dna  <cit> . about 60% of all genes have a cgi, normally unmethylated, in their promoter region  <cit> . however, in some physiological or pathological situations promoter-associated cgis can be methylated, then provoking a change in the expression of the associated gene  <cit> . the maintenance of a particular genomic pattern of methylated cpgs provides an epigenetic means for differential regulation of gene expression  <cit> .

approximately 80% of all cpgs are methylated in human and mouse genomes, which makes the hypomethylated and gc-rich cgis an outstanding genomic property. given their putative function in gene regulation and their importance as genomic markers in promoter prediction, over recent years there has been a considerable effort to predict cgis in silico. current algorithms  rely on the ad hoc thresholds of length, cpg o/e ratio and g+c content early defined by gardiner-garden and frommer  <cit> . these three thresholds lead to a parameter space which is relatively large and difficult to explore completely. consequently, in many publications, these parameters have been fine-tuned in different ways -for example, to filter out spurious alu elements or restricting the prediction to putative promoter cgis. however, in every fine-tuning, "valid" cgis also become filtered out, as a consequence of using the same parameters for both prediction and filtering; this suggests the use of different parameters in both steps, as proposed below in the cpgcluster algorithm. another shortcoming, shared by the algorithms using the conventional moving-window approach , but not by the cpg script  or cpged , is that the island boundaries cannot be accurately defined to single base-pair resolution. as is well known , the methods using a moving window add another level of subjectivity in choosing both the length of the window and the step size. taking this problem into account, the algorithm cpgcluster is able to predict the island boundaries to a single base-pair resolution by definition.

bulk cpgs are thought to be in a dynamic equilibrium between the decay of methylated cpgs and the generation of new ones due to point mutations  <cit> . this is a random process and therefore the cpg distance distributions should be strikingly different for bulk and island cpgs, which motivated our approach. in particular, the distances between consecutive bulk cpgs, as the result of a random process, should follow the geometric distribution, while the distance distribution for in-island cpgs must contain information on the high local clustering. taking advantage of this high local clustering of cpg dinucleotides at cgis, cpgcluster directly predicts clusters of cpgs on the chromosome. predicted clusters with high enough statistical significance can then be identified as cgis .

RESULTS
benchmarking cpgcluster
the accuracy of cpgcluster was evaluated by comparing it to five commonly used cgi finder programs . to benchmark the programs, a set of test sequences containing experimentally determined cgis in a random background was assembled, as described in the methods section. as in the gene-finding field  <cit> , the accuracy of a prediction was measured by comparing the predicted island value  with the true island value for each nucleotide along the test sequence, then deriving estimates for sensitivity , specificity  and the correlation coefficient . the averaged values over ten test sequences, each with  <dig> experimental islands randomly distributed over a randomized sequence, are shown in table  <dig>  when the threshold distance was set to the median of the observed distribution, cpgcluster showed moderate values for sn, while reaching the highest ones for both cc and sp. the high specificity achieved by our algorithm indicates that it has the lowest rate of false-positive predictions .

*hit: percentage of true islands overlapping  with predicted islands.

average accuracy values  of cpgcluster and other five cgi finders over  <dig> test sequences, each one with  <dig> experimental cgis. default parameters values, as recommended in the corresponding publications, were used for each program.

for these results, the median distance between neighbor cpgs and a p-value cutoff of 10- <dig> were used to run cpgcluster. as shown in the last row of table  <dig>  the raising of the distance threshold to the 75th percentile, thereby obtaining longer islands, increased sensitivity by more than 20% while only minimally improving overall accuracy. however, this led to a smaller fraction of cgi overlapping with phastcons . on the other hand, lowering the p-value threshold beyond 10- <dig> slightly increased sp but also clearly decreased sn, thus lowering overall global accuracy . consequently, the median distance was used as the only parameter for the island prediction and the 10- <dig> cutoff for the filtering in all subsequent analyses.

finally, we examined another accuracy indicator, the hit percentage, which gives the proportion of experimental cgis which have been at least partially overlapped by the predicted islands. table  <dig> shows that cpgcluster "hits" a higher number of islands than any other algorithm. this highest partial overlap , together with the highest specificity mentioned above, might indicate an advantage of cpgcluster over the other tested algorithms.

statistical analysis of predicted islands in human and mouse genomes
basic statistics of the cgis predicted by cpgcluster in the human  and mouse  genome assemblies are shown in table  <dig>  for comparison, this table also includes an analysis of the islands predicted by cpgprod. the number of cgis predicted by cpgcluster in both genomes is higher, and their average length shorter than those predicted by cpgprod or the ones previously reported in the literature . some of the short cgis predicted by cpgcluster might be spurious, but some others may play a true functional role . the spurious fraction may be due, for example, to the presence of arginine-rich exons, which are then rich in cgn codons, and therefore are prone to erroneous identification as cgis. comparing our prediction to annotated exon boundaries, we estimated this fraction to be relatively low .

*percentage of the genome covered by the cpg-islands.

basic statistics of the cpg-islands predicted by cpgcluster and cpgprod in the human  and mouse genomes .

the hypothesis that some short cgis could be truly functional is based on the fact that many known functional cgis are shorter than commonly assumed -the extreme example being xenopus cgis, which are known to be shorter and have a lower g+c content than the cgis found in mammals  <cit> . however, short and functional cgis exist also in the human genome. one example concerns the cgi of the human tissue-specific serpinb <dig> gene. the promoter of this gene is associated with a gc-rich region that, while fulfilling the conventional %g+c and cpg fraction defining criteria for cgis, is significantly shorter than the average  <cit>  and consequently goes unnoticed in most annotations  <cit> . to our knowledge, cpgcluster is the only algorithm capable of catching the core of this fully functional cgi . a second example refers to mage genes, which are found as antigens in a wide variety of tumors, and become methylated during normal mammalian development. they have a cpg-rich region 300– <dig> bp long at their 5' end that, although shorter than average cgis, remains nonmethylated in sperm but methylated in somatic tissues, where the genes are not expressed. therefore, these genes represent clear examples of tissue-specific genes that use dna methylation as a primary mechanism for their regulation  <cit> . the ability to detect the cpg-rich regions enabling this type of regulation is an important measure of quality for any cgi finder and was tested on ten mage genes having known tss . our algorithm detected cgis in eight of the ten mage genes analyzed, while the number of islands reported by the other programs in this gene set was significantly lower.

predicted cpg islands in  <dig> mage genes  and percentage of overlap between the cpg-islands predicted in the human chromosome  <dig> and both alu retrotransposons and phastcons .

the minimum length of a functional cgi is a difficult question, but insights can be derived from recent advances in mapping functional promoters. the shortest island in our prediction which overlaps with a tss from dbtss is  <dig> bp in length. when functional promoters are determined through chip-on-chip technology  <cit> , that length goes down to  <dig> bp. finally, when promoters are determined by using the cap analysis of gene expression  approach  <cit>  the minimum island length is just  <dig> bp long, thus approaching the minimum lengths observed in both derlab and cpgcluster databases. thus, it seems that even very short islands may be functional. also, it bears mentioning that short islands  predicted by cpgcluster which overlap with a tss also show a very high degree of overlap  with conserved elements , thus suggesting probable biological relevance.

further insight into the possible role of short cgis is suggested by the recent finding of cpg "islets", genomic regions that are not conventionally classified as cpg islands because of their short length , but have a gc content and observed-to-expected cpg ratio that is characteristic of a cpg island. cpg islets may be non-methylated, corresponding to sites of active transcription and/or boundaries that separate major centromeric chromatin sub-domains  <cit> .

all in all, these data support the possibility that genomic tracts with gc content and cpg obs/exp ratios typical of cgis, but below the detection threshold of conventional cgi finders, may have a functional role in the genome. cpgcluster represents a new tool that may help to uncover such regions.

minimal overlap between cgis predicted by cpgcluster and alu retrotransposons
a major source of uncertainty in cgi prediction is the interference of alu retrotransposons. these elements, abundant in primate genomes, have often been falsely identified as cgis by conventional cgi finders. to cope with this problem, some authors  <cit>  have proposed a simple increment in the value of some of the thresholds used. the drawback of such a strategy is that some cgis associated with genes would also be excluded under these more stringent criteria. even so, the fraction of alu overlap shown by the islands predicted by most programs is still rather large, while cpgcluster's cgis demonstrate the least amount of overlap with alu elements . we wish to stress especially that cpgcluster does not need any minimum-length criterion to exclude a higher proportion of alu elements than any of the previously existing algorithms tested.

highest degree of overlap between cpgcluster islands and phylogenetic conserved elements  from vertebrates
functional genomic elements, being under natural selection, are expected to be highly conserved during evolution. therefore, if the predicted cgis truly play a functional role, they should show a high degree of overlap with vertebrate phastcons  <cit> . taking advantage of the 'most conserved' track  at ucsc genome browser  <cit> , we computed the percentage of overlap between phastcons and the cgis predicted by the different finders. as seen in table  <dig>  the islands predicted by cpgcluster show the highest degree of overlap with phastcons, thus indicating that our algorithm predicts a higher proportion of evolutionarily conserved, functionally relevant cgis than does any other tested algorithm.

promoter and cpg island co-location
for a further quality assessment for the islands predicted by cpgcluster, we assigned them to five classes according to their co-location with annotated genes from the refseq database  <cit> . the classification proposed by ioshikhes and zhang  <cit>  was improved by using exon boundaries  to define the different classes. accordingly, we divided cgis into five classes defined as follows: l <dig>  the island overlaps with the tss; l <dig>  the island does not overlap with the tss but is located somewhere between  <dig> kb upstream of the tss and the end of the first exon; l <dig>  the island is located somewhere between the end of the first exon and the start of the last exon; l <dig>  the island is located between the start of the last exon and  <dig> kb downstream of the transcription end site ; ng, the island is outside the gene environment.

most of the islands predicted by cpgcluster are located outside of the gene environment . only  <dig>  in humans and  <dig>  in mice are within or around the genes. note, however, that the curate samples of refseq genes used in elaborating this table represent less than half of the existing genes in both species. when we analyzed the entire refseq database without any filtering, these percentages rose to  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. when genscan gene predictions, another well-known gene-finder track available at the ucsc genome browser, were considered, the percentages rose to  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. these results indicate that a substantial fraction of the cgis predicted by cpgcluster may overlap the putative, non yet confirmed genes predicted by this popular gene-finder.

*see text for a description of the different classes.

co-location of cpg islands predicted by cpgcluster and genes in human  and mouse  genomes.

in addition, two surprising observations were made in the mouse genome: 1) promoter islands have smaller cpg densities and cpg fractions than non-genic islands have; and 2) l <dig> islands, located mainly in the 3' untranslated regions , show a high proportion of phastcons overlap. it is well known that when mouse and human orthologous genes are compared, the mouse line shows a net loss of cpg islands  <cit> . this probably indicates a higher "pressure" on cgis in mice, which may account for these findings.

for a comparison, we also analyzed the co-location of genes with the cgis predicted by cpgprod . as shown in table  <dig>  the statistical properties of the cgis predicted by this finder are quite similar for mouse and human. however, as shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  cpgcluster predicts islands with striking differences between human and mouse, especially when looking at the co-location with genes. for example, mouse cgis overlapping with tss have lower cpg densities and obs/exp ratios than non-genic islands. we interpret these as being the true statistical properties of those islands , as cpgcluster does not predetermine these values in the detection process.

*see text for a description of the different classes.

co-location of the cpg islands predicted by the program cpgprod and genes in human  and mouse  genomes.

median and mean distances between cpgs, and average %g+c content for both, human and mouse chromosomes.

discussion
"stretches of dna with a high g+c content, and a frequency of cpg dinucleotides close to the expected value, appear as cpg clusters within the cpg-depleted bulk dna, and are now generally known as cpg islands". this original description of cpg islands by gardiner and frommer in  <dig>  <cit>  formulates the basic idea underlying the present work: cpg dinucleotides appear clustered within the cpg-depleted bulk dna and these clusters should be able to be associated with cpg islands. in the same work  <cit> , the above authors also proposed a criterion for cpg islands based on thresholds which later became the basic principle of practically all existing cpg island finders. they justify these criteria by assuming that cpg-rich regions over  <dig> bp in length are unlikely to have occurred by chance alone, which points out another important property of cpg islands implemented in this work: the statistical significance. some years before, mcclelland and ivarie  <cit>  had introduced a chi-square test to assign a statistical significance to cpg islands. therefore, our approach is probably more related to the original perception of cpg islands as statistically significant cpg clusters within cpg-depleted regions.

both our distance approach  and the threshold approach are derived from the same original idea stating that the cpgs form clusters in the genome. however, the main disadvantage of any threshold approach is that generally valid cpg islands may become discarded as well, an effect that is aggravated as the dimension of the parameter space grows. in our distance approach, we reduced the parameter space notably, furthermore linking the distance parameter to intrinsic statistical properties of the sequence. the chosen median distance between two cpgs in a given chromosome separates fairly well the cpg clustering from the inter-cluster distances  and therefore affords certain objectivity to the choice of this parameter. note furthermore that the median distance is correlated to the g+c content of the chromosome sequence. the higher the g+c content of the chromosome, the higher the probability that a cpg appears and consequently the lower will be the median distance. in this way, the median distance adjusts itself to the global conditions dictated by the given input sequence. this can hardly be achieved using the conventional large-dimension threshold parameter space and therefore, in previous work, the same threshold values were used indiscriminately for all the chromosomes.

the first consequence of the difference between the distance and threshold approaches is that, on average, cpgcluster islands are shorter. however, they show higher mean g+c content, cpg density, and cpg fractions than do any of the other five tested algorithms . the lower values shown by these threshold-based algorithms may be an inherited consequence of the general approach shared by most of them. to some extent, the chosen thresholds predetermine the statistical properties of the islands, since these usually become enlarged as long as the thresholds are not violated. this threshold-dependent enlargement in the search process may also lead to the observed over-prediction of cpg islands and high alu overlap shown by most threshold-based algorithms. on the contrary, cpgcluster overcomes this drawback since statistical properties of the cgis, such as g+c content or cpg fraction are not used as search parameters. note furthermore that the p-value is a crucial filter parameter to sort out spurious alu elements. young alus have p-values around 10- <dig> ; therefore, the high substitution rates on the alu cpg sites produce a fast loss of statistical significance, which explains the low overlap with spurious alu elements shown by the islands predicted by cpgcluster.

finally, we wish to discuss briefly the lack of any length filter in cpgcluster which allows the prediction of extremely short islands and which, at first glance, could be interpreted as a disadvantage. it should be noted that in all of the previous algorithms the length is not used for prediction purposes, and is considered only in the final filtering process. in fact, the original idea of the length threshold was to guarantee that the predicted islands are not just a mere product of chance alone. instead, we change the length filter by a statistically stricter criterion: the p-value. in this way, all predicted cgis are statistically significant cpg clusters. we are aware that the putative functional cgis are on average very long . however, it is important to stress the conceptual difference between the detection of cpg clusters and the subsequent filtering for a particular subset . these two steps should be clearly distinguished.

CONCLUSIONS
the distance-based cgi-finder algorithm described here presents three outstanding features: i) all the predicted cgis start and end with a cpg dinucleotide; ii) all the computations needed use integer arithmetic, thus leading to a fast and computationally efficient cgi finder, and iii) a p-value is associated with each of the predicted islands. when compared to other cgi finders,cpgcluster is able to predict cgis with the highest global accuracy and specificity, thus indicating a low rate of false-positive predictions. short but fully functional cgis are also predicted by cpgcluster. furthermore, the degree of overlap of predicted cgis with alu retrotransposons is minimal, while the overlap with vertebrate phastcons is maximal. the promoter cgis predicted by cpgcluster also show the highest statistical significance, thus qualifying cpgcluster as a valuable tool to distinguish functional cgis from the remaining islands in the bulk genome.

