BACKGROUND
understanding the connectivity of signalling pathways within organisms has always been an important challenge in biological research. one approach to address this is to study individual parts in vitro and look at protein localisation, homologies and co-expression in order to elucidate signalling pathway connectivity. another approach is to use genetics and mutants to attempt to work out the pathway connectivity in vivo.

more recently, systems biology approaches have used quantitative measurements to develop mathematical models that can be used for understanding the properties of biological signalling pathways and their connectivity  <cit> . these models are usually a result of cyclic mathematical model/experiment design iterations, which aim to yield maximum information about the system under study  <cit> . it is well known, however, that models of comparable complexity corresponding to different pathway connectivities may fit experimental data equally well, leaving the researcher with the dilemma of which model is correct  <cit> . the question of which model is correct is actually impossible to answer as model validation is a misnomer. the related question of which models are invalid can be answered if appropriate data are available, i.e. the inability of a model to reproduce a data set renders it invalid. applied in this way, model invalidation can be used to reduce the number of possible models  <cit> , hence narrowing down the number of possible network connectivities.

previous work in model invalidation emphasised the importance of using time-varying inputs to the system under study. one method of invalidation is to apply a dynamical input and try to maximise the difference in the phase shift of two competing deterministic models  <cit> . the disadvantage of this approach is that phase-shift is usually difficult to quantify, especially with noisy data. another approach is presented in  <cit> , where the authors develop a dynamic model-based controller and an input profile that drives the system output along a prescribed target trajectory. however, this approach requires the implementation of a controller in the laboratory which may prove difficult. other approaches for model invalidation are presented in  <cit> , and the references therein. these lack-of-fit methods are used to invalidate models in a statistical manner, but there can be problems with this approach as it relies on large data sets and focuses on obtaining reliable parameter estimates rather than network connectivities. there is also the issue that a wide range of model parameters could give a very similar model output and these methods would have difficulty coping with this.

in this paper we present a new method for developing mathematical models of biological signalling networks, aiming to understand biological network structure. given a set of experimental data, models corresponding to competing network connectivies are first constructed, all of which can explain wild type data equally well. then, experiments which maximally discriminate between models corresponding to different networks are designed systematically. these experimental results are used to invalidate models of these networks, resulting in a cyclic process which aims to produce a mathematical model corresponding to a signalling pathway structure which explains all available wild type and mutant experimental data. our method is applicable to biological pathways for which it is possible to experimentally modify the input profile and measure the output simultaneously. one such system is the chemotaxis signalling pathway, for which tethered cell experiments can be performed in a flow cell and used to measure the response of the system to dynamic ligand concentration profiles.

chemotaxis is the biasing of movement towards regions of higher concentrations of beneficial or lower concentrations of toxic chemicals by altering the frequency of flagella switching  <cit> . the signalling pathway within e. coli is well understood and is a simple circuit with one feedback loop  <cit> . the receptor in the system is a methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein  that senses ligands outside the cell. associated with the mcp is the histidine protein kinase called chea. binding of certain ligands to mcp decreases the auto-phosphorylation rate of chea. chea can transfer phosphoryl groups to two possible response regulators, chey and cheb. chey-p interacts with motor binding sites of the multiple e. coli flagella motors causing a change in direction. the receptors are constantly methylated by the action of a methyltransferase cher, while cheb-p acts as a methylesterase to demethylate the receptor, making it less responsive to ligand binding. this creates a feedback loop, allowing for adaptation. adaptation allows e. coli to react to changes of the concentration gradient of ligands and not to changes in concentrations per se. finally, chez acts to dephosphorylate chey and to terminate the signal.

chemotaxis pathways in other species are less well characterised and often contain multiple homologues of the e. coli system and sometimes proteins not found in the e. coli signalling pathway, for example, ched  <cit> . chemotaxis pathways in other species may also have a different connectivity - for example in s. meliloti, only one of the two chey homologues interacts with the motor, with the other chey acting as a phosphate sink  <cit> . another good example is the chemotaxis pathway in r. sphaeroides. this bacterium has three chemotaxis operons, two of which are expressed under normal laboratory conditions. proteins expressed from these operons have previously been shown to localise to discrete signalling clusters, one at the poles of the cell, similar to e. coli, and one in the cytoplasm  <cit> . this localisation is thought to prevent cross talk between the two clusters, allowing them to potentially signal separately. despite these data and corresponding data on the possible phosphotransfer patterns  <cit> , the way the signal is transmitted and integrated between the chemotaxis clusters to control flagella activity is currently unknown  <cit> . this is a good example of the difficulty of inferring a network structure from homology alone. the current known connectivity and protein localisation is shown in figure  <dig> 

in this paper, we apply our method of model invalidation to different possible and plausible connectivity structures in the chemotaxis pathway of r. sphaeroides. in particular, we use the model invalidation/experiment design cycle outlined above, in order to shed light on the signalling pathway in r. sphaeroides.

RESULTS
a method for discriminating between competing network models
a general method for designing experiments so as to render the outputs of candidate models as different as possible is described. these experiments can then be performed in the laboratory and, when compared to the model predictions, allow the invalidation of some of the candidate models, even when the experimental data set is noisy.

our method involves the development of ode models corresponding to different signalling pathway connectivities, all of which can explain current wild type experimental data equally well. the models have in common all currently known interactions and differ in that each model represents a new speculative pathway connectivity. some parameters in these models are known and some others are unknown. thus in principle, one can develop a "set" of models with uncertain parameters for a particular signalling structure, each member of this set representing the wild type experimental data equally well. we would want to discriminate between these "sets" of models  but since this is a very hard problem, our method uses a nominal model from each set and then designs an experiment in order to discriminate between these nominal models. once the discriminatory experiments between the nominal models are designed in silico, we a posteriori assess the discriminatory property of the stimulus by simulating the behaviour for many, randomly chosen, models within these sets in order to see whether the outputs from the two model sets remain distinguishable.

the discriminatory experiments were designed by initially determining the input profile that maximises the magnitude of the squared output difference between models over time. this is typically an optimal control problem, which is often laborious to solve and can result in an input profile that is difficult to realize experimentally  <cit> . in order to design the input profile in a numerically efficient manner, we used the following result from linear systems theory: for a linear time-invariant system, the input that produces the largest energy output given an input of fixed energy is a  sinusoid of a particular frequency  <cit> . the frequency can be obtained using a bode plot , a tool which is often used in control and systems theory  <cit> . thus, we first linearised the models and then determined this particular frequency of a sinusoidal input corresponding to the error system, i.e. the difference between the two models.

if the above method is insufficient to discriminate between the models then a further method of 'mutating' the two models in biological terms or changing parameters/initial conditions  in engineering terms is applied to achieve discrimination. these changes can be tested in silico to determine those which will discriminate best between the models under test, before undertaking experiments. the exact nature of the perturbation that can be performed will vary with the system being investigated, but could include altering protein levels by knockout, knockdown , protein over expression, etc. thus the space of perturbation which can be searched will be defined by what is possible to implement experimentally in the biological system under investigation.

the designed experiments can then be implemented and the data obtained from such laboratory experiments used to help us differentiate between the models under study, by invalidation. in the above procedure we used deterministic models and a worst-case input design procedure, therefore even if the data are noisy, we expected that we would still be able to invalidate some of these models.

determining pathway connectivity in r. sphaeroides chemotaxis
we applied our model invalidation method to elucidate unknown interconnections within the r. sphaeroides chemotactic signalling pathway. in vitro phosphorylation measurements have determined some of the internal connectivity and genetic work has shown that only chey <dig> and either chey <dig> or chey <dig> are required for motor switching and that chey <dig> can bind to the motor  <cit>  . whilst it has been shown in vitro that all cheys 1- <dig> can interact with flim, the rotor switch  <cit> , it is currently unknown whether chey <dig> and chey <dig> proteins cause flagella motor switching or whether some cheys have an effect on other parts of the signalling pathway to influence the motor indirectly, for example, by acting as a phosphate sink.

model creation and parameter estimation
we created a number of different models representing various plausible chey <dig>  chey <dig> connectivities within the chemotaxis system . each of these models contains all the currently known connectivities, shown in figure  <dig>  but differs in which unknown connectivity is considered. to allow each of our models to represent current, wild type observations equally well, we fitted the unknown parameters of each model  such that the error between model prediction and wild type data is small . these parameters represented the activation of the receptor on the chea , and the effect of and rate of methylation on the receptor . these values are currently unknown biologically. the fitting results in the models with different connectivities having different such parameter values.

we obtained the following values for the parameters for the different models :

• blue: k <dig> =  <dig>  k <dig> =  <dig>  and k <dig> =  <dig> 

• red: k <dig> =  <dig>  k <dig> =  <dig> and k <dig> =  <dig> 

• grey: k <dig> =  <dig>  k <dig> =  <dig>  and k <dig> =  <dig> 

• magenta: k <dig> =  <dig>  k <dig> =  <dig>  and k <dig> =  <dig> 

we assumed that these parameters are the same for the polar and cytoplasic clusters, so .

we used the pearson product-moment correlation coefficient as a measure of correlation between model prediction and data. for  <dig> ≤ t ≤  <dig> seconds, we found a good correlation between data and the predictions made by the models. for example, we obtained a coefficient of  <dig>  for the blue model and of  <dig>  for the red model.

to ensure our models can fit all current experimental data we then compared the output of all models to data previously determined for the deletion of various genes within r. sphaeroides  <cit> . one possible plausible connectivity contains chey <dig> and chey <dig> acting only as phosphate sinks, similar to the roles of the multiple chey's in s. meliloti  <cit> . however, the model representing this connectivity  was unable to fit mutant experimental data as it still showed chemotaxis in a chey3y <dig> deletion state . another possible connectivity where chey <dig> and chey <dig> can bind to chea <dig> preventing chey <dig> binding and hence phosphorylation was also considered . however, this connectivity was unable to fit experimental data as it remained chemotactic in a Δchey3y <dig> state . to strengthen our conclusion that both connectivities are invalid, we ran  <dig> simulations of the models lacking chey <dig> and chey <dig>  in which we allowed parameters k <dig> to k <dig>  to vary by ± 50%. we observed that, even when we allowed for greatly different parameter configurations, the connecitvities modelled by the magenta and grey models are still chemotactic, hence our invalidation is robust . as opposed to the grey and magenta model, the red and the blue model cannot be invalidated by above deletion data.

the reaction rates used for the models determined by fitting phosphotransfer in vitro experiments  <cit> . for some of these reaction rates the best fit is zero suggesting that these reactions do not occur in vitro.

we then designed an experiment to invalidate one or both of the remaining two models following the model-invalidation cyclic procedure described in the background section. as mentioned previously, we chose a sinusoidal input with a particular frequency to help discriminate between the models. using a bode plot showing the response of the difference of the outputs to a sinusoidal input with fixed amplitude, we determined an input frequency  in order to discriminate best between the remaining two models . we chose an input period of four minutes, which was both close to the optimal in terms of discrimination and easy to implement experimentally. we then ran simulations of the time evolution of the models with alternating step inputs mimicking a sinusoidal input of this period  to ensure that the difference in the outputs was sufficiently large to be accurately measured experimentally .

we observed that the difference between the outputs of the two models under consideration was insufficient to allow discrimination between the models experimentally using this discrimination technique. therefore, we sought experimental perturbations which resulted in a larger difference between the outputs of the different models. possible experimental perturbations in this system involve deletions of one or more components, over expression or under expression of a protein component and growth of the bacteria in different growth conditions; the latter results in large-scale changes of the expression of the chemotaxis operons and hence protein concentrations.

before experimental implementation, we tested the possible perturbations in silico. the over expression of chey <dig> was chosen as this resulted in a large difference in both the models' steady states and their dynamical behaviour . moreover, in order to ensure that this discrimination is not influenced by errors in determining parameter values, we confirmed that our findings are relatively robust to parameter changes. we allowed all parameters to vary by ± 15% and still observed the same clear difference in the behaviour of the models .

we then used iptg to experimentally induce the over expression of chey <dig> from an expression plasmid. the level of chey <dig> over expression as a population average was verified using semi-quantitative western blotting . we observed that when chey <dig> is over-expressed to five times the wild type level the tethered cell trace was similar to that of wild type cells ; this suggested that the model, in which the chey <dig> and chey <dig> or chey <dig> bind to the motor co-operatively  and do not have other interactions, is invalid, as it is unable to represent our new experimental data . since the red model, where there is an interconnection between chey <dig> and chey <dig> and the cytoplasmic cluster altering the chea <dig> kinase activity, can represent this data, it is the only model we cannot invalidate .

discussion
we have developed a methodology for elucidating biological signalling pathways which we applied to understanding the chemotactic signalling pathway in r. sphaeroides. our method differs from many other methods currently in use in that is based on manipulation and observation of the entire biological system under in vivo conditions and, importantly, offers a systematic approach to model invalidation based on cyclic model development/experiment design iterations. in particular, it does not aim at designing experiments for the refinement of parameter values, but rather at identifying possible interconnection structures. by doing so, our method considers a model representing a specific structure that it aims to invalidate.

we applied our method to a real biological system and successfully managed to invalidate some potential signalling pathway network models. thus, this method helped to more rationally consider the interconnectivity of the chemotactic signalling pathway in r. sphaeroides through relatively simple input-output experiments in vivo and helps to design rational future experiments.

the method is applicable to other biological systems but requires an experimental setup where it is possible to control the input and measure the output simultaneously. even with this limitation the method could be used for both pathway determination and parameter determination, where multiple models with different parameters could be systematically invalidated. our method could potentially be used to help annotate and understand signalling pathways in non-model organisms, using the information from model organisms as a guide for the first model generation step. these could then be tested and models invalidated. a parameter search could also be performed by creating models which deviate from the model organism data and then, through model invalidation, determining which parameter sets are able to fit the experimental data. in all these cases though, the input of the system must be under experimental control and the output easily measured.

a potential limitation would be the case in which two models from different network structures produce outputs that are indistinguishable under all potential experimental conditions. the problem in this case could lie with the particular properties of the network and their discriminatory nature - i.e., whether such differences in structure are identifiable from input-output experiments  <cit> . performing all calculations in silico before any experiments are undertaken is important in saving experimental time ensuring that experiments are only performed when the results will have discriminating property between the models under test.

in the system studied in this paper the modelling and experiment design was done on average cell traces for r. sphaeroides responses. the reason for this is that single cell behaviour is noisy, and in any case the model parameters we have available at the start of the procedure correspond to the average system behaviour. the total protein concentrations, for example, are the population average determined for these growth conditions. thus the model output is for the 'average' cell hence we compared the output to the average of the tethered cell data.

when constructing the models we used in vitro rates as it is very difficult, if not impossible to measure these rates in vivo. the multiple homologues in r. sphaeroides would prevent a fret assay such as the one applied to e. coli being used. thus the parameters are the best estimate of the real value. to allow for this uncertainty we considered models where these parameters were varied to ensure robust invalidation. also for simplicity in the modelling we did not consider the increased concentration of the cheas at specific points in the cell due to clustering nor the effects of clustering. this is because the exact concentration of chea in specific regions and the effects of clustering are currently impossible to measure experimentally. the fitted parameter k <dig>  which relates the activation of the ligand on the receptor, includes the effect of clustering and as such it is accounted for in our models. to ensure that this is robust we also allowed the concentration of the chea proteins to vary sufficiently and our invalidation conclusion was still correct.

interestingly, the connectivity that best fits the experimental data suggests that in r. sphaeroides chey3-p and/or chey4-p do not bind co-operatively with chey <dig> to flim. the model we have been unable to invalidate suggests that chey3-p and chey4-p form a link between the polar and cytoplasmic signalling clusters, helping transmit the signal between the two clusters. we have through modelling and comparing to experimental data invalidated a model representing the previously held hypothesis that chey <dig> and chey <dig> act only as phosphate sinks for the system. we have also invalidated a model with strict co-operative binding of chey's at the motor and as such our technique adds to the body of knowledge on r. sphaeroides chemotaxis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we have developed a control engineering method for elucidating biological signalling pathways and applied it to a real system. this method is based on multiple model creation and subsequent invalidation using in silico designed experiments. this is a general method that can be applied to other biological pathways where it is possible to control the input and measure the output in simultaneously. we used the method to invalidate all but one model for the chemotaxis signalling pathway in r. sphaeroides and in doing so have invalidated models of certain possible connectivities.

