BACKGROUND
strawberry  is among the most lucrative agricultural crops worldwide and its consumption has doubled since  <dig>  <cit> . the fruits are rich in bioactive phytochemicals, especially phenolic compounds with high antioxidant capacity, and as a part of daily diet could be beneficial for human health  <cit> . the conventional breeding programmes aiming at the combination of optimal composition of natural products with outstanding cultivation characteristics and disease resistance are facing a significant barrier caused by the octoploid genome of cultivated strawberry. breeding through genetic engineering offers a more straightforward strategy by allowing direct introduction of dominant traits to the parent cultivar. once stably integrated into strawberry genome, the transgene remains in the subsequent rounds of vegetative propagation through runners. the transgene is thus not lost from the complex genome, as might be the case in sexual propagation. since the first report on the in vitro regeneration of strawberry, resulting in the large-scale commercial micropropagation of a crop plant for the first time  <cit> , ample number of protocols for genetic engineering and in vitro techniques on strawberry has been developed. during the past few years several reports on improving transgenic strawberry production methods have been published  <cit> , and plants e.g. with better fruit firmness  <cit> , freezing tolerance  <cit>  and enhanced resistance to gray mold fungus  <cit>  have been achieved. all the reported procedures are usually fine-tuned for certain varieties. there is an apparent need for a widely applicable method that would be suitable for several different cultivars adapted for commercial strawberry production in different climatic conditions.

bioreactors have become an option for plant in vitro multiplication and have been applied for the production of several agricultural and forestry species  <cit> . a widely used technique is the temporary immersion bioreactor  where the liquid medium is applied in intervals to the plant material which is located on a separate compartment apart from the medium. the advantages of the tib systems have been well documented, and benefits have been shown both for reducing workload and thus cost, and for better plant performances by allowing a direct contact of the medium throughout the plant material and by renewing the culture atmosphere on each immersion  <cit> . application of the tib system for in vitro regeneration through organogenesis or somatic embryogenesis has been described e.g. for coffee  <cit> , pineapple  <cit> , tea  <cit> , banana  <cit>  and apple  <cit> . however, only one report has been published where this system was used as a part of regeneration process after agrobacterium mediated callus transformation  <cit> .

in all genetic modification experiments the first important step in the characterization of the putative transformants is to verify the integration of the introduced gene fragment. this is usually achieved by southern analysis which, however, requires a significant amount of dna and involves several time-consuming steps  <cit> . extraction of pure dna from sources such as strawberry, which contain high amounts of phenolic compounds and polysaccharides is challenging, as the compounds tend to attach to dna during purification and interfere with the subsequent enzymatic reactions  <cit> .

an alternative approach for the initial screening of transgenic events is to characterize the genomic dna regions flanking the t-dna insertion sites. thermal asymmetric interlaced pcr , a method originally described by liu and whittier in  <dig>  <cit> , is well applicable for this purpose. the strategy is to use nested, t-dna border region specific primers together with a shorter arbitrary degenerate primer for the unknown genomic dna region flanking the insertion site. such priming creates both specific and non-specific products, whose relative amplification efficiencies can be thermally controlled. in three serial pcr reactions the unspecific products are gradually diluted out and in the final reaction the specific products are detectable on the gel by the slight shift in size due to the nested priming on the t-dna region. since its development, tail-pcr has become an extremely valuable and versatile tool in all research involving recovery of unknown genomic sequences adjacent to known sequences and it has been utilized in functional genomics  <cit> , characterization of promoter sequences  <cit>  and also in the detection of genetically modified material in food  <cit> . the application of this technique for the initial screening of transgenic events has not been previously published.

in this report we describe the generation of transgenic strawberries in the tib system, and the applicability of tail-pcr for the detection of individual transgenic events at an early stage of plantlet development.

RESULTS
regeneration of transgenic strawberries in tib
by using several strawberry cultivars we have shown previously that the temporary immersion containers are a good environment for the regeneration and organogenesis of strawberry  <cit> . for the present studies cv. jonsok was chosen as it is a commonly cultivated scandinavian variety which has good frost tolerance and firm and aromatic fruits used both as fresh fruits and for processed products  <cit> . this cultivar could serve as a starting material for biotechnical improvement to develop elite strawberry varieties for northern latitudes.

the agrobacterium-mediated gene transfer protocol was started with standard co-cultivation of strawberry on semi-solid medium, followed by transfer to the tib containers for regeneration . the leaf pieces were placed in the container with  <dig> ml of medium, at the immersion frequency of ten seconds every four hours, and the medium was changed at two to three week intervals. the leaf pieces started to regenerate three weeks after the onset of the experiment, on average, and gradually produced new shoots as long as they were kept in the regeneration medium, which was usually eight weeks. strawberry regenerates in this medium as dense clusters of emerging shoots after a short callus phase. when tightly folded young leaves are used as starting material, the leaf pieces are often completely covered with regenerating plant material . at the stage where regeneration started and adventitious buds appeared, the pieces were transferred into another container, and the regeneration medium was supplemented with the selective antibiotic.

antibiotic regime in the tib system
in agrobacterium-mediated transformation, control of bacterial overgrowth with antibiotic is necessary, and total elimination of agrobacterium from the regenerating tissues is inevitable in order to avoid false positive signals in pcr. cefotaxime is the most effective antibiotic for controlling agrobacterium strain lba <dig>  <cit> . on the other hand,  <dig> mg/l of cefotaxime has inhibitory effect on the regeneration of shoots from leaf discs of the diploid strawberry species fragaria vesca and f. vesca semperflorens  <cit> . also in our studies, cefotaxime showed inhibitory effects on the regeneration of cv. jonsok, when tested on agar-based regeneration medium. at  <dig> mg/l, cefotaxime reduced the regeneration significantly and at  <dig> mg/l it caused severe necrosis and death of the leaf tissue . however, as the use of liquid medium facilitates an effective and rapid removal of the bacterium without the need of prolonged exposure, a concentration of  <dig> mg/l of cefotaxime was applied for two weeks in the present study. this short exposure did not inhibit the regeneration process but eliminated the bacterium effectively, as confirmed by the lack of amplification with virg gene-specific primers .

the most commonly used selectable marker genes in the genetic transformation of plants are nptii  and hpt , which confer resistance to kanamycin and hygromycin, respectively. both antibiotics have been used in strawberry transformation, and a variety of concentrations have been shown to be effective depending on the cultivar; kanamycin has been used frequently at the concentrations of 50– <dig> mg/l  <cit>  and  <dig> mg/l  <cit> . however, houde et al.  <cit>  used up to  <dig> mg/l of kanamycin for cv. chambly, while as low as  <dig> mg/l was effective for selecting transformants in a new cultivar lf <dig>  <cit> . in the case of hygromycin, a concentration of  <dig> mg/l has been applied  <cit> . also higher sensitivities to hygromycin have been reported, as  <dig>  mg/l was appropriate for cv. lf <dig>  <cit> , and  <dig> mg/l for the diploid fragaria vesca  <cit> . based on these studies, commonly used concentrations of kanamycin  and hygromycin  were chosen for the tib system. in the liquid culture conditions, kanamycin incurred only partial bleaching of the emerging shoots, still allowing growth and making it difficult to distinguish between the transformed and non-transformed shoots. on the other hand, hygromycin was effective, causing clearly distinguishable, severe tissue necrosis . as the impact of hygromycin was thus easier to monitor visually, it was chosen for the subsequent transformation experiments.

the inhibitory action of antibiotics on the onset of regeneration is well known, and for hygromycin it has clearly been demonstrated in soybean  <cit> . no shoot formation from agrobacterium-treated soybean tissue was observed, when the selection pressure was applied directly after co-cultivation. delaying the selection by  <dig> days allowed the generation of transformed shoots. we have a very similar experience with strawberry cv. jonsok based on several gene transfer experiments in which regeneration failed if the regeneration process was not induced either on semi-solid cultivation or in the tib system before the direct contact to the antibiotic. in the present study, antibiotic selection was started only after the emerging buds were visible . at this stage the leaf pieces were picked into another container and the regeneration medium was supplemented with  <dig> mg/l of hygromycin. the selective effect was visible within two weeks, the non-transformed senesced plant material being clearly distinguishable from the green and vital, putatively transformed shoots .

in order to eliminate possible chimeras and non-transgenic escapes from transgene tests, an iterative selection phase with gradually increasing concentration of the selective agent has been claimed as essential for accomplishing pure transgenic strawberry lines. since first described by mathews et al.  <cit> , the iterative selection method has been applied for transgenic strawberry production also by other researchers  <cit> . in our study, one more renewal of the regeneration medium was done after selecting the transformants with  <dig> mg/l hygromycin, and the concentration of hygromycin was increased to  <dig> mg/l. with this regime, the putative transformants remained viable and the best shoots started to initiate roots . the number of transgenic regenerants from one tib container with the leaf mass from two to three folded leaves varied from two to ten. in this experiment, five tightly folded young leaflets were used as starting material, and altogether  <dig> regenerants were transferred to soil. of the regenerants,  <dig> were transgenic based on hptii-pcr, which indicates that the selection with  <dig> mg/l hygromycin followed by  <dig> mg/l hygromycin was effective in distinguishing the transgenic plantlets from the non-transformed ones, although even a higher hygromycin concentration in the second selection round might further decrease the number of non-transgenic escapes. after the selection phase, the plantlets were left in the tib containers with ms medium until shoot formation was vigorous and root formation visible, followed by the acclimatization and planting to soil. there is no evidence of chimerism after several rounds of runner propagation, as all the vegetatively propagated runner plantlets have been transgenic based on pcr screening.

application of the medium in liquid form brings the active components into effective contact with the treated plant material. a close contact with antibiotics promotes effective selection, which has been reported in ryegrass with hygromycin  <cit> . in that study, the recovery efficiency of transformed hygromycin-resistant clones was higher when the antibiotic was applied in liquid medium  rather than in semi-solid medium .

dna purification from strawberry leaves
a wealth of reports are available for the extraction of dna from strawberry tissues, but none of them has proven to be applicable for all cultivars, and no single practice among different laboratories exists  <cit> . gaining pure dna from strawberry is difficult because of the high content of interfering phenolic compounds and polysaccharides. pre-treatment with polyvinylpyrrolidone  or polyvinylpolypyrrolidone  before dna precipitation to bind the phenolic components before dna precipitation has been suggested as a helpful step in the purification process  <cit>  but to our experience the recovered dna may not be sufficiently pure for enzymatic reactions. the main factor affecting the quality of dna obtained from strawberry leaf, which is the part in the developing plantlet normally used for dna extraction, is the age of the leaf. we have used a commercial dna extraction kit for purifying dna from mature, dark green leaves and from young, pale green folded leaves. when a maximum amount of starting material  is loaded in the kit, dna with the a260/a <dig> absorbance ratio of  <dig> , characteristic for pure dna without contaminating proteins, and a260/a <dig> value above  <dig> , illustrating the absence of phenolic compounds, can be routinely achieved from the young leaves. however, when the same amount of dark green mature leaves is used, the typical value of a260/a <dig> is  <dig>  and the value of a260/a <dig> is below  <dig>  indicating the presence of contaminating compounds. also the total yield of dna from young tissue is higher , as the dna content is higher in young leaves due to a smaller cell size. thus, based on our experience on cv. jonsok, the main difficulties in dna extraction can be overcome by the careful choice of starting material. the most suitable plant part is the folded young leaf, since it has lower amount of interfering compounds and higher content of dna compared to the mature leaf. furthermore, purification of dna with a kit is rapid, and the small amount of leaf material  needed is easily obtained from a very young plantlet. pure dna can be recovered when the final elution volume of the kit is adjusted to the amount of starting material.

analysis of t-dna integration
screening of positive transformants by southern analysis is time-consuming and involves several steps, including extraction of large amount of pure dna. in order to get enough dna  for southern analysis from one putative transformant, either several emerging leaves need to be collected or the plant needs to be multiplied via runner proliferation. both ways are time-consuming and the genotyping of a set of transgenic strawberries may take the entire first growing season. nevertheless, a careful monitoring of each individual is inevitable to distinguish between the different transgenic events, because the regeneration of strawberry typically occurs from tight clusters of emerging shoots, which can originate from the same agrobacterium-transformed cell. with a technique that involves cloning of the dna, a small amount  of dna is sufficient and easily achievable already from a very small plantlet by commercial plant dna extraction kits. once pcr-grade pure dna sample is extracted, it serves as a template for preliminary screening of positive transformants, and can subsequently be used for tail-pcr analysis to verify independent transformants.

strawberry genomic dna flanking the inserted t-dna left border was cloned by tail-pcr using three nested t-dna-specific primers  together with four arbitrary degenerate primers . the products from the three tail-reactions were separated on agarose gel, and the specific products were identified on the basis of size shift and absence of similar products from the wild type sample . the specific bands were cut out from the gel and sequenced. all of the ten individual plants characterized gave specific tail-pcr products with at least one of the four arbitrary primers, ranging in size between 300– <dig> bp. when the products were sequenced, only three different sets were found, which suggests that several transgenic shoots have emerged from the same callus cluster originating from a single transformed cell. for one of the three lines , as many as three arbitrary primers gave specific products and, when sequenced, showed a single t-dna insertion primed by three arbitrary primers, proving well the suitability of this set of arbitrary primers for strawberry genomic dna . for another transformant, two different sequences were obtained from the reactions with two different arbitrary primers, suggesting two separate insertion sites .

rearrangements, such as duplication or translocation of the target genome sequence and insertion of filler dna, are commonly observed in the t-dna junction site as a result of illegitimate recombination during the integration process  <cit> . in the t-dna/strawberry dna junction such rearrangements were also seen. sequencing of three different t-dna junction sites all indicated different arrangements  showing the imprecise and poorly conserved junction typical particularly for the left border insertion site of t-dna  <cit> . a short segment of vector dna from the t-dna left border region was usually present . a  <dig> bp duplication of the t-dna border region was detected in one of the transformants, with a  <dig> bp filler dna fragment of unknown origin .

with tail-pcr, already the different amplification patterns seen on agarose gel provide information about the different transgenic lines, enabling one to confirm the presence of separate transformation events already within a few days from the first dna extraction of the shoots. whenever the junction sites need to be further characterized, the cloned t-dna-flanking dnas can be extracted from the gel and sequenced. compared to southern analysis, this method does not give conclusive information about the number of insertions in the individual tranformants. tail-pcr may produce several sequences and indicate several insertion sites, but there may still be some insertion sites that do not give products in tail-pcr. for accurate copy number, southern analysis is still a proper method of choice.

for the safety assessment of genetically modified crop plants, sequencing of the transgene junction sites may be required  <cit> . tail-pcr provides a convenient way to generate these data and gives a good basis for the molecular level selection of the "cleanest" transformation events for further commercial development. further applications of tail-pcr in strawberry research include t-dna mutagenesis research for both reverse and forward genetics purposes. such studies are ongoing with the diploid strawberry fragaria vesca  <cit>  and the results shown in this report by octoploid fragaria × ananassa suggest that tail-pcr could be used for the diploid relative as well. overall, the method can be utilized for resolving the structure of genes in the rosaceae plant family.

CONCLUSIONS
development of transgenic plants is an indispensable tool both in functional genomics research and also in modern plant breeding. for many plant species, protocols have been developed to generate transformants, some plants being more amenable for transformation and regeneration than others. the tib system proved to be a suitable environment for the generation of transgenic strawberries and provides, as a labour effective method, an easy and convenient system presumably applicable for other plants as well. while in our case it proved to function for a recalcitrant plant, it can reduce workload also in the case of routine gene transfers by allowing more convenient handling of plant material.

verification of the presence of transgene in the plant genome and distinguishing between the independent transformation events can be time-consuming, as usually large amount of dna is needed to accomplish the analysis. a method that involves cloning of the target sequence enables the analysis from a smaller amount of plant material. with tail-pcr, distinguishing between different transgenic lines is possible already from the first plantlet. with the combination of tib and tail-pcr, an effective system can be set up for the generation and characterisation of transformed plants, exemplified here by strawberry.

