BACKGROUND
life is organised in a hierarchical fashion. genes are organised on chromosomes, chromosomes in nuclei, organelles in cells, cells in individuals, and individuals of different species in mutualisms and individuals of the same species in colonies. entities thus form groups that can become a new unit of selection  <cit> . however, as long as the constituent entities have some autonomy, lower-level selection can oppose higher-level organisation. for example, selection for fast replication among the cells of multicellular individuals can lead to cancer. also ‘organelle cancers’ have been discovered that decrease cell fitness and are caused by selection among mitochondrial genomes for fast replication within cells or increased transmission  <cit> . to understand the emergence of higher levels of biological organisation we must understand how the interests of lower-level units became united and the relative importance of selection shifted towards a higher level of biological organisation.

in this article, we study the potential for multi-level selection in the mutualistic fungi cultivated by fungus-growing termites. to what extent does natural selection operate within individuals  of these fungi? fungus-growing termites form colonies consisting of thousands of sterile individuals, which cultivate a fungus inside their colony, housed in multiple connected fungus gardens. the termite colonies are founded by a single reproductive pair, and most species rely on horizontal acquisition of fungal symbionts  <cit> . new colonies thus start without a fungus and acquire their fungal symbiont from the environment as basidiospores . these spores are produced by the sexual fruiting bodies, the mushrooms, which generally are produced seasonally, a few weeks after the termite nuptial flight period  <cit> . in contrast to this sexual fungal propagation when new colonies start, fungal propagation within the nest is always asexual, via the continuous propagation of asexual spores . all colonies screened so far contained a single-strain monoculture of termitomyces [e.g.  <cit> .

natural selection on termitomyces fungi potentially not only acts at the level i. of the colony, but also ii. of fungus gardens within colonies, iii. of fungal individuals  within fungus gardens and iv. of nuclei  within fungal individuals . we address the potential for selection at the level of nuclei within termitomyces .

fungal individuals  deviate from other multicellular organisms in three key respects. first, mycelia are not strongly compartmentalised and compartments usually contain multiple haploid nuclei, which can cross the boundaries of compartments  <cit> . second, fungal mycelia have a modular organisation and each fragment can reproduce via fission or the formation of asexual spores. third, fungal mycelia can fuse so that organelles may disperse from one mycelium to another. these characteristics favour selection at the level of the nucleus, and experimental evidence has been found for this hypothesis  <cit> . termitomyces cells in particular are multinucleate with up to  <dig> nuclei per cell and thus do not regulate the precise number of nuclei per cell  <cit> . this is in sharp contrast to most other basidiomycetes, which have special adaptations such as clamp connections to regulate the number and kind of haploid nuclei to be precisely two per cell  <cit> . we thus hypothesise that termitomyces is prone to nucleus-level selection. in the termitomyces life cycle, selection at the level of the nucleus potentially occurs at two stages. first, in the sexual life cycle, if more than two homokaryons meet, multiple nuclei may compete within the mycelium to become part of the heterokaryon that ultimately becomes the dominant strain of a colony . second, during the asexual stage, nuclei with a replication or a segregation advantage during spore formation can be selected . crucially, nucleus-level selection may favour a nuclear variant even if this variant decreases mycelial fitness, as has been shown in other fungi  <cit> . to test the hypothesis that termitomyces is prone to nucleus-level selection, we performed competition experiments among multiple nuclei, using mixtures of homokaryons and following nuclear segregation in the asexual spores of heterokaryons.

RESULTS
patterns of sexual compatibility between homokaryons
using protoplast regeneration, we obtained five homokaryons from three heterokaryons of the termitomyces sp. associated with the termite species macrotermes natalensis . these five termitomyces homokaryons were compatible when paired in all  <dig> pairwise combinations, and led to the formation of a stable heterokaryon. pairing occurred in a characteristic fashion different from most other basidiomycetes. in all cases, the growth morphology of the contact zone changed, and formed a thick ridge . genetic analysis of this interaction zone and of both sides of the pairing showed that only the interaction zone had become heterokaryotic, while the rest of the mycelia had remained homokaryotic. heterokaryons were thus formed upon fusion between the two homokaryons in the contact zone, without the subsequent nuclear migration observed in most other basidiomycetes  <cit> .

growth patterns of homokaryons and heterokaryons
overall, heterokaryons had a significantly higher growth rate than homokaryons . for  <dig> of the  <dig> combinations of two nuclei, the mycelial growth rate of the heterokaryon was higher than the average of its two component homokaryons. the only exception was heterokaryon cd, which had a lower growth rate than both its constituent homokaryons c and d. a more conservative, non-parametric test, assuming an equal probability of a higher or smaller growth rate of the heterokaryon than that of the mean growth rate of its two component homokaryons, already gave a significant result .

the production of asexual spores by homokaryons was always lower than that by heterokaryons. however, especially for homokaryons, nodule formation was highly unstable, ranging from absent to a few nodules for the same strain under the exact same growing conditions, so we refrained from quantification. the generated heterokaryons showed significant differences in nodule formation although generally the variance between replicates within strains was high .

patterns of heterokaryon formation and subsequent selection
the initial stages of a fungus comb originating from sexual spores collected from the environment were simulated under laboratory conditions by mixing the homokaryons both in equal and in unbalanced proportions . after one week, the asexual spores formed were harvested and 10% was inoculated on new plates .

in most cases, the homokaryons were rapidly heterokaryotized. however, importantly, we never found a heterokaryon with more than two nuclei. already at the first harvesting, the proportion of remaining homokaryons usually was small, although some replicates retained up to 30% homokaryons. surprisingly, on some plates, a small proportion of homokaryons remained until the third harvest . as expected, over the course of multiple harvestings, diversity significantly decreased  leading to the dominance of a single heterokaryon in the mixture. furthermore, at the end of the experiment, a significantly different diversity was observed between the two treatments with different starting frequencies. if one homokaryon was in the majority, diversity decreased faster than if the initial mixture consisted of equal frequencies of homokaryons. this shows that although the ultimate result will likely be a single heterokaryon, the speed of this transition depends on the initial situation. the dominant heterokaryon always consisted of the nucleus from the majority homokaryon, associated with a specific nucleus . when this nucleus was in the majority homokaryon itself , the resulting heterokaryon was the same heterokaryon that became dominant in the mixes with no single most frequent homokaryon .

nuclear composition of asexual spores
the number of nuclei per asexual spore was determined for the two heterokaryons ad and de by comparing the fluorescence image showing the nuclei and the normal bright field image showing the cell walls and septa between adjacent cells. the average number of nuclei was similar in the asexual spores of both tested heterokaryons, with a higher deviation from evenness in the spores originating from heterokaryon de . obviously, an odd number of nuclei in a spore implies a deviation from a 50% ratio of both nuclei in that spore.

the image on the left shows two nuclei in a spore and the one on the right five nuclei in a spore, as revealed by nuclear staining with dapi. this implies that the nuclear distribution in the asexual spores can deviate from 50%. note that the proportion of even nuclei per spore varies greatly between the two tested heterokaryons.

considering a mode of three nuclei per asexual spore, the nuclear identity of  <dig> single spore cultures is sufficient to show, with a probability of 95%, that the absence of homokaryons in the sample is higher than expected if nuclear segregation occurs randomly . likewise, for a mode of four, a sample of  <dig> single spore cultures is needed. we genotyped  <dig> single spore cultures per generated heterokaryon and no single homokaryon was found, meaning that all asexual spores analysed contained the two nuclear types.

discussion
natural selection simultaneously acts at different levels in the hierarchy of life. to explain higher levels of biological organisation, we need to understand how the relative importance of lower-level selection decreased. a colony of fungus-growing termites is a nice illustration of the hierarchical nature of life . earlier research had shown that an adult termite colony is associated with a single clone of termitomyces <cit> . however, the extent to which within-mycelium selection among multiple nuclei could occur was still unknown. here we clearly show that the scope for selection at the level of the nucleus is restricted in the termitomyces species associated with the termite macrotermes natalensis. only during mating, a homokaryon may have a preference for a particular nucleus, which can be considered as an example of ‘female choice’  <cit> . below we outline in more detail the consequences of the reported results for the evolution of this mutualism and for multi-level selection in general.

in contrast to most basidiomycete fungi, termitomyces has no nuclear migration
pairwise interactions between the five different homokaryons of termitomyces sp. showed that these were sexually intercompatible in all combinations, confirming that the termitomyces strains associated with the termite species macrotermes natalensis all belong to a single biological species  <cit> . the high degree of sexual intercompatibility implies a high diversity of mating-type alleles, similar to most basidiomycetes studied so far  <cit> . in contrast to most other basidiomycetes, however, there is no nuclear migration following fusion among the tested termitomyces sp. homokaryons. it is tempting to ascribe this difference with non-cultivated heterothallic fungi to their symbiotic lifestyle. the way the fungus is cultivated by inoculating asexual spores in a high density  <cit>  implies that opportunities for fast radial growth and extensive nuclear migration in an established colony are limited. instead, there is a premium on fast reproduction, as this increases the representation in the next inoculum. assuming a trade-off between nuclear migration and fast reproduction, selection for fast reproduction implies selection against nuclear migration or, alternatively, the absence of selection for nuclear migration may have eroded the genes required for nuclear migration. instead of nuclei migrating themselves throughout the mycelium, termites thus accomplish nuclear migration by transporting the nuclei via the asexual spores throughout the fungus comb, which then may grow out and produce new spores, or additionally donate one of their nuclei to unfertilised mycelia via so-called buller pairings  <cit> . a different species, agaricus bisporus, does not show nuclear migration either  <cit> . however, this species is secondarily homothallic, so that spores normally contain two compatible nuclei, and the frequency of outcrossing is low  <cit> . therefore, and similar to termitomyces sp., there is no strong selection on nuclear migration in that species.

mycelia consist of two, and never more than two, nuclei
most basidiomycete fungi have mechanisms to regulate the distribution of the nuclei in a heterokaryotic mycelium, leading to a so-called dikaryon, with precisely two genetically different nuclei per cell  <cit> . since termitomyces species do not regulate the precise number of nuclei per cell  <cit> , we inferred that mycelia of termitomyces might consist of more than two genetically different nuclei. this has been observed in another species with multinucleate cells, heterobasidion annosum, where mycelia with three nuclear types have been isolated  <cit> . in contrast to the latter observations, however, all heterokaryons examined in this study always consisted of two genetically different nuclei, and never more than two. this is consistent with the evidence obtained so far based on sequence data of natural heterokaryons of termitomyces <cit> . therefore, despite the absence of regulation of the number of nuclei per cell, the identity of nuclei is strictly regulated, and the stable coexistence of more than two nuclei in a single mycelium is precluded.

heterokaryons produce more spores and have a higher growth rate than homokaryons
although it is often assumed that heterokaryons have a higher competitive fitness than homokaryons, empirical data give mixed results. for example, whereas simchen and jinks  <cit>  found higher growth rates for heterokaryons of schizophyllum commune, clark and anderson  <cit>  found the opposite. hiscox and co-workers  <cit>  found comparable competitive abilities among homokaryons and heterokaryons in the species trametes versicolor. in this study, overall, heterokaryons had a significantly higher growth rate than homokaryons, although the differences were small. furthermore, heterokaryons consistently produced more asexual spores than homokaryons . this implies that even if a nucleus would ‘escape’ from the heterokaryon to form a homokaryon, this homokaryon would be out competed by heterokaryons over time. we have earlier shown that positive frequency-dependent selection occurs among heterokaryons  <cit> . we now show that -under the conditions of our experiment- spore production and to a lesser extent growth rate are determining factors for the success of a heterokaryon starting with equal frequencies:

1) the most successful heterokaryon of all ten heterokaryons , winning almost all the competitions, produced most spores, but had the lowest growth rate. this suggests that spore production may be more important than mycelial growth rate during the heterokaryotic stage;

2) the next most successful heterokaryons -de and ad- both had a high growth rate and moderate to high spore production.furthermore, our experiments show that being in the majority as a homokaryon, guaranteed the presence of that nucleus in the most dominant heterokaryon at the end of the experiment. strikingly, nucleus d was part of all the most successful heterokaryons. homokaryon d was the only homokaryon that consistently produced spores . this suggests that spore production during the homokaryotic stage may also be of relevance.

almost certainly, growth rate and spore production will differ on natural substrates and, therefore, the ranking of heterokaryons as well. for example, nodules not only are a source of new inoculum and food, but also of fungal enzymes, which are mixed with the substrate  <cit> . this means that other heterokaryons may have a selective advantage on different substrates and under different conditions than the strains here. however, our experiments demonstrate the consequences of selection on the basis of asexual spore production, and that there is limited scope for nuclear competition within mycelia.

nuclei cannot cheat by monopolising the spores
despite extensive sampling effort, we have not found any homokaryotic spore from heterokaryotic cultures. we therefore conclude that no nuclear segregation occurs among asexual spores. in other fungi with a less strict control of the number of nuclei per cell, such cases have been documented  <cit> . so, although the number of nuclei per cell  <cit>  and per asexual spore are not strictly regulated and the frequencies of both types often differ, the asexual spores of a heterokaryotic culture always receive both nuclear haplotypes. nuclear distribution among spores thus appears to be regulated by some unknown mechanism.

the homokaryon stage is short-lived in nature
our results demonstrate that, starting with a mixture of homokaryons, heterokaryons with two nuclei arise quickly. subsequently, drift and positive frequency dependent selection are likely to lead to a single heterokaryon, and all colonies studied so far indeed had a single heterokaryon  <cit> . the symbiont units among which competition occurs thus primarily are the heterokaryons, and not the homokaryons nor the nuclei within mycelia. the scope for selection between homokaryons and between nuclei during the start of a colony, when sexual interactions occur between multiple homokaryons, is therefore limited. only during mating, a homokaryon may have a preference for a particular nucleus, which can be considered as an example of ‘female choice’  <cit> .

in the light of these results, it is striking that sometimes homokaryons persisted up to the 3rd harvesting. however, in pairwise interactions between homokaryons, we noticed that successful mating became less frequent in later stages of the experiment . although we do not have an explanation for this finding, this reduction in successful mating could explain the long-term persistence of homokaryons in our experiments.

increases in ploidy are a common theme in mutualistic symbionts
it remains to be demonstrated to which extent the presence of multinucleate cells and spores, which are different than their non-mutualistic sister groups  <cit> , are functionally related to the mutualistic lifestyle of this fungus. however, it is remarkable that completely unrelated symbionts in other mutualisms show convergent increases in ploidy. for example, the unrelated fungi cultivated by leaf-cutting ants, also lack mechanisms to restrict the number of nuclei per cell to two, and have multinucleate cells . furthermore, in other examples of mutualistic symbiosis, such as between plants and arbuscular mycorrhizas, the ploidy of the fungal symbionts also has dramatically increased with many nuclei per cell and per asexual spore . this pattern of increased ploidy in symbionts can even be seen in the two main classes of endosymbionts in eukaryotic cells, plastids and mitochondria, which have highly increased ploidy levels with around  <dig> genomes per endosymbiont  <cit> . even our own crops fit into this general picture, as most of them are polyploids  <cit> . this striking similarity between completely independent examples of mutualistic symbiosis suggests that increased ploidy of symbionts has been selected as a consequence of a symbiotic lifestyle, possibly because of increased demands from the host on productivity of the symbionts and relaxation of the selective constraints found in non-mutualistic relatives. despite the high number of nuclei per cell and per spore, however, our study demonstrates that there are only two kinds of haploid nuclei per individual.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that the scope for selection at the level of the nucleus for the mutualistic fungi cultivated by fungus-growing termites is restricted, despite a less strict regulation of the number of nuclei per cell and per asexual spore:  <dig>  heterokaryons produced more asexual spores than homokaryons, showing that any homokaryotic escape from a heterokaryotic culture would be outcompeted;  <dig>  nuclei cannot monopolise the asexual spores as asexual spores from heterokaryons always had both nuclei;  <dig>  in contrast to most other basidiomycete fungi, no nuclear migration occurred upon mating between homokaryotic mycelia;  <dig>  despite extensive efforts, i.e. by maximising contact between multiple compatible homokaryons in a high density, the resulting heterokaryons always had two and never more than two nuclei.

