BACKGROUND
colorectal cancer  is one of the most common forms of cancer in the world  <cit> . crc can be cured if diagnosed at early stage using endoscopic examination  <cit> , making early non-invasive screening a crucial aim. the development of crc results from the progressive accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations leading to the transformation of normal colonic epithelium to colon adenocarcinoma  <cit> . fecal-occult blood test  is the most widely used method of screening for crc  <cit> . however, fobt lacks sensitivity as well as specificity for screening an average risk population. epigenetic alterations have been found frequently in neoplastic diseases  <cit> . it has been reported that the analysis of dna methylation carried out in body fluids represents a valuable source for the discovery of cancer biomarkers  <cit> . prior studies showed that the hypermethylation can be detected in tumor-derived dna found in the serum  <cit>  and stool  <cit>  of patients with crc. more recently, we proposed a panel of three hypermethylated genes  as potential biomarkers for the early diagnosis of crc in tissue and blood samples, based on qm-msp assay  <cit> . however, these studies show that the sensitivity of detection must be improved for the application in diagnostic routine. for this reason, the analysis of aberrant methylation in stool dna might provide a novel strategy for early detection of crc. the ahquist’s team demonstrated that blood invasion is more common in advanced stages of crc where an earlier exfoliation of adenoma and/or tumor cells into the colonic lumen  <cit> . moreover, davies rj and colleagues showed that the number of colonocytes in the stool following exfoliation from malignant lesions is about 4– <dig> fold greater than from normal tissue  <cit>  with a mean concentration of 100 ng/g stool, corresponding to  <dig> % of the total dna  <cit> . however, the composition of feces is highly complex including pcr inhibitors . it has been reported that the presence of inhibitors can dramatically reduce the sensitivity and amplification efficiency of pcr  <cit> . as a consequence, consistent extraction of high-quality dna from fecal samples can be quite challenging, because of the presence of pcr inhibitors that are co-extracted with dna. spermidine is a polyamine that has previously been reported to facilitate stool dna amplification by inhibiting pcr inhibitors  <cit> .

here, we investigated the stimulating effect of spermidine as pcr facilitator for detecting tumor-specific methylated markers in stool dna.

RESULTS
using the alb gene to test pcr specificity to bisulfite sequencing; checking about absence of interference with pcr ampilication of the npy, penk and wif genes
we performed bisulfite sequencing of the entire amplification products in presence and absence of spermidine using nucleic sequences obtained from the albumin  gene . in figure 1a, we have represented the sequencing electrophoregram of the alb promoter, as assessed by using sg rt-pcr from c <dig> and s <dig> with 1 mm spermidine. we observed that thymidine are detected instead of cytosine, as expected after dna bisulfite modification of unmethylated amplicon products, since they correspond to a region of alb which does not contain cpg sites. those findings indicate that all cytosine are converted to thymine as a result of the dna modification step being performed successfully and that the spermidine do not interferes in the specificity of pcr. we also verified that spermidine does not interferes the pcr amplification of npy, penk and wif <dig> genes into of cpg rich regions .figure  <dig> verification and comparison of pcr amplification products of the albumin gene in presence and absence of spermidine. a: representative bisulfite sequencing electrophoregram of the alb promoter using sg rt-pcr in presence of 1 mm spermidine from universal methylated human dna  and stool dna sample . all cytosine are converted to thymine noted in red resulting entirely from dna modification. this follows after sodium bisulfite treatment  when referring to wild-type  alb gene sequence and b: the same pcr products of the alb were analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis and revealed single amplification fragment of the predicted size  when spermidine is present  and absence ; ntc as negative control.



comparing alb pcr products with and without utilization of spermidine
on agarose gel electrophoresis, we observed, in control  and sample  dna, the 76 bp band confirming the existence of alb gene with or without the presence of spermidine . figure 1b, shows the dna migration from c  and s  with and without 1 mm spermidine addition to the reaction mixture. as expected, we noted a correspondence between band intensities and ct values with s <dig>  and s <dig>  and not with c <dig>  and c <dig>  . the negative template control  was negative, indicating that it was not nonspecific primer binding or contamination using 1 mm spermidine and also in presence of various concentrations of spermidine, ranging from 1 mm to 10 mm .table  <dig> 
pcr efficiencies in presence and absence of spermidine



1st experiment
sperm.
ct
∆ct
ae 
effects ?
abbreviations: sperm., spermidine ; ct, mean of cycle threshold value ± standard deviation value; ae, amplification efficiency; na, non amplification; nd, not determined; =, equal; −, inhibitor; +, facilitator.

the amplification efficiency of the albumin gene at each spermidine concentration points was calculated using 2-Δct where Δct =  – . for example in the 1st study, control dna with 1 mm of spermidine showing a Δct =  <dig> , we recovered 96% of the true yield .



impact of spermidine on the melting curves of pcr products of alb gene
in figure  <dig> are represented the melting curves of amplicons of the alb gene using spermidine in sg rt-pcr from c  and s . we highlight in figure 2c the melting curves of c and s in presence  and absence  of 1 mm spermidine. both, c <dig> and s <dig> showed a similar temperature of melting  of  <dig> °c and  <dig> °c as expected, while for c <dig> and s <dig>  we obtained a tm near  <dig> °c  and  <dig> °c , respectively. .figure  <dig> comparison of melting curves of amplicons of the alb gene using spermidine. we used a mixture of primers to amplify alb gene with an amount of 50 ng of dna templates at various spermidine concentrations ranging from  <dig> up to 10 mm. melting curves of products are shown from c  and s , respectively. in , we highlight the melting curves of c and s in presence  and absence  of 1 mm spermidine.



checking about pcr inhibition of alb gene when adding spermidine at different concentration
we tested different concentrations of spermidine, ranging from 1 mm to 10 mm  and  <dig>  mm to 1 mm . in figure  <dig> are represented the amplification curves of alb gene  illustrating the observed efficiency-ct shift relationships using spermidine in sg rt-pcr from c  and s . in table  <dig>  the observed result is that low concentrations of spermidine have opposite effects on pcr efficiency of c and s, with a negative effect on c and a positive effect or pcr facilitator on s,  while an excess of spermidine  inhibits amplification and this regardless of the nature of dna. taken together, those findings suggest that the addition of 1 mm spermidine during pcr cycling might be an optimum for obtaining the highest amplification efficiency on c with for both studies ae = 800 ± 39%  of the true yield  on the detection of alb gene. no significant difference was found on control with ae = 96 ±  <dig> % . exceeding 10 mm of spermidine leads to pcr inhibition.figure  <dig> interference of pcr amplification by spermidine. from 50 ng of dna, the amplification curves of pcr products of the alb gene using spermidine in sg rt-pcr are shown from c  and s . the spermidine has been used at various concentrations, ranging from 1 mm to 10 mm.



varying stool concentration and spermidine concentration
the results are shown in table  <dig>  they suggest that the 1 mm spermidine together with 100 ng of s dna provides an optimal amplification efficiency condition, with ae amounting to 1680%.table  <dig> 
relationship between spermidine concentration and amount of stool dna


sperm.
ct
∆ct
ae 

2nd experiment
abbreviations: sample, stool dna pooled; sperm, spermidine ; ct, mean of cycle threshold value ± standard deviation value; ae, amplification efficiency; na, non amplification; nd, not determined.



measuring promoter methylation of npy, penk, and wif1
the results are shown in table  <dig>  we evaluated in triplicate assays the performance of qm-msp to quantify the methylation levels of npy, penk, and wif <dig>  for co-amplifying two methylation-specific dna targets in real-time, we used the associations of fam-alb/vic-wif <dig> and ned-npy/vic-penk. qm-msp were performed from id <dig> to id <dig> plus s  and c  with  and without  the addition of 1 mm spermidine and the methylation percentage was determined by the 2-∆∆ct method. we summarize the results by using the cumulative methylation index , which is the sum of the three values. as indicated in table  <dig>  the results suggest that the addition of spermidine to the pcr mixture allows a sensitive analysis of dna methylation biomarkers, relative to that not containing spermidine  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  with , respectively and reflects a near 10-fold factor of cmi ). furthermore, when we do not observe amplification both in the presence or absence of spermidine, the most likely hypothesis is that the promoter region of this gene is unmethylated .table  <dig> quantitative dna methylation analysis

methylation 
cmi 

3rd experiment
npy
penk
wif1


discussion
detection of precancerous and early-stage crc is central to improving patient prognosis. noninvasive colon cancer screening by testing feces for the presence of occult blood still shows poor sensitivity. consequently, a number of assays for detection of cancer-specific dna alterations from fecal dna have been proposed as a new approach for screening and detecting early-stage colon cancer  <cit> .

pcr is a powerful technique for the detection of target dna, but its application to stool specimens is always limited, due to the presence of several components , that are known to often inhibit pcr  <cit> . problems in eliminating pcr inhibitors from stool specimens have been extensively reported and, for many situations, dilution of inhibited samples proves necessary to provide a rapid and straightforward way of permitting amplification  <cit> . however, dilution is only possible if the amount of dna is sufficiently high. hence, for applications involving low-copy targets and in presence of high background , the dilution solution is often undesirable, and indeed sometimes impossible, due to the further reduction of already reduced target amount  <cit> . others methods have been used to alleviate the effects of inhibitory substances of pcr, such as the use of separation columns. they present a number of problems too, ranging from reduced dna yields, leading to decrease dna targets, to decreased amplification capacity  <cit> , and for all these reasons, we have not chosen these methods.

spermidine, a polyamine compound, has been reported to have a high affinity for plant and stool dna and could be used as pcr facilitators by its addition to the reaction mixture during the pcr steps  <cit> .

in the present study, spermidine concentrations were tested to alleviate pcr inhibition associated with dna isolated from stool samples. for the first time, we showed that spermidine can act both as an activator on stool dna or pcr inhibitors on a high purity dna. indeed, we showed that, at increasing concentrations, we have 1) on dna samples extracted from stool: increasing efficiency up to an optimum reached at about 1 mm and then decreasing up to total inhibition and 2) on a set of highly pure dna: same as 1), but with optimum reached at a much lower concentration, namely  <dig>  mm.  the hypothesis is that spermidine can block the action of pcr inhibitors . the optimum that we observe might be explained by the existence, for each specific sample type, of a concentration threshold above which spermidine no longer blocks pcr inhibitors, may be due to steric effects or saturation, and starts massively binding to dna, so inhibiting pcr.

interesting, we observed that the addition of spermidine causes a positive shift of the melting temperature of the stool and control dna. this observation may be due to the interaction of the spermidine with dna as it has been described previously by ahokas and erkkila  <cit> . we have determined a range of spermidine concentrations that counteract the pcr inhibitors co-extracted with dna, so facilitating the amplification efficiency of methylation markers. we applied that finding to assessing the methylation of npy, penk, and wif <dig>   while maintaining sufficient dna yield. we showed the advantage of our method in the quantification of methylation values of crc markers npy, penk and wif <dig>  where, on undiluted stool dna  and by using the qm-msp in presence of 1 mm spermidine, we globally enhanced detection by a near 10-fold factor, as assessed by summing up the three values. in the future, it would be interesting to evaluate our method with other biomarkers such as septin  <dig>  which is used as a marker of blood-based methylation requiring improved accuracy for a clinical practise  <cit> .

in summary, we performed a comparative study on the effect of spermidine onto pcr efficiency reporting that spermidine addition is easier and more useful than dilution or purification methods and that it can dramatically improve the quantification of methylation values. we also highlighted a possible mechanism for its action. our qm-msp using the presence of 1 mm spermidine and 100 ng of stool dna could be used as a potential pcr facilitator for stool-based detection of crc. our methodology is also a serious candidate for being developed into a robust technology, as it has been optimized with several primer pair and reaction buffer.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we present a proof of principle for using spermidine to allow alleviation of the pcr inhibitors frequently encountered in dna amplification from stool samples. we also demonstrated that spermidine, an inexpensive chemical, is useful for sensitive stool-based detection of methylation-specific markers for crc tumors using qm-msp. these results, after corroboration in a large cohort, can lead to the elaboration of a method to be used in clinical practice as a aid in preselecting the patients for colonoscopy.

