BACKGROUND
the g protein-coupled receptor  superfamily represents one of the largest and most diverse families of proteins in mammals and is found in nearly all multicellular life
 <cit> . these proteins are cell-surface receptors that play a major role in signal transduction and perception of and response to the environment. gpcrs are divided into five highly diverged families: rhodopsin/class a, secretin/class b, adhesion/class b, glutamate/class c and frizzled/taste2/class f
 <cit> . gpcr sequences within these families can share less than 25% identity between species
 <cit> . gpcrs bind a diverse array of ligands including proteins, lipids, neurotransmitters, calcium, odorants, and other small molecules
 <cit> . in vertebrates, gpcr signaling networks are associated with neurotransmission, cellular metabolism, secretion, cellular differentiation and growth, inflammatory and immune responses, smell, taste and vision
 <cit> . all gpcrs share a core seven transmembrane α-helical region with an extracellular ligand binding domain that is coupled intracellularly to a g protein heterotrimer composed of α, β and γ subunits. gpcr activation leads to the exchange of gdp for gtp by a g protein, and g protein subunits then interact and regulate effector molecules , activating further downstream signaling pathways such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase , phosphoinositide- <dig> kinase -akt and nf-kappab pathways that ultimately activate transcription factors that affect gene expression and regulation
 <cit> . many of these scaffolding and signaling proteins mediate signal transduction in other intracellular pathways in eukaryotes and thus are highly conserved. the importance of these receptors is exemplified by the fact that 3-4% of human genes code for gpcrs and that nearly 30% of all currently marketed drugs target these receptors
 <cit> . numerous endocrine and sensory-related diseases are associated with gpcr mutations in humans
 <cit> .

despite the crucial importance of gpcr signaling in metazoa, the prevalence and function of these proteins in non-model organisms such as unicellular photosynthetic eukaryotes is not well understood. diatoms are a major class of eukaryotic phytoplankton found throughout the world’s oceans that play a crucial role in primary production and nutrient cycling and serve as a base for marine food webs
 <cit> . diatoms are also responsible for forming large phytoplankton blooms that in some cases can be toxic to humans, marine mammals and seabirds
 <cit> . while the molecular mechanisms by which diatoms perceive and respond to their surrounding environment have not been resolved, previous findings suggest a role for cell surface receptors linked to intracellular signaling pathways. for example, exposure to osmotic, shear or nutrient  stress in culture leads to changes in cytosolic ca2+ concentrations in the diatom phaeodactylum tricornutum <cit> . the presence of a chemical-based defense system in p. tricornutum and thalassiosira weissflogii has also been reported in which these diatoms respond to challenge via diatom-derived aldehydes triggering ca2+ and nitric oxide release
 <cit> . this “stress surveillance system” may function in cell-cell communication across diatom populations to detect damaged or stressed cells resulting from phytoplankton competitors and other ecological or physical stressors. these findings are important when considering environmental perception and response as alterations in ca2+ homeostasis are a hallmark of signal transduction activation throughout the eukaryotes
 <cit> . levels of the second messenger camp have also been shown to change in cultures of p. tricornutum following exposure to elevated carbon dioxide levels
 <cit> . while there is sequence evidence for putative gpcr signaling pathway proteins in the thalassiosira pseudonana <cit>  and p. tricornutum <cit>  genomes, the role gpcr signaling may play in regulating environmental perception and response in diatoms warrants more detailed investigation.

here we use an in silico approach to probe the genomes of pseudo-nitzschia multiseries , t. pseudonana <cit> , p. tricornutum <cit>  and fragilariopsis cylindrus  for translated nucleotide sequences with similarity to known gpcr signaling pathway proteins. we also probe expressed sequence tag  libraries for each diatom to determine whether these genomic sequences are actively expressed in laboratory isolates. our rationale for emphasizing sequence comparisons between diatoms and higher eukaryotes is three-fold. first, the gpcr signaling pathway is well-characterized in mammals compared to less well-studied, non-model organisms and thus the functions of putative homologs are better understood in this system. while model organisms such as yeast provide valuable insight into potential gpcr signaling mechanisms in mammalians, yeast and humans are found in the same eukaryotic supergroup, and thus other unicellular systems with different evolutionary histories found outside this supergroup would allow for further comparative analyses of gpcr signaling pathway diversity. secondly, diatoms must rapidly sense and respond to multiple environmental changes, many of which are likely mediated by receptor-based signaling pathways. as major contributors to ocean productivity and carbon cycling, diatoms may play a critical role in the changing ecosystems of the future ocean, and thus understanding the breadth of their ability to sense and respond to environmental changes may be crucial to predicting their future success. lastly, from a human health perspective, a better understanding of gpcr conservation and functionality in other organisms may provide further insight into the importance of these receptors as extracellular or environmental sensors and as pharmacological and human disease relevant targets.

the goal of this study is thus to provide a comprehensive analysis of the gpcr signaling repertoire and its potential functionality in sequenced diatoms by using a suite of bioinformatic tools aimed at annotating the genomes of non-model organisms. we hypothesize that the conservation of this pathway in diatoms may reflect shared mechanisms of environmental response related to gpcr signaling across the eukaryotes.

RESULTS
gpcr signaling pathway analysis
using the analysis framework shown in figure 
 <dig>  we first searched the diatom genomes for evidence of gpcr signaling pathway proteins, many of which are expected to be highly conserved across eukaryotes . genomic matches were then searched against the respective diatom est library. based on sequence similarity to human proteins from the human gpdb database
 <cit> , all four diatoms have genes coding for core components of the gpcr signaling pathway. these putative proteins share approximately 25-50% sequence identity to human gpcr pathway proteins when considering alignment lengths > <dig> aa .

g protein
g protein α- and β-subunits were well-conserved across all four diatoms and were verified with est support . all four classes of the g α-subunit were conserved, including αq, α12/ <dig>  αs and αi. the level of sequence similarity was slightly higher for diatom g protein α- and β-subunits and human homologs than for known viridiplantae g protein subunits and human g proteins . there was no sequence similarity to the g protein γ-subunit in any of the diatoms using blast with human gγ-subunits or with the canonical plant gγ-subunits from arabidopsis thaliana  and oryza sativa . this may be expected given that the gγ-subunit has been shown to be highly divergent between species and among model organisms such as arabidopsis, rice, corn and soybean
 <cit> , furthermore, the gγ-subunit is a small protein , and thus conventional blast parameters may miss more distant homologs. therefore, to increase our search sensitivity, the pfam gγ subunit ggl domain  was used to screen conceptually translated diatom genome sequences. the ggl domain is found within the gγ subunit across a wide range of species. the hmmer search identified an open reading frame  of  <dig> amino acids in t. pseudonana with similarity to the ggl domain  . furthermore, this orf contained the highly conserved canonical c-terminal caax box involved in post-translational processing of the gγ-subunit
 <cit> . the corresponding genomic region on chromosome  <dig> in t. pseudonana  had >99% similarity to four ests. the  <dig> aa orf had the best match to a hypothetical protein in another stramenophile  that also contains the ggl domain and caax box. other matches containing the ggl domain fell into either stramenophile or amoebozoa clades and had e-values as high as  <dig> , demonstrating the need for alternative approaches to standard blast criteria.

rgs
because regulators of g protein signaling  have been shown to have high affinity for the gβ-subunit and therefore may substitute for the gγ-subunit in the gβγ complex
 <cit> , we searched the translated diatom genomes for the rgs protein. we compiled a small database of  <dig> human rgs variants to search against the diatom genomes using tblastn. the only significant match was to t. pseudonana with an e-value of 10- <dig>  to further verify the absence of rgs in the other three diatoms, the conserved ~ <dig> aa rgs core domain , which is present in all rgs proteins, was hmmer searched against the translated diatom genomes. t. pseudonana again had a significant match  while matches to the other diatoms had e-values >10- <dig> and either partial or split rgs domains.

effector proteins
the gα-subunit and gβγ complex activate effector proteins, leading to stimulation or inhibition of second messengers such as camp, cgmp, diacylglycerol and inositol -trisphosphate and phosphatidyl inositol -triphosphate as well as opening or closing ion channels and regulation of intracellular ca2+. the four different classes of the gα-subunit interact with their respective downstream effectors including phospholipase c , rho family gtpase signaling proteins and adenylate cyclase. except for rhogef, these effector enzymes were present in all four diatoms based on sequence similarity. est support was also available for plc and adenylate cyclase in p. multiseries and p. tricornutum and for the rho small gtpases in all four diatoms. the presence of adenylate cyclase, phosphodiesterase and protein kinase c suggest a role for camp signaling in the diatoms, and similarly plc, protein kinase c and ca2+ channels support a role for ca2+ signaling. other than raf, no similarity was detected for ras-related proteins within the tyrosine kinase pathway. receptor tyrosine kinase was present in the diatom genomes and supported by est evidence in p. multiseries and t. pseudonana. tyrosine kinases have been shown to mediate gpcr-induced ras activation. gpcr kinase, which regulates the activity of gpcrs, was also conserved  in all four diatom genomes and also in the est libraries except for t. pseudonana.

gpcrs
due to the divergence of gpcr sequences, the blast search space was expanded to include all known and predicted eukaryotic gpcrs within the g protein-coupled receptor database  
 <cit> . this approach resulted in 5 f. cylindrus,  <dig> p. multiseries,  <dig> p. tricornutum and 2 t. pseudonana candidate gpcr sequences with correct transmembrane domain  orientation and the strongest similarity to the class c gpcr superfamily . the best protein matches for the putative gpcr sequences for p. multiseries and f. cylindrus were to a class c receptor from the unicellular amoebae dictyostelium discoideum . the best matches for the putative gpcr sequences from t. pseudonana and p. tricornutum were to gabab receptors  from a mosquito and x. tropicalis, respectively. for reference, the percent identity of the diatom putative gpcr sequences to their best human match  was similar to that of the known class c receptor from d. discoideum to its best human match . p. tricornutum gpcr1a and gpcr1b appear to be splice variants of the same gene.

n/a, not applicable.

1http://genome.jgi-psf.org/psemu1/psemu <dig> home.html.

2boissonneault kr, bates ss, milton s, pelletier j, housman de: gene discovery and expression profiling in the toxin -producing marine diatom pseudo-nitzschia multiseries  using cdna microarrays, unpublished.

3krell a, gloeckner g: analysis of an osmotic stress induced cdna library of the psychrophilic diatom fragilariopsis cylindrus, unpublished.

4http://genome.jgi-psf.org/thaps3/thaps <dig> home.html.

5t. pseudonana gpcr <dig> had no corresponding est data but the sequence was found to be upregulated during transcriptome profiling under silicon starvation conditions.

the tmd sequences contained residues conserved across the class c gpcrs . the two cysteine residues in the first and second extracellular loops are postulated to be involved in disulfide bond formation
 <cit> . the two basic residues  at the cytoplasmic face of the tmd <dig> and the acidic residue  at the cytoplasmic end of the tmd6
 <cit>  have been shown to be crucial for activation of the gabab receptor subclass of class c gpcrs. the pk motif in tmd <dig> is also conserved in class c gpcrs
 <cit> . other conserved residues that may be important for receptor activation in the diatom sequences are highlighted in figure 
 <dig> 

we used a second approach to identify potential diatom gpcrs by downloading the class a, b and c gpcr alignments from the gpcrdb, and then converting these alignments to hidden markov model  profiles to search against a custom microeukaryote database  and the ncbi refseq database. no diatom sequences were recruited to the class a and class b alignments, while two sequences that were also identified using the blast approach  were recruited to the class c alignment. these results further indicate that putative diatom gpcrs are likely to be highly diverged from known metazoan gpcrs and that they appear to have family c gpcr-like properties.

based on sequence similarity searches against the diatom est libraries, there is evidence for transcription of a number of the putative diatom gpcr sequences . the putative p. tricornutum gpcr sequences had the greatest est coverage, likely due to the larger repository of ests for this diatom. the majority of these ests detected in the four diatoms came from cultures under various stress conditions, including growth-limiting factors for p. tricornutum, domoic-acid producing conditions for p. multiseries, osmotic stress for f. cylindrus and iron limitation and silicon starvation for t. pseudonana.

the length of the candidate diatom gpcr sequences ranged from  <dig> to over  <dig> amino acids. this wide range was due to considerable size and domain variation in the n- and c-termini among the candidate class c gpcr sequences . seven of these sequences contain an n-terminus domain with similarity to prokaryotic periplasmic binding proteins , which are involved in amino acid and nutrient transport in bacteria and are considered to be the origin of the class c gpcr ligand binding domains
 <cit> . based on blast similarity, four of these seven sequences  have n-termini with strongest similarity to the class c gpcrs, while the other three from p. tricornutum have similarity to the periplasmic component of abc sugar transporters, which also are known to contain pbps. we verified the completeness of the gene prediction models by searching the genomic regions upstream of the n-terminus of the diatom gpcr sequences for orfs containing the ligand binding domain using the ncbi conserved domain database . no pbp-like domains were detected in diatom gpcr sequences that were originally not predicted to contain the domain. there was also no evidence in the extracellular region upstream of the tmd for a cysteine-rich domain. this domain is found in certain class c gpcrs including metabotropic glutamate, calcium-sensing and taste receptors but absent in gabab receptors
 <cit> . the c-termini of the putative diatom gpcrs share no similarity to other gpcrs or known proteins in general. this is not the case for other known class c gpcrs, which share sequence similarity in the c-terminus.

phylogeny of predicted diatom gpcrs
to determine the phylogenetic relationship among the putative diatom gpcrs and their relationship to known gpcrs from other domains of life, the  <dig> tmd regions of the putative diatom gpcrs identified by blast were used as the seed alignment to hmm search for other gpcrs in the custom microeukaryote and ncbi refseq databases . the recruited sequences were then used to generate a tree that examined the diversity of possible diatom gpcrs among other putative microeukaryote and established gpcrs. the diatom tmd hmm profile recruited an array of class c gpcrs, with the strongest sequence similarity to the gabab receptors and to lesser extent the mglur and calcium-sensing/vomeronasal receptors. for maximum likelihood  tree construction, the wag amino acid model was found to have the highest likelihood score when comparing models with different fixed substitution rates among the different amino acid changes. we also tested a number of other amino acid models and obtained similar tree topology. within the ml tree, the majority of diatom sequences clustered with one another and with other microeukaryotes and formed a deeply diverged sister clade to the gabab receptors albeit with weak bootstrap support . the seven putative diatom class c gpcr sequences that contained the pbp <dig> ligand binding domain grouped within a divergent clade. within this clade, the sequences were differentiated by their n-termini, with the three p. tricornutum sequences that had similarity to bacterial abc transporters grouping together and the remaining three sequences  clustering together with strong bootstrap support. other than the stramenopiles , microeukaryotic sequences recruited to the tree included the slime mold  and the coccolithophore emiliania huxleyi.

discussion
using a comparative genomics approach, we elucidated a gpcr signaling repertoire in diatoms that points to the highly conserved nature of this signaling pathway across the eukaryotes. specifically, sequence comparisons indicate the presence and expression of gpcrs, gα- and β- subunits and other common downstream effectors and pathways known to be activated by gpcr signaling. there was genomic evidence and est support for the gγ-subunit in t. pseudonana only. t. pseudonana was also the one diatom to contain a complete rgs domain. based on a combination of blast, hmm profiling and phylogenetic analyses, the putative diatom gpcrs were most similar to but still highly diverged from the class c gpcrs. furthermore, they formed a clade basal to the gabab receptors within the class c gpcrs. there was considerable variability in the size of the putative diatom gpcrs, and seven of these sequences had n-terminus similarity to the class c ligand binding domain. a number of these putative gpcr sequences also have est support. these putative gpcrs may potentially represent an additional group of class c sequences recovered from diatoms and other microeukaryotes that do not fit within existing class c subfamilies.

the diatom gpcr signaling pathway repertoire
the majority of the proteins involved in the gpcr signaling pathway appear to be well conserved in the diatom genomes based on protein sequence similarity. furthermore, gene expression data indicates that the genes coding for many of these proteins are transcribed. despite strong conservation of the gα- and β- subunits in all four diatoms, there was evidence for the gγ-subunit in only t. pseudonana. all identified functional g proteins in other organisms are heterotrimeric, consisting of the three subunits. the β and γ-subunits function structurally as a monomer, as the two subunits cannot be dissociated
 <cit> . the g protein βγ subunit regulates the functionality of the α-subunit in addition to mediating downstream signaling pathways. while the γ-subunits of different mammalian species can share as low as 27% sequence similarity
 <cit> , we were still not able to recover the highly conserved γ-subunit ggl domain in p. multiseries, f. cylindrus and p. tricornutum. furthermore, rgs, which in some studies has been shown to act as a substitute for the gγ-subunit
 <cit> , was also only present in t. pseudonana. this may simply be due to differences in genome coverage and genome size between the diatoms, as described below. nonetheless, the structure and functionality of the g protein in diatoms requires further investigation.

the putative diatom gpcr sequences had the strongest similarity to the class c gpcrs based on tmd and in a few cases n-terminus similarity. class c receptors are characterized by a long extracellular n-terminus  required for ligand binding. the diatom n-termini ranged from 40– <dig> aa, with the shorter domains potentially representing a truncated or absent ligand binding region and thus altered functionality. viral gpcrs provide an example of a gpcr with a very small or absent n-terminus whose functionality is maintained through constitutive expression
 <cit> . the n-terminus ligand binding domain required for class c gpcr activation was present in seven of the putative gpcrs. four of these sequences  have the strongest similarity to the known class c gpcr topology, and also phylogenetically group together. three of these candidate gpcrs  had stronger similarity to the periplasmic component of bacterial abc sugar transporters, which are in the same superfamily as the gpcr ligand binding domains. their tmds had typical class c structure and similarity. these sequences were also shorter than typical class c receptors . taken together, these results suggest that these p. tricornutum sequences are class c gpcr-like but may have modified or altered binding activity. the ligand binding domain is considered to have evolved from prokaryotic periplasmic binding proteins which are involved in amino acid and nutrient transport in bacteria
 <cit> . the lengths of the intracellular c-termini were also variable across the diatom sequences, and the c-termini shared no sequence similarity to any other proteins. this is not unexpected given the fact that the c-terminus is the least conserved region of class c gpcrs, even among orthologs
 <cit> . the c-terminus is not required for receptor coupling to g proteins, but interactions have been shown between this region and various scaffolding proteins associated with receptor signaling, desensitization and targeting. in sum, while the tmd regions of these putative diatom gpcr sequences were conserved, further investigation into the diversity of the n- and c- termini are needed to classify these sequences. the phylogenetic analysis does indicate that there is considerable diversity even within the tmds that distinguishes the diatom and microeukaryotic sequences from the tmds of metazoan class c gpcrs. the fact that those diatom gpcr sequences with the ligand binding domain cluster together suggests that the tmd alone can distinguish the presence or absence of putative gpcr binding domains based on the conserved amino acid residues shown in figure 
 <dig> 

the extent and diversity of microeukaryotic sequences recovered from the hmm searches suggests gpcr signal transduction is an ancient signaling cascade retained in diverse forms of life. the putative diatom and microeukaryotic gpcrs were distantly related to the metazoan class c gpcrs and formed a series of branches basal to the metazoan gabab receptor sequences. a distant relationship between these groups of putative gpcrs is expected considering the deep evolutionary relationships of these organisms and the unlikely functional homology of the putative diatom and microeukaryote sequences to metazoan receptors. the class c gpcr subfamily profile recovered sequences from the stramenopiles , a haptophyte  and slime mold . slime molds are evolutionarily basal to the opisthokonts, which include metazoa, and thus the presence of metazoan homologs in dictyostelium is not surprising. diatoms and haptophytes were the only photosynthetic organisms recruited by these searches. both of these groups are products of secondary endosymbiotic events
 <cit>  and therefore derive from a more recent heterotrophic host cell than green or red algae. an example of the acquisition of a novel trait due to this secondary endosymbiotic event is the presence of the urea cycle in diatoms
 <cit> . the urea cycle is typically associated with metazoan metabolism, and is absent in green algae and plants. the class c gpcr-like proteins in the diatoms may also reflect their evolutionary history and represent a more ancestral version of this protein family. the other photosynthetic chlorophyll a + c groups that were included in the custom database, such as dinoflagellates and cryptophytes, were not recruited to the class c subfamily profile with a hmmer e-value <10- <dig>  the diatom sequences profile also did not recruit any sequences at an e-value <10- <dig> from aureococcus, another microalgal stramenopile. a putative gpcr sequence was recovered from an additional slime mold but no sequence matches were recovered from the many other heterotrophic microeukaryotes for which ests are available or from naeglaria gruberii, one of the only free living excavate-lineage genomes available. the apparent sporadic recovery of gpcr-like sequences from microeukaryotes may simply be an issue of low reference sequence availability, possibly compounded by low expression of the putative class c receptor homologs in microeukaryotes, limiting representation in est libraries. alternatively, the basal nature of the putative diatom and microeukaryotic class c gpcr sequences may indicate that these sequences represent a separate, possibly ancestral, family of class c gpcrs. it is possible that diatom gpcrs underwent an independent evolution after a recombination event between an ancestral class c receptor and a gpcr-like locus, or evolved directly from an ancestral class c receptor as has been proposed for plant gpcrs
 <cit> .

functionality of gpcr signaling in diatoms
class c gpcrs are responsible for a vast array of physiological processes ranging from the modulation of synaptic transmission to the perception of sensory stimuli in the nervous system
 <cit> . the primary ligands for class c receptors include the neurotransmitters glutamate and gaba. sequences cloned from the sponge
 <cit>  and the amoeba dictyostelium discoideum <cit>  represent the most basal class c receptors that have been identified to date. a metabotropic glutamate receptor identified in d. discoideum  is diverged from other characterized metabotropic glutamate receptors in multicellular organisms , as is also the case for the putative diatom gpcr sequences. functionally, ddmglupr is involved in early development of d. discoideum <cit> . gaba produced by d. discoideum also functions as an intracellular signaling molecule by regulating differentiation during development through a gabab receptor homologue
 <cit> . d. discoideum thus provides an example whereby class c receptors play an important functional role in the absence of neuronal synapses, and may therefore shed light on the functionality of potential diatom gpcrs.

while gaba has been directly detected in cultures of p. tricornutum <cit> , there has been no documented role for gaba in diatoms or algae in general. in the mammalian central nervous system, gaba is the most widely distributed inhibitory neurotransmitter
 <cit> . it has also been found in nearly every plant and plant part examined
 <cit> . gaba levels in plants increase several-fold in response to biotic and abiotic stresses such as heat shock, cold shock, mechanical stimulation, hypoxia, phytohormones, and water stress
 <cit> . there is also support for a role for gaba in plants in contributing to c:n balance, regulation of cytosolic ph, protection against oxidative stress, self-defense, osmoregulation and cell signaling
 <cit> . a gpcr system in diatoms involving gaba or other extracellular or intracellular ligands may function similarly in protecting the cells against abiotic and biotic stressors such as temperature or salinity changes. the coupling of gabab receptors with ca2+ ion channels or ca2+-sensing receptors in other organisms
 <cit>  suggests the potential for a gpcr to mediate the documented increase in intracellular ca2+ following exposure to physical and chemical stressors in diatoms
 <cit> .

database limitations
diatom genome size, coverage and completeness varied greatly between the diatoms analyzed in this study. this may have impacted our ability to profile completely the repertoire of gpcr signaling pathway proteins  in diatoms with less sequence data available. p. multiseries has an estimated eight-fold larger genome size  and f. cylindrus a three-fold larger genome size  than the smallest diatom p. tricornutum . the smaller diatom genomes though have greater sequence coverage  than the two larger diatoms . the genome sequences for p. tricornutum and t. pseudonana are also assigned to finished chromosomes rather than genome scaffolds. as genome and est coverages increase and additional diatom genomes are sequenced, evidence for the gpcr signaling pathway in these organisms will likely become more complete.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, using a cross-species comparative genomics approach this study has found conservation at the amino acid level of many of the core proteins involved in the mammalian gpcr signaling pathway in diatoms. sequence similarity and expression data support the presence of gpcrs, gα- and β- subunits and other common downstream effector proteins. while evidence for the gγ-subunit and rgs was only detected in t. pseudonana, the lack of these proteins in the other diatoms suggests a need for increased genome coverage or further investigation into the heterotrimeric nature of the g protein in diatoms. a number of the putative diatom gpcr sequences have transcriptional evidence under various stress conditions in culture. phylogenetic analyses revealed the putative diatom gpcr sequences to be most similar to but deeply diverged from the class c gpcrs, and within this family they appear to form a unique clade basal to the gabab receptors. these putative diatom gpcr sequences exhibit high diversity in the n- and c- termini and have a conserved tmd region that is unique from that of metazoan class c receptors. the presence of gpcrs and gpcr signaling proteins in diatoms suggests a secondary signaling mechanism that warrants further experimental investigation to better define the functional roles of these proteins in diatoms. the confirmation of gpcr functionality in diatoms would indicate that these organisms are able to perceive and respond to their surrounding environment in a more complex manner.

