BACKGROUND
eukaryotic messenger rna , after being transcribed from its coding gene, typically undergoes processing events, such as capping, splicing, and polyadenylation, before it is translocated to the cytoplasm and translated into proteins. while these three essential steps of processing are interrelated, each step is performed by a defined set of protein factors and uses specific signals encoded in the precursor mrna   <cit> . the polyadenylation signals for all eukaryotes seem to have three common parts: a cleavage site , a near upstream element  about 20– <dig> nucleotides  upstream of the cs, and an element about  <dig> nt upstream of the cs   <cit> . in mammals, there is an additional signal element located ~ <dig> nt downstream of the cs  <cit> , which is not commonly observed in yeast and plants. moreover, both yeast and plants possess much less sequence conservation in nue and fue regions compared to that of animals  <cit> . however, there is little conservation between yeast and plants in term of sequences of the poly signal elements.

plant polyadenylation signals in general are more similar to yeast, in which no highly conserved signal sequences have been identified. for example, a recent work revealed that the nue signal aauaaa, albeit proven the best signal in plants  <cit> , can only be found at the right position in about 10% of arabidopsis genes  <cit> . however, the same signal is used by over 50% of human genes  <cit> . this makes it very difficult to predict the cs of plant genes without experimental evidence such as est that can be used to deduce poly sites. with many ongoing plant genome sequencing projects, using poly sites as a determinant of the 3'-end of genes would greatly enhance the accuracy of genome annotation. to this end, we were interested in devising an algorithm to predict poly sites using our newly developed nucleotide composition model of poly signals in 3'-utr of the genes in the model plant arabidopsis  <cit> .

in our improved plant polyadenylation signal model, there are three types of sequence elements that possess some level of conservation, fue, nue, and the newly defined cleavage element   <cit> . within the ce, there are three sub-domains made up of different prevailing sequences: the highly conserved di-nucleotide  right before the cs; and two u-rich sequence elements on the right and the left sides of cs, termed ce-r and ce-l. beyond signal sequence information, the clear transition of the nucleotide composition  <cit>  also offers additional features for the design of the algorithm. briefly, a high u/a ratio in the fue decrease to a into a low value  in the nue. such a transition happens two more times between the nue and ce, and within the ce. finally, the u/a ratio becomes  <dig> beyond  <dig> nt downstream of the cs. during these u/a transitions, the g and c contents remain low except at the cs where a spike of c is evident  <cit> . such a profile of the 3'-utr in arabidopsis has been confirmed independently  <cit> . other features of arabidopsis polyadenylation signals are also found in that of the rice genome  <cit> .

the hidden markov model , a widely used system in bioinformatics, is a probability-based mathematical model with a complete set of theory, methods and an algorithm. it is widely used to describe both stability and variability of signals over background. rabiner  <cit>  systematically described the hmm and made it a common technology in voice recognition. in recent years, because of the similarity of biological data  to voice signals, the hmm has been used in different aspects of sequence analysis such as sequence comparison, prediction of protein structures and gene annotation. however, the length of the state in the original hmm is geometrically distributed, which limits its application. a new generation of the hmm, called the generalized hidden markov model , was introduced to extend the utility of the hmm. the ghmm gives each state multiple observed values , so it can easily be used in describing the organization of gene sequences. in this paper, we present a ghmm-based method for predicting the poly sites in arabidopsis. the prediction results of poly sites are compared with experimentally validated data for some of the genes. interestingly, our program can also predict the results of traditional mutation studies, as the site efficiencies and scores given by the program are linearly correlated.

RESULTS
we were interested in using a computer program to predict the plant poly site in a given transcript . to do so, we transformed the profiles of the known poly sites and their adjacent region, based on the data presented by loke et al.  <cit>  from arabidopsis, into features that can be used for computational modeling. the analysis of a dataset of  <dig> sequences  described in that paper provided the basis for setting parameters as described in the methods section. hence, we designed an algorithm and wrote a code named poly site sleuth  in pascal.

sensitivity and specificity of the program
to evaluate the performance of pass, we employed the two most common standards: sensitivity  and specificity . the definitions are:

sn=tptp+fnsp=tptp+fp=1−fptp+fp
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaafaqabeqacaaabagaem4uamlaemoba4maeyypa0zaasaaaeaacqwgubavcqwgqbauaeaacqwgubavcqwgqbaucqghrawkcqwggbgrcqwgobgtaaaabagaem4uamlaemicaanaeyypa0zaasaaaeaacqwgubavcqwgqbauaeaacqwgubavcqwgqbaucqghrawkcqwggbgrcqwgqbauaagaeyypa0jaegymaejaeyoei0yaasaaaeaacqwggbgrcqwgqbauaeaacqwgubavcqwgqbaucqghrawkcqwggbgrcqwgqbauaaaaaaaa@4e60@

in these equations, tp  is the number of actual sites that are identified or predicted correctly. fn  is the number of actual sites that cannot be identified or predicted correctly. fp  is the number of false sites that are predicted by pass. the value of sn represents the fraction of the actual poly sites that can be predicted, while sp represents the fraction of actual poly sites in all the predicted sites. the higher the sp value is, the lower the fraction of false positive sites among predicted sites is.

to evaluate the algorithm, we tested  <dig> known poly sites  to calculate sn. because not all poly sites have been identified in each sequence of the database, we cannot calculate the real sp value. therefore, we used several negative control datasets for sp calculations. these include arabidopsis 5' utrs, introns, coding sequences, and a randomly generated sequence dataset that preserve the trinucleotide distributions found in the 8k dataset. since all the sites predicted by pass in these control sequences are false sites, fp was set to be the number of sites that were predicted in these sequences.  was set to be the total number of sites. the results are shown in figure 1a. the horizontal value represents the threshold, which is an user selectable standard in determining whether or not a nucleotide is a poly site. if the value of a nucleotide is higher than the threshold, this position is thought to be a poly site. sn_ <dig>  sn_ <dig>  and sn_ <dig> represent the distance between the predicted site and the known site, which are  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides, respectively. sn_ <dig> means that the predicted site is exactly the same as the known poly site . based on figure 1a, when the threshold is increased, sn decreases while sp increases. there is no drastic different when the sn are calculated with the three positions relative to the poly sites. however, sp can be quite different when different control sequences are used. for the coding sequences and the randomly generated sequences, both sn and sp reach 97% at a threshold  <dig>  for 5' utr, sn and sp are about 82% at a threshold of  <dig> . in the intron sequences, sn and sp are lower than others at 72% at a threshold of  <dig>  the lower sp may reflect the feature of the sequences of 5'utr and the introns, because these sequences tend to have higher a and t content, a characteristic shared by 3' utr on which pass design was based.

to evaluate the program, we tested the sequences in the above-mentioned datasets. using the probability score, an output of pass, we examined the distributions of the scores as shown in figure 1b. the average scores of the 8k dataset peak at location  <dig>  the authenticated poly site position in these sequences. this is a demonstration of the efficacy of the program because it was designed to predict these positions as poly sites. the average scores of the control sequences are much lower than that of 8k with the exception of the intron dataset. again, this could be due the shared features between 3' utr and the introns. importantly, there is  <dig> point score difference between the average peak score of the poly sites and that of the introns, which is significant enough to differentiate the poly site from introns. this is demonstrated in the genomic sequence scan that is discussed later.

to further examine the prediction scores that are distinctive for poly sites, the distributions of the scores at position  <dig> and the average scores of all other non-poly sites in all the sequences of 8k dataset were compared . the majority of the poly sites have a score between  <dig> and  <dig>  whereas the average scores of all other non-poly sites peak at 4– <dig>  difference of  <dig> to  <dig> score points again could be significant enough to resolve the poly site from the background at the sequence level.

predicting poly sites by pass
to demonstrate the efficacy of the algorithm and the software, we tested many sequences including those with multiple poly sites. three of the typical results are shown graphically in figure  <dig>  in general, most of the experimentally authenticated poly sites are found in the high probability area with scores larger than or around  <dig>  however, not all predicted sites with high scores are confirmed by est data. there are a few possible reasons for this. first, the est data may not be exhaustive, meaning that not all sites have been found in the available est dataset. second, not all possible sites are efficiently used in the cells. instead, some sites may only be used under certain environmental or developmental conditions. third, some may be inaccurately predicted. this could be corrected by further optimization of the algorithm. it is very interesting to note that in several cases, there are authenticated poly sites located in the low score area . the reason for this is not clear. one possible explanation could be that the use of this site could be facilitated by yet unknown trans-acting factors.

identification of multiple poly sites
to see if pass can differentiate multiple poly sites, we further tested some genes that have been reported by others or collected from genbank collections . tobacco rna binding protein- <dig> gene , which is known as a gene with many alternative poly sites  <cit> , was scanned for poly site scores by pass. as shown in figure  <dig>  most of the poly sites are in the highly scored  area of the 3'-utr with a couple of exceptions . however, the pass predicted peaks at around location  <dig> were not validated. it is very likely that there are other factors contributing to the site selection, e.g. protein factors, rna secondary structures, etc.

prediction of mutational alterations of poly site efficiencies
one way to further assess the software would be to see if it can predict the change of the utility of poly sites after the polyadenylation signals are mutated. examples of this can be found in the well-studied 3'-utrs. the polyadenylation signals for two genes, pea rubisco small subunit gene  e- <dig> and cauliflower mosaic virus  35s transcript, have been extensively studied by classical mutagenesis and genetic means  <cit> , and are being used widely in transgene constructions  <cit> . as shown on figure 4a, the main poly sites of the camv 3'utr are located on the peak of the scores predicted by pass. there are four validated poly sites in rbcs, but sites  <dig> and  <dig> are the major poly sites  <cit>  . interestingly, our program predicted such site usage bias by 6– <dig> score points . again, similar to fig.  <dig>  there are a few peaks  sites) after site  <dig> that are not used, presumably due to unknown factors that are not considered in this algorithm. it may also be possible that these sites are behind the major sites, and thus being skipped. nonetheless, our predicted sites are typically in the near vicinity of the authenticated sites.

detailed conventional mutagenesis experiments were performed on the poly signal for rbcs site  <dig>  which was chosen to avoid the overlapping signals of sites  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . linker scanning, base substitution, and enhancing the signal by using aauaaa all altered the site usage at different levels  <cit> . interestingly, these changes can also be predicted by our software as indicated in figure 4c. this becomes evident when the pass scores are compared with the site efficiency  site being chosen and used in the pool of the rbcs mrna) after mutation . there is a tendency of linear relationship between pass scores and site efficiencies following mutation. this suggests that our model can identify the poly sites both qualitatively and may be also quantitatively.

predicting poly sites in the genomic sequences
one of the utilities of pass is to predict poly sites of unannotated genomic sequences, which could be helpful in genome annotation. this is because a poly site marks the end of a 3'-utr, which generally is the end of a gene. to test the effectiveness of pass in this regard, we used it to scan several  <dig>  nt genomic sequences downloaded from tair . figure  <dig> shows one of these examples, in which many poly sites were predicted. when the gene annotation data  were overlaid with the pass prediction scores, several interesting phenomena became obvious. the ends of the  <dig> genes annotated in this region  all have the relative high score at the 3' termini of their transcripts, particularly when comparing the scores in the coding region and 3'-utr . some of them show a few sites with good scores in the 3'utr  or even in the coding sequences , which may reflect alternative poly sites. more interestingly, however, the two regions with the highest scores  were not located in any annotated genes. this could be due to the traditional annotation process failing to recognize the genes. alternatively, there may be some special sequences that possess the features of a poly site. it is also possible that pass produces false positive sites. these possibilities could be distinguished using wet lab experiments  tail, for example).

discussion
based on the current model of arabidopsis poly signals and their features, we developed a ghmm-based algorithm that for the first time can predict poly sites in plant mrna. in this paper, the structure of the model is described, and the program was tested with known poly sites. using this model, we achieved sufficient sensitivity and specificity both at 97% in the coding sequence and random datasets at a threshold of  <dig>  for other control datasets like 5' utrs and introns, which are known to share some features with 3'utrs, the sn and sp are still in a range of 72–82% at thresholds between  <dig>  and  <dig>  moreover, the algorithm was able to predict many poly site regions accurately when scanning a big fragment of arabidopsis genomic sequences.

ghmm is an important model in gene identification and is widely used by gene identification software such as genscan, genemarks and hmmgene  <cit> . ghmm can give each state multiple observed values  which makes it more suitable for describing a model of biological sequences. this improvement, however, is at the expense of an increase in computation. for example, the calculation complexity of the viterbi algorithm, a traditional hmm algorithm, is o, in which n is the number of states and l is the length of a sequence, while the calculation complexity of ghmm is o. such an improvement resulted in better sensitivity.

graber et al.  <cit>  described a hmm model that predicts the poly sites in yeast. while the basic principles of hmm are used in modeling algorithms in which the parameters were designed rather than trained, the difference and improvement using ghmm can be found in our algorithm. each of the two models deals with a distinct group of organisms both of which have different types of poly signal conservation, from which different parameters have to be given. our model was produced based on information of plant poly signals from a much large dataset . moreover, the generalized hmm was used in our algorithm. ghmm is known for better detaching the main model from sub-modeling of each signal state, a function that is expandable for modeling complicated signals. detailed comparisons of the differences between hmm and ghmm that was used in our algorithm can be found in additional files .

liu et al.  <cit>  used a machine learning method to generate human poly signals and then used a support vector machine to identify the real sites. after refinement of their method, the sensitivity of their program increased from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, while its specificity reached  <dig> %. our results reached a similar level , even though plant poly signals are less conserved than those of humans. in particular, there are only  <dig> patterns that cover about 90% of nue equivalent signals  in animals  <cit> . by contrast, in arabidopsis, a list of such patterns reaches several hundreds, with no predominant patterns . the prevalent signal aauaaa, although it is the best, can only be found in about 10% of the plant genes  <cit> . the rest of hundreds of signal patterns form a continuous distribution without a clear cut-off value . even so, nue is still the strongest signal among the tri-part poly signals, including fue and ce, based on classical genetics analysis  <cit> .

most recently, cheng et al.  <cit>  also reported a human poly site prediction algorithm using a support vector machine. the algorithm took advantage of  <dig> highly conserved poly signals, but also used other signals and u-rich elements to contribute to the prediction efficiency. these additional features improved the program's sensitivity, although the specificity remained more or less the same. integrating new features like secondary structure into pass should also improve its performance.

beyond the known variability of the nue signals in plants, a lack of conservation and identifiable features of other signal regions presents another difficulty in the prediction of poly site by an algorithm. no highly conserved pattern was found in the fue region. however, deletions of the fue region were found to affect adjacent poly site efficiency  <cit> . the best feature in the fue that helped our program was the distinct t and a richness of the region  <cit> . the ce region also suffered a lack of sequence conservation. however, this region exhibited complex nucleotide profiles  that made feature selection easier. under such circumstances, our program can predict many of the alterations of the poly site efficiency in mutants constructed by conventional genetic means . in particular, upon the change of a few nucleotides within polyadenylation signals, pass predicted the change of the poly site usage efficiencies  implying that the program has high merit in terms of accuracy.

pass should also be useful in gene annotation, where dna sequences can be entered and the poly site profiles deduced. the high values of the pass predictions are indicative of potential poly sites which signify the end of a mature transcript. we demonstrated this possibility by scanning fragments of genomic dna in  <dig>  nts in length  as shown in figure  <dig>  furthermore, pass can also be used to predict alternative poly sites that are not normally found by est experiments. alternative polyadenylation has been found to be more frequent than what was originally anticipated in human  and plant  genes  <cit> . a complete understanding of the significance of alternative polyadenylation is yet to be realized. our program should also be a useful addition towards achieving this goal.

CONCLUSIONS
based on the profiles of arabidopsis polyadenylation signals, a new algorithm, named pass, was developed to predict the poly sites in plants. the efficacy of the program was tested using known poly sites collected from est sequencing projects or published papers. interestingly, pass can also predict the alterations of poly site efficiency by traditional genetic mutations of poly signals. both specificity and sensitivity of the program reached around 97% at the best datasets. this algorithm will be useful in genome annotation by predicting the ends of the transcripts, in the study of alternative polyadenylation of mrna, and in genetic engineering by enabling researchers to recognize and then eliminate potential undesirable poly sites in the transgenes. the pass program is available through our web site  <cit> .

