BACKGROUND
various kingdoms of life appear to have proteins or protein segments that lack a folded structure  <cit> . these proteins and segments are thought to be intrinsically disordered structures providing essential biological functions  <cit> , so predicting such disorder should help us understand protein functions. disorder have been found in proteins involved in regulatory and signaling events  <cit>  and may provide conformational flexibility that allows proteins to interact with several structurally different targets  <cit> .

many studies have shown that the primary structure of disordered regions is distinct from that of structured regions  <cit> , and this has encouraged the development of many prediction methods based on the amino acid sequence. pondr  <cit> , globplot  <cit> , disopred  <cit> , vl <dig>  <cit> , disembl  <cit> , iupred  <cit> , and ronn  <cit>  predict the probability of any given residue being in a disordered region by using information about the amino acid sequences near that residue. a different approach predicts disorder by binary classification of amino acid sequences into mostly disordered sequences and mostly ordered sequences  <cit> . the former approach is based on the view that features of the local sequence are a more important than features of the whole structure.

two methods have been used for binary classification. uversky et al. suggested that a mostly disordered protein sequence could be discriminated from an ordered one by plotting the average hydrophobicity of the residues in the sequence against the net charge of the sequence  <cit> , and that method has been implemented as the web-based foldindex application  <cit> . garbuzynskiy et al., on the other hand, classified proteins as ordered or disordered by estimating the number of contacts of the whole protein  <cit> . both methods classify a target protein by using a linear discriminant function.

linear discriminant analysis, like other classification methods, infers a discriminant function that minimizes the misclassification of training data. the parameter optimization of the linear equation is therefore strongly influenced by the distribution of training data. in the prediction of protein disorder, the analysis depends on the protein sequences that are already known to be folded or unfolded. the training will be successful if the amount of training data is large enough to approximate the distribution of all protein sequences. if the quantity of training data is too small, however, the classification boundary overfits to a local cluster of protein structures.

it is hard to find disordered proteins not only because protein structures are often determined by x-ray diffraction analysis and information about proteins that could not be crystallized for x-ray analysis is seldom reported but also because not every failure to crystallize is due to disorder. previous studies have estimated the proportion of disordered proteins in various genomes. pondr estimated that 60% of eukaryotic proteins and 28% of bacterial proteins include disordered regions more than  <dig> residues long  <cit> . disopred <dig>  on the other hand, estimated that  <dig> % of eukaryotic proteins and  <dig> % of bacterial proteins include disordered regions longer than  <dig> residues and estimated that no more than  <dig> % of the sequences in the protein data bank  include disorder regions longer than  <dig> residues  <cit> . despite the appreciable frequency of disordered proteins, the sequences of few mostly disordered proteins are publicly available. although the current version  of disprot  <cit> , which is a public database providing information about disordered proteins, provides the sequences of  <dig> proteins, only  <dig> of those proteins are more than 70% disordered.

we therefore think that protein databases might be biased against disordered proteins. if there are a lot of unknown disordered proteins, the structural distribution of proteins in nature will differ from that of proteins whose structure has been determined experimentally. since training classifiers on data biased in this respect neglects of the actual distribution of natural proteins, the discriminative boundary should be adjusted to compensate the sparseness of the training data. semi-supervised learning has been gaining increasing attention for dealing with problems due to data sparseness. conventional supervised-learning methods, including support vector machines  and neural networks, use only labeled data when optimizing the parameters of the discriminant function. in binary classification, the labeled data is a set of samples each of which is known to be positive or negative. when semi-supervised learning builds a model to improve predictions, it takes into account not only the labeled data but also the unlabeled data by adapting to the distribution of unlabeled data.

a huge amount of known-sequence data is available. uniprot , for example, which is a widely used database of protein sequences, contains  <dig>  nonredundant proteins  <cit> , many of which can be expected to include a lot of disorder. we therefore, think it efficient to utilize the information of structure-unknown proteins by using semi-supervised learning to avoid training data sparseness. and prediction that considers a robust model will provide a new indicator for protein disorder.

in this study we developed a novel method for predicting disordered proteins by using joachims' spectral graph transducer   <cit> , which is a binary classification algorithm based on semi-supervised learning. it constructs a k-nearest neighbor  graph with both labeled and unlabeled examples as vertices, and the edge weight between two vertices represents their similarity. if the graph is separated into two subgraphs, both labeled and unlabeled vertices are classified into two categories. the sgt takes into account both the prediction accuracy of labeled training data and the distribution of unlabeled data, because it cuts the knn graph so as to minimize both the misclassification of labeled vertices and the sum of edges weights across the cut. we apply the sgt to the disorder prediction problem with structure-known sequences as labeled data and structure-unknown sequences, including query sequences, as unlabeled data. the proposed method can therefore be used for training both structure-known sequences and a huge amount of structure-unknown sequences, and it creates a model that incorporates a larger protein structural space. we examined how data with no structural information improves the prediction of disordered proteins and we compared the accuracy of the proposed sgt-based method with the accuracy of an svms-based method and the accuracies of two other previous methods. we compared this sgt-based binary-classification method with per-residue methods by comparing their predictions for both mostly disordered proteins and mostly ordered proteins. we also estimated the false positive rate when the proposed method was used for partially disordered proteins.

RESULTS
effect of structure-unknown proteins on disorder prediction
since the sgt constructs a model on both labeled data and unlabeled data, the accuracy of its predictions is influenced structure-unknown sequences as well as structure-known sequences. here we examine how structure-unknown sequences affect prediction accuracy.

does structure-unknown data increase prediction accuracy?
we tested different quantities of unlabeled samples in order to find out whether structure-unknown sequences have a positive or negative effect.

the sgt classifies unlabeled data as either a disordered protein or an ordered protein, so query sequences are also treated as unlabeled data. we tried to increase prediction accuracy by using as unlabeled data not only query sequences but also large numbers of structure-unknown protein sequences.

to investigate the effect of structure-unknown sequences, we prepared different quantities of unlabeled samples that were added to query sequences. each set of unlabeled samples  was chosen randomly from the swiss-prot database. we prepared  <dig> different datasets for each experiment in order to avoid sampling bias, and the results we obtained are shown in figure  <dig>  note that the x-axis in figure  <dig> does not include the number of query sequences, and the total number of unlabeled samples in these experiments was the sum of the number of query sequences and the number of proteins selected from the swiss-prot database.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the maximum, minimum and average matthews correlation coefficient  for the  <dig> datasets were highest in the experiment with  <dig>  structure-unknown samples selected from the swiss-prot database. the computational cost of building and decomposing a knn graph increases with the number of examples, so smaller numbers of examples are more practical with respect to computation time. since the average mcc is almost the same for  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  examples,  <dig>  is the most practical number of examples as well as the one yielding the highest average mcc.

the recent research reported that regions of predicted disorder were found to be conserved within a large number of protein families and domains  <cit> . the proposed method considers information about conserved regions through similarities among sequences. the results shown in figure  <dig> indicate that the proposed method effetely utilized information about conservation of protein disorder.

curated data or uncurated data?
to investigate whether classification accuracy is affected by the quality of unlabeled samples, we used unlabeled samples from three different databases: swiss-prot, uniprot <dig> and trembl. each set of  <dig>  or  <dig>  unlabeled samples was chosen randomly, and we used  <dig> datasets from each database in order to avoid sampling bias. the results are listed in table  <dig>  swiss-prot outperformed uniprot and trembl, which indicates the quality of unlabeled data is an important factor for prediction accuracy.

swiss-prot is a reliable database, which is carefully organized by human curators. trembl is a computer-annotated supplement to swiss-prot, which contains amino acid translations of all the embl nucleotide sequence entries, including sequences automatically predicted by gene-finding programs. uniprot consists of swiss-prot and trembl. this means that trembl and uniprot might include a lot of artificial translation of pseudogenes, which are not translated into proteins in vivo. such databases containing noise sequences are inferred to have a background distribution distinct from that of native protein sequences, and this distinction would have a negative effect on prediction.

which similarity measurement is best?
sgt divides a knn graph into two subgraphs for binary classification. since the edge weight of the graph represents the similarity of two vertices, a similarity measurement for two protein sequences has to be defined. we based predictions on three measurements  and examined which is best. the results obtained using  <dig>  structure-unknown sequences are listed in table  <dig>  the amino acid composition yielded the best results , and the blast score yielded the worst results . compositionally based similarity measurements were thus better for predicting dissimilar proteins than was motif or sequence similarity measurement.

comparison with previous methods
we compared the proposed method with two previous methods: foldindex  <cit>  and plotting hydrophobicity against the number of contacts   <cit> . foldindex output was obtained from the web server provided by the israel structural proteomics center, and we implemented a method for hydrophobicity-contactnumber plot because no web server or tool was available. we optimized its parameters on the same data we used for training our sgt-based method. for the proposed method, amino acid composition similarity measurement and  <dig>  structure-unknown samples were used. the results are listed in table  <dig>  the proposed method yielded a mcc  <dig>  points greater than that obtained using foldindex and yielded a mcc  <dig>  points greater than that obtained using the method calculating the number of hydrophobic residues in contact. we also show receiver operating characteristic  curves in figure  <dig> 

the proposed method has two advantages over previous methods. the first advantage is that it can construct a nonlinear classification boundary taking account of the background distribution of a large amount of protein sequences, which enables the classifier to avoid training data sparseness. the second advantage is that it uses more information than the previous methods do. foldindex and hydrophobicity-contactnumber plot postulate that a few physicochemical properties of target proteins are the main factor of disorder. although this strategy provides a simple and clear indicator, it overlooks many disordered proteins because other complex factors are involved in protein disorder. classification over a larger feature space should facilitate more accurate prediction. simple indicators cannot express some features of disorder. plotting average hydrophobicity against net charge or the number of residues in contact, for example, does not always reflect the sequence complexity, which is an important factor in the discrimination of disordered proteins  <cit> . if an amino acid that is used repeatedly has average hydrophobicity, net charge and contact number values, such information will remain hidden. although the composition of the entire sequence cannot be used to distinguish the local sequence complexity, it reflects long-range complexities. we conjecture that the hydropobicity-vs- and hydropobicity-vs- feature spaces should be considered subsets of the amino-acid-composition feature space. the two advantages of the proposed method enable it to identify more disordered proteins. for the same false positive rate , sgt found  <dig> disordered proteins that foldindex or plotting hydrophobicity against contact number did not find and found nine proteins that neither previous method found. and neither foldindex nor plotting hydrophobicity against contact number found four disordered proteins that sgt did not find .

comparison with support vector machines
many forms of biological data are classified using support vector machines, neural networks, or other types of traditional machine learning. these algorithms are supervised learning procedures where the classifier is trained on labeled data. spectral graph transducer, which is associated with semi-supervised learning, differs from other forms of supervised learning in that it uses unlabeled data. we also tested svms with the same features we use in sgt in order to investigate whether semi-supervised learning with unlabeled sequences is effective for predicting disorder. we compared sgt with svms, which is known to be a powerful classifier and has been widely applied to biological data analyses, using amino acid compositions as the feature vector. the svms package libsvm was used; performance of major three kernels  was compared, and rbf kernel, which gave the best result, was used. all parameters were tuned by grid-search. for sgt,  <dig>  structure-unknown samples were used. these results are also shown in table  <dig>  sgt gave a mcc  <dig>  points better than the svms did.

supervised learning methods, including svms, are especially sensitive to the training data distribution when the given data set is a small one. therefore, if biased data are provided, the predictive tendency will differ even if predictions are made using the same data. we compared the predictive tendencies with different training data as follows:  evaluation data were divided into three groups ;  each datum was predicted using a classifier trained on different data; and  the correlation coefficient between the two results was calculated. . the average correlation coefficient for sgt was  <dig>  higher than that for the svms . an sgt-based method, which uses a huge number of unlabeled samples, makes prediction robust with regard to training data sparseness. this result indicates that sgt prediction is less affected by training data bias and provides accurate predictions even with a poor data set. experimentally determined protein structures can potentially bias the data set. previous research has shown that discriminating disorder from order is similar to finding the classification boundary between crystal structures and solution structures  <cit> . this is an unavoidable problem as long as a limited dataset is used, but distribution of structure-unknown data modified the training data bias.

comparison with per-residue predictors
there are many studies in which the probability of any given residue being in a disordered region was predicted. although the methods used in those studies are not directly comparable to our method, comparing the proposed method to per-residue predictors gives helpful information about the accuracy of the proposed method.

we select four successful per-residue predictors for comparison: vl <dig>  <cit> , globplot  <cit> , disopred <dig>  <cit>  and iupred   <cit> . the vl <dig>  globplot and iupred  results were obtained from web servers, and the disopred <dig> results were obtained from a stand-alone program  <cit> . detailed results are shown in figure  <dig>  which shows the results of two types of evaluation. in the graphs on the left side, showing results for mostly disordered proteins , the sensitivities of each per-residue predictor are plotted against the sgt scores. in the graphs on the right side, showing results for mostly ordered proteins , the false positive rates of each per-residue predictor are plotted against the sgt scores. the sgt gives each protein a score that shows how likely the protein is to be disordered. it assigns positive score when it predicts a query protein to be disordered. for example, if a point is plotted in the lower right portion of one of the graphs on the left, the proposed method can correctly classify the target sequence while the corresponding per-residue predictor cannot find a lot of disordered residues.

specificity for mostly disordered proteins cannot be calculated because sequences selected from disprot have no information for ordered regions. the  <dig> predictions by vl <dig> for mostly ordered sequences were excluded because the vl <dig> server does not return results for sequences that include ambiguous characters such as 'z'.

disopred <dig> and iupred have low false positive rates on mostly ordered proteins. disopred <dig> successfully predicts short disordered regions in mostly ordered proteins , but does not detect  <dig> % of the disordered regions in mostly disordered proteins . vl <dig>  on the other hand, successfully finds  <dig> % of the disordered regions in mostly disordered proteins but produces a lot of false positives on mostly ordered proteins.

these per-residue predictors try to find exact position of disorder by classifying a fixed window length to be disordered or ordered. because their prediction thus concentrates on the local trend of disorder, they miss the global trend of disorder. and because a shorter window size includes less information, the local trend of disorder is more difficult to discriminate than the global trend of disorder. when a classification scheme such as neural networks or svms is used to determine a classification boundary between similar examples, there is inevitably a trade-off between getting a large number of false positives and getting a large number of true positives. this trade-off is strongly influenced by ratio of positive/negative training examples.

predicting disorder by classifying proteins as mostly disordered or mostly ordered is a rough approximation but has the advantage of detecting long disordered regions with a low false positive rate by neglecting short disordered regions. the proposed method predicts  <dig> % of the disordered regions in mostly disordered proteins, and its false positive rate on mostly ordered proteins is only  <dig> %. we therefore think insight is obtained by predict both disordered regions and disordered proteins, since a region-based-prediction provides information local trends of disorder while a protein-based-prediction gives information about large-area trends of disorder.

evaluation on partially disordered proteins
here we describe the results of prediction on partially disordered proteins. not all proteins are mostly disordered or mostly ordered and many are partially disordered. evaluating our method on partially disordered proteins gave us practical information we could use for estimating the false positive rates that would occur when it is used for large-scale genome analysis. as shown in table  <dig>  the proposed method is insensitive for the partially  disordered proteins, although the method can predict that  <dig> % of the moderately  disordered proteins are disordered.

prediction of disordered proteins in large databases
to provide illustrative examples of novel predictions made by our sgt-based method, we made predictions on several databases.

ward et al., using disopred <dig>  estimated  <dig> % of eukaryotic genomes and  <dig> % of bacterial genomes to be disordered and found long  disordered segments in  <dig> % of archaean proteins,  <dig> % of bacterial proteins and  <dig> % of eukaryotic proteins  <cit> . bogatyreva et al., evaluating the expected number of contacts, estimated that 12%, 3% and 2% of the proteins in eukaryotic, bacterial and archaean proteomes are totally disordered and that long  disordered segments occur in 16% of archaean proteins, 20% of bacterial proteins and 43% of eukaryotic proteins  <cit> . the proposed method predicts that an average of  <dig> % of archaean proteins,  <dig> % of bacterial proteins and  <dig> % of eukaryotic proteins are mostly disordered. the frequencies estimated for  <dig> archaean,  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> eukaryotic genomes, in addition to the overall totals for each domain, are listed in table  <dig>  in line with the results of previous genome-wide analysis, eukaryotic genomes are predicted to code for much more disorder than prokaryotic genomes do. this is consistent with much experimental evidence that has shown that dynamic flexibility of the protein structure is more often related to eukaryotic protein function than to bacterial and archaean protein function  <cit> .

the proposed method also predicts that  <dig> % of all sequences in the swiss-prot database are disordered. to investigate functional annotations of those sequences that were predicted to be disordered, we calculated the normalized ratio of annotated go molecular function terms: r = rd/rs, where rd is the ratio of the proteins annotated by go term t to all the proteins predicted to be disordered and rs is the ratio of the proteins annotated by go term t to all the sequences in the swiss-prot database. the top  <dig> of the go molecular function terms that describe more than  <dig> protein annotations, the  <dig> with the highest normalized ratios rd are listed in figure  <dig>  the proposed method was biased to find transcriptional-factor-related, rna-binding-related and dna-binding-related proteins to be disordered. binding to nucleic acids requires interaction between the nucleic acid phosphate backbone and charged amino acids, which have a propensity for disorder . therefore it is not necessarily appropriate to suggest that all rna-binding and dna-binding proteins need dynamic flexibility, though previous papers have discussed the relation between disorder and proteins binding rna and dna  <cit> . the global analysis over large databases by the proposed method is an on-going study, and in the future we will use the proposed method to find new disordered proteins and will promote its use in further functional analysis of disordered proteins in collaboration with experimental laboratories.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we proposed a semi-supervised learning approach for predicting disordered proteins. disordered proteins are getting more and more attention because many of them are found to be functionally important. few proteins however, are known to be disordered because information about a protein that could not be crystallized for x-ray analysis is seldom reported, even if the protein might be disordered. we therefore expect the distribution of disorder among proteins whose structure has been determined experimentally to differ from that of disorder among all natural proteins. since the predictions made by previous methods are based on structure-known data, they are strongly affected by the bias for information about readily crystallized proteins. to avoid training data sparseness and to structure the hypothesis space based on the entire protein distribution, we have proposed a prediction method that uses joachims' spectral graph transducer and is trained on both structure-known sequences and structure-unknown sequences.

this method yielded mccs  <dig>  points higher than the mcc yielded by the method plotting hydrophobicity vs. net charge  and  <dig>  points higher than the mcc yielded by the method plotting hydrophobicity against the number of contacts. when the false positive rate was 5%, we found  <dig> disordered proteins that were not found using those previous methods.

the proposed method predicts disorder by classifying proteins as either mostly disordered or mostly ordered. while such binary classification cannot detect partially disordered regions that per-residue predictors can find, it has the advantage of detecting long disordered regions by neglecting short disordered regions. when the proposed sgt-based method was compared with four per-residue predictors-vl <dig>  globplot, disopred <dig>  iupred -its sensitivity for disordered proteins was  <dig> , which is  <dig> – <dig>  higher than that of the per-residue predictors and its specificity for ordered proteins was  <dig> , which is  <dig> – <dig>  higher than that of the per-residue predictors. 

the main contribution of this paper is that it provides a method in which structure-unknown protein sequences are used to increase the accuracy with which disordered proteins can be predicted. we compared the results obtained using the proposed method with the results obtained using a svms-based method that used the same features that the proposed method used . the proposed method resulted in a mcc  <dig>  points higher than the mcc obtained using the svms-based method. when it and the method using svms were trained on two different datasets and both methods were tested on a third dataset, it provided an average correlation coefficient that was  <dig>  higher than that provided by the method using svms. the sgt-based prediction was less affected by training data sparseness and provided more accurate predictions when the data set was a poor one. these results provide convincing evidence for a positive effect of structure-unknown protein sequences, and our sgt-based method is therefore able to serve as a new indicator of disordered protein that considers the overall protein distribution in nature.

