BACKGROUND
evidence of increased levels of specific cytokines and growth factors within nigrostriatal dopamine regions of the brain in parkinson's disease  patients, has led to the belief that pd is the result of immunological responses that promote an increased synthesis and release of proinflammatory cytokines  <cit> . these cytokines have been shown to affect the quantity and distribution of intracellular proteins such as α-synuclein in cultured microglia  <cit> . the exact function of α-synuclein is unknown. however, there is evidence supporting a vesicular, pre-synaptic role for α-synuclein in the dopamine transporter system  <cit> . this normally soluble protein is recognized to be a large component of the lewy body, the pathologic hallmark of the disease. what promotes the formation of lewy body inclusions is poorly understood, but it has been proposed that this is a protective pathway in response to failed mechanisms, such as aggresome degradation of dysfunctional protein  <cit> . the lewy body, and its precursor the lewy neurite, have been reproducibly traced through the cns, resulting in a progressive and predictable pattern of involvement leading to the staging of sporadic parkinson's disease and the clinical correlation of symptoms with neuroanatomical localization  <cit> .

the majority of investigations regarding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying cell death in pd have emphasized post-mortem studies, genetically altered animals and neuronal cultures, but a role for non-neuronal cells in the pathoetiology of pd by investigations into glial cell line responses, may lead to a better understanding of the role of α-synuclein in cell-cell communication and the neuron-glia relationship in pd. our previous work with cultured microglia cells showed that after exposure to specific cytokines, α-synuclein was both redistributed and increased in content, with the cells becoming prone to enter cell death pathways  <cit> . we therefore treated cultured human microglia cells with pd-csf to see if we could produce similar results. the cells responded dramatically, exhibiting reduced growth, a loss of adhesion, and eventual necrotic death. given these findings with cultured microglia, we postulated that effects in other glial cell lines such as astrocytes might be similar to those in microglia. astrocytes have not been investigated to as great a degree as other cell types, despite having critical signaling and support roles in the cns. astrocytes are known to be involved in protection against neurodegeneration, and display α-synuclein immunoreactivity in cases of sporadic pd  <cit> . therefore, the purpose of this study was to continue a line of research exploring the effects of pd-csf and disease control csf on cultured glial cells, while comparing outcomes with microglia and astrocytes in terms of resiliency and protein aggregations and distributions. these two cell types differ in their functions in the cns and in their origins, microglia being derived from bone marrow and functioning primarily as phagocytic neuroprotective first responders, whereas astrocytes are multi-task cells derived from neurectoderm, with functions ranging from metabolic buffers and detoxifiers, to providers of endothelial support and scar formation. we hypothesized that these two functionally diverse cell lines would both succumb to pd-csf treatments, but different responses would occur in protein losses/changes and ability to overcome these challenges. using not only pd-csf, but also non-pd disease control csf and no-csf treatments, expands our limited knowledge of cellular responses in pd. previous studies have shown the 'toxicity' of pd-csf on adrenal medulla tumor cells and retardation of cell growth  <cit> . since  <dig>  it has been known that pd-csf contains factors which result in dopaminergic neuron distress and growth inhibition  <cit> . however, the role of non-neuronal cells in disease progression has been studied to a lesser degree, even though their roles in signaling and neuron support are well established.

RESULTS
cultured microglia cells growth patterns
microglia cells showed a reduced rate of growth following pd-csf treatment, as well as diverse morphological changes that included cellular blebbing, but these observations were not apparent in disease control csf treated or control  microglia cultures. figure  <dig> demonstrates that by day four control cells had grown to confluence, whereas pd-csf treated microglia were sparse and non-confluent. disease control csf treated cells had a reduced growth rate, but overt changes in cell morphology were not apparent. by day seven, after the addition of fresh culture medium, all cell groups showed substantial renewed growth and viability .

cultured astrocytes cell growth patterns
α-synuclein distribution in microglia
as seen in figure  <dig> the intracellular content of α-synuclein following pd-csf treatment, compared to disease control csf treated and no-csf controls, was significantly increased . however, what is of note is that α-synuclein protein increases were in a somewhat random, intracellular locale, not along the periphery of the cell and clustered to the nucleus .

α-synuclein density in astrocytes
in contrast to microglia cultures, figure  <dig> shows that the α-synuclein density in cultured astrocytes was variably affected, with no discernable increases in protein content following various csf treatments . unlike the microglia cells, the α-synuclein seen at the cell extensions, was minimally disrupted .

α-synuclein content in treated microglia cells
relative densities of α-synuclein content in cultured microglia over time , between the three treatment groups are shown in figure  <dig>  pd-csf treatment resulted in a rapid, significant increase in α-synuclein content, compared to both the no-csf control and disease control csf treated cells by days  <dig> and  <dig> .

α-synuclein content in treated astrocytes
in contrast to microglia, figure  <dig> illustrates that treated astrocytes showed modest increases in α-synuclein content, with a tendency to return to pre-treatment levels without further additions of csf. only the pd-csf treated cells revealed significant increases in α-synuclein, and this was much later, on day  <dig>  than in microglia . these later increases were not sustained and disappeared over the next 2- <dig> days. these changes are also shown in the western blot.

α-synuclein distribution in modeled microglia and astrocyte cells
discussion
based on our previously reported results with cultured microglia and cytokines, we postulated that exposure of these cultured cells to pd-csf, which has been reported to contain cytokines, would give similar results  <cit> . as a comparison to microglia, which play a critical role in neurodegenerative disease and may well be an integral part of the immunologic cascade that occurs in pd and possibly alzheimer's disease, we chose to culture astrocytes since they have been shown to play a protective, anti-inflammatory and signaling role in the brain  <cit> .

we hypothesized that neuro-toxic effects from pd-csf exposure would be specific to the individual cell types given that they have different roles in the cns  <cit> .

interest in comparing these two essential cns cell types was piqued by reports of microglia-astrocyte interactions in neurodegeneration and the lack of understanding of the role of astrocytes in parkinson's disease  <cit> . we therefore undertook a localization-quantification direction in our investigations to carry out cell comparison studies, and found that there were indeed different outcomes in our two cell lines with regard to protein content and cell growth responses following treatments with pd-csf, a fluid known to be toxic in cell cultures  <cit> .

our previous research reported the effects of cytokines on both protein aggregations in cultured cells and resulting cell viability. results revealed that glial cells were not only deleteriously affected by sustained and high-dose cytokine treatments, but that these changes were continuous by exposure to high doses, in regard to both protein localizations and protein content  <cit> . we therefore wanted to determine the effects of pd-csf treatments on cultured glial cells, while comparing outcomes to changes seen in cultured astrocytes.

while both cell types showed somewhat similar alterations in growth patterns, with astrocytes growing at a slower rate, dramatic changes were seen in glial cell morphology, with evidence of cellular blebbing and a much decreased growth rate, suggesting their greater susceptibility to agents such as cd <dig> or secreted alpha-synuclein  <cit> . furthermore, the two cell types revealed contrasting outcomes when α-synuclein distributions were compared following exposure to pd-csf. astrocytes revealed minimal changes in distributions of α-synuclein, while microglial cells exhibited a marked change from a diffuse distribution pattern throughout the cytoplasm and along the plasma membrane, to a dense, peri-nuclear aggregation. whereas astrocytes did not reveal defined changes in α-synuclein protein densities, glial cells did demonstrate increasing amounts of the protein after pd-csf treatment, amounts that were significantly higher than those found in both control  and disease control csf treated cells on day  <dig> post-treatment. additionally, these increases in α-synuclein content were concurrent with reduced glial cell growth, suggesting that the different outcomes might reflect diverse roles for α-synuclein in the two cells types and lending support to reports of over expression of α-synuclein by genomic multiplications leading to parkinsonism  <cit> . excess α-synuclein causes deleterious effects in cultured glia, and infers disruptions in cellular machinery involved in membrane trafficking, chaperon-mediated autophagy, or via the production of excessive amounts of reactive oxygen species leading to oxidative damage  <cit> . in contrast, astrocytes appear to be more resilient to pd-csf assault and somewhat immune to protein aggregations, thereby suggesting that astrocyte protection of neurons might be sustained under attacks from such factors as soluble α-synuclein, astrocyte originating prostaglandins and other noxious compounds  <cit> . these findings also give support to the possibility that astrocytes, in which α-synuclein plays a role in fatty acid uptake and trafficking, suffer dire consequences to their membrane functionality, rather than in their signaling role  <cit> .

due to the results of this study revealing an apparent resiliency of astrocytes, our future research will include a focus on changes in cell adhesion properties as a cause of neurodegeneration, the role of glial derived neurotrophic factor  in pd and cellular protection, and the co-culturing of cns cells to display neuroprotective effects of gdnf and the proactive role of astrocytes in neurodegeneration  <cit> . isolation and identification of circulating factors involved in chronic neurological diseases is an ongoing task, but the roles of specific cells and their diverse reactions to pd-csf treatments revealed by these comparative studies are important in not only understanding the interactions between cells in neurodegeneration, but possibly by refocusing research to pathways and mechanisms that can halt the loss of dopaminergic neurons by looking at other cell types. sporadic pd has a variable phenotypic expression and rate of progression, no biological marker exists and as such the diagnosis is made clinically, being solely dependent on symptoms and signs of motor dysfunction from striato-nigral failure  <cit> . nonetheless, our pd patient population in this study was at least seven years post their pd diagnosis and in the off medicine state when csf was obtained, placing them uniformly in a moderately severe stage of the disease. in order to exclude non-specific effects, we used neurological disease controls or non-pd csf for comparison, samples that were harvested and stored similarly.

CONCLUSIONS
to summarize, these findings show that not all cell types in the cns react in a similar manner to exposure to csf from pd patients. the data suggest that a constituent, or constituents, specific to pd-csf, leads to cell growth retardation and exerts specific and possibly unique effects on α-synuclein distribution and densities in multiple cell types, thus disrupting multiple pathways.

previous results combined with those presented here, illustrate the important role α-synuclein plays in the pathology of pd and the profound changes that occur due to exposure to pd-csf and/or cytokines  <cit> . apparent recovery of the microglia over time suggests that the cells appear to flirt with a death pathway, but are able to overcome the low-dose/initial insult of pd-csf and cytokine treatments, and return to a robust growth rate comparable to untreated cells. whether this recovery is due to initiation of protective cellular mechanisms such as the release of gdnf, or to changes in the binding of toxic agents, needs further studying, particularly as a possible therapeutic concern  <cit> .

this study reveals different responses to pd-csf in each of two cns cell types, with α-synuclein protein aggregations and redistribution leading to inevitable, eventual, cell death following disruptions in cell-cell communication due to loss of adhesion properties in microglia. in contrast, astrocytes, whose function is to provide endothelial support as part of the blood brain barrier, and transport fatty acids, do not succumb to pd-csf exposure in such a deleterious and catastrophic manner and these diverse cellular responses show trends that, if properly delineated, might lead to the development of neuroprotective therapies, enhancing cell adaptation mechanisms and targeting the induction of protective and recovery pathways for improved cell survival outcomes. a role for α-synuclein in cell-cell communication and/or adhesion is implied by our findings, and provides support for the hypothesis of excess or abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein in the neurodegenerative process leading to disruption of microglia mediated cell signaling. astrocytes on the other hand, appear to be more resistant to pd-csf treatment, which may reflect a less critical role of α-synuclein in the normal functions of these cells, but indicates an important role in endothelial support.

