BACKGROUND
as scientists, the methodologies we use both enable and help define our research. furthermore, the methodologies we declare in articles permit others to judge the merits of the research we have carried out and to replicate our experiments. as experimental complexity has increased, however, the choice of appropriate methodologies has become an increasingly difficult task  <cit> , especially in fields that rely heavily on computational analysis. indeed there is now a bewildering array of software tools  that often perform similar tasks using different methods, making it difficult for individual researchers to keep track of new and existing software, let alone the most suitable software in a specific research area.

best practice is the most efficient  declaration of the process that describes the implementation of a specific methodology. although all of the elements of best practice are routinely considered by researchers, its explicit declaration in biological research is rarely performed. recording of best practice is an important element of many disciplines such as clinical medicine, e.g., evidence-based medicine  <cit>  and nice guidelines  <cit> ; medical research, e.g., mrc guidelines  <cit>  and meta-analyses  <cit> ; and in business, e.g., best practice templates  <cit>  and best practice benchmarking  <cit> . the commonality between these groups is evidence; in order to justify a decision you need evidence upon which to base it. however, most of the current usage of best practice in biological research employs evidence in the context of results with limited regards to the design of experimental protocols  <cit> .

to enable researchers to choose appropriate methodologies, we propose that systems to automatically suggest experimental design templates based on literature-based validation of best practice information will:  simplify the design process and  provide a sound scientific basis for the choice of the specific details of an experiment. in order to survey practice in a community and identify best practice we must first be able to collect practice in general. from this data we can then attempt to identify elements therein that may be considered for inclusion into a best practice proposal. experimental best practice is dependent on its contextual environment. this could constitute the size of the data set to analyse, the field in which the researcher works or the kind of research questions that the research aims to address. we aim to capture elements of context in relation to practice and to incorporate this into our best practice information. specifically we examine the impact of field allegiance, co-authorship patterns and the overall popularity of methods on experimental practice.

we refer to the complete set of all different practices used by all members of a research community as "community practice". additionally, we define "best practice" as a subset of community practice, incorporating those elements most scientifically credible and providing the most appropriate choice for any practitioner from the field. note, when defining best practice we are not necessarily seeking superlatives, but rather a combination of optimal and agreed solutions.

our implementation of methodology capture involves the application of information extraction techniques to full-text journal literature. text analysis, text mining and data mining are becoming increasingly popular techniques for information conglomeration. they are suited to the large information resources that are currently available, for example, literature  <cit>  or gene expression  <cit>  databases. these techniques, for example, have been used extensively in the identification of protein interactions  <cit> . when we combine text mining with the increasing availability of full-text journal articles  <cit> , we find it facilitates the automatic identification, extraction and dissemination of experimental methods.

to assess the utility of our approach we selected the field of molecular phylogenetics to act as a test case. phylogenetics was selected because:  the methods used are mainly computational and are implemented by a large but well defined group of software programs, the names of which can be easily collected.  there is significant variety in the methods that different researchers use.  phylogenetic methods are employed by many scientifically distinct fields of research.  there is debate over which methods should be employed.  there is no standard way to communicate or declare the methods and software used in a phylogenetic analysis.

the single largest source of phylogenetic and indeed scientific practice is journal literature. because of the adherence to the scientific method and therefore the need to declare the methods used, each article describing original research should contain text relating to the methods employed. our approach makes use of this practice resource by operating on the full-text of journal articles. we then search this text for terms that are significant in the description of phylogenetic experiments .

the set of important methodological terms found in any one article can be said to be a description of the protocol employed in that piece of research. we divide the methodological terms, found in the text, between four key stages:  sequence alignment,  tree inference,  statistical testing and data resampling, and  tree visualisation and annotation . the individual protocols are, thus, a model of a scientific experiment that is inferred from the text of the methods described in an article. the phylogenetic terms found in the methods are inferred to describe a task or part of a task and the collection of these tasks is what we term the protocol. note, our analytical protocol model  is only part of a fully declared workflow that also includes the more mundane aspects: data retrieval, reformatting etc., which may then be transformed into a computer-enabled workflow that can be implemented by a system such as taverna  <cit>  or kepler  <cit> . these are the stages that need to be included for full automation  <cit> .

our approach successfully retrieves a large number of phylogenetic protocols from the scientific literature. analysing this data, we find that phylogenetic practice over the last  <dig> years has varied both temporally and between different groups of practitioners. distinct fields of phylogenetic practitioners can be identified that, although they overlap, are significantly divergent in the protocols they use. we have also identified, using a collaboration network, highly published and widely collaborative researchers for each field. these "expert" researchers design their experiments in very similar ways to the other members of their field and therefore act as useful practice indicators for their field. our recommendation for producing a best practice proposal for phylogenetics involves a combination of expert practice from each of the most significant fields  and the most sophisticated or appropriate practice from all fields.

RESULTS
a pubmed  <cit>  search for "phylogen*" in titles or abstracts identified  <dig>  results, which yielded  <dig>  different articles in pdf format. this difference is attributable to incorrect pubmed "link out" data and software difficulties with finding the pdf version of the article from the original link. after processing the  <dig>  pdf files,  <dig>  articles in plain text remained. reasons for this difference include a number of pdf files being encrypted, while others contained only scanned images of text.

the result of the community practice gathering and extraction process was  <dig> unique phylogenetic protocols found in  <dig>  different articles. the oldest available article to contain any terms in our data set was published in  <dig> and 90% of all analysed articles were published after 1996; before  <dig> protocols were retrieved in fewer than  <dig> articles per year. thus, we focussed our analysis on the  <dig> unique protocols identified from  <dig> to  <dig>  we found there are several very popular protocols with most articles  using one of the top  <dig> most utilised protocols . this does, however, leave another  <dig> protocols that have on average only been used seven times each. the  <dig> most popular protocols all include at least one reference to either neighbor-joining, maximum-likelihood, parsimony or the unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic mean  as a method for phylogenetic tree inference. when assessing the accuracy of protocol identification by comparing our approach to manually annotated text  we found very high levels of protocol retrieval: precision  <dig> %, recall  <dig> % and f-measure   <dig> %.

now that we have a sample of community practice we can address how practice varies with respect to contextual properties. to do this we investigated the importance of field allegiance and scientific authority  in relation to community and best practice. our first step, therefore, in identifying best practice is to define the fields for which it must be able to cater and whether practice varies between them.

 <dig> different journals are represented in the  <dig>  articles that we collected. out of these,  <dig> journals are represented in the set of  <dig>  articles from which a protocol has been extracted. the  <dig> most commonly represented journals have published almost 40% of all the articles in our data set. excluding pnas as a general interest journal, there are three defined journal groups relating to fields of research within these  <dig> journals: evolutionary biology, microbiology/bacteriology and virology. in addition to the  <dig> most common journals, we have also classified all journals represented in our article set  into these journal groups. we found that 17%  of articles were published in evolutionary biology journals, 22%  were published in microbiology or bacteriology journals and 11%  were from journals related to virology. the remaining 50%  were published in a wide variety of fields.

given that a best practice proposal should be able to cater for all users of phylogenetics, we assessed the differences/similarities between these fields and how they have developed through time. furthermore, we can use this to assess whether there is methodological communication between fields. to do this we calculate the proportion of articles from each journal group that contained each of the protocols implemented in each year and generate a series of networks  that map the methodological choices made by authors from three different fields during the last  <dig> years . these networks indicate that, while there is overlap, a significant shift in methodological preference has occurred between fields. we have used calculations of the network assortativity coefficient   <cit>  to highlight changes in methodological choice. in this case a larger r-value indicates field-specific method choice. overall network assortativity and some field-field assortativity comparisons, specifically, evolutionary biology/microbiology and evolutionary biology/virology, have increased throughout this period . compared to random networks, there is a significantly different increase in overall network assortativity . this is presumably due to the larger increase in assortativity between the evolutionary biology field and the other two fields . there was no change in assortativity between the microbiology and virology fields, with the values being inside the 95% confidence interval from 1996– <dig> and  <dig>  and when outside the 95% confidence interval only varying between - <dig>  and  <dig> .

to analyse the pattern of divergence between evolutionary biology and the other two fields, we analysed the usage of terms relating to bayesian phylogenetic analysis . over 60% of evolutionary biology articles published in  <dig> included one or more references to a term describing bayesian phylogenetic analysis of some kind, this compares to 5% of microbiology and 11% of virology articles. this demonstrates that the kind of protocols implemented by the three fields have diverged during the period 1996– <dig> and that, in particular, protocols published in evolutionary biology journals have become more distinct from those in the other two journal groups during the same period.

to further investigate the heterogeneous use of different phylogenetic software and methods between fields for each of our phylogenetic terms we analysed:  the field or fields in which it was used in its first year  and  whether it was ever used in each of the fields . interestingly, there are a large number of terms that are only used in their first year of reporting  in evolutionary biology  and outside of the three fields . very few were used in all fields in their first year , while many more terms  are used by all fields at some point, and some are only ever used by one  or two  of the fields . many terms are first published outside the three fields with 80%  used at least once by one or more of the three fields studied.

it is commonly accepted that much scientific practice is influenced by authority of some kind, be it by role, citations or experience. therefore authority can be seen as an indicator of best practice. authorities are, however, almost always specific to a field, for example, a virologist will tend to read virology literature more often than microbiology literature. given that field-specific research communities exist, we can make an inference on what might be considered "best", or perhaps more accurately commonly published and scrutinised practice, by capturing what is done by the experts in each field. we define our experts as those who are most widely collaborative and also who contribute the most research of publication quality to the community.

to explore expert practice we constructed a collaboration network  <cit>  from our articles and overlaid collaboration metric data. we also labelled our authors according to the journal group in which they most frequently publish. we included only those authors that came from articles from which a protocol has been extracted. this resulted in  <dig>  unique authors and  <dig>  collaborations between them. each author was represented as a node and each collaboration as an edge. we assigned two sets of attributes to the edges: these were the number of collaborations  between the two authors connected by the edge and the number of collaborations divided by the number of authors on each article  of which they were co-authors  <cit> . this weights collaboration between authors on articles with a small number of co-authors more highly than articles with many co-authors.

in order to identify authors who were most active in this network, we restricted the node set to include only those that had co-authored three or more articles with one or more other authors. this reduced the largest connected component of the resultant network to  <dig>  nodes and  <dig>  edges; we refer to this network as the reduced collaboration network . when we consider the reduced collaboration network of authors  who have published in our phylogenetics corpus, we see a field-specific pattern similar to that in figure  <dig>  there are many authors who tend not to collaborate regularly with others outside their field  and then there are other authors who link the clusters through interdisciplinary collaborations.

we quantified the field specific structure in figure  <dig> in the same way as figure  <dig> . overall network assortativity is  <dig>  with fields being almost equally assortative with respect to each other . note, the assortativity value of  <dig>  between evolutionary biology and microbiology indicates there are no co-authorships between authors from these fields in this reduced network. using a metric of collaborative activity  we have highlighted the five most active researchers from each of the three fields as well as five from outside the fields. interestingly, the protocols employed by these  <dig> most highly active authors in the network are very similar to those used by the rest of the community. the  <dig> most frequently used protocols by the non-experts  are used almost as frequently by the experts . the experts have co-authored  <dig>  articles between them and these articles have made use of  <dig> protocols unique to their group.

discussion
our survey of phylogenetic practice over the last  <dig> years has found a large range of experimental protocols declared at varying levels of detail. this has created an environment of both consensus and variation. we have authors reporting methods that are commonly used by hundreds of authors, and others who create highly bespoke experimental protocols of their own design and remain the sole practitioners of these protocols. context is clearly important. it could be that these highly specific protocols are used to answer highly specific research questions. until we are able to reliably capture detailed contextual information of this kind we will not know whether this is the case. in addition our results highlight the need for better recording and communication of experimental methods.

the observed field-specific and temporal variations  in community practice suggest that an opinion of what constitutes best practice is changing through time and depends to a large extent on the field to which an individual belongs. in particular, we find there has been a significant shift in the methodologies used by the evolutionary biology field and the microbiology and virology fields, which is partly attributable to the differential use of bayesian inference. we have analysed the emergence and spread of different phylogenetic terms in the three fields , and find a large number of terms unique to the evolutionary biology field  and that a large number of terms are never used outside of this field , except for when they are used in ungrouped journal articles. the number of terms being first used outside the three fields  is presumably a reflection of the specialised nature of phylogenetic methods and software. the authors who develop new methods and software tend not to publish in the same kind of journals as those who use their innovations.

almost all of the  <dig> protocols used most commonly by the phylogenetics community represent a valid choice ) for a researcher new to the field. common community practice is therefore a good starting point upon which to build a best practice proposal. it does, however, lack those features unique to specific fields and the requirements of specific users.

our analysis suggests that communication of methods is not only difficult, i.e., researchers apparently use many different computer programs for generally the same type of analysis, but it is also hampered by inefficient information exchange between practitioners of phylogenetics. the latter appears to be due to academic specialism, in that researchers tend to first look to others from their own field when choosing methods. interestingly, expert authors tend not to use protocols that are distinct from others in their field. this makes the protocols used by experts in each field a valuable indicator of the kind of protocols commonly used in their respective fields and, thus, a useful short-cut to identifying best practice for that specific field.

our model-based method for protocol extraction  has permitted the construction of representations of protocols that have a direct link with the physical implementation of that protocol. the use of full-text journal articles was necessary due to the information we were endeavouring to capture, i.e., experimental methods. many other text mining projects would be significantly enhanced with the use of full-text. an abstract is only an abbreviated summary that presents the most important findings from a piece of research and very briefly places them in context. its function is to act as a point of entry to a complete manuscript. much potentially important information, and nuance, will only be found in the full manuscript. thus, given the number of different scientifically interesting elements  <cit>  contained in a full article, that are usually not present in the abstract, text mining research needs to make more use of full-text.

the model-based method for protocol extraction also allows us to organise method terms according to the order in which they would have been used in the experiment rather than their order in the text. this is a powerful element of our approach that could lead to further work on automated suggestion of methods or software for a given task or part of a protocol. the model can also allow us to account for missing information in our extracted protocols, so that if an extracted protocol does not contain any terms related to a single part of the model , we can still analyse the other parts of the protocol for which we do have information. this is an important feature for analysing information automatically derived from text, which is often sparse, with some elements well described and easy to identify and analyse, and others described indirectly via citation, figure legends or supplementary information. our structured approach to capturing protocols from full-text articles could be applied to any discipline of science where the methods used can be broken down into individual sequential stages. for example, a simple molecular biology task to sequence a genic region from a fruit fly could be broken down into: dna extraction, purification, amplification, sequencing and chromatogram analysis. as with a phylogenetic protocol several terms could map on to each one of these stages, for example, pcr or bacterial cloning could be used in the amplification step.

in the increasingly specialised world of scientific research, our results demonstrate the need for strong collaboration and communication between fields of research, especially between those implementing similar experimental designs. best practice information derived from whole disciplines rather than small research communities allows us to share information between a larger number of researchers who may have no knowledge of new innovations in other fields. best practice also supports replication of results and standardisation of practices by providing protocols that can be reused in many different research areas and which produce comparable results. comparable results are of particular importance in phylogenetics at the moment, with the advent of phylogenomics  <cit>  and projects attempting to construct and represent the full tree of life  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our capture of protocols from a large group of researchers has allowed us to reliably survey the current state of practice in the design of protocols in the field of molecular phylogenetics. this information is useful for monitoring best practice versus new trends and directions in the community as well as identifying from where they originate.

the capture of best practice is a non-trivial task; in this case we have found that the practice of highly published authors acts as a good proxy for that of others in the same field. we have also defined how the main fields have altered methodologically over time. the evolutionary biology field, in particular, has diverged from the others and these changes are characterised by the use of new and more advanced methods. this suggests that the practice of expert authors in evolutionary biology  is the closest to contemporary best practice for phylogenetic experimental design. notwithstanding data specific issues, a protocol combining those methodological elements present in the protocols of the evolutionary biology group combined with elements from protocols of the experts in the specific field offers an appropriate choice for any researcher. we also envisage the tailoring of best practice to individual users needs. this would determine the user's experimental context, including such information as data set size, any potential idiosyncrasies of the data, the level of analytical detail required, possible time constraints etc. such information could be used to modify a base protocol to the data and users needs.

a sample of the most commonly implemented methodological protocols used by the top five expert authors from the evolutionary biology field

currently practice capture requires extensive effort to identify community-wide information from a field where the choices of methods are well defined and described. we propose that an explicit model of an experimental protocol represented as a workflow  <cit>  will improve communication, sharing and ranking of experimental protocols and will support one of the central tenets of the scientific method, that of replicable results  <cit> . importantly, this computer-enabled workflow should contain all parameters and methods of all elements of the experiment, with stable connections to implementations of these methods that are accessible to all. specific phylogenetic protocols  could then be associated with quality metrics. for example, quantification of usage based on the number of published articles using the protocol, protocols associated with specific authors and types of data, specialist protocols that integrate additional methodologies, e.g., the detection of recombinant sequences. work such as this will benefit from concerted effort on the subject of context capture and how to capture the real aims of a study. this will complete the linking of methods with aims permitting researchers to efficiently tailor experimental solutions to specific research projects.

