BACKGROUND
within the tropics water availability, with soil fertility, is one of the most important environmental factors determining tree species richness  <cit>  and distribution  <cit> . although wet tropical regions are characterized by high annual rainfall, seasonality makes it unevenly distributed across the year such that even tropical humid forest can experience seasonal soil drought  <cit> . regions currently occupied by luxuriant rainforest have also undergone decade- to century-long drier spells in both recent and geological past  <cit> . tree species' natural range may have changed during those periods, but selective pressure may also have acted on extant populations. genetic mechanisms of drought tolerance are therefore expected to have evolved in tropical tree species, and variation for these mechanisms is expected as different species, and populations within species, are adapted to different soil water availability optima. study of potentially adaptive natural genetic diversity is needed to understand ecological mechanisms underlying the composition of such diverse ecosystems as tropical forests and to predict species responses to climate change . research on mechanisms and molecular bases of drought stress tolerance have been conducted for decades and several reviews exist  <cit> , but only a few studies have focused on tropical trees as keystone species of tropical forests. there is a need therefore to explore the adaptive potential of forest tree populations  <cit>  in natural tropical ecosystems.

the molecular basis of drought tolerance is extremely complex and a wide variety of expressional candidate genes has been suggested for example in a. thaliana  <cit>  and in trees  <cit> . among protein classes involved in response to drought, and the regulation of water balance in general, aquaporins are a good candidate starting point for the exploration of genetic diversity in natural populations of non-model species such as neotropical rainforest trees, as they are ubiquitous, well known and the focus of in-depth functional studies in plants in general  <cit>  and trees in particular  <cit> . in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, aquaporins play a channel role in water transport  <cit> . in plants, they form a large family divided into four subfamilies  <cit> . we chose for this study plasma membrane intrinsic proteins , which are grouped in two subfamilies . pips are well characterised and share a recent evolutionary history which permits quick isolation of multiple members of the gene family by homology-based methods. moreover alexandersson et al.  <cit>  have shown that most pip transcripts are down-regulated upon gradual drought stress, indicating that they are involved in, or affected by, response mechanisms to drought stress. therefore, these genes may be under selection in natural populations. we tested the hypothesis that the genes coding for these proteins undergo natural selection in a set of neotropical species.

the extent and selective/demographic meaning of diversity at drought-response candidate genes in natural populations of forest trees has been analysed in several recent studies . some of these studies  <cit>  present results on one or a few aquaporin genes, but no signature of selection or demography was detected at these loci when tested.

in this study we developed universal primers, based on plant sequences available in public databases, to sequence pip genes in five tropical tree species: pachira quinata , virola sebifera , carapa guianensis , and two congeneric species eperua falcata and eperua grandiflora . we describe their nucleotide diversity in natural populations and apply tests for departures from the standard neutral equilibrium to detect patterns that potentially indicate the action of natural selection. our results point to the action of a combination of balancing selection and demographic events at these loci in populations of neotropical forest trees.

RESULTS
amplifications with universal primers allowed the cloning of 1- <dig> different genes per species . for eleven contigs, homology in tair databases  <cit>  was found and sequence information was used for the development of gene-specific and species-specific primer pairs for the amplification of seven amplicons . successful amplification conditions were found for six primer pairs, while for one of the three e. falcata-specific primers transfer was possible to the congeneric species e. grandiflora. using specific primers we sequenced a total of  <dig> bp both in coding and non-coding regions . the identity of each amplicon as a different locus was proven at the population level by the detection of both homozygote and heterozygote individuals in the sampled populations. if there had been co-amplification of closely related isoforms, all individuals would have been expected to show heterozygosity for the sites differentiating the isoforms. as further evidence that single genes are amplified by each primer pair, non-synonymous polymorphisms, when occurring, mostly caused replacements between amino acids of similar structure and chemical properties, and in no case were stop-codon mutations detected. this led us to conclude that the amplicons correspond to separate, functional gene loci.

legend: nt: number of sequenced pcr fragments amplified using universal degenerate primers; contigs: codoncodealigner-generated contigs ; nc: number of sequences per contig; tair: closest blastx match from the tair database; pip subfamily: subfamily to which belongs the best tair match; lc : length of contig alignments; genbank: genbank/embl accession numbers; pcr amplification: presence/absence of a single pcr product using specific primers ; l: length  of the specific primer-generated pcr products

legend: primer names, primer sequences, annealing temperature, size of the sequenced fragment, accession number of the closest arabidopsis thaliana blast match. primer names are derived from clone name followed by a sign corresponding to the direction of the synthesis  and a number corresponding to the position of the primer's 5' end relative to the clone's sequence.  pcr touchdown: the first seven cycles with one degree decrease each cycle, from 64°c to 57°c. other cycles at 57°c

 for e. grandiflora, the same primers and conditions were used for pcr amplifications.

polymorphism distribution in each gene fragment and each species is shown in table  <dig>  polymorphism was identified in all species, although the amount varied according to gene and species. a total of  <dig> snps  was found, distributed across coding and non-coding regions and between synonymous and non-synonymous sites. details of the distribution of these polymorphisms in coding and non-coding regions, and between synonymous and non-synonymous sites within the latter, are provided in table  <dig> .

legend: analyses were performed taking recombination into account. n = sample size ; l = amplicons length ; s = total number of segregating sites; si = number of sites segregating in introns ; ss = number of synonymous sites segregating in exons; sa = number of non-synonymous sites segregating in exons; a = number of observed haplotypes; hd = nei's  gene diversity computed on haplotype frequencies; θπ, θw = estimates of population diversity parameter  from pairwise nucleotide differences and number of segregating sites, respectively ; values multiplied by 1000; rho = population recombination parameter ; d, d*, f*, fs: standard neutral model statistics . * = significant and the p =  <dig>  threshold level. n.b. some significant values of fs are numerically negative but lie above the upper limit of the neutral confidence interval ; they are therefore "statistically positive".

haplotype  reconstruction was generally robust, with p-values for most genotypes higher than  <dig> . the number of haplotypes varies greatly between species and populations with only one for c. guianensis population nw  and  <dig> in e. falcata population nw  in french guiana. overall, haplotypic diversity is large with values higher than  <dig>  except in c. guianensis  and e. grandiflora .

two gene amplicons  have very high ρ values , in spite of having levels of haplotypic diversity similar to those displayed by other amplicons, perhaps indicating large effective population sizes and/or past recombination with very divergent populations.

tests for departures from the standard neutral equilibrium  were performed taking into account recombination rates. the calculation of neutral confidence intervals for mutation-drift equilibrium statistics was performed at the most-likely values of rho, as a robustness test showed that the confidence interval limits of the statistics did not change substantially when values of rho at least  <dig> times less likely than the most-likely value  were used . in particular, as all significant tests are positive , we were mostly interested in changes that shift upward the upper limit of neutral confidence intervals, which is the critical threshold for significance of positive values of the statistics. the only case for which a dramatic threshold change  was observed is tajima's d for e. falcata population se at gene pip <dig>  . however, as shown in table  <dig>  this statistic is not significant, and therefore changing rho estimates has no consequences for our results. for six amplicons/populations, mutation-drift equilibrium tests gave significant departures from neutral intervals: cgupip <dig>  , pqupip <dig> , efapip <dig>  , efapip <dig>  , efapip <dig>   and egrpip <dig> . four amplicons/populations out of eleven did not reveal any departure from mutation-drift equilibrium , efapip <dig>   and efapip <dig>  ). one amplicon/population combination  could not be tested due to lack of polymorphism.

tests of selection on gene sequence data are summarised in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> . all significant tests show a departure from neutral allele frequency spectrum toward an excess of haplotypes at intermediate frequencies and/or deficit of rare variants ; thus they are effectively positive in terms of their statistical meaning). although not all tests are significant, the global trend is towards positive and significant values for the test statistics. this indicates either the occurrence of a past bottleneck for most species or the ongoing action of balancing selection. no departure from  equilibrium towards population expansion or background selection was detected.

for one gene , a sliding-window analysis of the mutation-drift equilibrium tests  shows that most positive and significant values are detected in windows centred at nucleotides 230- <dig>  at or just downstream from the predicted intron splicing site. two more sites display significant statistics within the exon.

to check whether the observed statistics were compatible with purely demographic events , all significant mutation-drift equilibrium statistics were re-computed on simulated data sets having the same descriptive statistics as the observed data and having undergone bottlenecks of varying size, duration, and timing. observed statistics were considered as compatible with a given demographic scenario if they fell within the 95% upper quantile of the values obtained on simulated data. the results of demographic simulations are illustrated in figure  <dig> for tajima's d and for fu and li's f*. the observed values of tajima's d for c. guianensis gene cgupip <dig>    are only compatible with relatively recent and strong bottlenecks . there is widespread compatibility with several demographic scenarios for the e. falcata gene efapip <dig>    when a short bottleneck is simulated, but not for simulations including a longer bottleneck. simulations for fu and li's f* show that the observed statistic is entirely incompatible with any demographic scenario for c. guianensis , while most demographic scenarios are compatible with the observed value for efapip <dig>  population nw . finally, all scenarios are compatible with the observed values for fu and li's d*  and with the significant tajima's d test observed for efapip <dig>  . the significant departure from standard equilibrium observed for p. quinata  is also entirely compatible with demographic scenarios.

results on demographic transitions, as detected by chloroplast ssrs, are shown in table  <dig> and visually summarised in figure  <dig>  and show global trends that tend to exclude bottlenecks: no species or population displayed signatures of population contraction. c. guianensis, p. quinata and v. sebifera did not display departures from mutation/drift equilibrium after bonferroni correction, but the tests could only be performed on one locus for v. sebifera due to lack of polymorphism. however, the majority of tests tend to be negative, thus excluding a bottleneck signature. for e. falcata population nw and for e. grandiflora, values of test statistics against population bottlenecks were found at ssr loci concurrently with signatures of population contraction and/or balancing selection at pip loci. c. guianensis population nw showed signatures contrary to bottlenecks at cpssrs but was monomorphic for pip sequences. e. falcata population se also showed test statistics tending to exclude population bottlenecks, but no mutation-drift equilibrium test on gene amplicons was significant.

legend: ccmp <dig> through ccmp10: names of chloroplast ssr loci. the value of dh/sd, standardised departure from gene diversity  expected under mutation/drift equilibrium, is reported. positive values indicate population contraction; negative values indicate rejection of population bottleneck. significance levels : *, p <  <dig> . n = number of informative loci; e = number of loci indicating population expansion; c = number of loci indicating population contraction; m = monomorphic locus; na = locus which did not produce any pcr product.

discussion
the present study shows indications of the action of balancing selection on drought response-related genes in neotropical tree species, although demographic changes in the populations, causing the same kind of departure from the standard neutral model, cannot be excluded, at least for some species .

extensive nucleotide diversity was found for six pip gene fragments in five tropical tree species; the sequences obtained are useful for the detection of snp polymorphisms, for genetic diversity analyses and for testing departures from expectations derived from the neutral theory of molecular evolution  <cit> . in one case  the same primer pair was used to amplify two congeneric species , providing a direct comparison between orthologs. for these two genes  the level of polymorphism in e. falcata was lower than in e. grandiflora, but departures from mutation-drift equilibrium were detected in both species , although not for the same statistics.

standard neutral model tests on approximately half of the gene amplicons gave significant results. in genes and populations with significant departures from mutation-drift equilibrium the general trend is towards population size bottlenecks and/or balancing selection. however, sliding window analyses show that this trend does not apply uniformly to the entire sequence and that different regions of the genes may be subject to different processes. in one case , sites responsible for the positive and significant test statistics seem to be mostly restricted at the exon-intron boundary, possibly indicating selection on intron splicing sites or other regulatory functions by intronic sequences. interestingly, when matched against small rna databases, the intron fragment contained in efpip <dig>  sequences is similar to immature arabidopsis thaliana mirna ath-mir <dig> and to oryza sativa mirna osa-mir <dig> , indicating a putative functional role for the intron.

two pieces of evidence favour balancing selection, rather than demography, as an explanation for the diversity patterns observed in this study, at least for a subset of the gene amplicons.

first, simulations of bottlenecks of variable sizes and ages, resulting in the same amounts of genetic diversity as observed in current populations, cannot produce statistics  as high as those observed on real data for c. guianensis , unless moderate to strong and recent bottlenecks are assumed. d* values are however compatible with all demographic scenarios. for e. falcata , short bottlenecks are generally compatible with the observed tajima's d, but not long bottlenecks . as the species studied here were sampled in largely undisturbed portions of neotropical forests, and are not known to have historically been exploited for timber, strong, short and very recent bottlenecks seem unlikely. however, bottlenecks hundreds of generations ago would be compatible with processes dating to the late pleistocene-early holocene, which would correspond to large-scale floristic changes in neotropical forests  <cit> . the contrasting behaviour of d*, and f* and d, can be explained by what the statistics actually test and by the structure of our data. both f* and d rely on estimation of the difference between an estimate of θ based on average pairwise sequence divergence and another estimate based on the number of segregating sites , whereas d* compares two estimates of numbers of segregating sites . the former account for the depth of sequence divergence, whereas the latter does not. it appears that, at least in some cases, purely demographic scenarios cannot account for the excess sequence divergence observed in our data, while they can account for the observed number of segregating sites. this is an indication of exceedingly long genealogical branches in our data, which again favours balancing selection as opposed to bottlenecks. moreover, all the tests applied have been shown to have similar power in the detection of recent bottlenecks  <cit> , so that they are expected to give similar results under a purely demographic scenario.

second, the tests on chloroplast ssrs generally refuted past bottlenecked populations, even if not all loci detect signatures of population expansion. variability in the results from different loci is due to the fact that, if all loci describe the same evolutionary process, their statistics are multiple stochastic outcomes from the same probability function. as demography should influence all portions of the nuclear genome, as well as organellar genomes, in the same direction although with different sensitivity for the intensity and timing of demographic events  <cit> , it is unlikely that events in opposing directions would be detected at different loci . thus we can tentatively conclude that the departures from equilibrium at pip loci are due to balancing selection. a caveat should be added that, as ssrs generally have different mutation rates than coding sequences, comparison of results from these two types of data may be misleading. in particular, chloroplast ssrs tend to mutate more quickly than nuclear, non-repeated sequences, although more slowly than nuclear ssrs  <cit> , and the demographic events suggested by these markers may be more recent than the results of forces acting on sequence diversity. a further concern is that effective population size and demographic dynamics are not the same for chloroplast and nuclear loci, making the former, being haploid, more sensitive to demographic change. however, a recent demographic event detected in ssrs should also be detectable in sequences. significant values for tests of departures from standard neutral equilibrium of opposite sign seem to support balancing selection on the expressed loci, while cases where demographic signatures are detected at chloroplast markers but not at pip loci can be conservatively attributed to differences in marker sensitivity. note, however, that this argument does not hold if the populations have undergone a bottleneck relatively far in the past . in this case, fast-evolving ssrs may display the effects of the expansion following the bottleneck, while slow-evolving sequences may still display the effect of the bottleneck itself.

the observed departures from hypothetical selective neutrality in spite of a relative paucity of non-synonymous mutations is not surprising, given that regulatory sequences, potentially undergoing selection, may lie anywhere along gene sequences and that introns can have a function besides gene regulation. among the gene fragments shown by mutation-drift equilibrium tests to putatively experience selection, vsepip <dig>  and efapip <dig>  do not contain non-synonymous mutations, and so, for these loci, selection may not be acting directly on the portion of protein-coding sequence analysed here. selection may however affect other properties of the transcribed sequence, such as codon composition or intron functions. as pip sequences are conserved among and within species  <cit>  selection could rather act on regulatory regions. alternatively, these polymorphism patterns may reflect selection on neighbouring sites, although the estimated population parameters suggest that recombination would quickly break down associations between selected sites and associated neutral sites, such that selection signatures may not extend beyond a few hundred base pairs from the site under selection. for genes that did not display any departure from expectations of the standard neutral model, full-length sequencing, including the promoter region, is advisable. in general, evolutionary patterns may diverge among different parts of a gene  <cit>  and there is evidence of balancing selection in the promoter region of the tfl <dig> gene in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . on the other hand, demographic events could be responsible for significant departures from the standard neutral model in the whole genome, including gene regions. moreover, loci outside the sequenced region, but in linkage disequilibrium  with it, may also affect the results of mutation-drift equilibrium tests. this possibility cannot be ruled out for the current data set, as the fragments are too short for testing the decay of ld with distance, although, in some species, population recombination rates are relatively high , indicating that ld should rapidly fall to zero. this is generally the case for forest trees, where ld falls below  <dig>  within 200- <dig> base pairs  <cit> ). therefore the main issue when observing significant mutation-drift equilibrium tests in genes is to discover whether selection or past demography underlie the observed levels of diversity.

for c. guianensis population se, all tests for departure from mutation-drift equilibrium on locus pip <dig>  gave strongly significant results, while no chloroplast ssr marker did. this pattern is consistent with the maintenance of polymorphism by long-term balancing selection. it is interesting to note that the samples of population se were collected from a hybridisation zone between c. guianensis and c. procera. bayesian assignation methods, applied to independent loci , show however that the sampled trees belong with a probability of  <dig> to c. guianensis populations  <cit> , perhaps pointing to a stable and selectively advantageous introgression of c. procera genes into a c. guianensis genetic background. actually, sequences of cgupip <dig>  obtained in pure c. procera stands show the same haplotype found in population se of c. guianensis . if this hypothesis holds true, it may also explain the pattern of polymorphism observed for the two populations of this species: the nw population would display the "typical" status of the species, while the se population, which would have undergone historical introgression, would carry an extra allele derived from the sister species c. procera . further analyses of the diversity of pip genes in the two species will test this hypothesis .

the results for pip genes of e. falcata  were divergent for the two populations. in summary , population nw displays significant results for d and f* for genes pip <dig>  and pip <dig> , while population se displays a significant test for gene pip <dig>  and the statistic d*. the results are almost perfectly complementary for the two populations: they show significant results for different genes and different statistics. moreover, test statistics for population nw largely show incompatibility with demographic scenarios. as stated above, d and f* are more sensitive than d* to the extent of sequence divergence, and thus to balancing selection. therefore, the simplest explanation for the observed pattern is that balancing selection is detected in population nw for two genes, while demography  drives diversity patterns in population se. the fact that chloroplast ssrs tend to support population expansion, rather than bottleneck, for population nw provides a further hint that the positive values of the mutation-drift equilibrium tests are due to selection rather than demography. selection on the pip <dig>  gene would overcome the baseline demographic signal, which would provide negative statistics which are detected by ssrs . a similar argument can be applied to the only interspecific comparison, for gene pip <dig>  in the two eperua species. here, estimates of θ from pairwise sequence differences  are higher in e. falcata than in e. grandiflora, while estimates from haplotype diversity  are higher in e. grandiflora . this apparent contradiction may be explained by the fact that e. falcata has a smaller number of more divergent haplotypes than e. grandiflora . such results tend to favour different explanations for the diversity patterns in the two species: the historical preservation of highly divergent haplotypes in e. falcata, which is compatible with balancing selection  and the presence of larger numbers of less differentiated haplotypes for e. grandiflora, which may be compatible with recovery from an old bottleneck or population expansion.

finally, for p. quinata, departure from mutation-drift equilibrium was found for fu and li's d*, but the species displayed very little polymorphism at cpssr loci, and therefore it was difficult to evaluate alternative hypotheses. the observed value of d* was, however, entirely compatible with demographic scenarios. moreover, sample sizes per sampling site were relatively small for this species  and, although tests for population differentiation were all non-significant, statistical power was low. consequently, the departures from mutation-drift equilibrium may in this case be an artefact caused by hidden population structure. large year to year variation  in overall rainfall and length of dry season may provide balancing selection, while extensive gene flow  may reduce population differentiation.

among the cases described in this study, balancing selection may be the most common trend, but it is currently hard to outline why this should be the case. one possibility is that the sampled populations may be further structured along local ecological gradients at a smaller geographic scale, and that different environments favour alternative alleles, thus maintaining genetic diversity within populations. in this case, variation of ecological conditions at a spatial scale smaller than the size of populations may lead to the coexistence of different genetic optima in sub-structured populations, providing patterns that mimic balancing selection. as stated above, hidden population subdivision at loci responding to selective gradients can bias tests such as those applied here  <cit> . however, since we used pip genes themselves to group individuals into non differentiated populations, this is likely to be a relatively minor problem in our data set. alternatively, the wide variation in environmental conditions over time, both between seasons and over longer climatic cycles, may prevent selection from fixing a particular variant, explaining the balancing selection patterns. in general, although selective explanations of observed patterns of diversity should not be taken for granted unless solid evidence is provided, there is no reason either to assume that the most likely explanation should be a demographic one  <cit> .

to test for the presence of selection, further studies could look for association between haplotype and adaptive traits related to water stress, as well as for selection in other candidate genes. indeed, a large number of genomic or proteomic studies have identified candidate genes for water stress tolerance. for example dehydrin genes are up-regulated by drought stress  and alcohol dehydrogenase  transcripts are induced by anoxia and hypoxia  <cit> . contrasting the results for these genes with analyses of neutral loci to detect demographic events will also be fundamental to disentangle demographic versus adaptive interpretations of tests for departure from the standard neutral equilibrium model. as this is the first genomic study of gene sequences in non-plantation tropical trees, genomic resources that would allow such comparisons among different classes of genomic regions are not yet available.

another limitation of our study is the length of the fragments analysed for each gene. statistical tests, such as those we applied, gain more from increases in sequence length than from increases in sample size. again, the complete lack of genomic resources for non-plantation tropical trees slows down the accumulation of sequence information, although isolation of larger sequences , as well as large-scale genome sequencing  are under way. on the other hand, analysing larger sample sizes than generally suggested for this kind of studies was necessary, as the underlying distribution of genetic diversity and delimitation of populations was also unknown for these species. this information was necessary prior to the application of statistical tests. in spite of these limitations, the current data set allowed us to detect informative trends in sequence diversity. the results reported here should actually prove the feasibility of such research programmes, and are expected to prime more extensive investigations into the genomics of non-model tropical trees.

CONCLUSIONS
the fragments of pip  genes analysed here have revealed large variability and potentially strong signatures of past population-genetic events, in some cases with patterns that vary along the gene. besides being the first report on molecular diversity in genes of ecologically relevant species of one of the most diverse biomes on earth and on non-plantation tropical trees, the results presented here, if confirmed by further studies, may convey some interesting messages. first, high levels of diversity at pip genes may be maintained by selective mechanisms - either sensu strictu balancing selection or divergent selection at a local scale, which mimics the effects of balancing selection. second, this trend appears to be common to a diverse array of species. extended characterisation of these loci is likely to reveal more details on the processes shaping their diversity and to provide information on the link between genetic diversity and ecological conditions. more generally, systematic characterisation of candidate genes may lead to a more complete picture of the way genotypes interact with their environment in tropical forests and other ecosystems. we are convinced that this is a necessary step towards the consolidation of ecological genetic understanding of tropical ecology. at the same time, the suggested presence of balancing selection seems to fit well in the greater picture of tropical ecosystems: the maintenance of gene diversity by selection at the species level may be another facet of the many mechanisms proposed to explain the high levels of biological diversity observed in the tropics. the extant genetic diversity, and its maintenance by selection, may indicate that these species harbour the adaptive potential to cope with future, expected climate change. this will be particularly crucial if tropical rainforests undergo increased droughts that threaten  <cit>  to severely affect their productivity and therefore their survival.

