BACKGROUND
in the quest for revealing the function of dna sequences, scientists have used a variety of approaches, from molecular techniques targeting specific genes, to systematic analyses of thousands of functional units encompassed by the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome. this heterogeneous mass of knowledge is time-dependent, with new information constantly arising from a variety of sources. thus, a quantitative tool for assessing annotation depth is important for directing ongoing research and for analyzing the emerging results. efforts in this field have included the genome annotation scores  algorithm  <cit> , which demonstrates a quantitative methodology of assigning annotations scores at the whole genome level, the go annotation quality  score, which gives a quantitative measure of go annotations  <cit> , and the gene characterization index , which scores the extent to which a gene's functionality is described, based largely on the quantification of human perception, and applied only to protein-encoding genes  <cit> . we now introduce the genecards inferred functionality scores  tool  <cit> , which utilizes the wealth of gene annotation within genecards  <cit>  to quantify the degree of functional knowledge about > <dig>  genecards entries. genecards is a comprehensive gene-centric compendium of annotative information about human genes, automatically mined from nearly  <dig> data sources  <cit> . thus, gifts can provide quantitative annotation estimates for a very large number of genes, and at a significant depth, made possible by the exploitation of dozens of annotation resources.

RESULTS
gifts definition and applications
we devised the genecards inferred functionality score  which allows a quantitative assessment of a gene's annotation status, with potential relevance to the degree of relevant functional knowledge. a gifts value for a gene is defined as the number of genecards sources, out of a total of  <dig> , that include information about this gene . data sources have heterogeneous sizes, as estimated by the number of human gene entries for which the source contains information , having an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  entries per source. one of genecards' main aims is to incorporate overlapping sources, and perform integration of data for different annotation fields. considerable attention is also directed to conflicts among sources, one clear example being the geneloc  <cit>  member of the genecards suite, which handles conflicts in genomic coordinates from ensembl  <cit>  and ncbi  <cit> . the overlap problem is particularly applicable for data extracted from genome-wide sources such as entrez gene, ensembl, go  <cit> , uniprot  <cit>  and interpro  <cit>  which are all closely linked and share some of the information presented, which may introduce a degree of redundancy.

to study the effect of overlap between sources, we generated a pairwise overlap matrix for all  <dig> data sources . for this we utilized a parameter  which assesses the overlap by gene set sharing. the rational is that if, for example, all information about a set of genes, such as micrornas, is imported from one source to another, it will result in an overlap in gene sets. based on the overlap matrix, we proceeded to select the  <dig> source pairs with the highest overlap , and eliminated  one source of each pair. fig. 1s-b  shows that the exclusion of overlapping sources has only a minor effect on the overall shape of the distribution, hence, by inference, on the relative positions of the majority of genes on the gifts scale. this may suggest that having an overlap among sources does not impose an adverse effect on proposed functionality scale. while such a finding could be interpreted as suggesting over-representation of information items, we believe that source redundancy also has its advantages, as pointed out below.

we also asked whether overlap might exert an advantageous effect. for this, we comparatively analysed the gci scale with  <dig> data sources, i.e. having a lower  degree of source overlap, and gifts, which has  <dig> sources and a considerably higher extent of source overlap. focusing on the  <dig> genes with highest functionality scores in gci, all having the same score of  <dig> , we note that the same genes span a rather broad range of gifts values, from  <dig> to  <dig> . thus, for the most well-annotated genes, the gifts scale displays a fine resolution not seen in gci. we suspect that this may actually arise from the diversity of overlapping sources in gifts. that this is the case is tentatively supported by the fact that when eliminating the  <dig> smallest-size sources  the spanned score range for the top  <dig> genecards genes diminishes appreciably, from 68- <dig>  to 92- <dig>  . when performing a similar analysis for  <dig> low-annotation genes, all having a gci score of exactly  <dig> , a wide range of gifts scores was seen again, between  <dig> and  <dig> , suggesting that the enhanced resolution afforded by the larger number of sources is not unique to top-scoring genes.

gifts is fully implemented in genecards. every genecards gene entry is marked with its gifts value. also provided on the genecards homepage is a capacity for obtaining a random gene with a specified gifts score within a given range, constituting a useful tool for browsing the human gene annotation landscape. linked from the genecards homepage is the expanded gifts tool, which affords additional functionalities such as: a) retrieving a list of genes within a specified range of gifts value, thereby obtaining random genes with more detailed gifts specifications; b) obtaining a list of sources that did not comprise data for a selected gene, thereby facilitating further characterization for genes of interest, and potentially useful for understanding poorly researched genes; c) obtaining the gifts value of a selected gene, which results in an annotation indicator graphically superimposed on the overall distribution graph; and d) displaying gifts distributions and statistics.

gifts distributions
to explore the annotation landscape of the human genome, we analyzed the distribution of gifts for all genecards entries . the bimodal shape of the gifts distribution suggests a division of the human gene repertoire into two main groups, based on the degree of annotation. dissecting the curve according to genecards gene categories , we find that the high-gifts peak consists almost entirely of protein-coding genes, while the low-gifts peak consists of genes from all of the categories . it should be pointed out that low gifts genes include not only those originally identified as predicted genes, e.g. ciiorfjjj  and famxxx genes , but also many genes that are not easily defined by their symbols, such as non protein-coding genes.

* unknown genomic location.

well studied genes are prominent at the top of the table. lines 8- <dig> depict genes with unexpectedly high gifts values for their category.

we asked what might distinguish genes with extremely high gifts score  as compared to those at the top of the same peak ; we note that some sources are particularly enriched  in the former. such sources include, for example, databases on genetic association , cytogenetics in oncology and haematology , human gene mutation , drug response variations , news about biomedical research  genetic testing of inherited disorders  and human genome epidemiology , all indicative of advanced stages in functional gene annotation.

we subsequently clustered the genecards entries according to the source combinations that provide their annotation . as an example, under the assumption of  <dig> clusters, the most distinct was cluster  <dig> , with contribution from the sources almaknowledge server , expoldb  <cit>  and genewiki  <cit> . since these sources integrate data which is usually available for highly annotated genes , it is conceivable that they appear in this unique cluster of high gifts. we see that different parts of the gifts distribution are dominated by different clustered patterns of annotation sources. genes with high gifts tend to consist of data from the same source combination, as shown by the high degree of similarity among clusters of the high gifts peak .

characterization of data sources by gifts
gifts is also useful for characterizing and comparing different database sources. plotting source size against gifts values, an inverse correlation was found for gifts> <dig> . while the top of the graph  comprises general sources pertinent to a large number of different genes  the lower end of this curve includes sources that specialize in a small number of highly annotated genes . a separate cluster  arises from another class of specialized sources  whose genes tend to be poorly studied. the standard deviation of gifts values tends to be higher for the larger, high-gifts sources, reflecting annotation heterogeneity .

to achieve a higher resolution of sources analysis, we calculated gifts distributions for all sources. three typical prototypical distributions are shown in fig.  <dig>  the first  is genome-wide sources whose gifts distribution conforms with the one seen when all sources are combined together for all genecards entries. the second relates to sources, characterizing already known genes, whose genes are mainly found in the high gifts peak, illustrated by kegg  <cit> . the third includes sources, characterizing new and unusual genes, whose genes are mainly found in the low gifts peak, as exemplified by mirbase.

gifts facilitates the analysis of experimental genes sets
inspecting the level of annotation for a list of genes generated by experiments can supply additional insight about the data, and may facilitate research by suggesting targets for further study. as an example, we have generated the gifts distribution for genes whose expression was significantly altered vs controls in  <dig> different published experiments . as seen, different datasets show somewhat different distributions, suggesting better or worse typical prior knowledge about the constituent genes. in each of the sets, well studied genes in the high gifts region may suggest a higher probability for being associated with the relevant biological change, while genes in the low gifts tail may necessitate further earmarked functional studies. in parallel, we have performed a similar analysis for three sets of genes derived from genecards searches with keywords with different expected level of annotation, and showed that indeed the gifts distribution can capture such annotation differences that result from different depths of experimental evidence .

the power of gifts in aiding experimental research so as to achieve deeper understanding of a gene sets is further highlighted by a source-depletion analysis. for this we utilized, as an example,  <dig> sets of genes expressed in exactly two normal human tissues  derived from microarray experiments previously performed in our laboratory  <cit> . we asked what might be recommended for further scrutiny based on gifts-related evaluation of the information available about each of these gene sets. within the gifts database, each gene in every one of the eight sets is characterized by a different pattern of sources from which information is available. we compute a statistic stemming from the set-average of such annotation values, and identify the sources with the least information for the given gene set . such paucity of representation of a given source in a gene set  can point to new directions within the researcher's set-specific studies. for example, under-representation of the source asd  <cit>  in the genes expressed in pancreas and muscle indicates lack of sufficient information about alternative splicing; under-representation of kegg  <cit>  in the genes expressed in the brain and muscle, similarly indicates a need to seek more information on pathways related data; under-representation of swissprot  <cit>  and interpro  <cit>  in the genes expressed in the brain and thymus, indicates lack of sufficient information in the protein level, including protein domains.

another feature that assists in gauging biological results as contained within genecards has been introduced in the new genecards version  <dig> beta  <cit> . the user can select gene category or type  as well as gifts when browsing the genome by looking for a random gene or performing an advanced search.

time-evolution of human genomic knowledge
we suggest that gifts scores reflect the degree of known functionality for a gene, i.e. its annotation depth. one plausible parallel measure is the number of publications for a given gene, as found in its genecards entry with integration of gene-publication links from seven different sources  <cit> . indeed, there is ample correlation  between gifts and publications count, which are not part of the standard gifts score , but the lack of perfect correlation, comprising a small group of  <dig> genes  with gifts< <dig> and publications count>=  <dig>  suggests that gifts provides additional information. another gifts correlation is with hgnc gene symbol approval date  <cit> , with higher gifts genes tending to be older . genes with symbols approved before  <dig> show a plateau gifts value of nearly  <dig>  conforming to the approximate median of genes in the higher peak of the distribution of gifts for all genecards entries. this is statistically significantly different relative to genes approved after  <dig>  which show a declining trend to a low of gifts of ~ <dig> by  <dig> .

gifts subsectioning and weighting
in its simplest embodiment, used throughout this paper, the gifts tool regards each source as a unitary entity, irrespective of content. however, we have also installed improvements within the gifts web tool  <cit> , that include experimenting with increased resolution by using sub-sectioning of data sources and adjusting scores based on the presence or absence of detailed annotations within a source. in addition we have introduced weights related to the quantitative aspects of annotations items, enabling better evaluation of the data relevant to annotation levels. sub-sectioning was performed on data from a pivotal bioinformatics source for proteins data, swissprot  <cit> , whereby a user may request scores based on the presence or absence of detailed annotations within this source . weights were introduced for publications  and for orthologs .

with the latter modification, it is possible to perform explorations in the domain of low-gifts genes as follows: the user can request a comprehensive list of genes with gifts scores in a pre-selected range, activating the orthologs and publications options. the output then indicates genes for which there are known orthologs and published articles, so as to facilitate the initiation of study of a subset of the low gifts gene list.

we note that annotation about low-gifts genes is often limited to high-throughput generic genome publications, a situation which may reduce the usefulness of the publication-adjusted scores. we have therefore screened our database for such generic publications by looking for articles correlated with many genes. we found that only  <dig> publications are linked to > <dig> genes and that  <dig> publications are linked to > <dig> genes. genes whose only publications belong to such a category, and that are also represented in a large fraction  of all such publications, contain gifts scores of ~1- <dig>  highlighting them as extremely low gifts genes. for genes in the higher gifts realm, the publication adjustment is almost negligible.

discussion
gifts provides a quantitative tool for assessing annotation depth of every gene in the human genome based on genecards' rich compendium of information sources. three previously published relevant efforts focus only on protein coding genes; two of them are mainly aimed at gene sets and utilize more limited information sources. the first, the genome annotation scores  algorithm  <cit> , is broader in scope, since it addresses all species present in swissprot  <cit> . using  <dig> major information areas, literature, curation, sequence, structure and experiment, it provides only an average annotation score for all protein-coding genes in a given species. the second tool, the go annotation quality  score  <cit>  is a quantitative annotation measure based on the number, detail and evidence type of go annotations available for a gene. gaq uses only one information source, and in contrast to gifts, focuses on assessing the annotation for an entire set of gene entries. the third tool, the gene characterization index   <cit>  assesses the characterization status of individual human genes using annotations from six information sources, combined with the count of articles per each gene based on data from swissprot  <cit>  and ncbi entrez gene  <cit> . it is based on an original concept, whereby the perception of human researchers about the annotation status of a subset of genes is used as training data for developing a procedure to assign scores to all human genes. gci allows one to identify sets of low-scoring genes suited for experimental investigation as drug targets. gifts, on the other hand, offers a non-biased approach which does not involve human perception, scores all human genes , and is based on a much larger set of data sources.

one of the obvious advantages of the gifts scoring method is its applicability to all genes, irrespective to type and annotation depth. in recent years, several studies have highlighted the important role of non protein-coding genes  in cellular function  <cit> . therefore, it is important to develop bioinformatics tools such as gifts which are applicable to all types of genes. however, in a world of fleeting gene annotations, it appears that gci and gifts are complementary to each other: while gci contains about  <dig>  entries, all defined as protein coding  <cit> , gifts  addresses only ~ <dig>  genes defined to be protein coding , along with another ~ <dig>  non-protein-coding genes , and another ~ <dig>  which are still uncategorized). future scrutiny could help resolve this dichotomy.

the usability of gifts benefits in significant ways from its being embedded within genecards. as of the introduction of genecards version  <dig> beta in may  <dig>  it allows advanced searches that combine gene category and data section  with gifts range. furthermore, gifts enjoys the capacities of the genecards batch query engine, genealacart, whereby the user may receive tables with numerous genes, along with their gifts scores and a variety of annotation items, including pubmed ids. such queries can be keyed by hgnc official gene symbols or by several alias types, including entrez gene ids , as well as ensembl and swissprot ids.

the gifts scoring concepts demonstrate a generic system for evaluating genomic annotation that could be applied to a variety of species, providing that their annotation data is derived from multiple sources. this becomes more important for the many species with only minimal annotation, and in the context of the current development of high throughput, extremely rapid dna sequencing.

currently genecards focuses only on human genes, but it is rich in annotation data derived from other species., in addition to an integrated ortholog section, it has significant data from certain mammals, especially mouse, where we include in the function section mouse phenotypes from mouse genome informatics , based on the strong functional overlap between the species  <cit> , as well as mouse-related reagents . this should serve as infrastructure for the ambitious undertaking of a bona-fide extension of genecards to other species, allowing full-fledged application of gifts to such organisms. this will allow, among others, comparisons of the landscape of annotations of the human genome, having a genome annotation score  of  <dig>  <cit> , to those of genomes from other species, such as mus musculus , as well as less studied species such as bos taurus with gas< <dig> 

two projects currently running in our laboratory provide clear examples for the utility of gifts. one is genedecks  <cit> , a relatively new member of the genecards suite. one of its tools, set distiller, aims to detect common attributes for a set of genes. the use of gifts enables the profiling of gene sets, and helps choose the proper gifts-matched control sets for validation. the second project scrutinizes protein interaction networks in the realm of synthetic lethality  <cit> . the gifts score of each gene was used to measure the confidence in the known protein interactions for that gene, inferring an enhanced accuracy of known protein interactions for genes with a higher gifts score. this allows one to generate a weighted protein interaction network where high-confidence interactions receive high weights.

further, as exemplified here, we believe that understanding the gifts profiles for lists of genes that result from transcription profiling experiments may help experimental biologists choose or eliminate gene candidates for future research. finally, dissections of gifts data could be valuable for database construction, in decisions related to the incorporation of new gene category  or in the selection of additional or most relevant data sources.

CONCLUSIONS
gifts yields facile tools for navigating the human gene annotation landscape, which could be useful in describing trends in human genomic knowledge, performing database maintenance and refinement, and improving computational procedures for analyzing sets of genes resulting from wet-lab or computational research. in addition, gifts may also assist the scientific community with identification of groups of uncharacterized genes and fields of knowledge which are less studied for diverse applications, such as delineation of novel functions and charting unexplored areas of the human genome.

