BACKGROUND
as a primary arousal signal in wake control, orexin signaling is necessary for normal circadian regulation of consolidated wakefulness; exogenous application of orexin neuropeptides or optogenetic activation of orexin neurons induce arousal and genetic loss of orexin signaling is associated with narcoleptic symptoms  <cit> . endogenous orexin peptide levels oscillate over the course of the day: secretion during waking hours induces a peak in orexin levels late in the active phase, and rapidly decreasing activity precedes a nadir in levels during the inactive phase  <cit> . orexin-a  and -b  are processed peptide products of the hcrt  gene, which encodes the prepro-orexin peptide  <cit> . ox-a has similar affinity for both orexin- <dig> and - <dig> receptors , while ox-b selectively favors ox2r binding  <cit> . exogenous administration of ox-a is most effective in promoting wakefulness when applied during inactive-phase periods when the endogenous levels are normally low  <cit> . conversely, blocking orexin activity with dual orexin receptor antagonists  is most easily measured during the active phase  <cit> .

therapy targeting insomnia requires defined pharmacodynamic timing. unlike most other central nervous system therapeutics, compounds utilized in the therapeutic treatment of insomnia will, ideally, promote sleep throughout the resting period, maintain normal sleep architecture, and avoid residual effects upon waking, thus allowing for full wakefulness during the subsequent active period. this time-limited efficacy requires pharmacokinetic exposure and sufficient central receptor occupancy levels to drive sleep efficacy when desired, and reduced compound exposure to avoid residual effects upon waking. this limitation of duration of activity makes the half-life  of γ-aminobutyric acid  receptor modulators a key defining feature of their clinical utility. next-day/carry-over effects, in particular, are well-documented undesirable mechanism-related adverse effects of conventional therapies with long half-lives  <cit> . the current standards of care, benzodiazepine and non-benzodiazepine gaba-a receptor modulators, can also be associated with bothersome morning sedation and cognitive residual effects. in contrast, the current data on doras suggest that these compounds induce physiological sleep and demonstrate only mild residual effects despite relatively long plasma t1/ <dig> <cit> . preclinical studies of compounds with balanced potency at ox1r and ox2r, such as dora- <dig>  an analog of mk- <dig>  <cit> , demonstrate little or no effect on electroencephalogram  spectral frequency distribution, suggesting that blockade of orexin-mediated wakefulness allows sleep to occur that is similar to that measured in vehicle-treated controls  <cit> .

pharmacologically, the duration of sleep-promoting efficacy depends not only upon a compound’s mechanism of action, but also upon its pharmacokinetics, receptor-binding kinetics and potency, as these properties dictate the timing of receptor occupancy required for in vivo effects important for a compound’s overall activity and clinical utility. clearly, rapid central nervous system penetration is essential for sleep-onset efficacy, and a moderate pharmacokinetic t1/ <dig> and sufficiently high receptor occupancies are required for sleep maintenance throughout the desired resting period. however, to avoid next-day residual effects, compound levels must drop below exposures required for minimum effective receptor occupancy by the onset of wakefulness to avoid residual sleep effects. in principle, compounds that are effective at a low receptor occupancies are challenged to restrict sleep promoting effects to the resting phase, compared to mechanisms that require a higher occupancy threshold that are less likely to exhibit carry-over effects for a given pharmacokinetic profile and t1/ <dig>  here, we characterize the pharmacokinetic and receptor occupancy properties underlying the timing of efficacy elicited by structurally distinct doras including dora- <dig> and dora- <dig>  close analogs of suvorexant and mk- <dig> whose chemical properties have been described previously  <cit> . the ensemble of pharmacokinetic, receptor-binding kinetics and pharmacodynamic properties of doras appear advantageous to restricting the wake-inhibition efficacy of these compounds to the resting phase.

RESULTS
ox-a levels are associated with wakefulness across species
to more precisely define the timing of changes in orexin levels, their relationship with arousal and therefore the available signal window for the doras over the course of the circadian day, ox-a levels in cerebrospinal fluid  were determined by meso-scale immunoassay and correlated with baseline active wake as measured by polysomnography  in nocturnal and diurnal preclinical species. in nocturnal mice and rats, ox-a levels progressively drop during the inactive period, reaching a nadir in the second half of this period, and accumulate over the course of the dark  period . mean time in active wake generally mimics these ox-a levels. in diurnal dogs and rhesus monkeys, ox-a levels build during the light  period and fall during the resting period, coincident with increased arousal during the day and decreased wakefulness at night . these observations predict that doras will have maximum efficacy in the late dark phase of nocturnal species and the late light phase of diurnal animals which correlates to the active periods of both types of species.

dora efficacy in rats is most salient during the active phase
the sleep-promoting effects of doras were greatest during the active phase when orexin levels were highest in normal rats entrained to a 12: <dig> light:dark cycle. when administered during the mid-active phase, dora- <dig> , an mk- <dig> analog structurally distinct from suvorexant and dora- <dig>  promoted sleep characteristic of a dora: active wake was attenuated for up to 8 h, and both delta and rem sleep were increased for up to 6 h following treatment . the magnitude of wake-reducing activity was diminished when normal rats were administered dora- <dig> just prior to the inactive phase onset and was accompanied by small variable increases in delta and rapid eye movement  sleep . importantly, changes induced by dora- <dig> administered just prior to the inactive phase trend in the same direction as that seen in vehicle-treated animals progressing from the active to the inactive phase; namely, diminished active wake, increased slow wave sleep , and small fluctuations in rem sleep.

dora-induced efficacy occurs at ox2r occupancies exceeding 65%
a dose response for dora- <dig>  a structural analog of suvorexant, was evaluated in rat psg studies to determine the relationship between sleep-promoting efficacy as measured by active wake reduction and ox2r occupancy. dose-dependent attenuation of active wake was observed with dora- <dig> , which also resulted in corresponding increases in non-rem and rem sleep. sleep-promoting efficacy induced by each dose of dora- <dig> was quantified as a percent change in active wake relative to the vehicle-induced response over 2 h following treatment.

separately, the relationship between ox2r occupancy relative to plasma exposure was determined by administering dora- <dig> intravenously  over a range of doses to transgenic rats expressing human ox2r to determine a full occupancy curve over a wide range of plasma concentrations in order to define the maximal occupancy against which raw occupancy values could be normalized. this relationship was then used to determine the ox2r occupancy in psg experiments from measured plasma concentrations. the maximum plasma concentration  observed in satellite animals dosed in parallel with those used in psg experiments were used for these analyses since cmax occurs during the first two hours after treatment. increased ox2r occupancy, achieved at higher doses, was accompanied by progressively greater attenuation of active wake . this same pattern was also observed for suvorexant and structurally distinct compounds such as mk- <dig> and dora- <dig>  generally, compound-induced attenuation of active wake became salient and significant at ox2r occupancies between  <dig> and 83%. while  <dig>  and 1 mg/kg doses of dora- <dig> marginally reduced active wake, this change became highly significant at 3 mg/kg, where plasma levels reached  <dig>  μm, corresponding to 83% ox2r occupancy . for comparison, efficacy as determined by active wake reduction, plasma exposure, and ox2r occupancy in rats are presented for each dose of suvorexant and dora- <dig> in table  <dig> 

aocc, occupancy.

bnormalized occupancy was determined over a range of doses and fit to a one-sided binding hyperbolic curve to determine the maximum occupancy. ox2r occupancies corresponding to plasma values at indicated doses were calculated based on the normalized curve for each compound.

cmean percent change in active wake relative to vehicle in the 2 h following treatment .

it was previously shown that suvorexant attenuated active wake in dogs in a dose-dependent manner with corresponding increases in non-rem and rem sleep: the effects of 1 mg/kg on active wake were observed for up to 4 h, and 3 mg/kg responses for up to  <dig>  h  <cit> . re-examination of the time course of plasma exposures indicated that suvorexant efficacy was observed at time points when plasma concentrations were in excess of  <dig>  μm , a plasma exposure corresponding to  <dig> % ox2r occupancy calculated from rat occupancy values normalized for both rat and dog unbound plasma values . time points showing active wake reduction following administration of suvorexant  coincided with plasma exposures that were calculated to result in ≥65% ox2r occupancy , consistent with the range of effective occupancy observed in rats.

ox2r binding kinetics contribute to the timing of dora receptor occupancy
to determine the influence of ox2r binding kinetics on receptor occupancy and sleep-promoting efficacy, the time course of in vivo effects in response to dora- <dig> was compared with that of almorexant, a compound known to exhibit exceedingly slow dissociation from ox2r. almorexant is well documented to have slow binding kinetics relative to other doras  <cit> . depending upon the method and competing ligand used, the t1/ <dig> of almorexant for association with ox2r ranges from  <dig> to 162 min and from  <dig> to 268 min for dissociation . dora- <dig>  and almorexant  were administered both during the mid-active phase and just prior to the inactive phase, a therapeutically relevant dosing time, in rats. dora- <dig> significantly attenuated active wake for approximately 6 h following dosing during the active phase and up to  <dig>  h after treatment at the inactive phase onset . almorexant-dependent reductions in active wake were seen for up to  <dig>  h after treatment during the active phase and for up to 11 h following inactive-phase treatment .

aalmorexant t1/ <dig> on represents an underestimate as almorexant was applied at concentrations 3-fold above its kd in order to measure its kinetics alongside other doras.

kd, binding constant; koff, dissociation constant; kon, association constant; t1/ <dig> off, half-life off-rates; t1/ <dig> on, binding half-life.

plasma and csf levels of dora- <dig> and almorexant, as well as ox2r occupancy were determined in satellite rats following treatment at the onset of the inactive phase. as seen in figure 5a , dora- <dig> plasma and csf levels began to fall immediately after dosing, with corresponding decreases in ox2r occupancy to 77% of maximum at 8 h, coincident with the cessation of sleep-promoting effects. ox2r occupancy by almorexant, however, remained elevated at 10 h, even though levels within the csf were undetectable at this time point . the persistence of ox2r occupancy by almorexant despite disappearing levels of the compound in the plasma and csf is consistent with its extremely slow receptor-binding kinetics relative to other doras including suvorexant, mk- <dig>  dora- <dig> and sb- <dig> . together these results indicate that binding kinetics have the capacity to influence receptor occupancy and sleep promoting efficacy, particularly for compounds with excessively slow kinetic parameters.

next-day sleep, qeeg, and quantitative effects in rhesus monkeys
to evaluate the potential for both gaba-a receptor modulators and dora- <dig> to promote sleep through the resting phase and into the subsequent active phase, rhesus monkeys were administered these compounds 2 h before lights out. the doses, diazepam at 10 mg/kg, eszopiclone at 10 mg/kg, and dora- <dig> at 30 mg/kg, were selected based on their similar potential to promote sleep following active-phase dosing. quantified over 2 h, these treatments have previously been found to attenuate active wake by  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  min relative to vehicle, respectively  <cit> .

diazepam, eszopiclone, and dora- <dig> produced characteristic plasma-exposure profiles . the anxiolytic diazepam exhibited a peak at  <dig>  h , eszopiclone induced a more rapid cmax at  <dig>  h , and dora- <dig> a more delayed exposure profile . all three compounds significantly attenuated active wake in the 2 h after dosing before the onset of the inactive phase . unlike eszopiclone and dora- <dig>  diazepam significantly attenu-ated active wake at time points  <dig>  h into the inactive phase and 3 h into the subsequent active phase. despite the presence of measurable eszopiclone and dora- <dig> plasma levels 17 h after treatment, no consistent attenuation of active wake was observed in response to either compound the morning after treatment.

quantitative eeg analysis performed coincident with psg revealed time-dependent and qualitative differences between the effects of these compounds that were not evident in measurements of active wake. all three compounds increased delta frequency qeeg power in advance of the normal increase in delta power observed during the resting phase after administration of vehicle . however, both diazepam and eszopiclone increased high-frequency gamma power and substantially decreased theta power throughout the inactive period, while dora- <dig> had essentially no effect on these measures . the effects of diazepam persisted into the subsequent active period while eszopiclone-induced qeeg changes ceased abruptly upon lights on . the relevance of compound-induced qeeg changes occurring during cognitive testing intervals is currently unknown.

in order to better understand the consequences of compound-induced sleep and qeeg effects that persist though the inactive period, cognitive memory and attention parameters were evaluated in the same rhesus monkeys, the morning after treatment. memory was evaluated in the delayed match to sample  task performed at lights on , while attention was evaluated in the serial choice retention time  test administered 2 h later . significant deficits in recognition memory, as assessed by dms, were observed the morning after treatment with diazepam  but not following eszopiclone  or dora- <dig>  relative to their respective vehicle treatments . these results are consistent with diazepam-dependent active wake attenuation persisting into the active period. despite the presence of measurable levels of this dora- <dig> three hours after the dms task was performed , no attenuation of in performance was observed. in scrt, both diazepam and eszopiclone elicited significant deficits in the percentage of correct responses to cues of the shortest duration relative to vehicle-treated controls  . in contrast, deficits in next-day attention were not observed with dora- <dig> 

suvorexant exposure time course in humans
plasma samples obtained in an phase  <dig> clinical evaluation of suvorexant exhibited a common exposure profile, with a time to maximum plasma concentration  of 3 h or less . human free plasma levels of suvorexant sufficient for 65% ox2r occupancy were calculated based on extensive transgenic rat occupancy data and normalized for free fraction . the human plasma concentration of suvorexant calculated to correspond to 65% ox2r occupancy is  <dig>  μm . observed clinical suvorexant mean plasma concentrations fell below the levels predicted to correspond to 65% ox2r occupancy, where sleep-promoting efficacy is predicted, by the 8 h post-dose time point for both the  <dig> and 20 mg therapeutic doses. together this analysis indicates that the sleep promoting effects of suvorexant would not be expected to persist into subsequent waking hours at therapeutic doses less than 20 mg.

discussion
timing of the pharmacodynamic efficacy of drugs targeting insomnia is critical to promote sleep maintenance throughout the resting phase and to avoid undesired next-day effects such as residual drowsiness upon waking. gaba-a receptor modulators, the current standard of care for insomnia, act by potentiating the activity of endogenous neurotransmitters and have a low threshold of receptor occupancy for in vivo efficacy  <cit> . this low threshold allows gaba-a receptor modulators to promote sleep maintenance during the resting period, but also represents a challenge to terminate their agonist activity prior to ensuing wake periods to avoid next-day effects. doras provide an alternative mechanism for the treatment of insomnia by inhibiting the wake-promoting activity of orexin neuropeptides. as such, a higher percentage of receptor occupancy is required to block the effect of the endogenous peptide ligand in order to promote sleep. the current studies evaluate the pharmacokinetic and receptor-binding properties that contribute to the timing of ox2r receptor occupancy and in vivo efficacy to define the potential of the dora mechanism of action to promote sleep maintenance during the resting phase while avoiding next-day residual effects.

the capacity of orexin receptor antagonists to block orexin-induced arousal at a given time of day is dependent upon endogenous orexin neuropeptide levels. this signal window was defined by evaluating ox-a levels in two nocturnal and two diurnal species and was correlated with sleep/wake cycles in which the highest levels of wakefulness were observed during the active phase and the lowest levels during the inactive phase. as predicted, the largest observable sleep-promoting effects of doras in rats were greatest during the active phase when orexin levels were highest, and effects were diminished during the inactive phase, consistent with previous studies of other doras  <cit> . importantly, effects of doras detected during the resting phase were an augmentation of normal sleep parameters, including further attenuation of active wake, promotion of sws, and rem sleep that was either unchanged  or improved  <cit> . previous analysis of dora-22-induced changes in qeeg spectral power during the inactive phase found only minimal changes in frequency distribution relative to vehicle treatment, indicating minimal disruption of qeeg patterns during the resting phase  <cit> . these results were supported by the observed effects of dora- <dig> on resting-phase qeeg in rhesus monkeys where gamma and theta activity remained unchanged while delta frequency power was augmented from the pattern normally seen in vehicle-treated animals . in stark contrast, the effects of the gaba-a receptor modulators diazepam and eszopiclone increased high frequency gamma power and suppressed theta activity in directions that were diametrically opposed to those normally observed during the resting phase of vehicle-treated animals. these results are consistent with disrupted sleep-stage-specific qeeg spectral patterns induced by gaba-a receptor modulators, observed previously in rats  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . the relatively minimal effects of dora- <dig> on both sleep and qeeg spectral patterns further indicate that doras selectively block orexin-mediated arousal, which is at its lowest during the normal resting phase.

the etiology of insomnia is not well understood at the neurotransmitter or neuronal pathway level, and changes in orexin levels have yet to be demonstrated as a cause of insomnia. as such, translatable preclinical models for insomnia have not been developed and the studies performed in the current work only mimic the normal, or healthy condition where orexin levels are diminished during the normal inactive phase. however, orexin levels have been observed to increase with wake-related motor activity associated with forced swimming in rats  <cit> , in patients with restless legs syndrome  <cit> , and are diminished in narcoleptic patients based on examination of csf levels derived from lumbar collection  <cit> . persistent and significant reductions in wakefulness have been observed during the resting phase of insomnia patients in response to suvorexant treatment  <cit>  and to sb- <dig> in a situational model of insomnia  <cit> . these clinical observations suggest that doras are effective in reversing elevated orexin signaling present in insomnia patients.

this work in rats and dogs demonstrates that salient sleep promotion by doras is achieved at plasma levels necessary for ox2r occupancy to exceed a threshold of  <dig> to 80% as calculated based on the transgenic rat model. sleep promotion in dogs was observed at times during which suvorexant levels were sufficient for ox2r occupancies in excess of 65%. in rats, highly significant active wake attenuation in the 2 h following dosing of dora- <dig> occurred at plasma concentrations corresponding to occupancies of 83% in transgenic animals, while a trend toward active wake reduction  was seen at an occupancy of 63% occupancies did not reach significance in this experiment. while it remains possible that variation in expression in transgenic animals expressing the human receptor may have contribute to slightly different levels of receptor occupancy, the similar in vitro potency of dora- <dig> in humans and rats  indicates that the results in transgenic animals were a reasonable facsimile of receptor binding in genetically unmodified animals. the  <dig> to 80% occupancy range is consistent with prior studies measuring ox2r occupancy by orexin antagonists in specific brain regions. although efficacy thresholds were not explicitly defined, dugovic et al.  did not observe almorexant efficacy at 78% occupancy, and appeared to see significant changes at occupancies above 89%  <cit> , while morairty et al.  saw differential sleep drop-off when ox2r occupancies diminished from  <dig> to 63%  <cit> . moreover, effective occupancy thresholds of  <dig> to 90% for antagonists targeting cns g protein coupled receptors such as neuroleptics for d2-like receptors, have been found previously  <cit> . comparisons between methods, however, should be made with caution since different approaches utilizing varying assay incubation times coupled with differing compound off-rates can influence raw occupancy measurements. importantly, the pattern of increased ox2r occupancy in rats alongside dose-dependent attenuation of active wake with structurally distinct doras observed herein and in other published studies  <cit>  indicates that the occupancy threshold required for efficacy is a general property of orexin antagonism and is not compound dependent. these findings illustrate the importance of mechanism-dependent differences in receptor occupancy thresholds in determining the timing of sleep-promoting efficacy of gaba-a receptor modulators relative to doras. ideally, insomnia treatments are expected to normalize the elevated levels of active wake experienced during disrupted sleep that are characteristic of insomnia during the resting period . gaba-a receptor modulators, including diazepam  as well as zolpidem and eszopiclone , exhibit in vivo efficacy at a mean gaba-a receptor occupancy of 27%. low levels of receptor engagement are likely due to the receptor activation mechanism of these compounds leading to amplification of cellular signaling  <cit> . this low threshold for efficacy presents a challenge to gaba-a receptor modulators to restrict their sleep-promoting effects to the inactive phase. gaba-a receptor occupancy by diazepam, an anxiolytic bzrm with a long t1/ <dig>  exceeds this occupancy threshold long into the subsequent active period at sleep-promoting doses. as a consequence, diazepam exhibits substantial residual effects  in terms of both sedation and cognitive measures . non-bzrms that have a shorter exposure t1/ <dig> more rapidly exceed receptor occupancy thresholds sufficient for sleep promotion. however, depending on dosage, these non-bzrms may not maintain sleep throughout the inactive period, resulting in early morning awakenings . identifying appropriate dosages that avoid residual effects but maintain resting-phase efficacy is complicated by the additional non-sleep-related effects of these compounds. in the current studies, eszopiclone-induced reductions in active wake were detectable for up to 6 h while qeeg effects were observed almost 14 h later and effects on attention for up to 16 h .

in contrast, doras exhibit in vivo sleep effects at plasma exposures sufficient for 65% ox2r occupancy, the higher level of receptor engagement being required to sufficiently block the activating effect of the orexin ligand . this high occupancy threshold requires doras to maintain plasma concentrations sufficient to promote sleep maintenance throughout the normal resting period. at the same time, doras are less likely to exhibit next-day residual somnolence despite being present at measurable plasma levels due to the high receptor occupancy threshold required for sleep maintenance. the sleep-promoting effects of falling levels of the antagonist at the onset of the normal waking phase are also likely to be countered by accumulating levels of the endogenous orexin ligand, which might provide an even faster cessation of dora-induced somnolence due to the competitive nature of the antagonists and the relatively close ki values.

unlike gaba-a receptor modulators, dora- <dig> did not exhibit next-day residual effects in rhesus monkeys despite the presence of measurable plasma levels 17 h after dosing. dora- <dig> did not impact next-day sleep, qeeg, or cognitive measures as compound levels were insufficient to occupy ox2r above the necessary efficacy threshold. diazepam, an anxiolytic with a long t1/ <dig>  promoted sleep throughout the normal resting period and into the subsequent active phase and also impacted memory and attention. eszopiclone did not demonstrate next-day sleep effects or memory impairment; however, it did significantly impair attention as measured by scrt. although sleep effects did not persist with eszopiclone, qeeg spectral power changes were evident up to lights on/performance of dms tasks. the effect of cognitive testing on qeeg measures is currently uncharacterized, and the effect of administering a treatment for insomnia in addition to cognitive testing on qeeg spectral power is even less certain. direct compound effects may be one possible explanation for the next-day attention deficits found with eszopiclone, as measurable concentrations  were reported 17 h after administration. another possibility is that this attention deficit is a consequence of abnormal sleep occurring during the previous inactive phase. sleep-stage disruption, particularly of rem sleep, which is thought to restore cognitive performance  <cit> , may be responsible for potentiating this deficit. eszopiclone induced substantial changes in gamma and theta qeeg spectral power relative to vehicle for the entire resting period – a result consistent with both suppressed rem sleep and disrupted sleep-stage-specific eeg spectral activity observed in previous studies  <cit> .

conversely, the lack of qeeg spectral disruption by dora- <dig> during the previous resting phase was associated with no such cognitive impairment. currently, it is unclear whether the lack of cognitive impairment by dora- <dig> is due to the promotion of unperturbed sleep or a lack of on-drug cognitive effects. indeed, cognitive assessment of rhesus monkeys performed within 2 h following treatment indicated no impairment in dms and scrt tasks with dora- <dig>  but substantial deficits were induced by diazepam, eszopiclone, and zolpidem at sleep-promoting doses  <cit> .

even if dora levels sufficient to exceed the ox2r efficacy threshold are present at the onset of wake, emerging preclinical data indicate that these effects are expected to be benign relative to those induced by gaba-a receptor modulators. when evaluated acutely , doras have little or no impact on locomotor coordination in rats  <cit> , or on memory or attention in rats and rhesus monkeys  <cit> . this is in stark contrast to bzrms or non-bzrms, which induce substantial deficits when measured acutely  <cit> . while these differential effects remain to be investigated clinically, results in preclinical species indicate another fundamental difference between blockade of orexin signaling and gaba-a receptor activation.

the sleep promoting effect of doras is the result of the inhibition of orexin-induced arousal primarily mediated through ox2r. genetically, loss of this receptor is associated with narcolepsy in dogs  <cit>  and the hypersomnolent phenotype of mice lacking ox2r is similar to that of those lacking both receptors or hcrt gene encoding orexin ligands  <cit> , while ox1r kos reportedly display only a minor, sleep fragmentation phenotype  <cit> . pharmacologically, ox2r selective antagonists induce sleep promoting effects similar to that of doras, while ox1r selective antagonists administered alone exhibit only minor, if detectable effects on vigilance state  <cit> . it has been suggested that ox1r inhibitory activity of doras may counter the effect of ox2r inhibition by these compounds through a dopamine-mediated mechanism  <cit> , but further evaluation using alternative ox1r and ox2r selective antagonists of different selectivity has questioned this conclusion  <cit> .

based on these preclinical evaluations of structurally divergent doras, suvorexant exhibits a pharmacokinetic profile predicted to be advantageous for the treatment of insomnia. analysis of the time course of suvorexant plasma concentrations determined in an early phase  <dig> clinical trial indicates that concentrations sufficient for efficacy in humans  are restricted to normal sleep periods while efficacy is maintained for a range of doses. given their high ox2r occupancy threshold for efficacy, doras require a plasma concentration sufficient to maintain occupancy in order to promote sleep throughout the resting period in humans. for suvorexant, this is achieved with a plasma concentration t1/ <dig> exceeding 8 h. in early clinical trials, suvorexant exhibited an apparent terminal t1/ <dig> of  <dig> to 13 h  <cit>  – pharmacokinetic timing appropriate for sleep maintenance.

although insomnia is a common disorder, its underlying mechanisms are still not fully understood. doras have been rationally designed specifically to promote sleep by blocking wakefulness and thus alleviate the symptoms of insomnia while minimizing potential off-target activity that occurs with widespread signaling via gaba-a receptor modulators. by using antagonist compounds like suvorexant to block the arousal-promoting effects of orexin signaling in the brain, the oscillation in endogenous orexin pathway activation  is modified to mimic more closely the expected physiological state in normal sleep and wakefulness.

CONCLUSIONS
the combination of desirable pharmacokinetic and receptor-binding properties as well as a high level of ox2r occupancy necessary to antagonize the wake promoting effects of the endogenous orexin ligand allows doras to alleviate insomnia symptoms during normal sleep periods while avoiding residual somnolence during subsequent waking periods. these data support the thesis that doras such as suvorexant may have pharmacological and kinetic-binding properties appropriate for the treatment of insomnia.

