BACKGROUND
quinine is a natural molecule extracted from the bark of the cinchona tree commonly used as a flavoring agent in tonic water and bitter lemon and, at higher doses, for the treatment of some forms of malaria. consumption of quinine by rats strongly reduces food intake and body weight  <cit> . the decrease in food intake was initially attributed to the intense bitter taste of quinine but it was later shown that diminished food intake is observed with rats consuming a diet supplemented with quinine, but not with a diet supplemented with iso-bitter sucrose octaacetate, suggesting that palatability is not the only cause of decreased food intake in rats consuming quinine in the diet  <cit> . furthermore it is unclear from the rat experiments whether there is a direct effect of quinine on body weight, independently of food intake. quinine was recently shown to inhibit the activity of trpm <dig>  <cit>  a calcium activated cation channel expressed in the taste buds  <cit> , gastrointestinal tract  <cit> , pancreas  <cit>  and other hollow organs, involved in taste signaling and glucose homeostasis. here we present evidence that quinine controls body weight independently of food intake in male c57bl <dig> mice and investigate its mechanism of action, including a possible role of trpm <dig> in mediating the effect of quinine on body weight control.

RESULTS
initially we planned to use encapsulated quinine to mask its bitterness and eliminate any potential impact on food intake caused by unpalatable diet. during the course of optimising the encapsulation procedure, we found that c57bl <dig> mice consume equal amounts of regular diet or non-encapsulated quinine supplemented diet . therefore the encapsulation approach was dropped and all subsequent experiments were carried out with regular, non encapsulated quinine.

quinine fed mice gain less body weight and fat mass than mice on a regular diet 
we supplemented a regular balanced diet  of wild type male mice with quinine, and measured their body weight and fat mass for 13 weeks. we tested quinine concentrations of  <dig> %, which is the highest concentration allowed in drinks for human consumption, and  <dig> %. compared with wild type mice consuming regular diet , wild-type mice consuming  <dig> % quinine supplemented diet  had lower body weight  and lower fat mass  , whereas there was no significant difference in lean mass between wt control and wt quinine . wt quinine mice gained less weight , less fat mass  and less lean mass  than wt control mice. there was no significant difference in body weight, fat mass or lean mass between wt control and wt mice consuming  <dig> % quinine .

food intake is not different between quinine fed mice and mice fed a regular diet 
there was no significant difference in cumulative food intake between the wt control mice, wt quinine mice, and mice fed a diet supplemented with  <dig> % quinine . a preliminary experiment showed that the percentage of waste was very small, and real daily food intake  was not significantly different between groups, although there was a trend for increased real food intake by animals fed quinine supplemented diets . when given the choice between two diets with or without quinine , wild type mice avoid the quinine containing diet in favour of the regular diet, demonstrating aversion for the bitter taste of quinine . in contrast, when given only one choice, mice consume the same amounts of regular or quinine supplemented diet . thus the decreased body weight and fat mass gains observed in the wt quinine mice are not caused by diminished intake of unpalatable food.

metabolic parameters are improved by treatment with quinine 
compared with wt control mice, blood glucose and plasma triglycerides were lower in wt quinine mice . blood glucose was lower in trpm <dig> ko mice than in control . there was no significant difference in plasma free fatty acids and insulin between wt control and wt quinine mice .

effect of diet supplementation with  <dig> % quinine on body weight and body composition of wild type and trpm <dig> knockout mice 
since quinine inhibits trpm <dig> in vitro, in this experiment we investigated whether the effect of quinine on body weight and body composition was mediated through trpm <dig>  to this effect, we measured body weight and composition of wt control, wt quinine, trpm <dig> ko mice with regular ain diet  and trpm <dig> ko mice with  <dig> % quinine supplemented ain diet  and compared the effect of genotype , diet  and genotype*diet interaction. the means for body weight gain and fat mass gain for each group are given in table  <dig>  there was a significant effect of diet on body weight repeated measurements and gain , but no effect of genotype. there was a significant effect of diet on fat mass repeated measurements and gain . there was a significant effect of genotype on fat mass gain . there was a trend for an interaction diet*genotype for repeated measurements of body weight  and body weight gain  . these data confirm the effect of quinine on body weight and fat mass found in study  <dig>  trpm <dig> ko mice gain less fat mass than wt animals. the diet*genotype interaction trend suggests that part of the effect of quinine on body weight and fat mass may be trpm5-dependent. there was no significant effect of genotype or diet on lean mass gain .

mice do not regain weight after removal of quinine 
after 13 weeks of consuming a diet supplemented with quinine, mice were switched to a control diet for 4 weeks. during that period there was no significant effect on weight gain of diet and a strong trend for genotype  with no significant interaction . thus quinine treated mice do not regain weight after being switched to regular diet, whereas trpm <dig> ko mice tend to gain less weight than wt mice.

effect of quinine and trpm <dig> ko on energy balance 
faeces from wt control, wt quinine, ko control and ko quinine mice were collected and their total energy, fat and protein contents were measured . the amount of dried faeces per 24 h, faecal energy per gram of faeces, faecal energy per 24 h, faecal free fatty acids, faecal triglycerides, and faecal cholesterol were higher in mice receiving the quinine supplemented diet than those on control diet . the amount of dried faeces per 24 h, faecal energy per 24 h, faecal free fatty acids, and faecal cholesterol were higher in trpm <dig> ko mice than in control mice . phospholipids were not detectable in the faeces. there was no significant effect of genotype or diet on faecal nitrogen content. there was no genotype*diet interaction for any of those parameters.

the effect of quinine on fat mass gain is small and short lived in diet-induced obese mice fed a high fat diet 
the aim of this experiment was to determine if supplementation of the diet of obese mice with quinine would lead to weight loss. diet-induced obese mice were fed a 45% fat diet with or without supplementation with  <dig> % quinine for 12 weeks. wt quinine mice gained less weight than wt control mice, but fat mass was lower in wt quinine mice only after 6 weeks of exposure to the experimental diet . at week  <dig>  there was no significant difference in fat mass. lean mass was lower in quinine-treated mice at week  <dig> and week  <dig> . cumulative food intake was lower in mice fed quinine supplemented high fat diet than in control . thus when high fat diet is used, the effect of quinine on fat mass is small, short lived and caused at least in part by diminished food intake.

twenty four-hour energy expenditure and activity are not different between wt control, wt quinine, and ko control mice 
twenty four-hour energy expenditure, respiratory quotient and activity were measured after mice were fed the experimental diets for two weeks and did not differ between wt control, wt quinine and ko control fed ain  or high fat diet .

markers of hepatic toxicity and of systemic inflammation are normal in quinine-fed mice 
to rule out the possibility that the diminished body weight gain observed in the quinine fed animals was caused by liver toxicity or general inflammation, we measured plasma liver enzymes and cytokines. plasma aspartate-amino-transferase  and alanine-amino-transferase , which are elevated in case of hepatic toxicity, were within normal range in mice fed a diet containing  <dig> % quinine and not significantly different from control .

two mice in the control group and one mouse in the quinine fed group had elevated inf-γ, il- <dig>  il-12p <dig>  and il- <dig>  suggesting that those three mice had systemic inflammation . for all other mice the levels of il-1β, il-12p <dig>  inf-γ, il- <dig>  and tnf-α were either undetectable, in most cases, or slightly above the detection threshold. the levels of kc and il- <dig> were detectable above threshold in all mice, with no significant difference between control and quinine .

together these data show that there is no evidence of liver toxicity or systemic inflammation associated with quinine supplemented diet.

discussion
in this study, we tested the effect of quinine on mouse body weight and body composition and investigated possible mechanisms, including the role of trpm <dig>  mice consuming a balanced diet supplemented with  <dig> % quinine gained less fat mass than mice on a regular diet and maintained this difference at least for one month after quinine was removed from the diet.

previous experiments investigating the role of quinine in food intake and body weight were conducted using rats  <cit> . quinine has an intense bitter taste to humans and is aversive to rodents. adding quinine to the diet of rats results in a large decrease in food intake accompanied by diminished body weight. the decrease in food intake is observed with rats consuming a diet supplemented with quinine, but not with a diet supplemented with iso-bitter sucrose octaacetate, suggesting that palatability is not the only cause of decreased food intake in rats consuming quinine in the diet  <cit> . our results differ from those obtained with rats in that food intake was not diminished in mice consuming quinine supplemented diet compared to those consuming regular diet. in preliminary experiments we found that when given the choice between two diets with or without  <dig> % quinine, wild type mice avoid the quinine containing diet in favour of the regular diet, demonstrating aversion for the bitter taste of quinine. in contrast, when given only one choice, mice consume the same amounts of regular or quinine supplemented diet. food intake was carefully measured in studies 1– <dig> and the results were consistent for all the studies where ain diet was used. we also measured waste in a separate experiment and found that it was minimal, and real food intake was not affected by addition of quinine. thus, whereas decreased food intake explains part of the quinine induced weight loss in rats, it does not in regular diet fed mice. rats are more likely to decrease their food intake because of palatability than mice.

smaller gain in body weight and fat mass may be caused by increased energy expenditure, due to increased metabolism or activity, or decreased nutrient ingestion and/or absorption. we found an increase of total faeces, faecal energy and lipid content in the quinine treated mice compared to mice on control diet. there was no difference in protein content. faecal carbohydrate content cannot be directly measured since sugars are converted in the colon by the gut microflora into short chain fatty acids  <cit> . the largest contribution to faecal lipid difference between quinine treated and control mice was from free fatty acids, suggesting that absorption of fatty acids, not digestion of triglycerides is deregulated by quinine treatment. the 24 h faecal weight is larger in quinine fed mice than in mice fed regular diet. the difference  cannot be accounted for by the difference in lipid content, as the difference in faecal ffa between quinine fed mice and control diet fed mice is only ~ <dig>  mg. the bulk of the difference in faecal weight most likely results from differences in the amount of undigested starch. indirect calorimetry and measurement of activity showed no difference between wt control, wt quinine and ko control. altogether these data suggest that quinine administration deregulates intestinal nutrient absorption rather than energy expenditure. all mice, including quinine fed animals, looked healthy without any signs of distress during the experiment. there were no biological signs of liver toxicity, and biological signs of systemic inflammation were found in two mice in the control group and one mouse fed quinine. thus, it is unlikely that insults to visceral organs may have accounted for the diminished weight gain observed in quinine fed mice.

quinine-fed mice did not regain weight during a 4-week follow up period after quinine-containing diet was replaced with a regular ain diet. this fact is of clinical relevance. if quinine were to be investigated as a body weight control measure in humans, it may not be necessary to provide it on a continuous basis.

is the effect of quinine on body weight and body composition trpm <dig> dependent? for body weight and body weight gain there is a trend for an interaction genotype-diet, with a clear effect of quinine on wt type and a very small non significant effect on the knockout. this trend suggests the existence of a trpm <dig> and quinine-dependent mechanism of body weight and fat mass gain prevention. total faeces, caloric and lipid faecal contents are increased by quinine treatment both in the ko and wt backgrounds  indicating that they represent trpm5-independent quinine-dependent mechanisms of body weight control. quinine is likely to act on multiple targets, including possibly trpm <dig>  bitter taste receptors  <cit> , which are expressed in the gastrointestinal tract  <cit> , potassium channels  <cit>  or by direct activation of g-proteins  <cit> .

what is then the trpm5-dependent mechanism of diminished body weight gain? trpm <dig> is expressed in the taste buds  <cit> , gastrointestinal tract  <cit> , pancreas  <cit>  and other hollow organs. in the gastrointestinal tract trpm <dig> is expressed in solitary cells disseminated throughout the gut, some of which also co-express t1rs, the receptors for sweet and umami tastes, suggesting that they might be chemosensory cells. intestinal trpm <dig> expressing cells produce endogenous opioids  and uroguanylin, and they secrete β-endorphin in response to various stimuli, particularly hypertonic stimuli, in a trpm5-dependent fashion  <cit> . opioids are well known to inhibit intestinal motility. it is tempting to speculate that inactivation of trpm <dig> by gene knockout leads to increased intestinal motility through diminished release of β-endorphin thereby reducing intestinal nutrient uptake. consistent with this hypothesis increased faecal weight, and faecal caloric and lipid contents are found in trpm <dig> ko mice compared to wild type mice, although the differences are less marked as with quinine versus control. given that the trpm5-dependent prevention of weight gain takes place over a very long period, it is understandable that its underlying physiological changes are subtle. quinine, on the other hand decreases gastrointestinal transit  <cit>  and therefore would increase faecal weight, energy and lipids through a mechanism independent of trpm <dig> inhibition.

quinine mediated control of body weight and fat mass is clearly observed in mice fed a balanced diet  but is less clear when mice are fed high fat diet and interpretation of the results is confounded by lower food intake in the quinine group. mice fed high fat diet overeat because of the palatability of fat, and this overeating may have been smaller in the quinine group because of bitterness.

CONCLUSIONS
our data show that quinine contributes to the control of body weight and fat mass without impacting food intake in male mice fed a balanced diet and therefore may constitute a novel tool for the fight against the obesity epidemic.

