BACKGROUND
individuals in natural populations commonly prefer certain trait values over others when choosing their mates  <cit> . traits that are used for mate selection include vocal signals , pheromones , behavioral repertoires , and morphological compatibility . theory predicts that divergent preferences for certain trait values can generate behavioral reproductive isolation at both the intra- and interspecific levels  <cit> . consistent with this prediction, mating preferences have been observed to vary among populations and closely related species in nature , and in multiple taxa evidence suggests that the resulting behavioral isolation has been involved in speciation  <cit> .

species-specific mating preferences can arise via different mechanisms, and one of the critical components to understanding the process of speciation is determining which factors promote divergence in traits used for mate selection. for example, if mating with individuals from other populations is associated with costs, selection for population-level recognition can drive the evolution of mating signals . the resulting behavioral isolation can promote speciation and may lead directly to increased levels of prezygotic isolation, as via reinforcement  <cit> . alternatively, differences in mate selection traits between species can arise via neutral processes  <cit> , as a by-product of divergent ecological adaptation  <cit> , or they can evolve in parallel with reproductive isolation, for example as a consequence of sexual selection. under these scenarios, the same forces of evolution that affect signal properties for intra-specific mate choice would also affect reproductive isolation between species.

the different mechanisms that can cause species-specific mating preferences are expected to generate distinct patterns of evolutionary trait divergence  <cit> . if mating preferences contribute to the evolution and maintenance of reproductive isolation among species, mating signals are expected to change rapidly during the speciation process. little change might occur between speciation events, because stabilizing selection for reliable species discrimination should decrease variance in mating signals  <cit> . stabilizing selection for species discrimination should also favor large signal differences between species relative to intraspecific variation  <cit> . by contrast, under sexual selection or drift, mating signals may be expected to change continuously over evolutionary time, without accelerated change during periods of species formation  <cit> . thus, distinguishing between gradual vs. speciation-associated change of mating signals in a taxon can provide insights on the selective forces underlying phenotypic change  <cit> .

here, we investigate whether cuticular hydrocarbons may provide a signal for mate recognition in timema stick insects, and whether hydrocarbon profiles have diverged gradually between species or if most change is associated with speciation events. chemical communication among insects is extremely widespread , and cuticular hydrocarbons, in particular, serve as mate recognition signals in many species . analyses of courtship behavior suggested that chemical signals also underlie species recognition and premating isolation in timema stick insects  <cit> , a genus that comprises  <dig> described species  of plant-feeding insects, distributed primarily in california  <cit> . in timema, sexual isolation has been shown to represent an important reproductive barrier separating ecologically isolated populations within, as well as between, species  <cit> .

we analyzed cuticular hydrocarbon components of nine closely-related sexual species of timema  to characterize differences among species and to test whether interspecific matingsare more likely between species with similar than distinct hydrocarbon profiles. using the phylogeny of these species, we also evaluated the tempo and mode of hydrocarbon profile evolution to develop insights into the processes underlying divergence between species for this trait. finally, in order to test for possible links between species recognition, intraspecific mate choice, and the early stages of the speciation process in timema, we tested for divergence in hydrocarbon components between populations within one of the nine species, t. cristinae. this species was chosen because there is extensive evidence for sexual isolation between populations occurring on ceanothus versus adenostoma host plants  but the proximate mechanisms underlying mate discrimination have remained speculative. this analysis allows us to assess whether the same traits that are used to distinguish conspecific from heterospecific individuals may also be used in mate choice within species.

RESULTS
cuticular hydrocarbon variation between species and populations
for each of the nine species, we quantified the amount of five cuticular hydrocarbon components  of three to  <dig> virgin females. because our approach required analyzing nine species in parallel, we focused on only one sex for simplicity, and we used females because a previous study indicated that mate discrimination, at least in its early stages, appears to mainly depend on males. specifically, males are more likely to pair with, and court, females of their own than of other species  <cit> . for eight of the nine species we used females from two geographically distant locations, to account for intraspecific variation when evaluating species differences . except for t. bartmani and t. petita, which are known to occur only on a single host plant , the two populations of each species were collected on different hosts . for the ninth species, t. boharti, we were able to collect individuals from only one location; across the nine species, we therefore included individuals from  <dig> locations in total. sixteen of these  <dig> locations comprised only the focal species, with no other timema species present on the same or different host plants. for one of the populations , the focal species t. chumash overlapped with a second species, t. podura. because past work implicates reinforcement of mating preferences between co-occurring populations of t. cristinae  <cit> , we specifically chose isolated populations to avoid potentially increased levels of discrimination at locations where species meet.

in a first step, we tested whether timema species differed in the composition of their cuticular hydrocarbons, as expected if these chemicals contribute to sexual isolation. accordingly, a non-parametric manova revealed significant hydrocarbon profile differences among timema species . to simplify the graphical representation of hydrocarbon profile differences between species, we combined the hydrocarbon components using discriminant function analysis, after log-contrast transformation  <cit> . log contrasts were calculated by dividing the value for each hydrocarbon by the component 13me <dig>  and then taking the log of these new variables, resulting in four log-contrast transformed values  for every individual. results using other components as the divisor were qualitatively similar. the two first discriminant functions  captured  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total variance between species, respectively . df <dig> and df <dig> also encompass sufficient variance to allow for the visual separation of species . while the between-population differences in hydrocarbon profiles were relatively small compared to the between-species differences , t. chumash stood out with individuals from the two populations being characterized by very distinct hydrocarbon profiles . this difference in t. chumash is consistent with previous data on notable between-population divergence in chromosome numbers  <cit> , and mtdna . it is unlikely to represent a profile shift in areas of overlap with other species as the hydrocarbon profiles of t. chumash individuals in areas of overlap with t. podura  appeared more similar to t. podura than the profile of individuals from the isolated t. chumash population . significant hydrocarbon profile differences of much smaller effect size were also found between the two populations of the species t. cristinae  and t. poppensis  but not for any of the remaining species .

hydrocarbon variation and between-species mating propensities
next, we tested whether hydrocarbon profile differences may be involved in interspecific mating decisions by pairing individual males and females and recording whether mating occurred. these no-choice mating trials  revealed large-scale differences among species combinations in their propensity for interspecific matings, ranging from 0% to almost 95%. some of this variation appeared to stem from variation among species in male “eagerness” for mating. males of some species courted any female shortly after encountering her, whereas males from other species were reluctant to court females of even their own species. this pattern is reflected by the significant differences among species in mating proportions measured for intraspecific no-choice trials  as well as by the fact that the interspecific mating proportions measured for the reciprocal species combinations were only moderately correlated . we therefore analyzed the interspecific mating propensities in two ways  using the average values of the reciprocal combinations for each species pair, and  using two separate points for each species pair and using male species as the first explanatory factor in the statistical analyses .

both types of approaches are consistent with the idea that cuticular hydrocarbon profiles function as signals for interspecific mate discrimination in timema. the mean interspecific mating proportions were significantly negatively correlated with hydrocarbon profile differences between species . interspecific mating propensities were also negatively correlated with mitochondrial genetic divergences between species . the correlation between hydrocarbon profile differences and mating propensity was not, however, explained by genetic divergences, as these two variables were not significantly correlated with each other , and hydrocarbon profile differences were still negatively correlated with interspecific mating propensities after correcting for genetic divergences between species .

we obtained qualitatively the same results when using each male–female species combination as a separate data point and using male species as an explanatory variable . thus, interspecific mating propensity was significantly affected by cuticular hydrocarbon profile divergence, even after correction for genetic divergence . however, the significance values from these analyses must be considered with caution due to the non-independence of the different pairwise species divergences.

to develop insights into possible contributions of individual hydrocarbon components to the association between interspecific mating propensity and hydrocarbon profile divergences, we also tested for correlations between mating proportions and differences between species in their levels of each individual hydrocarbon . differences for 3me <dig>  7me <dig>  and 13me <dig> were significantly negatively correlated with interspecific mating propensity , whereas the two other components were not or only marginally non-significantly correlated with interspecific mating propensity . these patterns indicate that putative mating cues would likely be derived from global or combinatorial profiles rather than individual components, and/or that different components are used as signals by different species.

macroevolutionary change in chcs
finally, we wanted to infer whether cuticular hydrocarbon profile differences between species develop gradually over time, as expected under constant intraspecific selection or neutral divergence, or whether there is accelerated change during speciation events. to this end, we first built a maximum-likelihood  phylogeny describing the relationships between the nine timema species used for hydrocarbon analysis . the branch lengths in this phylogeny can be interpreted as proportional to time, as the ml tree with a global clock constraint did not differ significantly from the best  ml tree . maximum parsimony analyses and bayesian inferences yielded the same tree topology , which is fully compatible with previous phylogenies of the genus  <cit> .

we then used this phylogeny to investigate the evolutionary tempo and mode of hydrocarbon profile divergence, represented by df <dig> and df <dig>  as well as of the individual hydrocarbon components. in particular, we inferred whether hydrocarbon profiles tend to diverge continuously between species, or whether the amount of profile changeis correlated with the numberof speciation events  <cit> . to this end, we evaluated the fit of nine different diffusion-based maximum-likelihood models, each representing a specific evolutionary scenario of character change. these scenarios include a 'neutral divergence' model whereby character change occurs on all branches in the phylogeny and is proportional to time, as well as different types of 'speciation' models where character change coincides with species splits  in the phylogeny . akaike information criterion  values are calculated to determine which of the nine models of evolutionary change best characterizes the tempo and mode of diversification of hydrocarbon profiles in timema.

model-fit values are presented as aic value differences between the focal model and best model . models that differ by at least  <dig> aic units from the best model are considered to provide a significantly worse fit to the data; models within the  <dig> units are indicated in bold. 3me <dig> = 3-methylheptacosane; 5me <dig> = 5-methylheptacosane; 7me <dig> = 7-methylheptacosane; 9me <dig> = 9-methylheptacosane; 11me <dig> = 11-methylheptacosane; 13me <dig> = 13-methylheptacosane. notice that the convergent results for 3me <dig> and 13me <dig> are expected given the strong negative correlation between these two components. 1: numbers of parameters estimated; see additional file  <dig> for details 2: while these models are expected to be the best description for traits involved in speciation, similar phylogenetic patterns may also arise via other processes, for example, when speciation and trait evolution are associated with niche shifts  <cit> . 3: support for these models indicates very rapid divergence of traits; however, they do not provide insights into why such rapid divergence occurs .

the evolution of global hydrocarbon profiles  were better explained by change occurring proportionally to speciation events  than by neutral models in which change occurs proportionally to time . specifically, the evolution of df <dig> on the timema phylogeny was best explained by punctuated models, in which at each node, one daughter branch retains the ancestral character value, and the other daughter branch changes. for df <dig>  models with equal branch lengths provided a better fit to the data than any other model, but it was not possible to distinguish between nonphylogenetic and punctuated models . the evolutionary patterns returned by the analyses for individual components varied widely. support for speciational change was found for one of the five analyzed hydrocarbon components, 7me <dig>  where a phylogenetic model with equal branch lengths provided the best fit to the data . phenotypic change was therefore dependent on the number of speciation events but independent of time since divergence. by contrast, we found that evolutionary change in 3me <dig> was best described by a pure-phylogenetic model, with change proportional to branch lengths, consistent with the significant correlation of lc <dig> differences between species and their genetic divergences. the same pattern was also revealed for 13me <dig>  as expected given the strong correlation between 13me <dig> and 3me <dig> . the evolutionary change of the two remaining components  was best described by non-phylogenetic models, which provide little information on processes driving character changes . these diverse patterns for individual components could indicate that different species use different components as cues, or, more likely, that combinations of several components are used for species discrimination. the latter hypothesis is notably supported by df <dig>  representing a profile combination, and being best described by punctuational  models of change.

altogether, our data thus indicate that cuticular hydrocarbon profiles vary among timema species, and that most evolutionary change in global hydrocarbon profiles occurs in association with speciation events. individual hydrocarbon components appear to change according to different scenarios, with some following patterns expected under neutral evolution and others with the amount of change more strongly correlated with speciation events than with divergence time. similarities in hydrocarbon profiles between species are correlated with inter-specific mating propensities which in combination with the punctuational change of df <dig> and df <dig> on the timema phylogeny supports the idea that hydrocarbon profiles may function as inter-specific mating signals in this group.

cuticular hydrocarbon variation among t. cristinae populations
to test whether cuticular hydrocarbon profiles are also correlated with mating decisions at the intraspecific level, we combined an additional set of four populations of the species t. cristinae with the two t. cristinae populations included in the interspecific analyzes. this species was chosen because there is extensive evidence for host-plant associated mating preferences, and partial reproductive isolation, between populations occurring on ceanothus host plants and populations occurring on adenostoma host plants , but the proximate mechanisms underlying such mate discrimination have remained speculative.

a manova revealed significant cuticular hydrocarbon profile differences between populations on different host plants but also differences between populations within hosts . this multivariate difference appeared to be mainly due to variation in hydrocarbon component 13me <dig> . none of the remaining hydrocarbon components displayed significantly more variation between populations on different hostplants as compared to populations from the same host-plant.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we have used a combination of data from female cuticular hydrocarbon profiles, interspecific mating trials, and phylogenetics to evaluate the potential role of cuticular hydrocarbons in mating and diversification of timema walking sticks. our primary findings are that  hydrocarbon profiles differ substantially between species, and between t. cristinae populations adapted to different host plants, such that species-specific and population-specific sets of hydrocarbons may serve as signals for mate choice between species and populations;  in no-choice trials, mating was significantly more likely between pairs of species with similar hydrocarbon profiles than between species with divergent profiles; and  the macroevolution of major components of hydrocarbon profiles  fits best with a model of punctuational phenotypic change, as expected under change driven by selection processes. taken together, these convergent lines of evidence strongly suggest a role for cuticular hydrocarbon variation in mate choice and speciation in the genus timema, although elucidating the exact nature of this role will require additional studies. notably, the experimental manipulation of hydrocarbon profiles are required to demonstrate that these profiles are indeed used as mating cues in timema, and will allow direct assessment of the importance of hydrocarbons for mating preferences at the individual level and at different degrees of reproductive isolation.

among other insects, cuticular hydrocarbon variation has been implicated in a range of developmental, ecological and behavioral contexts, including ecological adaptation to the local abiotic or biotic environment  <cit> , effects from temperature and nutrition during juvenile stages  <cit> , interactions with host plants  <cit> , and mate choice and sexual selection within species  <cit> . evidence for cuticular hydrocarbons mediating the evolution of reproductive isolation has thus far centered mainly on associations between variation in hydrocarbon profiles and variation in propensities to mate  <cit> . for example, in chorthippus parallelus grasshoppers, male hydrocarbon variation, but not other potential mate-choice signals, was significantly linked with the degree of assortative mating among individuals from  <dig> populations  <cit> . similarly, in chrysochus beetles  <cit> , and some drosophila vinegar flies , mating between individuals from closely-related species or strains is affected in part by variation in cuticular hydrocarbon profiles. in timema, assuming individuals indeed detect aspects of hydrocarbon profiles, decreased propensity to accept mates with lower hydrocarbon profile similarity would limit the likelihood of potentially costly interspecific matings. therefore, cuticular hydrocarbon profiles and preferences may act as effective isolation mechanisms among divergent and potentially post-zygotically incompatible populations and species. alternatively, reproductive isolation, and cuticular hydrocarbon profiles, may evolve as byproducts of species divergence. the precise roles of hydrocarbon variation in processes underlying the evolution of reproductive isolation, and the timing of evolutionary changes in hydrocarbon profiles during the process of speciation, remain to be elucidated, and require integration of data on selective pressures, mechanisms, and underlying genetic changes from different temporal and spatial scales.

in this study, we have analyzed cuticular hydrocarbon variation across nine species, and multiple populations, at varying levels of phylogenetic and genetic divergence. inference of the tempo and mode of hydrocarbon profile evolution provides evidence generally consistent with the hypothesis that change in this set of characters does not occur gradually during phyletic evolution, but relatively rapidly, in proportion to the number of speciation events. this pattern of speciational change has also been found for the macro evolution of timema courtship behavior, but not for the macroevolution of male genitalic morphology, which has diversified in proportion to phyletic branch lengths, apparently under forces of sexual selection or sexual conflict  <cit> . among other insect species, previous studies of macroevolutionary change in hydrocarbon profiles have reported rapid evolution in conjunction with species specificity and a notable degree of phylogenetic conservatism  <cit> , patterns that are largely concordant with those described here for timema, but have not been partitioned into speciational versus phyletic concentrations of change. if changes in cuticular hydrocarbon profile drive speciation, then directional selection due to mate choice with profile-based criteria should characterize processes of divergence or reinforcement, while stabilizing selection should predominate at other times. alternatively, hydrocarbon profiles may diverge between populations primarily due to differences in ecological variables such as temperature, humidity, habitat preference, or host-plant use, promoting the evolution of pre- and post-zygotic isolation under circumstances where such profiles also function in intraspecific or interspecific mate choices  <cit> .

in timema, natural selection for cryptic coloration patterns that match those of their host plants represents a major force in phenotypic divergence among populations and species  <cit> . our intraspecific data showing hydrocarbon profile differences between t. cristinae from their two host plants, adenostoma and ceanothus, which are distributed in large- and small-scale mosaic patterns across their chaparral habitat, indicate that hydrocarbon-based chemical signals could be used as indicators of hostplant and other environmental adaptations  <cit>  of a prospective mating partner. in our interspecific analyses of hydrocarbon profiles, we also found significant differences between the two populations sampled for t. poppensis and t. chumash . in these cases, the study of additional populations from each host plant may indicate whether these profile divergences are also correlated to specific hostplant adaptations as in t. cristinae.

the degree to which cuticular hydrocarbon profiles are genetically-based, compared to being acquired from the host plant or other features of the local environment, remains to be investigated in timema; both heritable and environmental effects have been well established among other insects . recent studies have identified sets of genes, mainly desaturases, that underlie variation in hydrocarbon profiles among drosophila. findings of rapid evolution and positive selection of such genes  <cit>  suggest that hydrocarbon evolution may exert strong, direct effects on phenotypic changes that mediate speciation. in timema, the rapid changes in chc profiles associated with speciation events and their correlation with reproductive isolation, provide further support for the idea that such traits can play an integral role in population divergence and speciation.

