BACKGROUND
intra-muscular fat , also known as marbling fat, is an adipocyte depot located within perimysial connective tissues alongside myofibres  <cit> . intramuscular fat is a late-developing depot and intramuscular adipocytes have been shown to be metabolically distinct from adipocytes in other depots, such as subcutaneous fat, as reviewed by hausman et al. <cit> . imf is very important in defining pork quality from a sensory perspective, since it is positively correlated with flavour, juiciness, tenderness/firmness and overall acceptability of pork  <cit> . furthermore, imf also has an important influence on the sensory characteristics of dry-cured ham, an economically significant processed product  <cit> . some authors propose a minimum threshold of  <dig> % imf for acceptable eating quality in fresh pork  <cit> , while other studies suggest that levels of  <dig> to 3% imf are required to ensure desirable eating quality  <cit> . currently, imf levels in the majority of modern commercial breeds are typically less than  <dig> %  <cit> . while this is largely due to genetic selection for lean growth, carcass yield, carcass composition and meat quality traits including imf are influenced by an interaction between genotype and environmental factors such as level of nutrition  <cit> . an improved ability to manipulate imf deposition could provide a basis to enhance uniformity in desirable eating quality characteristics in commercial production, but a more complete understanding of porcine muscle biology in relation to intramuscular fat deposition, in particular in the more commercially relevant muscles, is first required.

dietary protein restriction during the growth/finisher phase in pigs, relative to overall energy content in the diet, is a nutritional strategy which has several profound effects on the pig, including reduced lean deposition, increased fat deposition throughout the carcass, and in particular, in the economically significant depot of imf  <cit> . for example, feeding pigs a 15% reduced lysine:energy diet significantly increased imf levels and furthermore improved juiciness, tenderness and overall acceptability scores by sensory panellists  <cit> . while extreme restriction strategies have also been shown to impair growth, limiting their relevance to the commercial setting, the generation of muscle displaying divergent imf through such a dietary intervention provides a valuable resource to explore the physiology of this key eating quality trait.

identification of gene pathways/networks whose expression is altered in response to nutritional modulation would provide insight into the physiological/biochemical processes important for muscle development and help to uncover the mechanisms involved in imf deposition in porcine muscle  <cit> . the duroc breed is characterised by moderate levels of imf  <cit>  which is more easily manipulated compared to other commercial breeds and it has been identified as a useful model for understanding the physiological basis for muscle lipid metabolism  <cit> . within a carcass there are a number of muscles which exhibit favourable quality characteristics and command relatively high value. the musculus semimembranosus  is one such muscle that is particularly relevant to ham production. hence, the objective of this study was to compare the phenotypic and transcriptomic response between duroc pigs maintained on low and high protein diets during the finisher phase.

RESULTS
phenotypic response to dietary protein restriction
although intakes did not differ significantly between animals on the low protein  and high protein  diets, average daily gain and feed conversion ratio were significantly lower in the animals on the lp diet  . while carcass weight did not differ significantly at slaughter, there was a tendency towards reduced carcass weight in animals on the lp diet . muscle depth did not differ between dietary treatments. however, fat depth measured between the 3rd and 4th rib was greater  following the lp diet . composition analysis indicated that there was no effect of treatment on protein or moisture content in the muscle . the lp and hp diets did, however, have a significant effect on fat content in the muscle: sm muscle derived from animals on the lp diet had almost twice as much imf  as muscle from the hp diet . our results concur with those of d’souza et al.  <cit>  and bidner et al.  <cit>  who also found a negative relationship with growth, as well as a positive increment in imf deposition following protein restriction during growth. the two levels of imf generated lie each side of the 2% imf threshold for ‘desirable eating quality’ as suggested by devol et al.  <cit>  and thus provide a useful model for exploration of the molecular basis of eating quality.

sm: m. semimembranosus muscle.

identification and functional characterisation of differentially expressed genes in sm muscle associated with dietary protein restriction
a total of  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed  at the  <dig>  level . of these,  <dig> genes were annotated by anexdb  <cit>  and are presented in additional file 1: table s <dig>  fold changes ranged from − <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig> genes had a greater than  <dig>  fold change across phenotypes. previous studies of gene expression in relation to meat quality have shown that expression changes can be small  <cit>  so in this study, all transcripts with a cut off p-like value of p ≤  <dig>  were considered de. differential expression assessed by realtime quantitative pcr  for  <dig> selected genes was in a similar direction and magnitude compared to the microarray . although fold changes were generally low, a number of functional modules were altered and several broad patterns emerged through the various functional and ontological analyses. the most significant molecular and cellular functions, along with the number of up- and down-regulated genes observed in each function, are presented in figure  <dig>  the pathways significantly over-represented in the de genes are presented in table  <dig> and the most significant gene interaction network is presented in figure  <dig>  suggesting potential specific mechanisms underlying the broader biological functions. taken together, these analyses suggest that an array of cellular processes including cell division and growth, protein metabolism, lipid metabolism, and the stress response were modulated in sm muscle by dietary protein restriction. almost twice as many transcripts  were down-regulated, compared to up-regulated  indicating a repression of transcription in the sm muscle in response to protein restriction. up- and down-regulated gene-lists were analysed separately using david functional annotation clustering, permitting evaluation of the high-level trends among the de genes, while reflecting the fact that genes have more than one function or may be members of several pathways. for up-regulated genes, three significant annotation clusters  were identified which cluster terms relating to cell division, glucose metabolism and lipid metabolism, respectively . four ac were identified for the down-regulated gene-list  with the first three of these all grouping terms related to cell division and cell cycle functions, while the fourth cluster represented terms related to extracellular matrix and connective tissue development. the major patterns observed in the overall dataset are discussed individually below.

*fc: fold change.

#positive fold changes indicate that the low protein  diet resulted in higher expression than the high protein  diet and the number represents . negative fold changes indicate that the lp diet resulted in lower expression than the hp diet and the number represents {−}.

gene expression changes  and p-values determined by microarray and qpcr are shown.

#% de: percentage of genes annotated in that pathway that were observed differentially expressed in the present study.

*cancer, disease-specific pathways, neurotransmitter and other nervous system signalling and pathogen-influenced signalling were excluded from the analysis.

down-regulated genes are highlighted in bold, up-regulated genes are in normal typeface.

+p-value from modified fisher exact score.

+p-value from modified fisher exact score.

repression of cell cycle, cellular growth and tissue development
in response to the lack of available protein in the diet, animals on the lp diet appear to have had a reduced capacity for efficient growth . functional annotation of the de genes highlighted a number of biological processes and those with the largest number of down-regulated genes were ‘cellular growth and proliferation’, ‘tissue development’, ‘cell cycle’, ‘organismal development’ and ‘skeletal and muscular system development’ . of the observed genes which have functions in growth and development, greater numbers were down-regulated in tissue of animals on the lp diet than were up-regulated , suggesting these are the molecular mechanisms actively repressing growth in this model. they included groups of genes with important functions such as ‘cellular assembly and organisation’ , ‘cellular growth and proliferation’  and ‘cell cycle’ . ipa analysis  revealed that key growth-related pathways modulated by the protein-restricted diet included, ‘alanine and aspartate metabolism’, ‘tgf beta signalling’, ‘arachidonic acid metabolism’ pathway ‘nitrogen metabolism’, and ‘mapk signalling’, suggesting an overall repression of growth and development within the muscle tissue as a result of the lp diet, which is reflected in the reduced average daily gain and the tendency towards reduced carcass weight . functional annotation clustering of gene ontology term annotations in david of down-regulated  genes showed that many of the functional categories down-regulated in high imf tissue relate to reduced availability of protein in the muscle, with significant categories such as ‘skeletal system development’ and ‘morphogenesis’ indicating that these processes may be repressed in a restricted protein regime . three of the acs related to cell division, cell cycle and reflected the divergence of resource allocation from protein deposition and growth. despite the down-regulation of numerous protein synthesis and cellular growth pathways, there was no significant discrepancy in muscle depth or muscle protein concentration at slaughter between the two dietary conditions .

several of the observed pathways differentially expressed in muscle tissue, offer potential mechanisms, through which the restriction of dietary protein may act to mediate this inhibition of growth. the key difference between the two diets was the availability of dietary protein, which was energetically compensated for through inclusion of carbohydrate. a key indicator pathway of amino acid deprivation, ‘alanine and aspartate metabolism’, was significantly over-represented in the data . for example, the asparagine synthetase gene, asns was significantly induced in lp diet muscle. asns responds to the deprivation of a wide range of different amino acids, therefore suggesting that this signal may be induced following amino acid restriction . this gene was also observed differentially expressed between lean and fatter pig breeds, i.e. large white versus basque  <cit> . a second significant pathway identified was the ‘transforming growth factor-beta  signalling’ pathway. the ‘tgf-β signalling pathway’ was differentially expressed and tgfbr itself was down-regulated . tgf-β plays key roles in regulating many cellular processes such as cell growth and differentiation, homeostasis, apoptosis, inflammation  <cit>  and extracellular matrix  metabolism  <cit> . the ‘arachidonic acid metabolism’ pathway  was also significantly modulated in the study. arachidonic acid is involved in cellular signalling and is abundant in skeletal muscle  <cit> . through its conversion to active components such as the prostaglandin pgf2α, arachidonic acid is necessary for the repair and growth of skeletal muscle tissue and in general muscle anabolic processes  <cit> . in the present study, the arachidonic acid pathway was also generally down-regulated in response to protein restriction . indeed, the second most repressed gene in the experiment with a − <dig>  fold change was involved in arachidonic acid signalling i.e. potassium voltage-gated channel, shal-related subfamily, member  <dig>   <cit> . ramayo-caldas et al.  <cit>  also observed that the arachidonic acid pathway, including genes identified in the present study, such as cyp2c <dig>  was significantly differentially expressed in liver of iberian x landrace pigs divergent for fatty acid content, suggesting this pathway may also be an influence on accumulation of fatty acids.

since the protein and amino acid composition of the diet was extremely limiting , in addition to the reduced availability of protein for growth, there may have been a reduced need for energy to excrete excess protein, as suggested by the down regulation of genes in the ‘nitrogen metabolism’ pathway . furthermore, myofibrillar protein turnover may also have been restricted in high imf tissue with observed down-regulation of the capns <dig>  gene. the repression of protein turnover could contribute to the conservation and efficient utilisation of a reduced resource of dietary protein. the efficient response to dietary protein restriction may thus involve a suppression of both protein synthesis and breakdown pathways in order to achieve an overall improvement in the efficiency of protein accretion in the myofibrils.

extracellular matrix and connective tissue development
connective tissue provides a source of physical strength and scaffolding support for growing muscle tissue  <cit> . in the present study, procollagen genes col3a <dig>  and col5a <dig>  were prominent in the most significant network  and along with several other collagens  were reduced in expression in high imf tissue. down-regulation of other genes important for collagen development e.g. plod <dig> , which codes for lysl hydroxylase and is involved in collagen synthesis  <cit>  and alox <dig>  was also seen in muscle of animals on the lp diet . while the extracellular matrix was long considered a relatively inert ground substance, recent work has shown that it is an integral component of cellular signalling, through the interaction of extracellular matrix molecules with growth factors to influence cell shape, movement and gene expression  <cit> . for example, studies have shown that the removal of collagen vi stimulates the metabolism and survival of adipocytes  <cit> . functional annotation clustering  revealed that functions such as ‘extracellular matrix organisation’ and ‘extracellular structure organisation’ were represented in ac  <dig> amongst the down-regulated genes . damon and colleagues  <cit>  investigated the longissimus muscle transcriptome of two breeds contrasting for fatness, the highly selected large white and the traditional unselected basque breed, which displays lower production efficiency and higher imf content compared to commercial breeds. they identified extracellular matrix functions as the most significantly over-represented group in their dataset. they also observed some of the genes identified in the present study such as decorin , which plays an important role in matrix assembly and whose impaired expression has a major influence on the collagen network. the extra-cellular matrix is an important influence underpinning differential cell and muscle tissue modelling. identification of this component as being differentially expressed in two such contrasting animal models  confirms its biological importance in the determination of composition and organisation of muscle tissue, as well as its significance to regulation of imf.

modulation of lipid metabolism
finisher pigs on the lp diet were characterised by a redirection of energy from overall growth to fat deposition, with increased fat accumulation in adipose depots including subcutaneous fat and imf content . this concept is supported by the observation that many of the up-regulated processes in sm muscle from animals on the lp diet have functions associated with increased lipid metabolism, and in particular synthesis . ipa analysis of biological processes indicated that high imf muscle displayed up-regulation of genes related to ‘phospholipid metabolic process’, ‘glycerolipid biosynthetic process’, ‘lipid biosynthetic process’, ‘organophosphate metabolic process’, as well as ‘glucose metabolic process’, ‘regulation of cellular carbohydrate metabolic process’, ‘regulation of carbohydrate metabolic process’ and ‘cell division’, ‘mitosis’, ‘mitotic cell cycle’. key pathways modulated by the protein-restricted diet include those involved with fatty acid uptake  and fatty acid synthesis .

peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-alpha  is a ligand-activated transcription factor that belongs to the nuclear receptor family. pparα signalling plays major roles in the stimulation of uptake, binding, activation and consequent oxidation of fatty acids in several tissues including skeletal muscle  <cit> . pparα is highly expressed in a number of tissues  with high levels of lipid catabolism and is activated by polyunsaturated fatty acids  <cit> . here, differential expression of  <dig> genes involved in ‘pparα/rxrα activation’  was observed and these genes were in general up-regulated in the higher imf condition. canovas et al. <cit>  also observed induced pparα signalling in muscle of pigs with high levels of imf content and this is also reflected in liver of pigs divergent for fatty acid profile  <cit> . pparα signalling was also highlighted in pathways relevant to carbohydrate metabolism indicating a high-level modulation of energy-generating and consuming pathways in muscle.

network analysis and functional annotation of biological processes  revealed over-expression of a number of other genes with functions in lipid metabolism, including membrane lipid biosynthesis , but which are not well known in relation to imf accumulation. serinc <dig>  is a member of the serine incorporator family which plays a pivotal role in the regulation of lipid biosynthesis by facilitating the synthesis of the serine-derived lipids, phosphatidylserine and sphingolipids  <cit> . here, serinc <dig> was highly up-regulated and was a member of the top network. serinc <dig> has not been well-studied in the context of meat quality but was recently identified within a qtl for fatty acid profile  <cit> . phospholipases are critical enzymes involved in mediating many aspects of cellular function through modulating the physical properties of membranes, generation of lipid second messengers and cellular bioenergetics. cytosolic calcium-dependent phospholipase a <dig>  group iva  has been shown to mediate the increase in triglyceride content of adipose tissue after high-fat feeding  <cit>  and here it was down-regulated in high imf tissue. lymphotoxin β receptor  is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily and has been shown to be an important mediator of lipid homeostasis  <cit> . malonyl coa decarboxylase  acts to increase the rate of fatty acid oxidation and mlycd was down-regulated in the present study indicating that not only is lipid biosynthesis and accumulation up-regulated but that fatty acid turnover may be repressed. stearoyl coa desaturase  is the catalyst of the conversion of saturated fatty acids to monounsaturated fatty acids   <cit>  and is of interest from a health perspective and was highly up-regulated in the lp diet, confirming its association with imf accumulation which is in accordance with observations by canovas et. al  <cit>  and da costa et al.  <cit> . these genes are potential markers of fatty acid uptake, binding, storage and oxidation.

as well as its roles in cell growth and differentiation, expression of the tgf-β signalling pathway suppresses pre-adipoctye differentiation and reduces expression of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase   <cit> . the observed repression of the tgf-β signalling pathway and increased expression of gpd <dig> in muscles of animals on the lp diet is thus a candidate mechanism for the increased orientation towards adipocyte differentiation and proliferation and may stimulate the accumulation of imf in this model.

while the primary function of adipocytes are to store triacylglycerols during periods of energetic excess and release again during periods where energy is deprived, adipocytes are also a major source of endocrine and paracrine signals  <cit> . adipogenic endocrine factors and secretory products are important mediators of energy homeostasis, immunological response, vascular disease and appetite regulation. angptl <dig> , the hepatic fibrinogen/angiopoietin-related protein, or ppar-γ angiopoietin-related protein, is a secreted glycoprotein abundantly expressed in adipocytes  <cit> . angptl <dig> abundance may be an indicator of imf accumulation in porcine muscle. network  <dig>  may be seen in figure  <dig> and included  <dig> down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated genes. leptin  was a hub molecule in this network and was up-regulated and a number of its downstream genes were also altered . leptin is secreted from adipose cells and acts as “lipostat” regulating food intake and energy expenditure to maintain body weight homeostasis  <cit> . indeed, several studies have shown that high circulating levels of leptin inhibit fatty acid esterification in rodent  <cit>  and porcine skeletal muscle  <cit>  and promote lipid oxidation. higher expression of lep is expected when a greater number of adipocytes are present and when fat content of adipocytes is higher  <cit> . our study supports the observed associations of lep with high imf accumulation in muscle tissue in line with previous findings  <cit> .

induction of hypoxic stress response
seven genes in the ‘hif1α signalling’ cascade were up-regulated . hypoxia-inducible factor  is a transcription factor that regulates the homeostatic responses to hypoxia by inducing expression of proteins controlling glucose metabolism, cell proliferation, and angiogenesis  <cit> . the relatively larger expanse of adipose tissue in high imf muscle, as is present in lp animals leads to the formation of hypoxic areas, as some adipocytes become too distant from the vasculature to receive oxygen properly  <cit> . hif1-α expression has also been proposed elsewhere as a marker of imf accumulation in pigs naturally divergent in imf content  <cit> . apoptosis in adipocytes can be induced through cell signalling in response to hypoxia, via the insulin-signalling pathway, leading to inhibition of glucose uptake and release of free fatty acids  <cit>  and here the ‘apoptosis signalling’ cascade was also significantly represented among the de genes.

mechanisms regulating imf accumulation in response to dietary protein restriction and other experimental models
two previous studies have examined the influence of restriction of protein in porcine diet on gene expression and phenotype in porcine muscle. da costa et al.  <cit>  examined energy and protein restriction and applied a small muscle specific microarray to male duroc pigs on restricted and adequate energy and protein. oster et al.  <cit>  applied a reduced protein supply to the maternal diet during gestation; subsequently measuring phenotype and transcription in the offspring at different stages post mortem using the same array platform as employed in the present study. da costa et al.  <cit>  in common with the present study, found reduced growth performance and increased imf accumulation in pigs on restricted protein and energy diets. while in the present study, we have only studied one muscle, similarities were observed in the pathways and functions modulated across all three studies, and a number of pathways, e.g. fatty acid metabolism, were commonly differentially expressed in all three studies. our phenotypic and gene expression findings in relation to dietary restriction at the post natal stage show interesting parallels with the impact of restricted protein at the gestational stage  <cit> . restriction of growth performance was observed in the pigs restricted in protein during gestation as in those of the present study, which were restricted in protein in their own diets. offspring offered poor protein supply during gestation had significantly lower body weight and lowered transcriptional abundance of growth-related genes and pathways at day  <dig> post natal. they compensated in terms of weight when offered adequate protein in later growth stages, but this was driven by fat accumulation while myofibrillar numbers remained low  <cit> . despite reduced lean growth performance it was noteworthy however that major transcriptional differences as a result of protein restriction in gestation were not evident until approximately 188 days post natal. at this stage, pathways such as ‘oxidative phosphorylation’, ‘fatty acid metabolism’, ‘cell cycle regulation’ and ‘citrate cycle’ were differentially expressed in both model systems. this indicates that the major transcriptional shifts we have observed in the present study by restriction of protein in later stages of growth are also entailed by restriction of protein at the gestational stage. while dietary protein restriction is just one strategy to modify imf content, a comparison of these studies and the study of damon et al.  <cit> , which applies a different model of differential imf content, i.e. studying breeds contrasting for fatness, indicates that common metabolic processes may be induced by diverse stimuli such as genetics, nutrition and fetal programming. these common mechanisms lead to major differences in phenotypic outcomes for muscle tissue structure and organisation and give rise to important consequences for meat nutritional and eating quality.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, two extremes of imf content were successfully generated using dietary lysine protein restriction. remarkable differences were evident in the transcriptomic profiles. for example, lp muscle displayed over-expression of genes related to lipogenesis and lipolysis, while several genes known to be associated with adipoctye mass such as scd and lep were up-regulated. functional categories which were decreased in their expression related to growth and development, protein synthesis and extracellular matrix development and organisation. the major patterns revealed by bioinformatic functional annotation clustering therefore involve restriction of cellular and muscle growth, cellular remodelling and differential expression of numerous lipid metabolic processes. a low protein diet can modulate imf content by altering gene pathways involved in lipid biosynthesis and degradation; however this nutritional challenge negatively impacts protein synthesis pathways, which may have potential consequences for overall growth. the involvement of key master regulators of energy homeostasis illustrates the extensive perturbation of overall energy metabolism in muscle that occurs in response to protein restriction. furthermore, the high imf condition in this nutritional model is associated with a suite of responses which have also been observed in genetic and fetal programming models and thus may provide robust biological indicators of imf accumulation.

