BACKGROUND
three old world vulture taxa in the genus gyps have recently been listed as critically endangered by the world conservation union  <cit> . these are the oriental white-backed, or white-rumped vulture  and two taxa long treated together as "long-billed"  vultures. all three share similar feeding behaviours, typically scavenging the soft tissues of large mammals  <cit> . this behaviour, along with their propensity to form colonies or aggregate at carcasses in large feeding groups often near human settlements, has likely contributed to their recent precipitous decline. population declines  of these three taxa over the past decade have been well documented. gyps bengalensis, in particular, were abundant as little as ten years ago in both pakistan and india, with nesting densities recorded as high as  <dig> nests/km <dig> in keoladeo national park in northern india  <cit> . in fact, their decline as a significant scavenger has likely led to associated changes within their environment and has implications for human health and disease  <cit> .

oaks et al.  <cit>  identified the apparent cause for this decline in g. bengalensis as diclofenac, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pharmaceutical commonly used to treat domestic livestock. vultures consume diclofenac in the carcasses of treated animals, and then experience renal failure and visceral gout followed by mortality within  <dig> hours of ingestion  <cit> . the toxicity of this drug to non-domesticated animals other than gyps vultures is not known; however, direct evidence indicates that diclofenac causes mortality in at least four of the gyps taxa   <cit> .

what has been missing up to this point in gyps conservation efforts is detailed consideration of their phylogeny and taxonomy. taxonomic uncertainties remain, and resolving them can help the scientific and conservation communities in identifying and recognizing taxa at risk, in identifying their critical habitats and geographic ranges, and in promoting policies to benefit species welfare. having well supported phylogenies and resultant taxonomies can also be useful for assessing priority in allocating limited funds for captive breeding and other conservation efforts . the extent of diclofenac susceptibility among species is not well known, though it is not unreasonable to suspect a phylogenetic component. thus, phylogenies can help set priorities for testing susceptibility among close relatives with similar life histories.

species traditionally treated within gyps are: the african white-backed vulture , cape vulture , and rüppell's vulture  in africa; the oriental white-backed, or white-rumped, vulture , long-billed vulture , and himalayan vulture  in asia; and the eurasian vulture  in europe, africa and asia  <cit>  . as treated in these sources, gyps indicus, g. rueppellii, and g. fulvus are polytypic. in a number of earlier references, g. bengalensis and g. africanus have been classified together as a separate genus, pseudogyps, due primarily to a smaller body size and a reduced number of rectrices  compared to other gyps taxa  <cit> . in addition, proposals have been made to consider the "long-billed" vulture as two separate species based on morphological differences  <cit> , and the taxonomic status of the two subspecies of eurasian vulture , as well as their characteristics and geographic distribution are unclear. to date, taxonomic relationships among gyps taxa, including subspecies relationships, remain to be assessed with molecular sequence characters, and the validity of fulvescens, which has not been considered in recent times  <cit> , clearly warrants further study.

here we assess phylogenetic relationships among all currently recognized gyps species using molecular methods. some taxa from this genus have been incorporated previously in molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit> ; however, none of these studies included all recognized gyps taxa. indeed, g. indicus , g. himalayensis, and g. f. fulvescens have never been included in a molecular phylogenetic study. therefore, this is the first attempt to ascertain gyps systematics based on samples of all recognized species using molecular techniques. we include morphological data and analyses to further investigate taxonomic status of the two "long-billed" vulture taxa .

RESULTS
sequence characteristics
among  <dig> representative individuals from the genus gyps using complete mitochondrial  cytochrome b  sequence data ,  <dig> unique haplotypes were distinguished based on  <dig> variable sites . combined analysis of  <dig> characters from mt cytb and nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig> , from a smaller set of individuals , identified  <dig> unique haplotypes based on  <dig> variable sites  among ingroup taxa. for  <dig> bp of mt control region ,  <dig> unique haplotypes were identified for  <dig> individual gyps vultures, including  <dig> variable sites . when cr was combined with corresponding cytb and nd <dig> sequence data,  <dig> unique haplotypes based on  <dig> variable sites were observed among  <dig> individual gyps vultures. uncorrected percent sequence divergence between taxa was similar across loci with cr showing slightly higher divergence estimates; however, these differences were taxon specific with cytb or nd <dig> showing higher divergence estimates in some cases .

 <dig> outgroup taxa for analyses including control region  are restricted to two taxa instead of five 

nucleotide composition varied slightly between cytb and nd <dig> with both loci displaying lower levels of guanine  and higher levels of cytosine  nucleotides than expected by chance. cr also possessed lower levels of guanine ; however, it differed from cytb and nd <dig> in showing higher levels of thymine  nucleotides. tests for departure from homogeneity in base frequencies across taxa with and without uninformative mt characters were not significant for all three loci analyzed separately or combined .

phylogenetic analyses
the aic identified the gtr+g model of sequence evolution  <cit>  for analyses of both cytb and nd <dig>  when partitioned by codon position, gtr+g, hky+i, and hky models were selected for each successive codon position  for cytb, and hky+g, hky+i, and gtr+i models were selected for each successive codon position for nd <dig>  the cr was analyzed with equal weights among characters in all analyses. the same topology was found in both mp and bayesian analyses irrespective of utilizing codon positions for the bayesian cytb analyses and also for each of the two multi-locus datasets; however, the mixed models provided increased support indices at most nodes for all data sets, and therefore, only the support indices while utilizing codon partitions are shown for the bayesian results .

regardless of dataset , monophyly of the genus gyps and each species was strongly supported with high bootstrap support and posterior probabilities for each clade . the high number of nucleotide differences consistently observed between taxa further highlight these diagnostic relationships . no geographic partitioning was observed within species or subspecies possessing large samples sizes . however, within g. indicus, the long-billed  and the slender-billed  vultures formed two separate monophyletic clades with high statistical support. similarly, representative individuals of the two subspecies of eurasian vulture, g. f. fulvus and g. f. fulvescens were phylogenetically distinct; however, they were not placed as sister taxa. both fulvescens samples clustered with the himalayan vulture . one of the two birds identified as g. f. fulvescens had an identical cr haplotype and differed by a single nucleotide from four of the six and all of the himalayensis haplotypes in cytb and nd <dig>  respectively . dna extractions for these taxa were conducted separately with multiple independent pcr amplifications to verify these results and to help rule out the possibility of contamination.

there were a few differences in sister relationships among gyps species when comparing results from different datasets . the cr analysis identified monophyletic species similar to cytb and nd2; however, further resolution was limited with all species forming a single polytomy . when nd <dig> was analyzed separately , its topology was identical to that provided by the combined cytb and nd <dig> results , while the topology for cytb alone differed from results given by the multi-locus datasets. in all analyses, the earliest divergence separated g. bengalensis from all other gyps taxa; however, whether the next divergence is for g. africanus or g. himalayensis/g. f. fulvescens varies by dataset analyzed, with g. africanus divergence supported as the second divergence within gyps by cytb and nd <dig> combined as well as the cytb, nd <dig> and cr combined dataset. all analyses supported a sister relationship between g. f. fulvus and g. rueppellii, with this clade sister to a clade consisting of g. i. indicus, g. i. tenuirostris, and g. coprotheres, and with the latter taxa forming a polytomy in the combined cytb and nd <dig> analyses without cr . in the multi-locus dataset including the cr , g. i. tenuirostris and g. coprotheres are posited as sisters with only weak statistical support.

long-billed vulture morphological analyses
although the two taxa long classified as subspecies of "long-billed" vulture  are similar in overall size, they differ markedly in proportions . the rostrum of tenuirostris is much longer than that of indicus , while in indicus the rostrum is deeper and broader . the longer skull and mandibular symphysis of tenuirostris is probably also a reflection of its relatively longer bill. the nostrils  of indicus are much longer than tenuirostris . in wing proportions, the "arm"  and alula of tenuirostris are longer than for indicus while the "hand"  is longer in indicus. lengths of individual primaries measured from the carpal joint did not differ significantly between the taxa and are not presented here. for the pes, most elements of tenuirostris are significantly longer than those of indicus, with the exception of the claws of digits  <dig> and  <dig>  whereas pedal elements of indicus are proportionately more similar to those of tenuirostris in width and breadth measures.

sexes pooled. significance levels: *, p ≤  <dig> ; **, p ≤  <dig> ; ***, p ≤  <dig> . l, length; w, width; d, depth; b, breadth.

in a principal components analysis , factor  <dig> was a highly significant  shape axis distinguishing indicus and tenuirostris specimens . variables with high positive loadings on pca factor  <dig> were lengths of culmen, bill from gape, mandibular symphysis, alula, tarsus, tarsus proximal, tarsus distal, toes , and depth of the claw of digit iii. these variables contrasted with the strongly negatively loading nares length, and to a lesser extent with bill width, outer rectrix length, and width of the claw of digit iii. although the first six factors had eigenvalues above  <dig>  component loadings of indicus and tenuirostris were significantly different only on factor  <dig>  nevertheless, on this axis they were significantly different and readily distinguished .

significance levels  from two-sample t-test between component loadings for indicus and tenuirostris. abbreviations for variables are as in table  <dig> 

discussion
our objective in this study is to resolve phylogeny and taxonomic uncertainties for gyps taxa, in order to inform current conservation efforts. by using museum specimens as dna sources along with tissues obtained from the field, we sampled representatives of all generally recognized gyps taxa with emphasis on those geographically distributed in south asia; the primary area experiencing recent, drastic population declines. our analyses support two changes to the traditional taxonomy for gyps. first, two individuals identified as g. f. fulvescens were most closely related to g. himalayensis . relatively high divergence estimates among all g. fulvus individuals  and relatively low divergence estimates between g. f. fulvescens and g. himalayensis  reflect this phylogenetic result. additional sampling and analyses for g. f. fulvescens are needed to verify these results. second, our analyses based on both morphological and molecular data indicate the phylogenetic distinctiveness of the long-billed and the slender-billed vultures, supporting their taxonomic treatment as distinct species  as recommended previously  <cit> . mensural analyses show that indicus and tenuirostris differ significantly in proportions, especially of the head, wing, and pes , and all individuals in each taxon are clearly separated on at least one axis in a pca . in our molecular analyses, pairwise sequence divergences between g. indicus and g. tenuirostris are similar to their respective divergence estimates from g. coprotheres , and to those reported between various other broadly recognized species within the family accipitridae  <cit> . these results highlight the utility of molecular phylogenetic methods in identifying independent evolutionary lineages within a group that has a long history of taxonomic uncertainty  <cit> , and, furthermore, help identify and resolve problematic specimen identifications .

the phylogenetic relationships found among gyps vultures were largely the same for the different methods and mt datasets. despite our finding of monophyly for the majority of gyps species, relatively small sequence difference estimates  separating some named species made determination of sister relationships difficult, and multiple relationships were unresolved due to low nodal support. this suggests that the gyps study taxa stem from relatively rapid and recent diversification events. if we use a generally supported avian mtdna divergence rate for coding regions ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> % change per million years , our mt cytb and nd <dig> sequence divergence estimates , indicate that the radiation of gyps vulture study species occurred  <dig>  to  <dig>  million years ago. these estimates must be considered with caution as they assume clock-like rates of sequence change, which is known to be violated in comparisons of some avian taxa and genes . however, we were not able to reject a hypothesis of clock-like behavior for our particular gyps sequence dataset using a log likelihood ratio test . even if we assume that the above divergence rates are too high , a lower rate  still yields divergence times that are quite recent .

these divergence estimates do not necessarily correspond with geographic proximity or the current distributions of species. for example, divergence estimates between g. indicus and both g. coprotheres and g. rueppellii are relatively low , yet the species compared occupy different continents. in contrast, divergence estimates between species with geographically proximate distributions, g. coprotheres and g. africanus in africa and g. i. tenuirostris and g. himalayensis in south asia  are relatively high .

the historic radiation of this genus likely evolved in environmental conditions that no longer exist to the same extent throughout their current distributions. gyps species are unique among old world vultures in that they feed exclusively as scavengers, whereas other vultures are also known to kill their prey on occasion or, rarely, to feed on fruits . these close associations likely played a significant role in the adaptation and rapid diversification of gyps vultures. indeed, houston  <cit>  proposed that their large body size and ability to soar over large distances in search for food are related to the associated migrant distributions and seasonal fluctuations in mortality of ungulates, and that they have consequently become incapable of actually killing their own prey .

CONCLUSIONS
both molecular and morphological data provide strong support for considering the "long-billed" vulture  to be comprised of two species, the long-billed vulture  and the slender-billed vulture , with both considered critically endangered by the iucn  <cit> . we found non-monophyly for our set of eurasian vultures, with both g. f. fulvescens individuals appearing more closely related to g. himalayensis than to g. f. fulvus, suggesting a topic for further analysis. our phylogenetic analyses indicate the oldest divergence among gyps species to be between g. bengalensis and the others, and conservative estimates suggest the diversification of gyps taxa to be within the past  <dig> million years.

the scavenging lifestyle of gyps vultures and the decline of their historical food sources has likely contributed to their increased dependence on habitats heavily impacted by humans . many gyps vulture populations have become increasingly dependent on domesticated animals, especially cattle, and this has contributed to their catastrophic decline in pakistan and india, due to their secondary exposure to the veterinary pharmaceutical drug diclofenac . gyps bengalensis was fairly recently described as the most abundant large bird of prey in the world  <cit> , yet, in as little as ten years, this species has become exceedingly difficult to find in the wild .

determining genetic and evolutionary distinctiveness for gyps lineages is increasingly important as a captive-breeding program is being established to prevent g. bengalensis extinction and other gyps taxa are considered to be at risk or of uncertain status. diclofenac susceptibility has been previously demonstrated for four gyps species , and the relative recency of diversification and the phylogenetic position of these four known susceptible species each forming a sister relationship with at least one of the remaining taxa in this genus, support concern that the other gyps taxa may be susceptible as well . the most obvious long-term solution to prevent their extinction is the immediate removal of diclofenac as a veterinary drug for domestic livestock. a recent study reported on findings suggesting that an alternative drug called meloxicam may serve as a surrogate to diclofenac without causing harm to gyps vultures  <cit> . fortunately, india has since banned the manufacture and use of diclofenac  <cit> ; however, the drug is still available for veterinary use in pakistan and vulture populations continue to decline.

