BACKGROUND
long-lasting neuroadaptations in mesolimbic structures, particularly in the nucleus accumbens , influence behavioural responses to emotional stimuli. this experience-based behaviour occurs as a result of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. at the molecular level, electrical activation of neurons leads to opening of ligand and/or voltage-gated calcium channels and generates intracellular calcium transients  <cit> . calcium signals can propagate to the cell soma, invade the cell nucleus, and lead to the activation of the nuclear calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase iv   <cit> . camkiv activates several transcription factors such as atf- <dig>  mef2d and nf-kappab  <cit> , and is a key regulator of neuronal gene expression that stimulates transcription through the phosphorylation of the camp response element binding protein  and activation of the creb co-activator, creb binding protein   <cit> .

the activation of creb after exposure to emotional stimuli has been shown to alter gating between these environmental stimuli and their behavioural responses  <cit> . disruption of creb function within the nac increases anxiety-related behaviour while creb overexpression reduces anxiogenic responses under certain conditions  <cit> . in line with these findings, nac-specific expression of the inducible camp early repressor , a natural inhibitor of creb-mediated transcription, has been shown to increase measures of anxiety in the elevated plus maze and neophobia to novel tastes  <cit> . two independent camkiv-deficient mouse lines were generated that showed overlapping phenotypes. means and coworkers demonstrated that the targeted disruption of the camkiv gene results in impaired cerebellar ltd and motor control  <cit>  while the other knockout strain  <cit>  had mild cerebellar abnormalities and deficits in long-term potentiation . the latter mutants also exhibited decreased fear memory  <cit>  and reduced anxiety-like behaviour in the elevated plus maze and dark-light emergence test  <cit> . functional redundancy and/or effects during development are inherent problems that can complicate the interpretation of results obtained in knockout mice and may mask the roles of camkiv in defined brain regions. to study the role of camkiv in cognitive processes, kang and colleagues generated transgenic mice expressing a dominant-negative  form of camkiv in the postnatal forebrain  <cit> . these mice showed normal locomotor and emotional behaviour. although this study revealed insight into the role of camkiv in the context of complex behaviour, it did not allow the characterization of camkiv function specifically in the nac of adult animals. to investigate this, we used a recombinant adeno-associated virus  gene transfer system to interfere with camkiv function specifically in the nac. camkiv activity was suppressed by raav-mediated expression of a kinase-dead mutant of camkiv  <cit> . the results obtained indicate that nac-specific suppression of camkiv activity increased anxiety-related behaviour whereas sensorimotor gating was unaffected.

RESULTS
raav-mediated gene transfer
we generated a raav vector expressing flag-tagged dominant-negative camkiv under the control of the cytomegalovirus enhancer/chicken beta actin  promoter . as control vectors, we packaged the raav-plasmid without any coding sequence , or with the humanized renilla green fluorescent protein open reading frame . we have previously shown that the dncamkiv mutant inhibts cre-mediated transcription in att <dig> cells  <cit> . in the present study, we first assessed the efficacy of gene transfer and expression of raav-dncamkiv in primary hippocampal neurons by immunoblot analysis and confirmed the functionality of the dncamkiv vector. figure 1b illustrates that raav-dncamkiv but not raav-hrgfp dramatically reduced expression of the creb-target gene c-fos after induction of action potential  bursting. the transgenes were readily detected using specific antibodies indicating a high transduction efficiency as described previously  <cit> .

next, the vectors were injected bilaterally into the nac of adult mice. raav-mediated gene expression requires at least three weeks to peak in the rodent brain and then persists at stable levels without overt inflammation or immunogenicity  <cit> . three weeks after surgery, the transduction efficiency was assessed by flag-immunohistochemistry. in line with the known neurotropism of chimeric raav1/ <dig> vectors  <cit> , robust transgene expression was found in nac neurons in all raav-dncamkiv-treated animals . as expected  <cit> , flag immunoreactivity localized to the cytosol of transduced cells . similar to our previous studies using raav1/ <dig> as gene delivery system in the nac  <cit> , the transduction covered most of the nac core and shell subregions and was restricted approximately  <dig> mm around the injection site in the nac . next, the response of dncamkiv expressing animals on emotional stimuli was investigated in a battery of behavioural tests.

locomotor activity
the locomotor activity of all animals was assessed in an open field. suppression of camkiv activity did not affect basal locomotor activity. animals expressing dncamkiv did not differ significantly from control-infused raav-empty mice  in activity time  , distance travelled   and rearing .

light/dark emergence test
to investigate anxiety-related behaviour, a classical anxiety paradigm, the light/dark emergence test, was chosen. expression of dncamkiv in the nac significantly increased anxiety-related behaviours in the light/dark emergence test. frequency of emergence into the lit compartment, time spent there   and rearing were decreased compared to controls  . no effects were seen on emergence latency and risk assessment .

social interaction test
to assess the effects of dncamkiv expression on different aspects of anxiety-related behaviour and social behaviour animals were tested in a social interaction paradigm. compared to controls, raav mediated dncamkiv expression in the nac significantly reduced the total amount of social behaviour in the social interaction test . this decrease in social behaviour was mainly related to a reduction in following behaviour observed in these animals. furthermore, expression of dncamkiv in the nac significantly increased anxiety-like behaviour in the social interaction test  . no significant effects were found for contact behaviour, social exploration or self grooming .

prepulse inhibition  of the acoustic startle response 
to further investigate potentially increased anxiety responses and difficulties in attentional processing or sensorimotor gating, animals were tested for their ppi of the asr. animals expressing dncamkiv in the nac did not differ significantly from controls in their asr magnitudes , nor in their ppi performance  .

suppression of camkiv activity in the nac did not significantly affect ppi or startle magnitude .

discussion
in the present study, we show that expression of a negative interfering mutant of camkiv in the nac of adult mice results in increased anxiety-like behaviour. the behavioural abnormalities in raav-dncamkiv treated animals appear to be very selective since locomotor activity in the open field, and functional sensorimotor gating assessed by normal ppi performance of the acoustic startle reflex were found unchanged. the social interaction test revealed an increased anxiogenic response towards an unknown social partner in animals expressing raav-dncamkiv, while other social behavioural elements such as self-grooming, contact behaviourand social exploration did not differ from controls.

two different approaches were used previously to study the loss of function phenotype of camkiv in the brain. kang and colleagues generated transgenic mice expressing a negative interfering mutant of camkiv in the postnatal forebrain  <cit> . these mice had deficits in long-term memory but showed normal behaviour in the open field or elevated-plus maze. results obtained by the latter test suggested normal fear-related behaviour in these mutants. in contrast, in mice with a targeted null mutation of the endogenous camkiv gene anxiolytic effects were found in the elevated-plus maze and the dark/light emergence test  <cit> . these authors also reported unchanged open field performance but a reduction of anxiety-like behaviour in the dark-light emergence test. however, in the current study, we observed an increase using the same test. it might not appear surprising that the different approaches to genetically altering camkiv function yield non-overlapping or even partially opposing phenotypes. camkiv is normally expressed during development and in the adult in many regions of the central nervous system and in the periphery  <cit> . expression domains in the brain include neocortex, hippocampus, striatum and amygdala, the latter region has been implicated in fear memory. hence, anxiety-related behavioural responses have been correlated with the role of camkiv in the amygdala  <cit> . in the present study we detected an anxiogenic phenotype after nac-specific suppression of camkiv function. although the nac is not considered a key structure for anxiety-related responses, there is increasing evidence for an involvement of this brain region in stress, anxiety and emotional behaviour  <cit> . furthermore, the ventral striatum  and the striatum have also been implicated in anxiety-like behaviour  <cit> . the nac has been characterized as a limbic-motor interface, which refers to the importance of this structure in the integration of different brain circuits, mediating the transfer from motivation/emotion into action  <cit> . these integrating characteristics of the nac for different brain structures, such as the amygdala, prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and hypothalamus, may underlie its involvement in anxiety-related processes.

the studies addressing anxiety-related behaviour in relation to activity-dependent gene expression in the nac focused on specific alterations mediated by manipulations of the nac shell  <cit> , while in the present study we targeted camkiv activity in both nac core and shell. it is has been shown that the nac core is critical for mediating the ability of environmental cues with learned relevance to stimulate and guide behaviour, whereas the nac shell is more involved in modulating unconditioned behaviours, such as feeding and drug reward. albeit their different functional roles, it is important to note that the shell and core regions of the nac are thought to be part of two closely direct interacting networks  <cit> . it has been suggested that for example cues associated with drug reward through the shell may affect instrumental performance by output of the core  <cit> . therefore, these two subregions and their associated circuitry are thought to have a strong influence on each other by specific, possibly gaba-mediated shell-to-core and reciprocal projections  <cit> .

we addressed the consequences of suppression of camkiv function exclusively in the nac of adult mice. our results differed from those obtained with camkiv mouse mutants generated using conventional transgenic technologies. the interpretation of results observed in complete null mutants is inherently complicated due to potential compensatory effects. in addition determining the function of genes in discrete brain regions is difficult because more than one neural circuit is likely to be affected by a genetic deletion in the germ line. the transgenic mouse line overexpressing a negative interfering mutant of camkiv in the cortex, hippocampus and striatum after birth was informative but did not allow dissection of camkiv function in specific brain areas after completion of neuronal maturation.

we have shown that inhibition of endogenous camkiv activity attenuated ca2+-induced expression of c-fos  and increases anxiety-like behaviour after viral transfer to the nac. likewise, the inhibition or deletion of camkiv causes a lack of activity-dependent phosphorylation of creb at serine  <dig> and c-fos expression in vitro and in vivo and behavioural abnormalities  <cit> . these data suggest that camkiv-dependent activation of creb/cre signaling pathways is involved in complex behaviour. support for the hypothesis that increased anxiety-like behaviour found in the raav-dncamkiv treated animals might be linked to acute reduction of creb/cre-dependent signaling in the nac comes from a study in which herpes simplex virus-mediated expression of dominant-negative mutant of creb in the nac of adult mice and rats enhanced anxiogenic and aversive behavioural responses to emotional stimuli while overexpression of creb had the opposite effect  <cit> . furthermore, induction of the endogenous creb antagonist, icer, in the nac has been shown to increase measures of anxiety in the elevated plus maze and neophobia to novel tastes  <cit> . barrot et al.  showed that inhibition of creb in the nac affected the initiation of sexual behaviour which was associated with an anxiety-like phenotype. in these animals the latency for the first mount as well as for intromission was largely increased without affecting later copulatory parameters  and could be restored by treatment with the anxiolytic drug diazepam, suggesting an anxiogenic response upon the initial contact with the female  <cit> . similarly, the deficits in the social behaviour of raav-dncamkiv mice analyzed in this study may mainly derive from an increase in anxiety-related responses  towards the unknown social partner that leaves unaffected other social behaviours such as exploration or contact behaviour.

CONCLUSIONS
our data show that the expression of a dncamkiv in the nac induces an increase in anxiety-related behaviour similar to that observed after overexpression in the nac of either icer or a dominant-negative version of creb   <cit> . in addition to anxiety, creb dysregulation in the nac has been implicated in depression and depressive symptoms  <cit> , indicating that understanding the role of camkiv in this brain structure is of clinical importance. creb/cbp has been suggested to be a key regulator of the reactivity of brain "reward" circuits which regulates individual sensitivity to emotional stimuli in general  <cit> . camkiv is an important upstream activator of creb/cbp-dependent gene transcription, and intracellular signaling through the nuclear calcium-camkiv-creb/cbp pathway might exert a similar or even a subsidiary modulatory influence on emotional gating processes in the nac. future virus-based studies will shed light on the role of camkiv for the behavioural responses to emotional stimuli and might offer new insights in the pathophysiology of mood-related disorders.

