BACKGROUND
picea balfouriana grows in a specific type of forest ecosystem in southwest china and is an eastern species on the tibetan plateau. for rapid growth and production of high-quality wood, many plantations selected p. balfouriana as one of the main species for afforestation. seedlings of p. balfouriana are produced primarily by sexual propagation; however, the seeds set late in the season, and the seedlings grow very slowly during the early phases.

propagation by somatic embryogenesis  is the primary technology used for many conifer biotechnology products, including the development of transgenic trees. the se system for most spruce  and some pine  species is sufficiently refined for commercial use; however, for many economically important conifer species, the initiation frequency of se is insufficient for commercial applications. in recent years, much research has been focused on the development and optimization of protocols for the induction and maturation of somatic embryos of coniferous species
 <cit> . the developmental stage of zygotic embryos, the contents of the growth or culture medium, the type and concentration of plant growth regulators, and culture condition factors such as ph, agar type, and nitrogen level can affect the generation of embryogenic tissue . therefore, understanding and balancing these factors is crucial for increasing the initiation rate of se. a complete understanding of the genes involved in the development of et and non-embryogenic tissue  will improve the understanding of the initiation process in embryogenic tissue.

cellular identity and function are determined by the transcriptome, i.e. the complete repertoire of expressed rna transcripts. transcriptome profiling is a powerful method that has been used widely to assess the relative importance of gene products in cells, tissues, organisms, or under different conditions. next-generation sequencing  technology is a cutting-edge approach for high-throughput sequence determination, which has dramatically improved the efficiency and speed of gene discovery
 <cit> . for example, illumina sequencing technology generates more than one billion bases of high-quality dna sequence per run at less than 1% of the cost of capillary-based methods
 <cit> . thus, ngs has significantly accelerated and improved the sensitivity of gene-expression profiling, and is expected to boost collaborative and comparative genomics studies
 <cit> . illumina sequencing of transcriptomes for organisms with completed genomes confirmed that the relatively short reads produced by this methodology can be assembled effectively and used for gene discovery and comparisons of gene expression profiles
 <cit> . despite the obvious potential, ngs methods have not yet been used in p. balfouriana.

the high-throughput rna-seq methodology involves whole-transcriptome shotgun sequencing, in which mrna or cdna is mechanically fragmented to produce overlapping short fragments that cover the entire transcriptome
. by mapping the rna-seq reads to a reference genome, gene assignments and large-scale functional annotation of genes can be carried out. further, compared with dna microarray data, rna-seq data can be used to detect and quantify rnas that are expressed at very low levels
 <cit> . additionally, gene ontology  analysis of the annotated genes can lead to a deeper understanding of the functions of the genes in cells, thereby providing sensitive and accurate profiling of the transcriptome and a description of gene function that resembles the biology of the cell
 <cit> .

very few studies reporting the mechanism of initiation during se have been published so far. the main objective of the present study was to identify differentially expressed genes in ets and nets, independent of genotype, through rna-seq analysis and mapping to the reference picea abies genome
 <cit> . the results of this work may provide fundamental insights into the early se in p. balfouriana.

RESULTS
rna-seq library sequencing
six p. balfouriana rna-seq libraries were produced and sequenced; namely, the ets and nets from three genotypes. in each library,  <dig> – <dig>  million clean reads were obtained after the low-quality reads were filtered out . among the clean reads,  <dig> – <dig>  million  were mapped to known genes .table  <dig> 
mapping of
picea balfouriana
rna-seq library reads to the
picea abies
reference genome database


et, embryogenic tissue; net, non-embryogenic tissue.



approximately  <dig>  genes  were detected in each library, accounting for more than 70% of the  <dig>  genes in the p. abies reference genome database
 <cit>  . overall,  <dig>  unique genes were expressed among the six libraries , which gives a mapping coverage of  <dig> %, conferring high confidence in the rna-seq results. the mean coverage of all genes was above 60%, with the highest coverage at  <dig> %. go terms were assigned to the mapped genes and an enrichment analysis of the go terms showed that intracellular organelle part, anion binding, and primary metabolic process were dominant in the cellular component, molecular function, and biological process categories, respectively. some of the genes assigned primary metabolic process terms were associated with kegg pathways involved in purine metabolism, rna polymerase, pyrimidine metabolism, inositol phosphate metabolism and phenylalanine, and tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis .table  <dig> 
genes found in
picea balfouriana
that uniquely match genes in the
picea abies
reference genome


et, embryogenic tissue; net, non-embrygeonic tissue.



uniform genes with consistent fold-changes in ets and nets from the three genotypes
after two-factor analysis of variance,  <dig>  genes with significantly different effects for “embryonic vs. non-embryonic”  and insignificant effects for “genotype”  were selected . then, the selected genes were analyzed using deseq to test for differentially expressed genes  in ets and nets, independent of genotype  < <dig> , fold change ≥2). ultimately,  <dig>  degs between et and net were identified, among which  <dig> were upregulated and  <dig> were downregulated . some of the degs were associated with se . about one-quarter of the genes were upregulated by ≥2-fold, and about  <dig>  genes were downregulated by ≥2-fold.

oxidoreductase activity, cell wall, and apoplast were the most enriched go terms, while biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, metabolic pathways, pentose and glucuronate interconversion, starch and sucrose metabolism, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction, flavonoid biosynthesis, phenylalanine metabolism, ether lipid metabolism, and propanoate metabolism were the most overrepresented kegg pathways among genes related to embryogenic competence . these findings will be very important for further understanding the intracellular signaling mechanisms of early se in conifers.

expression of housekeeping genes in the different tissue samples of p. balfouriana
the normfinder algorithm uses a model-based approach to estimate alterations in the expression of housekeeping genes
 <cit> . the algorithm also estimates variations across subgroups and avoids the artificial selection of co-regulated genes. the results of the normfinder analysis of the genes detected in the six libraries show that ws0109_c <dig>  and 18s rrna were predicted to be the most stable housekeeping genes .table  <dig> 
ranking of
picea balfouriana
candidate reference genes generated by normfinder




bestkeeper measures stability using a pair-wise correlation analysis of all pairs of candidate genes and calculates the geometric mean of the best candidates
 <cit> . a preliminary analysis based on the inspection of raw ct values estimated the variation of four housekeeping genes  to be compatible with an overall stability in gene expression . the standard deviation values were < <dig>  the four housekeeping genes were used to calculate the bestkeeper index. bestkeeper allows a comparative analysis across internal reference genes by estimating correlations in the expression levels between all the possible candidates. highly correlated control genes are combined into an index, and the pair-wise correlation between genes and the correlation between each gene and the index are also calculated. the results describe the consistency between the index and each internal reference gene. the four control genes tested in our analysis correlated well one with one another and with the normfinder index . the best correlation between one internal reference gene and the bestkeeper index was for ws0109_c <dig> . the statistically significant correlation for ws0109_c <dig> with the bestkeeper index appeared to be consistent with the good performance of this housekeeping gene as assessed by normfinder.table  <dig> 
statistical output from the bestkeeper analysis for the
picea balfouriana
candidate reference genes



n


n, number of samples; g mean , geometric mean of the ct; a mean , arithmetic mean of the ct; min  and max , extreme values of the ct; sd , standard deviation of the ct; cv , coefficient of variance expressed as percentage on the ct level. coeff. of corr. , coefficient of correlation. *indicates the best correlation between the control genes and the bestkeeper index.



quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  analysis
the peroxisomal targeting signal receptor ws0109_c <dig> displayed constitutive expression in all the analyses performed using the p. balfouriana rna-seq data; therefore, it was used as an internal control for the normalization of gene expression levels . total rna from the same six tissue samples that were used for the rna-seq analysis were used as templates for the qrt-pcr analysis . for most of the genes, the transcript fold-ratios determined by qrt-pcr were approximately the same as those estimated from the rna-seq data, indicating the reliability of the rna-seq in p. balfouriana.table  <dig> 
comparison of rna-seq data with expression data from qrt-pcr


three biological repeats were reverse transcribed and amplified independently. the raw threshold cycle  values were normalized against the ws0109_c <dig> standard to generate the normalized Δct values that were used to calculate the fold-change in expression in embryonic tissue  and non-embryonic tissue  of the three genotypes. log-cpm, log-counts per million.



discussion
most early studies on the initiation mechanism of se in p. balfouriana focused mainly on different genes between et and net from just one cell line. it has been suggested that genotype may have an important effect on initiation of et. in this study, we demonstrated that many genes were influenced by genotype, so we filtered them out and selected the genes that were related only to embryogenic ability. six rna-seq libraries were created to analyze the degs in et and net, yielding a total of  <dig>  genes. among them,  <dig>   and  <dig>   were enriched in go terms and kegg pathways, respectively. our transcriptome and gene expression profiling data will greatly enrich the current knowledge for the genus picea, and will contribute to the database for conifer species. these data will also help promote research on the identification of novel genes related to embryogenic competence.

several genes involved in the response to phytohormone and hormone-mediated signaling pathways in ets were strongly upregulated ; for example, the genes that encode auxin-induced proteins. the initiation of embryogenesis in somatic tissues requires auxins, especially in conifer species. exogenous hormones and culture-related stress has been reported to play important roles in triggering se, which presumably results from the expression of genes involved in cell division, cell polarization, and the regulation of signal transduction pathways. several auxin-inducible genes that are involved in cellular changes, such as activation of cell division, have been cloned
 <cit> . bögre et al.
 <cit>  used auxin-responsive genes as molecular markers to distinguish embryogenic from non-embryogenic genotypes of medicago sativa. our results indicated that most of the degs were involved in plant-pathogen interaction, metabolic pathways , and plant hormone signal transduction  and, therefore, they may play essential roles in the initiation of se.

a number of genes encoding membrane-localized, leucine-rich, repeat receptor-like kinases, such as imk <dig> , were among the degs. the somatic embryogenesis receptor kinase  gene encodes a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase that plays an important role in plant signaling pathways. the serk gene was first identified in carrot  suspension cultures where it was specifically expressed in cells that developed into somatic embryos
 <cit> . serk has been linked to se in a number of species, including dactylis glomerata
 <cit> , arabidopsis thaliana
 <cit> , medicago truncatula
 <cit> , sunflower 
 <cit> , ocotea catharinensis
 <cit> , citrus unshiu
 <cit> , and theobroma cacao
 <cit> . there is evidence that serk genes are required for embryo initiation in embryogenic cells
 <cit> . in d. glomerata, and a. thaliana, serks are characteristic markers of embryogenic cell cultures and somatic embryos
.

several arabinogalactan proteins  were upregulated in ets compared with nets, such as fla <dig>  agps have been implicated in five fundamental cellular processes: cell proliferation, cell expansion, cell differentiation, programmed cell death, and cell-cell communication
 <cit> . the involvement of agps in se has been studied previously
, and the role of agps in the establishment of embryogenic cell cultures and the influence of agps on cell development have also been examined. the presence of agps in seeds was found to increase the number of pro-embryogenic masses and the embryogenic potential
. filonova et al.
 <cit>  reported the importance of intercellular communication for the acquisition of embryogenic competence, and observed that separation of norway spruce cells by fractionation of suspension cultures inhibited the embryogenic process. agps restore differentiation potential after cell wall removal, and this restoration was reported to be more efficient with chitinase-cleaved forms of agps
 <cit> . based on these observations, we propose that complex interactions between cells and substances secreted in the medium of embryogenic cultures are essential to establish and maintain embryogenic competence in culture.

the qrt-pcr results confirmed the observed upregulation in ets of two genes belonging to the wus-related homeobox  family. previous studies have reported the expression dynamics of wox and shown that it is highly expressed during early somatic embryo development, but declines as the embryo matures
. haecker et al.
 <cit>  found that wox <dig> and wox <dig> were expressed in a. thaliana during embryo development from the very early stages and throughout development. several wox genes, including wox <dig>  were reported to constitute potential markers of cell fate during early embryogenesis, suggesting that they might have important functions in early embryonic patterning
 <cit> . palovaara et al.
 <cit>  found that wox <dig> played a fundamental role in early somatic embryo development in p. abies, possibly related to the regulation of cell division and/or differentiation in the embryos. it was also proposed that wox <dig> could be used as a molecular marker of embryogenic potential, but was not necessary for the regenerative capacity of cell lines
 <cit> . klimaszewska et al.
 <cit>  reported that wox <dig> was expressed exclusively in the early stages of se, and might be useful as a marker of embryogenic potential. wox <dig>  wox8a, and wox8b were all significantly expressed in proembryogenic masses in p. abies rather than in somatic embryos
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
although et and net can be discriminated by visual inspection, and molecular markers of embryogenic potential are useful, bioinformatics tools provide a powerful approach to identify degs in ets and nets. here, we found gene expression patterns in ets from p. balfouriana that identified changes in multiple pathways related to early se, such as plant hormone signal transduction, metabolic pathways , and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. if these pathways could be modified to induce ets with higher initiation rates that have competence to form normal somatic embryos they could be used to increase the initiation frequency of se for commercial applications.

a large number of candidate genes, such as those that encode heat shock proteins and glutathione s-transferases, showed significant different expression in the et libraries compared with their expression in the net libraries; however, these results require further verification and characterization. although the molecular functions of individual p. balfouriana genes and the associated signal transduction pathways often remained largely unknown, the rna-seq analysis has provided valuable information about the induction of se in p. balfouriana, which could promote further investigations into the detailed physiological initiation mechanisms of se. this analysis represents a starting point for detailed functional studies; however, further experiments are required to expand on these results and to define the complex interaction networks and molecular mechanisms responsible for the induction of se in p. balfouriana.

