BACKGROUND
campylobacter spp. are a common cause of acute bacterial gastroenteritis in humans  <cit> . the majority of campylobacterioses are caused by c. jejuni and are linked primarily to untreated water or consumption of poultry and raw milk  <cit> . c. jejuni has been divided into two subspecies: c. jejuni subsp. jejuni  and c. jejuni subsp. doylei . cjd strains were isolated originally as "gastric campylobacter-like organisms type  <dig> " from human gastric biopsies  <cit>  and "nitrate-negative campylobacter-like organisms " from australian pediatric patients with gastroenteritis  <cit> . as the "nnc" designation suggests, the characteristic feature of cjd, used commonly to distinguish cjd strains from cjj strains, is the inability to reduce nitrate. other phenotypic characteristics, such as variable growth at 42°c  <cit> , high susceptibility to cephalothin  <cit> , and the absence of γ-glutamyl transferase  and l-arginine arylamidase activity  <cit>  have been associated also with cjd; however, like cjj, all cjd strains are hippuricase positive.

cjd strains also differ from cjj in two other clinically-related aspects: first, cjd strains can be found throughout the gastrointestinal tract, leading to both gastritis  <cit>  and enteritis  <cit> , and are obtained often from pediatric patients  <cit> . second, in south africa, unlike cjj strains, cjd strains are isolated more often from blood cultures than from stool cultures  <cit> ; cjd was isolated from 24% of the campylobacter-positive blood cultures  <cit> , in contrast to  <dig> % of the campylobacter-positive stool cultures, obtained at red cross children's hospital, cape town, during the years 1990– <dig>  additionally, morey reported that cjd was isolated from  <dig> % of campylobacter/helicobacter-related bacteremia cases in australia during a five-year period  <cit> .

in some parts of the world, notably south africa, cjd strains represent a significant proportion of the total campylobacters isolated from human clinical samples; 16% of the non-cjj/coli campylobacter strains isolated in cape town, south africa were cjd. however, despite the unusual clinical symptomatology and relatively high prevalence in certain parts of the world, cjd is generally isolated infrequently and few strains exist  for this subspecies. one possible reason is that many clinical laboratories do not characterize campylobacter isolates past the genus level, much less subspeciate c. jejuni isolates as cjj or cjd. it is also likely that both the susceptibility of cjd to cephalothin and variable growth at 42°c prevents the isolation of a substantial number of cjd strains under normal cjj isolation conditions; the cjd strains isolated in south africa were obtained using the cape town protocol  <cit>  which uses passive filtration through a  <dig>  μm membrane filter, growth at 37°c and no antibiotic selection.

another factor in the lack of subspeciation characterization of c. jejuni strains is the absence of a rapid test to distinguish cjj from cjd. phenotypic characterization of cjd, based on the absence of nitrate reductase activity, remains the primary means of identification; however, such nitrate reductase assays require a large number of cells and can take 24– <dig> h. additionally, nitrate reductase assays require pure cultures; mixtures of cjj and cjd cells would type as nitrate+/cjj.

many commonly used molecular-based campylobacter detection methods cannot be used to subspeciate c. jejuni due to the high similarity between the two subspecies. molecular-based methods that can subspeciate c. jejuni do exist, based on hybridization  <cit> , amplified fragment length polymorphism fingerprinting  <cit> , or characterization of the 16s/23s rdna internal spacer region  <cit> ; however, these methods are lengthy or require specialized and costly equipment. in this study we present a simple, novel multiplex pcr method that can be used to unambiguously subspeciate c. jejuni.

RESULTS
development of the napab multiplex subspeciation pcr
preliminary results from c. jejuni dna microarray experiments, using cjd strain rm <dig> as a tester strain, indicated that, in addition to other loci, the napa and napb genes in strain rm <dig> were either absent or highly divergent with respect to cjj napa and napb . since napa and napb encode the large and small subunits of nitrate reductase, respectively, this was not unexpected, given the absence of nitrate reductase activity in rm <dig>  thus, the microarray results suggested that the nap phenotype in rm <dig> was due most likely to deletions in napa and/or napb and that these results might be extended to cjd in general; a loss of function in either subunit would result in a loss of enzyme activity. therefore, an obvious target for a subspeciation multiplex pcr would be the nap locus. the nap locus in several campylobacter species consists of six genes : napa, napg, naph, napb, napl, and napd. upstream of napa in cjj and c. coli is the tpx gene, encoding a thiol peroxidase. the conservation of gene order and high nt identity between c. jejuni and c. coli at this locus suggested that primers designed to amplify both species should also amplify cjd strains.

therefore, the sequences of the nap regions  of three strains , obtained from the genome sequence for each strain , were aligned and four primer pairs were designed to regions of high conservation within the alignment: primers internal to and flanking napa, and primers internal to and flanking napb. the primers were organized into two multiplex primer sets: nap mpx <dig> and nap mpx <dig> . a representative gel illustrating the nap mpx <dig> and nap mpx <dig> amplicons is presented in fig. 1a.

since napa is quite large , cjj strains would not be expected to amplify with the napa flanking primers under standard pcr conditions; however, both cjj strains did amplify with the napa internal primer set . the cjd strains did not amplify with the napa internal primer set but did amplify with the napa flanking primers. the resulting amplicon  was reduced in size from that predicted for cjj by about  <dig>  kb, indicating the presence of a deletion within napa; amplification with different sets of flanking primers indicated that this deletion extended into napg . noteworthy also was the fact that the cjd strains could be divided into two classes, differentiated by an apparent presence or absence of napb. the "napa-napb+" strains , termed cjd <dig>  amplified with the napb internal primer set  and gave a full length amplicon  with the napb flanking primer set. the "napa-napb-" strains , termed cjd <dig>  gave a reduced length amplicon  with the napb flanking primer set, indicating the presence of a napb deletion. both classes would be unable to reduce nitrate, based on the common napa deletion.

validation of the nap multiplex pcr using additional campylobacter genomic dnas
to test the specificity of the nap mpx primer sets, an additional  <dig> human clinical cjd strains and  <dig> human clinical, animal and environmental cjj strains were amplified using the nap mpx <dig> primer set. the pcr results were identical to those presented in fig. 1a  with two exceptions. the hs: <dig> penner serotype reference strain, listed originally as cjj, amplified as a cjd <dig> isolate; however, this serotype has been seen previously in cjd isolates  <cit>  and therefore this strain may have been misidentified as a cjj. also, one cjd strain amplified as a cjj isolate; a second nitrate reductase test on this strain indicated that the strain was mis-typed originally.

genomic dna from the c. coli strain rm <dig> amplified also with the nap mpx <dig> primer set; the resulting banding pattern was identical to that of cjj . consequently, representatives of the remaining non-jejuni/coli campylobacter spp. were amplified using the nap mpx <dig> primer set. genomic dna from five of these species  amplified, although the banding patterns were distinct from those in fig. 1a . therefore,  <dig> additional strains of these five species and  <dig> additional c. coli strains were amplified using both primer sets. all of the c. coli strains and some of the c. upsaliensis strains produced both of the cjj-characteristic  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp bands following amplification with nap mpx <dig> . moreover, the banding patterns for many of these  <dig> c. coli and c. upsaliensis strains were similar to those seen in fig. 1a for both multiplex primer sets; therefore, c. coli and c. upsaliensis strains could be confused potentially with cjj isolates.

combination of the nap and lpxa multiplex pcrs gives unambiguous speciation and subspeciation of thermophilic campylobacters
if the nap multiplex pcrs were performed on strains already speciated as c. jejuni, then the non-specificity of the nap pcr towards c. coli and c. upsaliensis would not be of concern. however, in many instances, food, animal and environmental samples contain multiple campylobacter species, especially c. jejuni and c. coli. in this case, the non-specificity of the nap pcr would not permit accurate identification. a pcr speciation method for thermophilic campylobacter spp, based on the lipid a gene lpxa, was published recently  <cit> . therefore, to extend the discriminatory power of the nap subspeciation pcr method, we tested whether unambiguous speciation and subspeciation of thermophilic campylobacter spp. would be feasible by combining the lpxa and nap mpx pcr methods. genomic dnas from five thermophilic campylobacter species were amplified with the nine-primer nap/lpxa primer set. unique banding patterns were obtained for all species/subspecies , indicating that unambiguous speciation and subspeciation of thermophilic campylobacters can be accomplished with only one amplification.

characterization of the cjd napb and napa loci
as described above, the cjd strains were subdivided into two groups based on the apparent presence  or absence  of napb. to characterize the cjd napb genes, the amplicons obtained with the napb flanking primers were sequenced. the napb loci of cjd <dig> strains rm <dig>  rm <dig> and ssi  <dig> contained an approx.  <dig> bp deletion extending from nt - <dig> to nt  <dig> . all three deletions had identical endpoints; however, single nucleotide polymorphisms present in the napb amplicon sequences indicated that all three strains were genetically distinct. interestingly, three of the four cjd <dig> strains contained an extra g at napb nt  <dig>  resulting in a truncated napb; thus, of the eight cjd <dig> and cjd <dig> strains, only rm <dig> would be predicted to encode a full-length, and presumably functional, napb protein.

similarly, the amplicons obtained with the napa flanking primers were sequenced. as with napb, single nucleotide polymorphisms are present also in the amplicon sequences of five of the eight strains, indicating that these five strains are different. the remaining strains, atcc  <dig>  atcc  <dig> and ccug  <dig>  have identical napa sequences. as predicted, all eight cjd napa genes contain  <dig> bp deletions that extend from napa  into napg; unexpectedly, however, all eight deletions have identical endpoints. amplification and sequencing of the napa loci from an additional  <dig> cjd isolates also revealed the presence of identical napa deletions.

discussion
the apparent absence of the genes encoding nitrate reductase  in cjd strain rm <dig> correlated well with the nitrate reduction-negative phenotype characteristic of this subspecies. thus, we reasoned that a potential subspeciation marker for c. jejuni would be the nap locus, specifically napa and napb, and we developed therefore a napa/b multiplex pcr method to subspeciate c. jejuni. amplification results indicate that this nap multiplex pcr method, using internal and flanking primer sets for napa and napb, can be used to subspeciate unambiguously c. jejuni: cjd strains  can be distinguished readily from cjj strains . moreover, different banding patterns were observed with cjj and cjd using nap mpx <dig> or nap mpx <dig>  suggesting that either multiplex primer set is sufficient to subspeciate c. jejuni. the almost total concordance between the subspecies identification of  <dig> c. jejuni strains and the multiplex pcr results indicates that the new multiplex pcr is robust and can be used successfully to subspeciate c. jejuni. one strain, the penner hs: <dig> reference strain, classified originally as cjj, was identified as cjd by our assay, suggesting a potential flaw in the pcr method. however, identification of a strain as cjd by our method requires a deletion in napa and/or napb. since a deletion in either of these two genes would lead necessarily to a loss of nitrate reductase activity, c. jejuni strains containing such defects would be, by definition cjd, regardless of the original classification. therefore, the penner hs: <dig> reference strain was either not subspeciated or was subspeciated incorrectly. finally, combination of the napa/b multiplex method with an lpxa multiplex method designed to speciate thermophilic campylobacters permits the speciation and subspeciation of thermophilic campylobacters with a single amplification reaction. combination of the two methods is especially important when the species identification of a campylobacter strain is unknown, as c. coli and c. upsaliensis strains may be confused potentially with cjj  strains if the nap multiplex method is used solely.

currently, cjd strains are subspeciated using the nitrate reductase assay, an assay used initially also in this study to identify cjd strains. although the nitrate reductase assay is relatively easy to perform, the multiplex pcr methods described here have several advantages over the nitrate reductase assay. first, subspeciation of c. jejuni strains, as well as the speciation/subspeciation of thermophilic campylobacters, can be accomplished with this assay in a matter of hours, compared to the 2– <dig> days necessary for the nitrate reductase assay, and in a single amplification reaction. second, the nitrate reductase assay requires a pure culture. mixtures of campylobacter strains of the same species or strains representing different species occur often during isolation  <cit>  and would be problematic with regards to phenotypic assays; mixtures of cjj and cjd cells would type as cjj. in contrast, the multiplex pcr method does not require a pure culture and would identify the species/subspecies comprising such a mixture. in fact, the multiplex speciation method identified successfully each species in a mixture of four thermophilic campylobacter genomic dnas . third, the nitrate reductase assay requires often more than a single colony for accurate identification. however, the multiplex pcr method requires at most only a single colony. indeed,  <dig> of the cjd genomic dnas used in this study were obtained by boiling a single storage bead in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig> , indicating that strains in storage at -80°c do not even have to be grown out to be characterized. finally, the nitrate reductase assay does lead occasionally to false identification. one of the strains in this study, identified initially as cjd, was determined by the multiplex pcr method to be cjj. a repeat of the nitrate reductase assay on this strain indicated that it was, in fact, cjj and that the original nitrate reductase identification was in error. taken together, these results indicate that the napa/b multiplex pcr method described here is a valuable tool for clinical and research laboratories and can be used successfully to subspeciate rapidly c. jejuni strains and speciate thermophilic campylobacters when combined with the lpxa multiplex pcr method.

an unexpected outcome of this study arose from the sequencing of the cjd napa and napb amplicons. some cjd strains contained deletions in napb  and some contained apparently full-length napb genes , although point mutations in many of the cjd <dig> napb genes would result in non-functional proteins; however, all  <dig> characterized cjd strains contained identical napa deletions of  <dig> bp. based on the presence of these identical napa deletions, it appears that the cjd strains, isolated on four continents over at least two decades, share a common ancestor. furthermore, as the defining phenotype of cjd is the absence of nitrate reduction, the evidence suggests strongly that cjd arose from a single evolutionary event, i.e. the napa deletion, with the divergence at napb occurring somewhat later; deletion of the gene encoding the large subunit of nitrate reductase would remove the constraint maintaining a functional small subunit-encoding gene. obviously, further experiments will be necessary to validate this hypothesis. such experiments would entail the isolation and characterization of additional cjd isolates, facilitated by the multiplex pcrs described above. although the results presented here will need to be investigated further, they nevertheless provide intriguing insights into the origin of this subspecies.

CONCLUSIONS
campylobacter jejuni subsp. doylei strains are isolated infrequently. they are isolated primarily from human clinical patients and often from blood cultures, suggesting that they may be more pathogenic than cjj strains. however, little is known about the doylei subspecies, especially with regards to the environmental reservoirs for this organism; no animal host has been yet identified for cjd  <cit> . cjj strains are isolated often from avian hosts. the absence of cjd from avian sources, such as poultry, may be due to the lower maximum growth temperature  for this subspecies. this lower growth temperature may restrict cjd strains to other hosts with lower normal body temperatures, such as swine and domestic pets. it may influence also the isolation of cjd at the clinical level since enrichment and selection of c. jejuni as a whole is normally performed at 42°c, precluding the isolation of most cjd strains. also, antibiotics used in typical c. jejuni isolation media may restrict the growth of some cjd strains.

the multiplex pcr method presented in this study will enhance greatly the identification of cjd strains from human clinical, veterinary and environmental samples. since this pcr does not require large numbers of cells or pure cultures, cjd strains can be identified even when they comprise only a small subset of the overall population. removing the need for enrichment or selection would reduce the isolation bias that might minimize or eliminate detection of cjd strains. finally, we have demonstrated here that pcr identification of cjd strains can be performed using only the cells coating bacterial storage beads from -80°c freezer stocks. thus, strains identified only as c. jejuni can be re-assessed rapidly without the necessity of growing the strains out to purity. this was instrumental in identifying, for example, an hs: <dig> penner serotype reference strain, identified initially as cjj, as a cjd strain; several other strains identified only as c. jejuni may be, in fact, c. jejuni subsp. doylei.

