BACKGROUND
type iii secretion systems  of bacterial pathogens translocate effector proteins into infected cells resulting in a variety of modulations and disruptive actions to host cellular processes. examples include preventing phagocytosis  <cit> , altering rho signalling  <cit> , subverting intracellular membrane trafficking  <cit>  and manipulating innate immune responses  <cit> .

t3ss are composed of at least  <dig> conserved proteins  <cit>  some of which are present in multiple copies. specific protein components form an export apparatus within the inner membrane. a needle complex is formed using the general secretory pathway  for some of the 'ring' forming components located in the inner and outer bacterial membrane. cryo-electron microscopy studies of 'needle complexes' isolated from salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium report a needle-like appendage with a central conduit of approximately  <dig> angstroms  <cit> . for epec, 'intact' needle complexes have been difficult to isolate  <cit>  and therefore detailed structural information is lacking. a novel difference for epec needle complexes is the presence of a polymeric espa protein filament on top of a basal needle complex  <cit> . the complete t3ss, composed of the export apparatus and needle complex, then secretes pore and filament forming proteins  and eventually effector proteins, the latter of which are rapidly injected directly into host cells during infection.

a conserved inner membrane protein found in all t3ss is yscu . this group of proteins has been the focus of considerable studies owing to an interesting proteolytic activity. specifically, flhb/yscu proteins undergo a post-translational intein-like auto-cleavage event at a conserved npth amino acid sequence, the result of which leads to proper secretion system functionality  <cit> . auto-cleavage occurs between the asparagine and proline residues with the resulting polypeptides remaining tightly associated within the bacterial cell  <cit> . in enteropathogenic e. coli , the auto-cleavage mechanism for its yscu homologue, escu, was elucidated through protein crystallization studies  <cit> . the reaction mechanism occurs at a type ii β-turn and produces a conformational change in escu, spatially moving the histidine within the npth region 180°. it was proposed that this striking conformational change provides a new interface for protein interactions that are required for efficient secretion  <cit> . in support of this interpretation, a non-cleaving escu variant  did not support type iii protein secretion  <cit> . a soluble c-terminal escu variant also remained un-cleaved in protein crystals, although it was suggested that the reaction mechanism could still occur at elevated ph or with slow kinetics. the protein structures of other escu homologues  have shown similar auto-cleavage mechanisms  <cit>  indicating a remarkable functional importance for this proteolytic event in secretion events. in all cases, the yscu homologue is an essential component of the respective secretory apparatus, however, there is considerable variability amongst bacteria in the secretory phenotypes that are associated with yscu or flhb auto-cleavage. in the case of y. enterocolitica, non-cleaving yscu variants were found to support secretion of type iii effector proteins but not translocator proteins suggesting that yscu auto-cleavage serves to recognize translocators for type iii secretion in this pathogen  <cit> . in two other yersinia species, y. pestis and y. pseudotuberculosis, non-cleaving yscu forms showed dramatic reduction of effector and translocator protein secretion compared to the respective wild type strains suggesting a modulating role for the yscu auto-cleavage event  <cit> . in the plant pathogen xanthomonas campestris, the c-terminal region of hrcu was demonstrated to interact with the putative substrate switching protein hpac, leading to effector secretion. with respect to flagellum biogenesis, an uncleaved form of flhb  was demonstrated to selectively export only rod/hook-type protein substrates but not filament type substrates  <cit> . this observation is in line with a modulatory or substrate switching role for flhb auto-cleavage. from all these studies, it appears that the context of the yscu homologue and its interactions with other secretory components influence t3ss function. it remains that auto-cleavage function is likely contextual and may have specific secretory consequences in different bacteria.

in this study, we provide experimental evidence that escu auto-cleavage in epec promotes effector protein translocation into host cells during infection. in the absence of escu auto-cleavage, very low levels of effector proteins were secreted as non-functional and abnormal forms. escu auto-cleavage also promoted efficient membrane association of the multicargo type iii chaperone cest, which has implications for effector delivery into cells during infection.

RESULTS
uncleaved forms of escu support low levels of translocator and effector protein secretion into culture supernatants
based on previous protein crystallography studies  <cit> , we generated three recombinant plasmids that encode auto-cleaved or uncleaved histidine tagged forms of escu  . escu-his , escu-his  and escu-his  were created for initial characterization studies. unlike shigella species where congo red is used to 'induce' in vitro type iii secretion  <cit> , culturing epec in dmem 'induces' type iii secretion  <cit> . after culturing for  <dig> hours in dmem, whole cell lysates and culture supernatants were collected from Δescu strains harbouring pjlt <dig>  pjlt <dig> and pjlt <dig>  escu auto-cleavage at the npth catalytic site is predicted to produce an  <dig> amino acid c-terminal product of  <dig>  kda. immunoblotting whole cell lysates indicated that escu-his was auto-cleaved due to the detection of an approximately  <dig> kda species with anti-his antibodies . a longer immunoblot exposure did not reveal any uncleaved escu  suggesting complete auto-cleavage. in contrast, Δescu whole cell lysates containing escu or escu produced a  <dig> kda species detected by anti-his antibodies, a molecular weight consistent with uncleaved  escu.

to further characterize these strains, the respective culture supernatant fractions were evaluated. under these growth conditions, four predominant protein species are routinely detected in secretion fractions and have been identified using protein micro-sequencing  <cit> . these include espa , espd  and espc . in contrast, low amounts of tir and other type iii effectors are secreted under these conditions but can be detected using immunoblotting approaches. as expected, Δescu expressing escu-his restored espa, espb and tir protein secretion back to wild type epec levels . Δescu expressing either escu or escu had visibly lower amounts of protein species in their respective secretory profiles, however, a notable ~30kda protein species was detected by coomassie staining and could represent low levels of either espb or espd . immunoblotting with anti-espa, anti-espb and anti-tir antibodies demonstrated reduced levels of espa , espb  and tir  from Δescu bacteria expressing either escu or escu relative to escu . immunoblotting the whole cell lysates of these strains demonstrated equal steady state amounts of espa, espb and tir were present, ruling out the possibility of intracellular protein expression differences. immunoblotting the same whole cell lysate samples with anti-escc and anti-escj antibodies revealed equal amounts of the type iii secretion apparatus ring forming proteins escc and escj. this latter result indicates that escc and escj protein expression levels are not altered by the cleavage status of escu.

an ΔescnΔescu double mutant was generated to investigate if non-specific leakage from bacterial cells was occurring . in the absence of escn, the atpase of the epec t3ss, type iii secretion does not occur  <cit> . espa, espb and tir were not observed in the secreted sample from the ΔescnΔescu double mutant by coomassie staining . immunoblotting using antibodies against espa, espb and tir did not detect these proteins in the ΔescnΔescu secretion fraction. genetic complementation of ΔescnΔescu with plasmids expressing wild type escn and escu restored the secretion of espa, espb and tir to wild type levels indicating that this double mutant strain could be rescued with multicopy plasmids expressing the appropriate proteins. complementation of ΔescnΔescu with plasmids pjlt <dig>  pjlt <dig> and pjlt <dig>  did not result in espa, espb and tir secretion as assayed by coomassie staining and immunoblotting . based on these data, the small amount of espa, espb and tir in culture supernatants for Δescu/pjlt <dig> and Δescu/pjlt <dig>  was due to escu or escu expression, and was escn dependant. importantly, plasmid mediated genetic complementation does not introduce leakage artefacts to the experimental system.

the  <dig> kda escu auto-cleavage product is membrane associated
the observation that uncleaved forms of escu support very low levels of type iii translocon and effector protein secretion was unexpected since escu auto-cleavage has been suggested to provide a binding interface for protein substrate recognition at the base of the t3ss  <cit> . we therefore set out to evaluate the cleavage state of our escu variants within sub-cellular fractions enriched for t3ss needle complexes.

to assess escu auto-cleavage and to detect post-auto-cleavage products, we generated double tagged recombinant escu forms. a hemagglutinin  tag was fused to the n terminus and a flag tag was fused to the c-terminus of escu. using this strategy, wild type escu auto-cleavage is predicted to produce a  <dig> kda transmembrane polypeptide that can be recognized by anti-ha antibodies and a  <dig> kda cytoplasmic polypeptide  that can be recognized by anti-flag antibodies. Δescu/pjlt <dig>  demonstrated a wild type epec secretion pattern indicating that the presence of ha and flag tags did not inhibit escu function . a sub-cellular fractionation procedure to produce a membrane fraction enriched for t3ss needle complexes  <cit>  was then used to evaluate the double tagged protein constructs in the escu null mutant. the membrane preparation derived from Δescu/pjlt <dig> was probed with anti-ha antibodies and anti-flag antibodies which detected  <dig> and  <dig> kda polypeptide species respectively . these polypeptide species are in complete agreement with the predicted sizes of escu auto-cleavage products. no full-length escu  was detected in the Δescu/pjlt <dig> membrane fraction, suggesting complete auto-cleavage had occurred under these conditions. escu was detected exclusively at  <dig> kda with anti-ha antibodies. interestingly, escu appeared as a  <dig> kda polypeptide along with a  <dig> kda and  <dig> kda polypeptides detected by anti-ha antibodies and anti-flag antibodies respectively. these data demonstrate that the escu  <dig> and <dig> kda auto-cleavage products localized to membrane fractions enriched for t3ss needle complexes and are in agreement with the crystal structure soluble domain interactions previously reported  <cit> . in addition, plasmid encoded escu is auto-cleaved in epec albeit at reduced levels compared to normal escu.

the formation of functional t3ss needle complexes is believed to be a multistep process. for epec, t3ss needle complexes are less well characterized than those of salmonella and shigella species. purified epec t3ss needle complex preparations often lack certain protein components that are highly conserved in all systems and hence expected to be part of a 'complete' t3ss needle complex. for example escf, the putative needle protein has not been detected in highly purified epec needle preparations  <cit> . antibodies to escj and escn  <cit>  were used to probe membrane fractions to assess the expression levels of these proteins. no change in the amount of cell envelope associated escj or escn was observed in Δescu bacteria expressing any of the escu variants . these data indicate that escu auto-cleavage is not essential for escn and escj localization to the cell envelope. in certain yersinia and shigella mutant genetic backgrounds and under defined growth conditions, the t3ss needle proteins  are secreted in higher amounts  <cit>  since no one has detected polymerized escf  in purified epec needle complexes or secreted protein fractions, we are currently unable to assess whether escu auto-cleavage is required for escf polymerization or escf protein secretion .

escu auto-cleavage is necessary for functional translocation of type iii effector proteins into human cells
the role of escu auto-cleavage in effector injection during epec infection has not been evaluated. we therefore set out to evaluate the role of escu auto-cleavage during epec infection of human cells. we used c-terminal his tagged escu forms for these experiments as we noted the complementation efficiency for these constructs were better than the dual ha and flag tagged constructs . escu mutants expressing escu-his variants were tested for their ability to translocate  the effector tir into human cells. while the epec bundle forming pilus  is known to mediate early and initial adherence to host cells during infection, t3ss mediated tir translocation into host cells is required for intimate epec adherence . in addition, tir translocation results in f-actin 'pedestal' structures directly beneath adherent bacteria. as expected after a three-hour infection, it was found that the Δescu infection had markedly fewer bacteria intimately associated to hela cells  and could not induce host cell f-actin rearrangement . infection with Δescu/pjlt <dig> fully restored intimate adherence and f-actin pedestal structures to wild type levels, indicating that escu is required for pedestal formation. the escu variant encoded by Δescu/pjlt <dig> had similar defects in intimate adherence and pedestal formation as Δescu . in contrast, escu supported an apparent increase in bacterial intimate adherence and formed short actin pedestals . notably all strains express bfp, suggesting that the intimate adherence differences are related to t3ss and escu function. we further quantified the number of intimately adherent bacteria by microscopic counts. these analyses revealed a significant deficiency in intimate adherence for both the escu null mutant and escu expressing escu .

to further support the tir injection and actin pedestal observations, we employed a tir-tem- <dig> β-lactamase fusion protein  to report on tir translocation. this approach uses living cells loaded with a fluorescent substrate that can be cleaved by β-lactamase and has been used in epec/ehec/citrobacter to quantitatively monitor type iii effector translocation  <cit> . using this approach, a tir-tem- <dig> fusion protein was translocated by wild type epec but not Δescu . Δescu/pjlt <dig> demonstrated translocation of tir-tem- <dig> near wild type levels while Δescu/pjlt <dig> supported significantly less translocation albeit above Δescu levels. Δescu/pjlt <dig> was unable to support tir-tem <dig> translocation and appeared similar to Δescu. these results demonstrate that epec strains with auto-cleaved forms of escu supported the translocation of tir-tem- <dig> fusion proteins into infected hela cells whereas strains with uncleaved escu or the absence of escu did not.

in the absence of escu auto-cleavage, novel tir polypeptides are detected in culture supernatants
the hela cell infection experiments established a substantial role for escu auto-cleavage in tir and presumably other type iii effector injection by epec. the in vitro secretion assay experiments shown in figure  <dig> reveal predominant epec translocon protein secretion  and very low levels of effector proteins. in contrast, epec sepd mutants are known to hypersecrete abundant levels of type iii effector proteins under the same growth conditions, including tir, nlea, nleh, nleg and espz among others  <cit>  . we reasoned that the Δsepd epec strain would be a suitable genetic background to gain some insight into the role of escu auto-cleavage with respect to in vitro type iii effector secretion. a ΔsepdΔescu double mutant was generated and grown under secretion inducing conditions followed by collection of the secreted protein fractions. the secreted protein fraction derived from ΔsepdΔescu was visibly lacking many protein species compared to that of Δsepd . trans-complementation of ΔsepdΔescu with pjlt <dig> restored secretion back to that of Δsepd with respect to protein amounts and profile. in contrast, the ΔsepdΔescu/pjlt <dig> did not restore a Δsepd secretion profile. interestingly, ΔsepdΔescu/pjlt <dig> secreted low amounts of a protein species with a similar apparent molecular mass as tir . untagged cis-complemented sepd::escu and sepd::escu strains  were generated by allelic exchange and were found to produce the same secretion profile as the respective plasmid complemented strains . immunoblotting with monoclonal anti-tir antibodies revealed that tir secretion occurred at variable levels when escu or escu variants were expressed although for escu, a novel lower molecular weight polypeptide was detected with anti-tir antibodies . this novel polypeptide species was consistently absent from ΔsepdΔescu/pjlt <dig> or pjlt <dig> and the parent Δsepd strain.

cest membrane localization is altered in the absence of escu auto-cleavage
in a previous report, we have demonstrated that the multicargo type iii chaperone cest mediates effector 'docking' at the inner membrane in an escn-dependent manner  <cit> . cest is also required for tir stability in the epec cytoplasm  <cit>  and mediates efficient secretion of at least  <dig> type iii effectors  <cit> . it has also been demonstrated that cest contributes to effector translocation  <cit> . the detection of a small novel tir polypeptide in culture supernatants derived from bacteria expressing escu suggested that cest-tir interactions may be altered in the absence of auto-cleavage. we therefore set out to investigate cest-tir, cest-escu interactions in context of escu auto-cleavage using bacteria that expressed ha-tagged escu variants. total cell lysates and membrane preparations were generated from the Δescu mutant expressing either escu, escu or escu followed by sds-page and immunoblotting analyses. total cest levels were unchanged in all the strains, indicating that escu auto-cleavage does not influence cest protein expression or stability . as reported previously  <cit> , cest was detected within the membrane fraction for wild type epec . band intensity  was quantified using densitometry normalized to escj levels within the same membrane fraction. a reduced amount of membrane associated cest was observed for Δescu and Δescu expressing either escu or escu, as determined by densitometric analyses. the reduced amount was statistically significant for the escu null mutant compared to wild type epec, although this significance did not extend to the escu variants. next, the membrane fractions were subjected to sucrose gradient fractionation to assess cest membrane localization patterns. escj and intimin are inner and outer membrane proteins respectively and hence served to identify inner and outer membrane enriched fractions. for Δescu expressing ha-escu-flag, a strong enrichment of cest was found within inner membrane fractions. in contrast, ha-escu-flag and ha-escu-flag showed a more diffuse pattern of cest membrane association, with a considerable amount of cest protein localizing to less dense fractions within the gradient. these observations suggested that cest function could be altered or less efficient in the absence of escu auto-cleavage. we therefore carried out a co-immunoprecipitation assay, using anti-cest antibodies, to assess cest-effector interactions. moreover, it has been shown that hpab, a type iii chaperone, interacts with hrcu  <cit>   and hence we asked whether cest interacts with escu. affinity purified anti-cest antibodies co-immunoprecipitated equal amounts of tir from all bacterial lysates . this was expected, since cest is required for tir stability  <cit> , and an earlier result that showed equal steady state levels of tir in whole cell lysates expressing escu variants . in contrast, both auto-cleaved and un-cleaved forms of escu were not co-immunoprecipitated with anti-cest antibodies.

taken together, these data indicate that total cest membrane levels were not statistically different for escu variant expressing strains, although the nature of cest association with the inner membrane was altered in the absence or with limited escu auto-cleavage. cest retained normal effector binding function in the absence of escu auto-cleavage and escu did not co-immunoprecipitate with cest.

discussion
the t3ss is one of the most complex secretory systems in prokaryotic biology, being composed of at least  <dig> conserved protein components  <cit> . the yscu/flhb proteins have been studied in considerable detail, although the phenotypes associated with secretion are highly variable among bacteria and even within the same species  <cit> . the intein-like auto-cleavage mechanism of escu was previously elucidated through protein crystallography studies. it was proposed that escu auto-cleavage likely results in an interface for important protein interactions for type iii secretion. in this study, we provide evidence to suggest that escu auto-cleavage supports efficient type iii effector translocation. we also observed that the multicargo type iii chaperone cest was less efficiently associated with the inner membrane , which may partly explain the deficiency in type iii effector translocation. the data extend previous findings pertaining to escu auto-cleavage and suggest a critical role for escu auto-cleavage in preparing the secretory apparatus to accept chaperone-effector complexes.

previous studies have demonstrated that escu null mutants are completely deficient in secreting proteins via the t3ss pathway  <cit> . this phenotype holds true in other pathogens with t3ss and therefore highlights the absolute requirement of yscu/flhb proteins in type iii secretion events. very little is known regarding how substrate proteins engage the epec t3ss export apparatus  located in the inner membrane. a non-cleaving escu variant still supported the secretion of tir although at least one novel tir derived polypeptide  was linked to the uncleaved state of escu. in contrast, bacteria expressing escu did not display novel tir degradation products which suggests that its low level auto-cleavage is sufficient to support tir stability and secretion. we did observe reduced levels of membrane associated cest in the absence of escu auto-cleavage, although the result was not statistically significant. our efforts to further explore this observation using other approaches included separating membrane preparations by sucrose density gradients. these analyses revealed that cest membrane association is less stable without or with minimal escu auto-cleavage . sucrose gradient membrane fractionation is a challenging biochemical technique, and gradient to gradient comparisons and exact gradient reproducibility are difficult. we are in the process of developing in situ approaches such as fluorescence energy transfer  to better assess protein interaction at the base of the t3ss. nonetheless, the presented experiments provide a framework for future experiments and demonstrate that the presence of auto-cleaved escu supported localized cest membrane association.

recently, galan and co-workers reported that type iii chaperones associate with a 'sorting platform' within the cytoplasm and that this chaperone association influences secretory events  <cit> . a platform has yet to be identified in epec, although it is possible that within our experimental system, cest may be mis-localized leading to aberrant type iii effector secretion. the observation of degraded tir due to escu  is in line with this interpretation. furthermore, the short actin pedestals directly underneath adherent escu expressing bacteria which showed reduced auto-cleavage levels is consistent with this view. since epec tir injection strictly requires a espabd translocon  <cit>  and espa filament formation requires escf expression  <cit> , escu likely supports the formation of a functional t3ss needle apparatus  formed by the putative needle protein escf and the translocon proteins espa, espb and espd. we performed three different, yet complimentary infection assays  to characterize escu and consistently identified intermediate effector translocation levels. interestingly, a similar intermediate phenotype was observed for a salmonella flhb null mutant expressing a slow cleaving flhb protein where cells were weakly motile and exported reduced amounts of flagellin  <cit> .

chaperone-effector complex docking at the inner membrane has been reported for many t3ss  <cit> . we have previously demonstrated that cest inner membrane association is aided by the presence of the t3ss atpase escn  <cit> . the data cannot rule out the possibility that the epec t3ss export apparatus may be structurally impaired or malformed in the presence of uncleaved escu although it has been demonstrated that un-cleaved forms of escu can fold correctly  <cit> . the levels of escn  were unchanged in Δescu bacteria expressing uncleaved or partially uncleaved forms of escu . since bacteria expressing escu did support effector translocation, albeit at a reduced level, a functional t3ss export apparatus was likely assembled even though escu was only partially auto-cleaved. in support of this, within s. typhimurium, uncleaved spas  still supported the formation of a high order export apparatus - needle complex composed of at least  <dig> proteins as shown by blue native  page of enriched needle complex containing fractions  <cit> .

a number of studies have reported on specific protein-protein interactions important for t3ss function. auto-cleavage of hrcu  promoted an interaction between the atpase hrcn, and the c-terminal cleavage product of hrcu  <cit> . the global t3s chaperone hpab was also shown to interact with hrcn and the full-length form of hrcu. co-immunoprecipitation experiments using epec lysates and anti-cest antibodies failed to detect an interaction with escu or non-cleaving escu variants . although we cannot rule out the possibility of a direct cest-escu interaction, we provide evidence that efficient cest membrane association occurs when escu is auto-cleaved .

it has been demonstrated that the yscu/flhb proteins interacts with multiple components within their respective t3ss  <cit> . a shortlist of protein interactions includes ysci, ysck, yscl, yscn, yscq and yscv  among other proteins. the putative yscl, ysci and yscq homologues within the epec lee pai are believed to be orf <dig>  rorf <dig> and sepq respectively  <cit>  although the homology scores are very low . a yeast two hybrid screen identified rorf <dig>  as an escu binding partner  <cit> . the ysci/prgj family form an inner rod within the t3ss needle complex, a structure that may exist for epec but has not been identified in highly purified needle preparations  <cit> . in shigella, spa <dig> is known to interact with the c-terminal region of spa <dig>  <cit> , however in epec an evident spa <dig> homologue has not been identified. the notable absence of clear homologues for known yscu protein partners is puzzling although might be explained by the different architecture of the epec t3ss compared to salmonella, shigella and yersinia. specifically, a long polymeric filament composed of espa sits atop the epec needle complex  <cit> .

from the various crystal structures now available, it has been hypothesized that the conserved auto-cleavage mechanism for the yscu/flhb group of proteins results in a critical surface to promote protein interactions for secreted substrates  <cit> . we extend this interpretation with experimental data to further suggest that escu auto-cleavage promotes translocon and effector protein secretion presumably by acting at the base of the epec t3ss.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence that intermediate phenotypes can be identified in the epec t3ss secretory pathway suggesting that sequential binding events are involved in type iii effector translocation into host cells. the conserved mechanism of auto-cleavage, shown here for escu, is a critical event that supports type iii effector translocation. additional studies will be required to identify the temporal sequence of events and to functionally characterize how protein substrates are trafficked through the t3ss.

