BACKGROUND
a phylogeny, or phylogenetic tree, is a representation of the evolutionary relationships among species. a well-known problem in biological classification is to combine phylogenetic information to produce more inclusive phylogenies. one way is to use supertree methods, which combine overlapping source trees, inferred from primary data . supertree methods are also useful, teamed with supermatrix methods, in a divide-and-conquer approach to reconstruct very large phylogenies: first, the set of data is divided into subsets that are analyzed individually, then the resulting phylogenies are combined to reconstruct the global phylogeny  <cit> .

supertree methods can be classified into two categories, depending on the way they deal with topological conflicts, i.e. different arrangements of the same taxa among source trees. liberal methods resolve conflicts, asking source trees to vote and opting for the topological alternative that maximizes an optimization criterion  <cit> . the hope is that each taxon is erroneously placed in only few source trees and this erroneous information will be overcome by the large number of source trees where the taxon is correctly placed. the most widespread liberal method is matrix representation with parsimony . supertrees proposed by liberal methods are often highly resolved and accurate, though several authors have shown that this approach sometimes leads to propose supertrees containing clades that contradict all source trees  <cit> . in contrast, veto methods do not allow the resulting tree to contain clades that contradict source trees. some examples of veto kind methods are semi-strict consensus  <cit> , smast and smct  <cit> , physic  <cit>  and extensions of the strict consensus .

a recent method, physic, returns a supertree with appealing theoretical properties. first, since it is a veto method, it does not contain relationships contradicting the source trees . in addition, it only infers relationships that are present in a source tree or collectively induced by several source trees . the last property insures that the method does not make arbitrary inferences. these features provide an unambiguous phylogenetic framework that is well suited for taxonomic revisions as for other applications where the reliability of the supertree is crucial.

supertree methods, in particular veto methods, can propose unresolved supertrees, especially when the source trees do not sufficiently overlap and/or they present a high degree of contradictions . when more informative supertrees are expected, a solution is to propose non-plenary supertrees, i.e. supertrees containing a subset of the taxa of the source trees. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show two cases where proposing supertrees  lacking only one taxon provides more information on the phylogenetic relationships among other species. both smast and smct methods  <cit>  can produce non-plenary supertrees. the former consists in finding one of the largest taxa subsets s such that each input tree t proposes exactly the same resolution as the supertree for the taxa contained in l ∩ s. in this approach the presence of a multifurcation in an input tree will inhibit resolution according to the information present in other input trees. on the contrary, the smct method allows these multifurcations to be resolved in the resulting supertree. unfortunately, both underlying decision problems are np-hard and no heuristic algorithm currently exists for general instances of these problems.

the algorithm presented in this paper, called physic_ist , looks for a supertree that satisfies pc and pi properties. physic_ist allows multifurcations in input trees to be resolved thanks to the information present in other source trees. to deal with topological conflicts physic_ist allows, like smast and smct, the insertion of only a subset of the species present in the source trees. moreover, physic_ist can also propose new multifurcations to avoid contradicting source trees, while smast and smct can only remove taxa. the aim of physic_ist is not only to find a supertree t  that satisfies pc and pi but to find the most informative supertree satisfying both properties. choosing the most informative alternative among several candidate supertrees requires one to be able to compare trees including potentially different subsets of the source taxa . the informativeness of a candidate supertree is computed by a variation of the cic  criterion  <cit> . this measure has roots in information theory and is basically proportional to the number of complete binary trees that are compatible with the evaluated supertree.

the resolution of supertrees computed by veto methods can be poor when considering large numbers of source trees. indeed, adding more trees provides more information on the relative position of some taxa, but in the same time increases the number of local conflicts. to handle large collections of source trees, one has to resort to the liberal approach that allows to arbitrate between conflicts arising among source trees. the most common way to deal with incongruent source trees is to use a supertree method that takes ad-hoc decisions  in the face of individual conflicts met when building the supertree. the second and much less explored way is to preprocess the data according to a statistical procedure and then to apply a veto method, not contradicting the retained information that was estimated to be reliable. in this paper, we follow the latter approach that has the advantage of making the removing of conflicts between source trees explicit. more precisely, we introduce a preprocessing step to detect and correct anomalies in the source trees. this step, called stc , analyzes the contradictions among the source trees; for all contradictions, it evaluates the possible topological alternatives and it drops the alternative that is  statistically less supported . then stc modifies each source tree  so that it does not contain the dropped alternatives and yet remains as informative as possible. in other words stc aims at correcting the source trees that propose anomalous phylogenetic position for some taxa . for example, if source trees contain two contradicting resolutions, one present in 99% of the trees and the other one present in 1% of the trees, we can reasonably think that the latter resolution is an anomaly and ignore it. if the user approves the proposed modifications, the physic_ist veto method is then applied to the modified source trees. the resulting supertree satisfies both pi and pc properties for the collection of modified source trees. if the user is not satisfied with the modified source trees, he can change the threshold and restart the procedure, or choose to skip it. in this way, the liberal component of the supertree inference is not only made explicit but also interactive and parametrized. physic_ist and stc were implemented using the bio++ libraries  <cit> , and are available from: .

RESULTS
in this section we present results of large-scale simulations conducted to evaluate both the resolution and the accuracy of physic_ist supertrees. these results help to measure both the improvement offered by physic_ist on the previous version of the method, and the effectiveness of the stc preprocess. we also validate the new methodology by applying stc+physic_ist to two biological case studies.

simulations
the simulation protocol, depicted in figure  <dig>  follows the standard guidelines in the field for assessing the effectiveness of supertree methods. its details are inspired from  <cit> . we created  <dig> different clocklike trees; for each tree, every branch length was multiplied by a random value, chosen in an exponential distribution. then each branch was divided by the total length of the resulting tree, providing  <dig> non-clocklike model trees. from each model tree, we generated  <dig> gene trees with different evolutionary rates, by multiplying every branch by a given value . then the evolution of dna sequences along these gene trees was simulated according to the k2p substitution model  <cit> , obtaining a sequence alignment data set per tree. the different taxa overlaps observed in real data sets were simulated by randomly removing some sequences of those  <dig> data sets. as in  <cit> , the deletion of sequences was performed according to four different proportions: d = 25%, to model a strong overlap between source trees, d = 50% and d = 75%, to represent sets with low taxon overlap, and a mixed deletion ratio , to model a more realistic heterogeneity among source trees sizes. the mixed deletion condition is composed of one tenth of data sets with d = 25%, three tenths with d = 50% and six tenths with d = 75%. from the resulting data sets, we inferred  <dig> gene trees for each value of d, using phyml  <cit> . the node supports were estimated using phyml with a bootstrap process based on  <dig> replicates. for each inferred tree, we only retained the best supported nodes i.e. those showing a bootstrap proportion at least equal to  <dig>  we built supertrees from all gene trees  or only a subset of them . combining this with the four deletion schemes,  <dig> data sets were obtained for each of the  <dig> conditions analyzed in this paper.

we detail results for several supertree methods applied to the collections of source trees, namely physic  <cit> , physic_ist, and mrp  <cit> . veto and liberal methods are not really comparable because they are used for different purposes. veto methods are expected to produce less resolved but more accurate supertrees: showing results for both kinds of methods gives an indication of how much is lost in resolution and of how much is gained in accuracy when using a veto method. for each supertree we evaluate its informativeness by computing its cicn . additionally, we compute its type i error, i.e. the number of triplets of the supertree not present in the model tree divided by the number of triplets in the model tree. for each condition, we average these values on the  <dig> replicates. figures  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the results of the simulations.

the informativeness of supertrees is frequently compared using type ii error, i.e. the number of triplets of the model tree that are not present in the supertree divided by the number of triplets in the model tree. it seems to us that the cicn is more appropriate when comparing the informativeness of supertrees. indeed, if a triplet r ∈ r is included in the computation of the type ii error, this may be a result of it not having been expressed in the supertree or of an alternative resolution having been proposed. to the contrary, the cicn strictly measures the information contained in the supertree, whether it is accurate or not. the accuracy of the supertree is separately measured using the type i error. because of this ambiguity of the type ii error and for consistency with the optimization criterion of physic_ist, cicn graphics are provided instead of the type ii error graphics.

improvement of physic_ist on physic
the increase in resolution of physic_ist in comparison to physic is noteworthy  no matter the deletion ratio. more precisely, the average cicn of physic_ist supertrees is  <dig>  that of physic . since cicn is measured on a logarithmic scale, this means a considerable improvement on physic. this different behaviour of the two methods is due, most of the time, to the fact that physic_ist is allowed to infer non-plenary supertrees. indeed, removing just one taxon is sometimes enough to make all source trees agree on a large subset of taxa. as veto methods are not allowed to contradict source trees, keeping the rogue taxa in the supertree means proposing a multifurcation for the surrounding subset of taxa, as done by physic. the physic_ist version escapes this situation by not including the rogue taxa in the supertree, and is hence able to obtain a relatively important resolution for the remaining taxa.

in the meantime, the type i error of physic_ist  is always inferior to 1%  and decreases importantly as the number of source trees increases. from the experimental results, it could appear that there is a choice to be made between the two methods since physic displays a significantly lower type i error rate , but this is mainly due to the fact that the trees reconstructed by physic can be much less resolved, as expected from a plenary veto method applied to a large number of source trees. thus, on practical data sets, physic_ist is always to be preferred to physic.

the table in figure  <dig> shows the average percentage of source taxa not included in the supertrees inferred by physic_ist, for each simulation condition. this percentage depends on the number and size of the source trees but remains globally low . when source trees contain insufficient information , physic_ist can infer supertrees lacking several taxa. indeed, in such a case, the insertion of some taxa is impeded by the pi property: very little overlapping information is available and consequently many taxa cannot be placed unambiguously. providing physic_ist with more information  allows one to make the position of some taxa more precise, hence to propose larger supertrees. yet, as the amount of available information continues to increase, the number of conflicts between source trees increases, leading some taxa no longer to be inserted due to the pc property. this means that increasing the amount of available information after some point can decrease the size of the inferred supertree .

the foreseeable but undesirable behavior of veto supertree methods when facing large numbers of source trees can be overcome by an explicit liberal preprocessing of the input trees, such as the stc proposed in this paper.

it is also interesting to analyze the cicn values plotted as a function of the number of removed taxa. for each of the  <dig> conditions analyzed in this paper, the  <dig> inferred supertrees are split into classes, depending on the number of taxa not inserted in the supertrees but present in the source trees. then, the average cicn value is computed for each class  and these values are plotted as a function of the number of input taxa not inserted in the supertrees . for comparison, we also plotted the cicn values of binary trees having the same number of leaves as the supertrees in each class. these values, denoted max cicn, provide upper bounds for cicn values of each class, hence enable to measure by eye the gap between physic_ist supertrees and fully resolved supertrees of the same size. the plots obtained for the  <dig> tested conditions show the same trend with slight variations.

the cicn values of the physic_ist supertrees decrease as the number of "not-inserted" taxa increases, i.e. as the size of the supertrees decreases. this is expected given the role played by this number in the cicn formula . more interestingly, physic_ist supertrees overall have cic values rather close to max cic values, i.e. physic_ist supertree are close to being fully resolved. moreover, as the size of the supertrees decreases, cicn values of physic_ist supertrees and max cic values decrease at a similar pace, the gap between both values narrowing slightly for the smallest supertrees. thus, overall, the resolution degree of output supertrees appears to be only slightly dependent on the number of taxa inserted in the supertree. the only exception to this rule happens for the conditions d =  <dig> with k =  <dig> and k =  <dig>  in these cases, which are the most extreme conditions in terms of overlap between the taxa set of source trees, the two curves decrease with different slopes. we now detail results obtained when resorting to stc statistical preprocess.

efficiency of the stc preprocess
figures  <dig> and  <dig> report simulations results for stc+physic and stc+physic_ist, when fixing the stc threshold to 95%, i.e. a 5% probability that a detected anomaly is not actually an anomaly . the resolution of both physic and physic_ist greatly increases thanks to the preprocessing step in most simulation conditions . the stc preprocess has no effect for d = 75%, where the low overlap between source trees impedes detecting anomalies.

stc+physic_ist is on average  <dig>  more informative than stc+physic according to the cicn measure. this replicates the gap observed between the methods without the preprocess, confirming the improvement of physic_ist on physic. the fact that the stc preprocess allows the physic and physic_ist supertrees to be more resolved without significantly changing the type i error, shows that this preprocessing step corrects the source trees in an appropriate way.

when only considering results with stc  in figure 6), the average percentage of discarded taxa decreases with the number of source trees and increases when d augments. thus, as more information is provided, supertrees are more and more informative, as usually happens with the liberal approach . indeed, giving more information to stc brings out anomalies more and more clearly, thus tends to modify the source trees more and more accurately.

comparison of liberal and veto methods
as expected, the resolution of supertrees obtained with mrp tends to increase with the number of source trees. in fact, mrp is a liberal method and adding trees supplies more information. unexpectedly, its type i error does not decrease considerably when adding more trees to the analysis.

as already mentioned, the resolution of supertrees inferred by the two veto methods tends to decrease when including more trees . in contrast, their type i error decreases importantly as the number of source trees increases. by applying the stc preprocess to physic and physic_ist, the two methods behave like liberal methods, i.e. the resolution of supertrees increases with the number of trees, as already explained except for d = 75%). this behavior is less apparent for physic. indeed, when faced with an insufficient number of triplets to satisfy the pi property, physic can not benefit from the improvement with respect to pc achieved by the stc preprocess.

note that in all conditions, mrp provides trees that are, on average, more resolved than other methods. thus, mrp appears to be the most liberal supertree method among those investigated. this is not a surprise as, when two alternative resolutions conflict with one another, the mrp parsimony criterion favors that supported by the highest number of source trees, while the stc preprocess favors a resolution only when it is statistically more supported than the other . however, favoring more resolved supertrees also leads to more errors in trees. indeed, the type i error of physic and physic_ist, with and without stc preprocess, is smaller than to that of mrp .

the important question of whether less resolved but more correct supertrees should be preferred to the opposite alternative, can only be answered by knowing the subsequent use of the inferred supertree 

plots of the type ii error are not presented but they show the same relationships between the analyzed methods.

case study focused on placental mammals
to illustrate the effectiveness of physic_ist and stc on biological data, we first considered data sets on  <dig> placental mammals. primary data was obtained from the orthomam database  <cit>  that uses the ensembl  orthology annotations to identify a set of exonic candidate markers for mammalian phylogenetics. the reliability of the phylogeny inferred from a single marker depends, among other things, on the length of the corresponding sequence alignment. therefore, we only retained the dna markers of orthomam associated to the longest sequences, namely those having more than  <dig> bp, which provided us with  <dig> sequence alignments. from the alignments, unrooted phylogenies were then separately inferred with paup*  <cit>  using a maximum likelihood criterion. using the facilities of our software, we rooted these trees according to one of the two following outgroups: monodelphis or, if it was not present, dasypus, echinops and loxodonta . at this step, two of the  <dig> trees had to be discarded since they did not include monophyletic outgroups. a first supertree data set, called ortho <dig>  was composed of all these source trees. additionally, we considered a second data set, called ortho <dig>  only composed of the trees obtained from alignment of more than  <dig> bp. these two data sets respectively contain  <dig> and  <dig> trees, each tree including from  <dig> to  <dig> taxa. figure  <dig> displays the supertrees inferred by physic_ist on these data sets, with and without applying the stc preprocess. the stc threshold has been fixed to 90%.

with exons longer than  <dig> bp, the physic_ist supertree is extensively multifurcated, with only three obvious clades recovered ): the two muroid rodents , the two hominoids , and the catarrhine primates . this reflects the fact that the source trees contain topological conflicts. a closer look at the source trees shows, for instance, that there is likely a long branch attraction phenomenon of the long muroid branch by the marsupial outgroup for the alignment composed of pan, macaca, mus, rattus, bos, canis, and monodelphis exons orthologues to human exon  <dig> of the celsr3-slc26a <dig> gene . in the absence of the rabbit  orthologue that would break the muroid branch, mus + rattus are artefactually attracted towards the basalmost position among placentals. this example illustrates the existence of conflicting resolutions among triplets of different source trees. thus, without the stc preprocess, satisfying the pc condition results in a highly multifurcated supertree. in contrast, applying the stc preprocess leads to a more resolved supertree ). the two remaining multifurcations involve  the rabbit relative to muroids and primates, and  the armadillo , elephant , and tenrec  relative to the other placentals. this probably reflects the lack of phylogenetic signal for these taxa among the  <dig> source trees.

with exons longer than  <dig> bp, the physic_ist supertree is extensively multifurcated, with only two obvious clades recovered ): mus + rattus and homo + pan. the greater number of source trees introduces additional conflicts within primates as compared to ortho <dig>  additionally, the supertree lacks the taxon macaca. the reason is that, in the source tree reconstructed from the ense <dig> exon , pan is unexpectedly more closely related to macaca than to homo. this anomaly appears in only one of the  <dig> source trees, but this impedes pure veto methods from recovering the correct resolution for the clade. indeed, inserting macaca while preserving pc, implies losing the clade homo + pan, hence leads to a completely multifurcated tree on the  <dig> taxa except for the trivial clade mus + rattus. this supertree t' has a cicn value inferior to that of the supertree t lacking macaca  =  <dig>  while cicn  =  <dig> ). for this reason, the taxon macaca is not inserted. in contrast, stc+physic_ist infers a plenary supertree ), the above-mentioned anomaly being overcome by a significant number of correct resolutions in other source trees. this supertree is also fully-resolved – unlike the supertree obtained from ortho <dig> – as stc benefits from the signal of  <dig> source trees additionally present in ortho <dig>  the supertree topology is in agreement with the current view on placental phylogenetics which depicts the monophyly of euarchontoglires , laurasiatherians , boreoeutherians , afrotherians , and xenarthrans  + afrotherians  <cit> .

case study focused on animals
the case study based on orthomam only involved  <dig> species. to illustrate how physic_ist performs on larger studies, we analyzed an animal phylogenomic data set containing  <dig> proteins  for  <dig> species, i.e. three poriferans ,  <dig> cnidarians , and  <dig> bilaterians   <cit> .

individual maximum likelihood  protein trees were inferred using treefinder  <cit>  under the wag + Γ model of evolution. among the  <dig> source trees,  <dig>  were discarded because the poriferan outgroup was not monophyletic. the remaining  <dig> ml topologies were subjected to a physic_ist analysis. to choose the stc threshold, we varied the value of the threshold from  <dig> to  <dig>  and we analyzed the cicn values of the resulting supertrees. fixing the threshold to a value from  <dig>  to  <dig>  leads to the most informative supertree. the topology of the obtained supertree  is in agreement with recent animal phylogenomic studies based on the ml and bayesian concatenated analyses of conserved proteins under the wag model of amino acid replacements  <cit> . for instance, bilaterians are split into protostomians and deuterostomians. among protostomians, annelids group with molluscs, and crustaceans are paraphyletic due to the grouping of artemia and daphnia with hexapods. among deuterostomians, tunicata branches with vertebrata, and xenoturbella with ambulacraria. two taxa are not incorporated, the priapulid priapulus and the nematode pratylenchus. these two taxa are by far the less frequent and they are probably not inserted due to a lack of information. seven multifurcations are displayed by the supertree. this reflects the fact that several source trees were inferred from very short alignments . the resulting stochastic error yielded a lack of signal and/or contradictions on the position of some taxa, thus diminishing the supertree resolution degree. for instance, the multifurcation involving the  <dig> major protostomian lineages reflects the lack of strong signal under the wag model, whereas the use of a mixture model like cat provides increased topological resolution with monophylies of lophotrochozoa  and ecdysozoa   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we propose a new supertree veto method , running in polynomial time , that returns supertrees satisfying desirable theoretical properties . the simulations and the biological case studies confirm the practical effectiveness of physic_ist, showing that this variant of physic proposes supertrees that are much more informative than those inferred by the original physic algorithm, while the type i error remains low . additionally, we introduce a statistical preprocess of the source trees to detect and correct artifactual positions of taxa. this preprocess can be performed for any collection of source trees and hence benefits any veto supertree method. this approach has the advantage of separating the liberal resolution of conflicts among source trees from the assemblage of the supertree. this makes explicit the choices done to arbitrate between conflicting source trees, and allows the user to choose the extent with which the sources trees can be modified. in practice, stc+physic_ist closes the gap between veto and liberal methods. this is the first practical method that provides informative and reliable non-plenary supertrees. the program is available for online executions and download at .

