BACKGROUND
understanding transcriptional regulation of gene expression is one of the greatest challenges of modern molecular biology. a central role in this mechanism is played by transcription factors , which typically bind to specific, short dna sequence motifs. these motifs are usually located in the upstream region of the regulated genes, although it is possible to find them also in the introns and in the 3' downstream region. they are often overrepresented, and appear in multiple copies inside the regulatory regions to form modules of cooperating items.

in these last years, the study of gene regulation has undergone a deep change of perspective  <cit> . while past studies usually dealt with individual regulatory interactions, it has become by now clear that the only way to understand the regulatory activity of the genome is to directly address the complex, combinatorial nature of the whole ensemble of tfs.

the identification of the cis-binding sequences and of the related tf's is a mandatory preliminary step toward this goal.

to this end it is becoming more and more important to construct tools able to

- address the problem on a genome wide scale

- keep under control the number of false positives to avoid an excessive increase of the noise to signal ratio

- use as input the statistical properties of the dna sequences, thus avoiding, as far as possible, any other a priori assumption on the binding motifs.

however, the study cannot be based exclusively on the statistical features of the dna regions presumably involved in transcriptional regulation, but must be complemented with independent information about gene regulation. in this respect three important sources of information may be used: the functional annotations collected in public databases, gene expression data on a global scale, and the so called 'phylogenetic footprinting'  <cit> .

in fact large functional annotation databases and large-scale expression data provide a wealth of information about coregulation. this is a crucial point, since coregulated genes are likely to share similar transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. at the same time in these last years a growing interest has been attracted by the 'phylogenetic footprinting', i.e. the idea that functional sequences are preferentially conserved over the course of evolution by selective pressure. comparison of orthologous gene sequences has been for a long time a standard tool in genomic analysis. recently this comparative approach has been extended also to non coding regions, thanks to the progress of the sequencing programs. it is by now accepted that these non-coding conserved regions have an important regulatory role  <cit> .

several computational method have been proposed in the last few years to identify tf binding sites. these can be classified into two separate groups: enumerative methods, including the one we will present in this paper, explore all possible motifs up to a certain length . the other large group consists of local search algorithms, including expectation maximization and various flavours of gibbs sampling .

we discuss here a simple and powerful approach for the identification of cis-regulatory motifs which fulfils the above requirements. it can be tuned to keep the number of false positives under control, and it allows us to study the transcriptional regulation of more than  <dig>  genes of the human genome . the method is based on an "ab initio" study of the statistical properties of the regulatory sequences of the genes of interest. together with the discussion of the method itself, we apply it to a full-genome analysis of the human case.

in particular in this paper, as a first step, we concentrated on the upstream sequences of the human genome , while we plan to extend these same tools to the downstream and intron regions in the future.

RESULTS
our proposed approach is based on three main ingredients:

 human-mouse genomic comparison

 statistical analysis of "motifs"  that are overrepresented in evolutionarily conserved regions upstream of orthologous genes

 two complementary "filters" to infer coregulation: the distribution of gene ontology annotation terms and the results of a set of microarray experiments

the approach based on steps  and  above was successfully applied to the search for regulatory binding sites in yeast  <cit> . the human-mouse genetic comparison is crucial in extending the method to higher eukaryotes, since it is expected to greatly improve the signal/noise ratio by selecting for analysis those portions of the upstream regions that are more likely to be functionally relevant. other algorithms taking advantage of phylogenetic footprinting to detect transcription factor binding sites have been published in  <cit> .

as a final result of our analysis we obtain a set of motifs which survive one or both of the above filters, which we consider as our candidate binding sequences. the final step is then to cluster together these words to obtain consensus binding site sequences. this step allows, at the end of the whole process, to recover the intrinsic variability or regulatory motifs, that we know to be one of the most important features of binding sequences in higher eukaryotes.

a flow-chart of our algorithm is depicted in figure  <dig> 

the total number of motifs analyzed, after identifying each motif with its reverse complement and disregarding the self-overlapping ones, was  <dig> . with the false discovery rate set at 10%,  <dig> of these turned out to be significant with at least one choice of scoring matrix  and filter .  <dig> different gene ontology terms were involved, and  <dig> microarray time-points.

all the significant associations between motifs and gene ontology terms and microarray time points, for both scoring systems, are reported in supplementary table  <dig> . the total number of such associations is  <dig>  meaning that each motif was found, on average, about twice. even if the various filters and scoring methods cannot be considered independent of each other, this fact is certainly encouraging in terms of the robustness of the method. these results are summarized in tab.  <dig> 

while the high degree of superposition between the results found with different choices is a clear indication of the robustness of our approach, the lists obtained are still significantly different: therefore the use of different filters/scoring matrices is useful in expanding the range of regulatory interactions explored by the algorithm.

in the supplementary table  <dig> we also provide the lists of the genes included in the sets found significant by one or more filter .

not surprisingly, in many instances several motifs, often very similar to each other, are associated to the same go term or microarray timepoint. for all gene ontology terms and microarray point associated to one or more motifs, we constructed, when possible, a consensus binding sequence from the motifs associated to the term as explained in the materials and methods section. the results are presented in tab.  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  for the three branches of the gene ontology and in tab.  <dig> for microarray time-points. for the latter, the consensus obtained is reported only when its length is at least  <dig>  in many cases, in fact, the large number of motifs significantly associated to a microarray time-point causes the clustering algorithm to produce very short and rather uninformative consensus sequences. these results were produced by considering the pam <dig> and pam <dig> results together.

if our method is really able to identify genuine transcription factor binding sites, we would expect to find, among the surviving sets, at least some of the tf binding sites that are known to regulate the transcription of target genes through multiple occurrences in their promoters.

we focus here on some major examples.

e2fs are transcription factors well known for their ability to regulate dna replication by binding multiple sites in the promoters of the target genes  <cit> . since the most abundant subpopulation of sets surviving the go filter display a strong overrepresentation of dna replication-related terms, it would be reasonable to expect that many of them are e2f binding sites. this was indeed the case, as the motifs ttggcgc associated to many significant sets perfectly matched experimentally determined e2f binding sites as well as the consensus sequence found in the transfac <cit>  database. significantly, some of these words were identified not only by the go filter, but also by the microarray filtering scheme, confirming that our method is very robust in identifying the binding sites of this particular transcription factor.

it is interesting to see whether these motifs are found in the conserved parts of the upstream regions of experimentally verified targets of regulation by e2f. from the transfac database we identified  <dig> such targets,  <dig> of which are included in the pam <dig> version of the corg database: cav <dig>  myc, dhfr, e2f <dig>  rbl <dig> and cdc <dig>  in five cases at least one of the motifs we find matching the e2f consensus can be found in the conserved part of the upstream regions, and in four cases many instances of the motifs are found: we find a total of  <dig> occurrences in the upstream region of myc,  <dig> for e2f <dig>   <dig> for rbl <dig> and  <dig> for cdc <dig>  only one occurrence is found for dhfr, and none for cav <dig>  similar results are found using the pam <dig> version of corg.

by performing these analyses, we observed that motifs characterized by the annotations 'chromatin' and 'nucleosome assembly', although obviously related to dna replication, could not be reconciled with e2f binding sites, but included instead the motif agagcctt and several similar ones. since most of the annotated genes in the sets encoded for histone proteins, we speculated that these consensus could be part of a critical control element involved in the production of histones during dna replication. one of the best known such elements is an evolutionary conserved inverted repeat found in the 3' untranslated region of histone mrnas, controlling their stability during the cell cycle  <cit> . surprisingly, our consensus sequence matched this element, raising the problem of how a 3' located regulatory element could be identified by our method. the reason is that histone genes form tight clusters in different chromosomal locations, and the distance between the initiator codon is in many cases below the  <dig> bp limit used by our algorithm. although of serendipitous nature, this result underscores two important points. the first is that our method is able to identify not only regular transcription factor binding sites, but also other less conventional regulatory elements characterized by a motif repetition. the second is that our approach could be systematically extended to other gene regions, such as the 3' untranslated and the introns.

the highly heterogeneous annotation associated to the sets surviving the go filter strongly suggests that our method can potentially identify relevant binding sites for known and/or unknown transcription factors in the promoter of groups of genes involved in a wide variety of biological processes, such as tissue and organelle-specific transcription.

for instance, we identified many sets significantly enriched for genes involved in muscle development and/or functions . interestingly, one of them  is compatible with the binding site of the well known muscular master genes myod and myf <dig>  <cit>  as represented by a mixture of the transfac matrices m <dig> and m <dig>  while the others had no significant match in the transfac database.

another example are the different motifs associated with the annotations "endoplasmic reticulum", "protein transport" and "intracellular protein transport". three of them  with known binding sites of atf <dig> , a strongly conserved transcription factor involved in endoplasmic reticulum function  <cit> . the others don't show significant overlapping with transfac, suggesting that they are new putative cis elements important for regulating er genes.

it is important to notice that in some instances, even though no hypothesis on the precise transcription factor can be formulated, it is at least possible to conjecture the general structural class to which the tf belongs. for example, the word gggggggt, associated with the annotation "organogenesis", is consistent with the binding sites of many zinc finger transcription factors, such as zic <dig>  zic <dig> and mzf <dig>  <cit> , thus suggesting that some of the genes in the set are transcriptional target for a member of this particular family of transcription factors.

it is interesting to investigate the distribution of the distance of the motifs identified by our algorithm from the tss of the corresponding gene. for all motifs found significant and for all genes in which the motif is overrepresented we computed the distance between the locations in which the motif is found and the tss of the gene. all these data are represented as a histogram in fig.  <dig>  the motifs are very obviously concentrated near the tss. this fact suggests that the choice to cut at  <dig>  bp the length of the upstream regions considered is unlikely to decrease the signal significantly. the data shown are for pam <dig>  but the ones for pam <dig> do not differ in any significant way.

taken together, these results suggest that our approach has the potential to identify new critical regulatory elements for genes involved in a wide variety of biological processes.

CONCLUSIONS
we have discussed a new algorithm for the "ab initio" identification of transcription factor binding sites in the human genome. the method is based on three ingredients:

- the so called phylogenetic footprinting, i.e. the idea that functional sequences are preferentially conserved over the course of evolution by selective pressure.

- the overrepresentation criterion, i.e. the observation that binding sequences are usually overrepresented in the upstream region of the genes that are regulated by the corresponding transcription factors.

- the coregulation test, i.e. the use of coregulation  as a criterion to select the true positive binding sequences

experience with yeast  <cit>  suggests that our method is characterized by a low rate of false positives but, presumably, a rather high number of false negatives. the reason for this is that the basic ingredients of our analysis are motifs defined as completely specified sequences. this requires the motifs to be overrepresented, in the upstream region of a gene in order to be selected for our analysis and thus limits our candidates to a subset of all possible motifs. our method is therefore complementary with respect to the standard approaches to binding sequences identification which use weighted matrices instead of completely specified motifs, since these typically have problems in detecting the true positive signals from the statistical background noise.

the variability of the motifs, which is a fundamental feature of eukariotic binding sequences and is neglected at the beginning of our algorithm is recovered at the end thanks to the careful consensus reconstruction discussed in the previous section. these are the major novelties of our approach.

we consider as an encouraging validation test of our procedure the fact that several known tf binding sequences are found with our method. this makes us confident about the reliability of the other candidates that we found. needless to say, these should be validated with suitable experimental tests. indeed we think our "ab initio" approach could be of value as a preliminary test for any experimental search of binding sequences.

several improvements of the present algorithm are possible. in particular it would be interesting to extend our analysis to other regions besides the 5' upstream one . in this respect the most natural candidates are the 3' downstream regions and the first intronic interval.

the method could be extended without major modifications to motifs with gaps, as considered in  <cit> . extension to longer motifs would also be important: however the extension of the algorithm to motifs significantly longer than the ones considered here should probably take into account motif variability from the start, which would in turn imply a significant increase in computational complexity. we are currently investigating some possible ways of overcoming this problem.

similarly, it would be important to address the combinatorial nature of transcriptional regulation by studying the correlation of overrepresented words along the lines discussed for instance in  <cit> . it is only by looking at the intricated network of interactions as a whole that one can hope to understand the collective behaviours leading to the tight and impressively efficient regulation of gene expression in higher eukaryotes and in particular in mammalians. it also clear that the algorithm can in principle be applied to any pair of closely related organisms.

we plan to address these issues in future work.

