BACKGROUND
one important objection to lamarckian evolution by inheritance of acquired characteristics emphasized by bateson over forty years ago is the reduction of adaptational flexibility upon progressive specialization, necessitating the occurrence of genotypic changes compensating for this limitation  <cit> . in unicellular organisms such as bacteria, in keeping with batesons' prediction the same acquired mutations beneficial in one environment can be restrictive in another  <cit> . at the same time, evolving escherichia coli populations can demonstrate remarkable flexibility in genetic adaptation  <cit> . the mechanisms sustaining this flexibility remain unclear. in order to understand the genetic flexibility it is essential to decipher the organizational logic of transcriptional control. for the classical model organism e. coli the largest electronically accessible network integrating the data on the transcriptional regulation of genes is available  <cit> . the interlinked elements form a complex structure, which is essentially of digital nature . notably, such pair-wise connections are not necessarily reflected in genomic expression profiles  <cit>  indicating that not all the interactions given in the network occur at all times. furthermore, this type of network does not account for the analog mode of gene regulation via alterations of dna topology – a long known control mechanism revived by recent dna microarray analyses  <cit>  . indeed, transcriptional responses to alterations of dna superhelicity reveal non-trivial spatial patterns, raising new questions on the coordination of genomic transcription  <cit>  and the interplay between chromosomal organization and patterns in gene expression is now becoming the focus of computational analyses  <cit> . from these considerations it is obvious that a holistic theory of transcriptional regulation has to include the relationships between these two logically distinct  types of information and therefore has to distinguish them in the first place. although other mechanisms of gene regulation between the binary and continuous extremes can be considered, for understanding the organizational principles of transcriptional regulation we assume a working model here in which the impacts of the two distinct logical types of control – one of digital and another of analog type – are to be clearly distinguished and related to each other.

in the following, we will translate the patterns in gene expression changes observed under systematic variation of the two types of control into effective networks and study their connectivity. the effective networks are derived as subnetworks of two larger  networks:  the transcriptional regulatory network based upon the action of dedicated transcription factors;  spatial proximity of two genes on the circular chromosome.

we will statistically compare the properties of these effective networks with those obtained by random sampling of the static networks with a certain number of expression changes. the core quantity derived from these comparisons is the ratio of connected to isolated nodes  and, furthermore, its z-score with respect to the random networks. this z-score we denote the confidence level of the particular control type .

RESULTS
in this study we aim at understanding the relationships between the digital and analog types of control in transcriptional regulation by using the model system of exponentially growing e. coli cells. the rationale is to investigate transcript profiles obtained under conditions where we either modulate the analog component of regulation under constant digital control, or modulate the digital component keeping the analog control constant. we modulate the analog component by experimentally varying the negative superhelical density  of chromosomal dna within the same genetic background . such variation of -σ is carried out within three genetic backgrounds – the wild type e. coli and two mutant strains lacking one of the two abundant dna architectural proteins, either fis or h-ns. these comparisons produce the so-called intra-strain transcript profiles  <cit>  . modulation of the digital component  is achieved by mutating genes of the same two global dna architectural proteins  and comparing the wild type and mutant transcript profiles at a single constant superhelical density – either dna relaxation  or high negative supercoiling . these comparisons produce the so-called inter-strain transcript profiles  <cit> . the first approach enables us to assess the impact of digital control in transcriptional regulation under variation of the analog component. the second approach allows us to assess the impact of analog control under variation of the digital component. we thus obtain seven data sets : three distinct intra-strain transcript profiles reflecting digital-type control , and four inter-strain profiles  and high negative supercoiling  reflecting analog-type control).

the transcriptional regulatory network  of e. coli is the basis of many recent studies on network architecture  <cit> , as well as on the consistency of the network with expression profiles  <cit> . to assess the impact of digital-type control we analyze subnets of the trn of e. coli spanned by genes with significantly changed expression in our three intra-strain transcript profiles, the effective trns . a convenient way of formalizing properties of these subnets is to analyze the ratio of genes with and without links, respectively. we define the control ratio r as the number of connected nodes divided by the number of isolated nodes in the effective trn. comparing this ratio with corresponding random models  we obtain the z-score of this ratio, which we denote the control type confidence . the ctc quantifies how much above-random connectivity is found in the effective network and, consequently, how much control the network exerts on the expression profile. formally, the digital ctc is the z-score of the control ratio r for the effective trn, when compared to the distribution of control ratios, where the same number of affected nodes is mapped randomly on the trn. we find a ratio r >  <dig> and ctc values beyond  <dig> only for two data sets – the intra-strain profiles of the fis and hns mutants , indicating that compared to wild type, in both mutants transcriptional regulation comprises a large proportion of digital-type control. thus unexpectedly, mutations of global regulators, which represent hubs targeting disproportionately large numbers of genes in the trn, increase rather than decrease the number links in the effective trn and thus enhance digital control. at the same time, effective trns of the four inter-strain profiles did not deviate substantially from a random model , as expected from our experimental design. this is because in the intra-strain profiles the constant digital control  enables to measure its impact under the variation of analog component , whereas in the inter-strain transcript profiles the trn itself is a variable. the concept of an effective trn thus allows quantifying the contribution of digital control to genomic expression patterns.

the schematics used in figure 1a represent the differences between the digital and analog types of control. in order to analyze the digital and analog types of control on the same methodological basis, we convert the chromosomal neighborhoods of genes into a network, designated the gene proximity network  . the gpn subnet analysis of the inter-strain transcript profiles exposes the extent of spatial connectivity between the neighboring loci and reveals the clustering of significant expression changes in the genome. alike the digital ctc, the analog ctc represents the z-score of the control ratio for the effective gpn, obtained in comparison to the distribution of control ratios for a null model, in which the same number of affected nodes is mapped randomly on the genome. an important difference between the fis and h-ns effects on the three-dimensional structure of dna is of note here. although both are abundant dna binding proteins occupying multiple chromosomal sites, h-ns is forming filaments by stabilizing tight dna plectonemes and acting as a universal repressor for the bacterial genome, whereas fis is stabilising toroids and superhelical loops implicated in activation of genes involved in metabolism and growth . thus, directionally opposite effects – one largely of activation and another of global repression – are expected to underlie the gpns in the inter-strain comparisons of wild type strain with fis and hns mutants, respectively. the gpns of the hns mutant primarily reflect the spatial connectivity between de-repressed genetic loci, especially since h-ns represses whole regulatory systems rather than selectively targeted individual gene components  <cit> . we therefore assign to the wild type background the genes with positive log ratio in both fis experiments  and the genes with negative log ratio in both hns experiments . a consistent difference of calculated ctcs is observed over the whole sensible range of gpn thresholds . in both inter-strain gpns derived from the comparisons of wild type with fis mutant  in figure 4a and 4b, the genes with a positive log ratio exhibit a higher ctc. as expected, an opposite result is obtained with hns mutant  in figure 4a and 4b, where genes with a negative log ratio clearly exhibit a higher ctc. as expected for intra-strain profiles in which due to experimental design the analog component  itself is a variable, the gpn does not deviate strongly from random model . since besides their long range effects on three-dimensional structure of dna, fis and h-ns also appear as trn hubs exerting specific effects on binding isolated gene promoters, we eliminated from our gpn analysis all the genes known to be specifically regulated by promoter binding of h-ns or fis. however, this did not significantly affect the results of the gpn analysis . our gpn analyses thus indicate a high spatial connectivity of neighboring genes in wild type strains as opposed to strains lacking either fis or h-ns. this high spatial connectivity depends on the superhelical density and its extent cannot be explained on the basis of the known specific binding sites of fis and h-ns. analysis of an operon based proximity network does not substantially alter the observed results . we infer that the constraint of dna supercoils and resultant reshaping of dna by abundant bacterial nucleoid proteins fis and h-ns substantially contributes to the analog-type of transcriptional control employing the spatial connectivity between neighboring genetic loci.

discussion
a unifying approach enabling to combine the data derived by different methodologies is essential for understanding the basic organizational principles of transcriptional regulation, especially since recently transcriptional sub-networks with organizationally distinct architectures have been described  <cit> . in this study we dissect the logical types of information derived by two established methodologies studying transcriptional regulation based either on trn analyses, or on the analyses of transcriptional supercoiling response of genomic expression patterns. we denote the information retrieved by assessing directional interactions between the genes in trn as digital, whereas we denote the information retrieved by assessing the influence of superhelical density on expression patterns as analog. this dissection enables us to present a generic approach allowing both, to distinguish and to assess the relationships between two logically distinct types of transcriptional control.

using this approach we demonstrate that variation of the analog component of regulation  effectively exposes the contribution of digital-type control  to transcriptional regulation, which is significantly increased in e. coli strains lacking global dna architectural proteins. in turn, alterations of the digital component  expose a substantial contribution of analog-type control  to transcriptional regulation in wild type cells. since the digital and analog types of control are constituents of a single transcriptional regulatory system of the cell, our data suggest that these two logically distinct types of control are balancing each other, such that upon limitations of one type of control  the other type can compensate for compromised regulation . what is the mechanism of compensatory increase of digital control observed in fis and hns mutant cells upon variation of superhelical density? the increased digital control may reflect a necessity of enhanced engagement of small regulatory circuits for sustaining cellular metabolism and growth, because the loss of global dna architectural factors fis and h-ns impairs the function of the overarching network of nucleoid-associated proteins and topoisomerases in regulating the supercoiling response of transcription  <cit> .

while this network is intimately involved in spatial organization of transcription in e.coli, spatial organisation of transcription is observed in both, prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . in e. coli this phenomenon can be readily rationalized on the basis of topological domains of variable size underlying the organization of bacterial chromosome  <cit> . indeed, both fis and h-ns have been directly implicated in formation of topological barriers to supercoil diffusion  <cit> . thus the preponderance of analog-type control in the wild type cells compared to mutants lacking fis and h-ns  is in keeping with the property of these proteins to stabilize supercoils and modulate the distributions of effective superhelicity in the genome  <cit> . furthermore, observed alterations of spatial connectivity by mutations of fis and hns genes are also consistent with long-range effects of these proteins on the three-dimensional structure of dna  <cit> . finally, our gpns analyses reveal that the control by fis is more pronounced at low superhelical densities, whereas in the case h-ns the spatial control is more pronounced under conditions of high superhelical density . these observations are fully consistent with the property of fis to buffer upon dna relaxation the activity of strong supercoiling-dependent promoters, such as those involved in ribosome production  <cit> , whereas h-ns has been shown to predominantly repress the genes requiring high negative superhelicity during the exponential growth phase  <cit> . we note however, that these differences might also include some variations of mrna stability. these effects are beyond the concepts  outlined here and may very well account for some of the expression changes not explained by the trn or the gpn.

one prediction from the observed interdependence between digital and analog types of transcriptional control is that adaptive mutations in e. coli will affect the determinants of global dna architecture. indeed, a recent study of long-term experimental evolution in e. coli unmasking dna topology as a key target for selection identified fitness-enhancing mutations in topoisomerase and fis genes  <cit> . furthermore, such "evolved" populations possess high adaptational flexibility  <cit> . we propose that the buffering of transcriptional regulation by balancing effects of analog and digital types of control can counteract the reduction of adaptational flexibility caused by accumulation of mutations in bacteria  <cit> . in this respect it is revealing, that fis is a relatively late acquisition in bacterial evolution  <cit> , whereas h-ns is implicated in regulating "adaptive" gene rearrangements and minimizing the cost of competitive fitness during horizontal gene transfer  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we believe that the general concept of distinguishing logical types of control developed in this study will apply to many complex biological networks. we shall also emphasize that based on our data, reinterpretation of the interactions contained in the e. coli trn database regulondb with respect to both, their digital and analog control characteristics – for example, consideration of the supercoiling sensitivity of the genes – might be a worthwhile extension of this database.

