BACKGROUND
haemophilus influenzae is a gram-negative coccobacillus that is an obligate resident of the human respiratory mucosa  <cit> . numerous studies have suggested that h. influenzae, present in the nasopharynx of the majority of children and adults  <cit> , is a common cause of superinfection following upper respiratory viral infections  <cit> . the h. influenzae display multiple pathogenic instruments, including redundant heme acquisition mechanisms, iga proteases, direct invasion of host columnar epithelial cells, and the release of a host of adhesins and proteins capable of functionally impairing the mucociliary escalator  <cit> . the presence of a polysaccharide capsule by some strains has provided for the division of the species into typeable  and nontypeable  isolates  <cit> . the nthi are frequently recovered from otitis media  effusions and from the sputum and lung biopsy specimens of patients with cystic fibrosis, chronic bronchitis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. moreover, direct cellular invasion by nthi may play a role in chronic sinopulmonary infections. h. influenzae type b , prior to the introduction of highly efficacious conjugate vaccines in the late 1980's, was responsible for 95% of the invasive disease associated with this species  <cit> . emerging evidence has linked the nthi to invasive disease suggesting that some of the nthi strains may be evolving to fill the niche previously occupied by hib  <cit> . in this study of twenty invasive nthi strains,  <dig> of which were from adult or adolescent patients,  <dig> distinct sequence types were identified indicating that this is not a clonal phenomenon.

clinical phenotyping studies indicate that there is a broad range of disease symptoms that can be triggered by the nthi, however the genetics of the virulence mechanisms underlying these myriad phenotypes are just starting to be elucidated  <cit> . like all infectious processes, nthi disease results from a set of complicated host-pathogen interactions  <cit> , however, in the case of the nthi this is compounded by their documented genomic heterogeneity  <cit> . the laboratory strain rd was the first free-living organism to have its genome sequenced  <cit> , however nthi diversity studies have demonstrated that each clinical isolate is genomically unique  <cit> . this diversity triggered the development of the distributed genome hypothesis  <cit>  which posits that at the population level there is a supragenome which is multiple times the size of the genome of any single bacterium, and that each strain contains a unique subset of the contingency genes that make up the supragenome. this high degree of genomic plasticity among strains, polyclonal nasopharyngeal colonizations  <cit> , and the possession of autocompetence and autotransformation mechanisms provide the nthi collectively with the ability to continually generate new forms, some of which will have novel combinations of virulence traits.

the nthi are responsible for greater than 30% of all om cases which is the most frequent complaint for emergency department and primary care physician visits by children less than  <dig> years of age worldwide – accounting for some  <dig> , <dig> annual physician encounters  <cit> . moreover, om can be complicated by direct invasion into adjacent organs causing mastoiditis and/or meningitis  <cit> . an understanding of the genetic repertoire of the nthi associated with om and its complications will aid in the development of prevention and treatment strategies ranging from vaccines to antimicrobials  <cit> .

in the current study we have used the chinchilla  model of om to investigate differences in the clinical phenotypes of  <dig> nthi strains obtained from patients with chronic om with effusion and otorrhea. studies at our institution and others have demonstrated the applicability of the chinchilla model of om to human disease as it provides an inexpensive, reproducible middle-ear infection in nearly 100% of inoculated animals that has yielded numerous insights into the molecular pathophysiology and microbiology of mammalian middle ear disease  <cit> .

RESULTS
differences in rapidity and severity of otologic signs
the first criterion we evaluated was days to the development of unambiguous otologic signs  which we defined as a score of  <dig> or higher based upon the otologists comments that the difference between  <dig> and  <dig>  was often difficult to discern. using this criterion there was no statistical difference among the strains with respect to rapidity of local disease onset . however, the variability in the amount of time for each strain to induce its maximum otologic scores  was highly statistically significant; an anova analysis of these data produced a p value =  <dig> . a scatterplot of these data indicates that strains pittff, pittgg, and pittii demonstrated the most rapid onset of severe local signs . moreover the differences in the mean maximal otologic scores among the  <dig> strains were significantly different for each of the first five days following infection, after which the high mortality rates for the more systemically virulent strains made such analyses problematic given the missing data . similarly, it was determined that the mean maximal otologic score per animal, regardless of day on which it was recorded, induced by each of the  <dig> nthi strains was statistically significant; anova analysis produced a p value =  <dig>  .

* due to extensive mortality beginning on day  <dig> associated with the more systemically virulent strains, there are many data points missing which artificially lowers the p value as evaluations could not be performed on dead animals.

differences in rapidity and severity of systemic signs
an anova analysis of the differences among the strains with respect to the rapidity of the development of the first signs of systemic disease produced extremely highly significant results: p =  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  however, this figure actually underestimates the real differences among the strains as animals that never developed systemic signs were excluded from the analysis. a scatterplot of these data demonstrate that four, three, two, one, and one of the animals inoculated with strains pittbb, ee, cc, aa, and dd, respectively, never evidenced any systematic signs and are therefore not plotted in figure  <dig>  this figure also shows that pittgg, ii, and jj induced systemic signs in 100% of the animals within  <dig> hours. the maximum severity score per animal is detailed in figure  <dig> and anova demonstrated that the ten strains did not induce equivalent maximum systemic severity . there was weak correlation between rapidity of onset of systemic illness and the maximal severity of that illness in any animal . finally we determined that there was a weak correlation between otologic and systemic severity in the animals 

differences in mortality
the mortality of the chinchillas was highly correlated with the inoculating strains. all of the animals infected with pittgg succumbed, and two thirds of the animals infected with pittff and pittii also died, whereas none of the animals infected with pittbb, pittcc, or pittee died . a fisher's exact test for these count data yielded a highly significant p-value =  <dig> , and kaplan-meyer plots of these data indicate the increased rapidity and percentages of death associated with the pittgg, pittii and pittff compared with the other seven strains. . a complete analysis of strain pairwise comparisons for differences in mortality demonstrated that pittgg was statistically more likely to be associated with death than pittbb, or pittcc, or pittee , or pittaa and pittjj . however, after the application of a bonferroni correction none of these values reached statistical significance due to the relatively small cohort sizes and the large number of tests performed .

pcr-based analyses of specimens
upon death all of the chinchillas were evaluated for nthi dna using a pcr-based assay  <cit> . microbial culture was not employed because according to the iacuc protocol all animals that had shown signs of systemic or invasive disease were treated with antibiotics, which we have previously demonstrated in the chinchilla model, will render cultures uniformly negative in spite of active bacterial infections  <cit> . middle-ear effusions, or lavages if there was no frank effusion, were recovered and assayed for h. influenzae dna and established that all of the animals had been productively infected including those with minimal local and absent systemic signs.

clinical origins of the nthi strains
after completion of the animal studies and the statistical analyses, a post hoc inquiry was made to determine the exact clinical origins of the  <dig> nthi strains under evaluation. although all strains were derived from pediatric middle-ear specimens, pittgg, pittff, and pittii, the consistently most virulent strains both otologically and systemically were identified as being otorrheic in origin, having been isolated from children with a perforated tympanic membrane, whereas the other seven were obtained from patients undergoing tympanostomy and tube placement for come, a less virulent disease.

global comparative genomics of the nthi strains
the entire genomes of nine of the ten nthi clinical strains  that were compared with respect to disease phenotype in this study were subjected to global analyses to determine their overall levels of genic relatedness along with seven other clinical nthi strains, the laboratory strain rd and a serotype b strain using the unweighted pair group method algorithm . it can be seen at this global level of comparison that strains do not cluster overall by clinical phenotype with the exception of pittgg and pittff which turned out to be serial isolates from the same patient and do not have any significant genic differences, but only allelic differences. pittgg/ff do not cluster with the other invasive strains including pittii from this study and r <dig> from a published study  <cit> . similarly the come strains do not cluster together when observed from a global genomic viewpoint.

discussion
this in vivo comparative study of the propensity of ten clinical nthi strains to induce otologic and systemic disease in the chinchilla following transbullar inoculation clearly demonstrates that different strains have varying abilities to cause both local and systemic disease. this is the first demonstration of the utility of chinchilla model of om to distinguish among multiple nthi clinical strains with respect to each one's myriad virulence parameters. these findings were not wholly unsuspected in light of the fact that each of these strains has been demonstrated to contain a different subset of distributed genes from the nthi supragenome  <cit> , nonetheless when you combine the fact that the functions of most of these novel genes are unknown with the observation that the chinchilla is not a natural host of the nthi it was not obvious either. it is of particular interest that this disease model was able to distinguish, when evaluated in a blinded manner, between strains of come origin and invasive strains of an otorrheic origin. the otorrheic strains, pittgg, pittff and pittii, consistently produced the most rapid and severe otologic and systemic signs and produced a combined mortality of  <dig> % , whereas the seven come strains only had a combined mortality of  <dig> % . strains hh and jj, which are of the same mlst type  <cit> , a measure of the relatedness of core metabolic genes, belong to completely different clades when evaluated by shared distributed genomic characters . interestingly pitt jj and pittii, respectively come and invasive strains, cluster most closely together in terms of shared distributed genes. the fact that both of these strains are associated with rapid systemic disease onset, but that only pittii induces severe systemic disease suggests that careful analyses of these two strains may provide candidate genes associated with systemic severity or limiting systemic severity. pittaa, which is clearly the most genomically unique of the phenotyped strains, produces local and systemic clinical profiles nearly identical with pittbb, cc and ee. taken together, the disease phenotype data and the global-level comparative genomic data suggest that it is not possible to predict disease phenotype based on simply viewing the degree of overall genic relatedness. this is not a surprising finding as the mean number of genic differences among each of the possible strain pairs is >  <dig> , and the number of genes that are associated with each of the various parameters of clinical virulence is most likely a small fraction of this number. we are pursuing a two-pronged approach to this problem of identifying disease genes associated with specific virulence phenotypes. in the first case once the point is reached where sequencing additional nthi strains does not materially increase the size of the supragenome we will do quantitative trait loci -like genic association studies using an exhaustive distributed genome chip to interrogate hundreds of clinically characterized strains. in the second case we will perform metabolomic reconstructions of multiple strains grouped by virulence phenotype to identify shared pathways.

little is known of what specific genotypic features are important for the development of local and systemic disease among the nthi. erwin et al  in a study of  <dig> invasive nthi strains concluded that invasive isolates are genetically and phenotypically diverse, but that some loci are frequently found in association  <cit> . the systemically virulent pittgg/ff strains examined in the current study contain the hif operon which encodes a pilus gene cluster that mediates adherence to sialic acid-containing lactosylceramide structures on epithelial cell surfaces  <cit> ; these genes have previously been implicated as being more prevalent in throat isolates than come isolates and are nearly ubiquitous among the invasive type b strains  <cit> . most nthi strains associated with chronic disease including pittaa and pittjj do not contain the hif operon, but pittaa contains one of the hmw cassettes , however, pitt jj is lacking all of the hmw genes as well; which are much more rarely found in invasive strains as these proteins mediate adherence to the respiratory epithelial cells. similarly the lic genes which encode los moieties, including phosphoryl choline, have been previously associated with chronic disease, but are often absent from invasive strains  <cit> ; among the chronic strains in the current study pittbb and pittee contained genes from this cluster whereas pittaa and pittjj did not.

to control for the small sample sizes and minimize bias in the current study we used very conservative statistical analyses and employed a single highly qualified individual to perform all of the otologic evaluations in a blinded manner. in addition we varied daily the order in which the animals were evaluated. the fact that our intra-strain variability was significantly less than our inter-strain variability strongly suggests that the model performed as expected. these findings together with the model's ability to differentiate the otorrheic strains from the come strains and its phenotypic clustering of pittff and pittgg which we subsequently determined were by far the most similar strain-pair genotypically augers well for the continued use of this model for characterizing nthi clinical strains.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides validation of the discriminatory power of the chinchilla-nthi-induced otitis media model for use as a tool in stratifying disease phenotypes of come- and otorrhea-derived nthi-isolates. in the current study, significant differences were demonstrated both with respect to local and systemic virulence parameters among a set of  <dig> low-passage clinical nthi isolates. moreover, the three strains that induced the most rapid and severe systemic disease, as well as the most rapid onset of local disease were determined post hoc to have been isolated from a more clinically aggressive disease condition. we will be performing whole genome evaluations of these strains using an nthi supragenome chip composed of all identifiable nthi genes derived from a project to sequence  <dig> geographically and clinically diverse nthi strains in their entirety.

identification of the genetic bases for the various virulence phenotypes including chronic persistence, local invasiveness, and systemic illness will have important implications for vaccine and antimicrobial development. with increasing knowledge of the diversity of the individual nthi genomes  <cit> , and the size of the nthi supragenome  <cit> , additional studies of phenotypic diversity will be needed to clarify the role of individual genic elements as well as various combinations of discrete genic elements. it is becoming clear that nthi recovered from disease states are genotypically different from those harvested from carrier states  <cit> . conceivably, genetic heterogeneity among the nthi combined with auto-competence processes may provide the necessary genetic reservoir and the means for the development of novel virulent strains in vivo via recombination between commensal residents and infecting pathogens.

