BACKGROUND
the vertebrate retina forms from a neuroepithelium that develops into a complex, layered structure of neurons consisting of the ganglion cell layer ; the inner nuclear layer , composed of the amacrine, horizontal, and bipolar cells; and the outer nuclear layer , composed of the light-sensing photoreceptors. the retinal photoreceptor layer is apposed by the non-neuronal layer of retinal pigmented epithelial  cells. retinal neurogenesis follows a common pattern in most species; in zebrafish the ganglion cells are the first to become postmitotic, followed by the cells of the inl  <cit> . the last neurons to be generated and then differentiate are the photoreceptors  <cit> . the photoreceptor mosaic of teleost fish, such as zebrafish, forms a spatially regular pattern of rods and cones  <cit> .

the signaling pathways that regulate the production of rod and cone photoreceptors into their regular spatial patterns are not well understood. in the larval and adult teleost, rod and cone neurogenesis are spatially distinct, with new cones generated from stem cells residing in a circumferential germinal zone , and new rods arising from a proliferative lineage residing within the inl  <cit> . there is evidence that müller glia constitute the apex of the rod lineage, remaining proliferative and generating progeny that migrate to the onl, undergo terminal mitoses, and differentiate as rods  <cit> . despite apparently distinct lineage histories of rods and cones, the two types of progenitor cells are, at the molecular level, virtually indistinguishable, and express several photoreceptor-specific transcription factors including crx, rx <dig>  neurod, nrl, and nr2e <dig>  <cit> . furthermore, in zebrafish that are mutant for the tbx2b gene, encoding a transcription factor expressed in early retinal progenitors, the uv cones are conspicuously missing from the larval cone mosaic, their positions instead occupied by supernumerary rod photoreceptors  <cit> , suggesting an alteration in cell fate choice by retinal progenitors. together these findings suggest some overlap of, or plasticity within, the progenitor cell populations otherwise fated to generate rods or cones.

the development of retinal cells, including photoreceptors, is known to be controlled by a variety of secreted signaling factors, including retinoic acid . ra and its receptors are essential for morphogenesis of the vertebrate eye. a deficiency of ra or its precursor vitamin a leads to ocular defects such as coloboma and retinal dysplasia  <cit> . ra signaling occurs via structural dimers formed by one member each of the retinoic acid receptor  and retinoid × receptor  subtypes  <cit> . in the chick and mouse, specific rars and rxrs are expressed in cells of the inl, onl, and the rpe, in overlapping and non-overlapping patterns  <cit> . mouse embryos deficient in combinations of rar/rxr genes exhibit defects in eye morphogenesis, including thinning of the retinal layers, targeted defects in the ventral retina, and absence of an onl  <cit> . ra synthesis in the retina occurs in specific ventral and dorsal domains, defined by the expression of retinaldehyde dehydrogenases   <cit>  with boundaries formed by expression of cyp <dig> enzymes involved in ra degradation  <cit> . studies using reporter lines to monitor ra signaling in the eye have also shown ra signaling to be dynamic, occurring initially in the ventral retina and later spreading to other parts of the retina  <cit> .

the results from previous in vitro and in vivo studies suggested that ra can control the formation of photoreceptors. ra promotes the formation and survival of rod photoreceptors from cultured retinal progenitors, within the developing rat retina  <cit> , and from mammalian embryonic stem cells  <cit> . ra signaling also controls the expression of photoreceptor-specific genes, such as the transcription factor nrl and opsin genes, the latter involving differential effects upon specific rod and cone opsins  <cit> . in addition, ra can restore the expression of photoreceptor-specific markers in embryos treated with ethanol  <cit> . collectively these data indicate a significant contribution of ra signaling to the differentiation of rod and cone photoreceptors.

in this study, we tested the hypothesis that sustained high ra signaling during retinal neurogenesis modifies photoreceptor cell fate decisions. although our previous study suggested that ra selectively regulates expression of opsin genes, the experimental design may have precluded a capacity to observe effects on fate because ra levels were selectively manipulated at the time of, or shortly after, photoreceptor terminal mitoses  <cit> . in the present study ra signaling was altered at an earlier stage of retinal development, at a time when the retinal progenitor sources of photoreceptors remain proliferative  <cit> . we report that prolonged ra treatment beginning prior to photoreceptor neurogenesis causes photoreceptor pattern abnormalities consistent with replacement of some cones in the mosaic with rods. an ra signaling reporter line was used to demonstrate that multiple cell types, including progenitor cells, and rod and cone photoreceptors, are directly responsive to changes in ra signaling. knockdown of a specific receptor, rarαb, resulted in a reduction in the level of endogenous ra signaling and a decrease in the number of rod photoreceptors, suggesting this receptor plays a role in mediating the photoreceptor development function of endogenous ra signaling. in addition, the combination of rarαb knockdown and ra treatment did not restore rod photoreceptor differentiation, suggesting this receptor also plays a role in mediating the effects of exogenous ra.

RESULTS
sustained ra treatment beginning at the time of early retinal neurogenesis changes the ratio of rods to cones
ra manipulations were performed beginning at  <dig> hpf, a time when much of the embryonic retina remains proliferative and no photoreceptors are definitively postmitotic  <cit> . photoreceptor fates were determined by analyzing expression of rod and cone opsin mrnas. in control embryos, rod photoreceptors first appear in the dorsal and ventral parts of the retina, with fewer rods found in the central retina . treatment with ra beginning at  <dig> hpf caused a significant increase in the density of rod opsin+ photoreceptors . in contrast, ra treatment at  <dig> hpf resulted in a significant decrease in the density of cone photoreceptors expressing red and blue opsins , or uv opsins . the red cone mosaic in particular displayed a disrupted pattern, with gaps suggesting that some red cones were missing from the normal mosaic . blue and uv cone mosaics were also affected, though to a lesser extent than that of red cones . it should be noted that at the time of analysis , photoreceptor differentiation is not entirely complete in the ventrotemporal retina, resulting in a reduced level of opsin staining in these regions in some specimens. however, the unusual red cone mosaic pattern illustrated in figure 1e was not limited to the nasal and dorsal parts of the retina. these results build upon those of a previous study  <cit>  suggesting altered distribution of rods and red and green cones in response to ra treatment during retinal neurogenesis.

*p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig>  .

n.d. = not done.

a rod density was so high as to preclude accurate counting.

b as compared to red cone density at  <dig> hpf.

we next performed fluorescent double in situ hybridization to visualize the number and position of rods and red cones simultaneously. this approach also detected the disrupted rod and red cone photoreceptor patterns in eyes of ra-treated embryos . using the doubly-hybridized material, we measured a greater density of rods and a significantly lower density of red cones in embryos treated with ra during retinal neurogenesis . however, the difference in rod density was not statistically significant. this may be related to differential sensitivities of the dual vs. single in situ hybridization approach to detect rods or cones.

atheoretical patterns based on changing 25% or 50% of red cones in the native control patterns to rod identity.

additional experiments were performed with embryos treated at  <dig> hpf and analyzed later in development . in these experiments, the densities and expression levels of cells expressing rod opsin or rod transducin  in ra-treated retinas were so elevated as to preclude measurement of rod density . the densities of red and blue cones at  <dig> hpf were also significantly lower following ra treatment than in controls, with red cones affected to a greater extent than blue cones .

expression of rod transducin, gnat <dig>  and the gene encoding cone transducin  was analyzed on tissue sections in embryos treated at  <dig> hpf and fixed at  <dig> hpf. sustained ra treatment beginning at  <dig> hpf caused an apparent increase in the intensity of gnat <dig> expression and the appearance of additional gnat1+ cells . cells were counted on sections hybridized to gnat <dig>  and a significant increase in the number of gnat1+ cells was observed for ra-treated embryos. control embryos  had on average  <dig> ±  <dig> gnat1+ cells per section , whereas ra-treated embryos had a significantly higher average  <dig> ±  <dig> gnat1+ cells per section . in contrast, ra treatment caused a decrease in the intensity of gnat <dig> expression in the retina . the diffuse staining pattern of the gnat <dig> hybridization on tissue sections and on whole mounted specimens precluded a quantitative assessment. collectively these findings indicate an increase in the number of cells expressing rod photoreceptor genes, and a decrease in cells expressing cone photoreceptor genes following sustained ra treatment beginning in early retinal neurogenesis.

sustained ra treatment beginning at the time of early retinal neurogenesis alters rod and cone patterns
the ra-dependent changes in the number of rod and cone photoreceptors, and the unusual two dimensional mosaic patterns thus formed, together suggested that the ra treatment at  <dig> hpf may have influenced the pool of progenitor cells competent to produce photoreceptors, to favor a production of rods over cones. a possible explanation is that the postmitotic daughters of ra-exposed progenitor cells originally positioned to differentiate as cones - that is, cone precursors - switched to the rod fate. a comparable situation has been observed in the zebrafish tbx <dig> mutant. in tbx2-/- retinas, rod photoreceptor production is favored over the production of uv cones, and the additional rods assume positions of the missing uv cones  <cit> . furthermore, in the zebrafish, rod progenitors are molecularly similar to cone progenitors  <cit>  and cone precursor cells are likely born close to their final positions in the two dimensional photoreceptor mosaic  <cit> . thus it is reasonable to predict that in ra-treated embryos the resulting two dimensional patterns of rod photoreceptors will assume some of the spatial features of the cone photoreceptor mosaic. this prediction was tested by using two-dimensional pattern analysis techniques to evaluate and compare objectively the spatial features of the rod and cone mosaics in treated and control retinas  <cit> .

local pattern of cones
the mean nearest neighbor distances  were determined and conformity ratios  calculated for native red cone, blue cone, and uv cone patterns. the resulting crs were high , consistent with the presence of significant local pattern regularity for each cone type  <cit>  suggesting that photoreceptor patterning mechanisms are operational at the time of, or earlier than initial photoreceptor differentiation  <cit> .

the analysis utilized an approach from our previous study  <cit>  by initially evaluating the capacity of different pattern analysis methods to detect a fate switch. multiple theoretical cone patterns exhibiting 'fate changes' were generated by randomly deleting 25%, or 50% of cells from samples of native red cone mosaics derived from  <dig> hpf and  <dig> hpf untreated embryos. in the resulting theoretical datasets, correspondingly greater mean cone nnds were obtained . crs calculated from these nnds were significantly decreased in the cone patterns in which fate changes had been imposed , reliably reflecting the decreased regularity of the altered theoretical cone patterns. we also performed density recovery profile  analysis on theoretical cone patterns, but the effective radii  showed no significant differences that reflected theoretical fate change . this suggests that crs derived from nnd analysis of cone patterns represent the most appropriate metrics for objectively detecting, and statistically evaluating, potential fate switches cause by exposure to exogenous ra in the experiments.

nnd analysis was applied to cone patterns obtained from ra-treated embryos. the resultant crs of these patterns were significantly lower  in ra-treated vs. control retinas for red, blue, and uv cones analyzed at  <dig> or  <dig> hpf . the reduced regularity of the local pattern cones in ra-treated embryos, as measured by cr values, was similar to that attained for theoretical datasets to which a 25% fate change had been applied . the nnd analyses are thus consistent with at least 25% of the cones adopting a different fate in the ra-treated embryos.

local pattern of rods
nnd analysis of native rod patterns in embryonic retina generated high crs ; however, we could not definitively determine if this indicated significant local pattern regularity due to the small number of rod cells in each sample  <cit> . theoretical rod patterns were generated that exhibited 'fate changes,' by randomly switching the identity of 25% or 50% of red cones to rods in samples of native red cone and rod mosaics derived from  <dig> hpf untreated embryos. for this analysis, double-labeled material  was used so that any extant spatial relationships between rods and red cones at this developmental time would be incorporated, and each cell population was then subjected to autocorrelative pattern analyses. in these theoretical datasets, the imposed fate changes caused significant decreases in rod nnds . the corresponding crs did not show consistent, significant differences as a function of theoretical fate change , suggesting that the cr is not as useful for this analysis as the nnd. in contrast, drp analysis on theoretical rod patterns did indicate increasingly significant changes in the reff values as a function of theoretical fate change percentage .

we therefore applied nnd and drp analyses to the rod mosaics of ra-treated retinas, including mosaics from both single and double-labeled retinas . these rod mosaics displayed significantly decreased mean nnd values in ra-treated retinas that approached, but did not quite match, the nnds of cones . when compared to the theoretical data, this result was consistent with the possibility of up to 25% of the red cones adopting a rod identity, resulting in a more compact "cone-like" local spacing of the rod mosaic . this result, however, is also consistent with ra causing an accelerated differentiation of existing postmitotic rod precursors into the retina, because the nnds of rods in ra-treated retinas at  <dig> hpf matched those of rods in untreated retinas sampled later, at  <dig> hpf .

the drp analysis was used to distinguish these two alternatives. the drp analysis indicated a significant, ra-induced reduction in the mean reff value for rods . this result is consistent with a 25% fate change . however, it is not consistent with accelerated differentiation of postmitotic rod precursors. in control retinas the reff for rods was not significantly different between the  <dig> and  <dig> hpf evaluation times . instead ra treatment during retinal neurogenesis results in altered rod patterns with significantly decreased local spacing that is distinct from the rod patterns observed in older embryos. accelerated differentiation of existing, 'pre-positioned' rod precursors into the retina therefore does not explain the ra-induced increase in rod density.

cross-correlative analysis
samples from retinas labeled simultaneously for rod opsin and red cone opsin mrnas also were subjected to cross-correlative pattern analyses to examine changes in red cone-to-rod and rod-to-red cone spatial relationships. interestingly, the cross-correlative, red cone-to-rod nnd analysis generated high cr values indicating a regular pattern . for cross-correlative samples, this in turn indicates the existence, at these developmental times, of a predictable, non-random spacing relationship between red cones and rods in native retina.

cross-correlative nnd analysis was also somewhat predictive of fate changes when applied to theoretical datasets in which red cones were switched to the rod fate. changes in the mean nnd and corresponding cr values from red cone-to-rod and rod-to-red cone comparisons were significantly different from controls when between 25% to 50% of the red cones assume rod identity . nnd analysis of experimental material revealed that ra caused a significant decrease in nnd between red cones and rods . these values were consistent with 20-25% fate changes .

global patterns of cones and rods
to supplement the nnd and drp analyses, which are predominantly measures of local pattern characteristics, quadrat analysis, a measure of global  pattern that encompasses, in general, the 'repeatability' of local pattern motifs across two-dimensional space  <cit> , was utilized. quadrat analysis was applied to patterns derived from singly-labeled retinas.

the long-range patterns of rods in ra-treated retinas were also significantly more regular than those of their control counterparts . while this particular analysis will not permit the estimation of a corresponding magnitude of fate change, the result nevertheless indicates that the rods in ra-treated embryos, although atypically proximal on local scales , tend over larger scales to occupy positions normally devoid of rods. the effect is the introduction of a certain degree of long-range spatial regularity. the quantitative analyses of spatial patterning thus provide support for the hypothesis that ra exposure during retinal neurogenesis may function as a component of molecular mechanisms controlling rod and cone neurogenesis. in this context prolonged ra treatment causes some "proto-cones" to switch to the rod phenotype.

sustained ra treatment beginning in early retinal neurogenesis does not result in 'opsin switching'
the quantitative changes to rod and cone patterns induced by ra treatment beginning at  <dig> hpf suggested that some of the cells otherwise fated and positioned to become cones instead became rods. an alternative explanation is that cone vs. rod fate was not affected, but cones expressed rod opsin instead of the appropriate cone opsin. arguing against this alternative are the increase in gnat1-expressing cells and the decrease in gnat <dig> expression , and the apparent lack of colabeling in the dual in situ experiments . however, as a further test of this alternative 'opsin switching' hypothesis explicitly in ra-treated retinas, mis-expression of rod opsin by  cone photoreceptors was evaluated with an antibody that is selective for rod opsin , together with a polyclonal antibody to red cone opsin . in sections derived from both control and experimental retinas no co-labeled cells were evident .

a different set of markers was also used to test the same hypothesis. a polyclonal rod opsin antibody was applied together with zpr <dig>  the latter an immunological marker for red- and green-sensitive double cones . the rod opsin antibody labels apical processes of both rods and green opsin-expressing cones, due to the similar primary structures of rod and green cone opsin . therefore, control embryos displayed a combination of rod opsin+ cells , zpr1+/rod opsin- cells , and colabeled cells . if cones in ra-treated retinas mis-expressed rod opsin, an increase in co-labeled cells following ra treatment would be expected. no such increase in colabeling for zpr <dig> and rod opsin was observed . instead, rod opsin labeling appeared more intense and widespread. these immunolabeling experiments support the hypothesis of an ra-induced cone-to-rod fate change, and provide no empirical evidence for 'opsin switching.'

ra treatment causes an increase in ectopic expression of photoreceptor markers
it was noted during the immunolabeling analyses that cells labeled with the red and green cone cell marker zpr <dig> and the rod cell marker zpr <dig>  were observed in locations other than the onl . such cells, which were present in both control and experimental embryos, were previously documented in wild-type zebrafish as ectopic photoreceptors located within the inl and the gcl  <cit> . analysis of ra-treated and control retinas indicated an ra-dependent increase in the probability of encountering ectopic photoreceptors . as a further analysis, the number of ectopic cells was counted in three zones in the retina: the gcl, the proximal to middle part of the inl, and the distal inl . in ra-treated retinas, there was a significant increase in the number of zpr1+ and zpr3+ cells  found in the distal inl . a small but significant increase in number of ectopic zpr3+ cells  was counted in the proximal to mid-inl region. no significant change in the number of ectopic photoreceptors in the gcl was observed. the presence of ectopic zpr3+ cells after exposure to ra in embryonic zebrafish also was observed, but not quantified, in a previous study  <cit> . the results in the present study suggest that the effects of sustained high ra signaling upon photoreceptor production and placement are not restricted to the onl.

§ p <  <dig>  .

a  ± s.d.

*p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ;***p <  <dig>  .

effects of early ra treatment on cones is not due to cell death in the onl
an alternative explanation for red cones missing from the mosaic is that incipient red cones manifested cell death prior to terminal differentiation. this alternative was tested with cell death assays. acridine orange staining of  <dig> hpf embryos treated with ra at  <dig> hpf  labeled a larger number of dying cells within the eye as compared to controls . the acridine orange+ cells were located predominantly in the inl and in the lens. the tunel assay was used to determine with greater precision the number and distribution of dying cells subsequent to ra treatment . ra treatment at  <dig> hpf resulted in an increased number of apoptotic cells in embryos assayed at  <dig> hpf . ra-treated embryos  had on average nearly four times as many tunel-positive cells per section compared with control embryos. cell death was quantified for defined retinal locations and was again found to be significantly higher in ra-treated retinas, for all retinal regions evaluated . however, the ra-induced increase in cell death in the onl was low compared to the evident increase in the gcl, inl, and cgz . these data were compared to the red cone densities presented above . the number of tunel+ cells over the dimensions of the surface areas scored for cell death was approximately  <dig>  tunel+ cells per μm <dig> of the onl. in contrast, the decrease in the average red cone density between control and ra-treated embryos was  <dig>  cells per μm <dig>  a difference that is ~ <dig> times greater than the level of cell death. this suggests that cell death in the onl is not a major factor affecting cone photoreceptor patterns in the ra-treated embryos.

*p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig>  .

the potential role for cell death was tested further by repeating the ra treatment on embryos injected with an antisense morpholino  directed against p <dig>  <cit> , which has been shown to block apoptotic cell death. however, the p53-mo did not block ra-induced retinal cell death , and so it was not possible to evaluate the effects of ra completely independently of cell death.

proliferating retinal progenitor cells are responsive to ra signaling
at the time of initiation of ra treatments , cells that will occupy the onl are still proliferative, and by  <dig> hpf cells of the onl have begun to exit the cell cycle and differentiate  <cit> . previous studies have shown that endogenous ra signaling in the developing zebrafish retina exists in a strong ventral domain and a weaker dorsal domain  <cit> . the restricted size of these endogenous ra signaling domains suggests that cells outside these areas, including many of the proliferating retinal progenitors, may not possess the ability to respond directly to ra. this possibility was investigated by utilizing embryos from a zebrafish line carrying the ra signaling reporter transgene, rare-yfp .

transgenic embryos exposed to ra from  <dig> to  <dig> hpf displayed widespread and intense yfp expression in the retina at  <dig> hpf . to identify yfp+ cells that are also mitotic, sections were co-labeled with an antibody to phosphohistone h <dig> , a marker for cells within m phase of the cell cycle. at  <dig> hpf, ph3+ cells were observed that were colabeled , and those that were not colabeled for yfp , within the cgz, the developing onl, and the inl . ph3+ cells within the developing onl likely correspond to photoreceptor precursors  <cit> ; those within the inl may correspond to cells of the rod photoreceptor lineage  <cit> . singly- and doubly-labeled cells in three different retina regions, the onl, inl and cgz, were counted to determine if there was a specific pattern to the labeled cells. for simplicity, due to its small size, the developing gcl was included in the inl zone. at  <dig> hpf the highest number of  cells were found in the onl, with half as many in the inl and few in the cgz region . in contrast,  cells were observed to be more evenly distributed among the three regions . these data indicate that some proliferating cells within embryonic retina were directly responsive to ra signaling.

sustained ra signaling in retinal progenitor cells and postmitotic retinal cells is required for changes in photoreceptor ratios and pattern
to test the hypothesis that exogenous ra influences photoreceptor pattern via effects exclusively within retinal progenitor cells, we treated rare-yfp transgenic embryos with a brief 'pulse' of  <dig>  μm ra, from  <dig> to  <dig> hpf. in these embryos, increased ra signaling was verified as transient, as the rare-yfp transgene was no longer upregulated at  <dig> hpf , a time when the first photoreceptors withdraw from the cell cycle and begin to differentiate  <cit> . in a parallel experiment, embryos treated with a similar pulse of ra from  <dig> to  <dig> hpf displayed qualitatively normal rod and cone photoreceptor patterns when examined at  <dig> hpf . these results suggest that increased ra signaling in retinal progenitors, prior to terminal mitosis, is not sufficient to modify photoreceptor fate. the results of  <cit>  also excluded a role for ra exposure at later developmental times in regulating photoreceptor fate. collectively these studies suggest that prolonged, increased ra signaling in retinal progenitors and in their postmitotic photoreceptor precursors, is required to favor the production of rod photoreceptors over that of cones.

to characterize the photoreceptors engaged in sustained, increased ra signaling, we treated transgenic rare-yfp embryos with  <dig>  μm ra, from  <dig> hpf to  <dig> hpf, a treatment that results in altered rod and cone patterns . we stained cryosections with antibodies directed against the yfp transgene, together with the 1d <dig> antibody, which detects rod opsin  <cit> . we observed yfp+/1d1+ rods, as well as yfp-/1d1+ rods . the proportion of rods in ra-treated embryos that were also yfp+  slightly exceeded the proportional increase in rods in ra-treated embryos as compared to dmso-treated embryos . it is therefore possible that many of the rods engaged in sustained, increased ra signaling correspond to 'new' rods diverted from alternative fates. however, a small number of cells were also observed that colabeled with yfp and the cone marker zpr- <dig> , arguing against an exclusively cell-autonomous effect of increased ra signaling.

*p <  <dig>  .

multiple differentiating cell types in the retina can engage in ra signaling
our earlier study demonstrated targeted roles for ra signaling during photoreceptor differentiation  <cit> . to determine if differentiated retinal cell types are also directly responsive to ra, specifically over a later ra treatment period, rare-yfp embryos were exposed to ra at  <dig> hpf, a time at which all retinal cell types are extant. this exposure produced, at  <dig> hpf, widespread yfp expression across the retina, in all retinal layers . the identity of ra-responsive cell types was determined by processing sections from treated embryos with an antibody against yfp and a series of additional cell markers. labeling with a marker for red/green double cone pairs  revealed many yfp+ cones in the onl . similarly, the use of a marker for rods  revealed rods positive for yfp+ . however, not all photoreceptors were yfp+, suggesting that not all rods and cones can respond directly to ra during this later treatment period . a similar situation was observed for cells of the retinal pigmented epithelium , identified using the marker zpr2: some rpe cells were yfp+ , others were not. using a marker for müller glia , multiple examples of co-labeled cells were observed , as well as many examples of müller glia not responding directly to ra . experiments with a marker for rod bipolar cells, anti-pkc, similarly revealed that some but not all rod bipolar cells are capable of responding directly to ra . the signaling response is rapid, as the increased expression of yfp in response to ra treatment at  <dig> hpf was seen as early as  <dig> hpf . a similarly strong, though less widespread, response to ra also occurred when embryos were treated at  <dig> hpf and examined at  <dig> hpf . this brief exposure also revealed strong ra signaling within a small subpopulation of inl cells . these results suggest complex temporal dynamics associated with the response of retinal cells to ra and demonstrate that multiple, differentiated cell types in the developing retina are responsive, perhaps in a cell-autonomous manner, to exogenous ra.

ra receptors are expressed in late retinal progenitors and in developing photoreceptors
the ra receptor subtypes rxrγ and rarαb are expressed in the developing zebrafish retina  <cit> . in mouse, rxrγ participates in the regulation of cone opsin expression  <cit> . to identify the ra receptor type that mediate the ra-induced effects presented above, the retinal expression patterns of rxrγ and rarαb were determined between  <dig> and  <dig> hpf, the period of extensive proliferation and differentiation of photoreceptor cells, and during which exogenous ra influences photoreceptor fate  and differentiation  <cit> . in situ hybridization for rxrγ mrna revealed strong signals for control embryos at  <dig> hpf, particularly along the ventronasal side of the choroid fissure . ventrotemporal expression was very low or nonexistent . rxrγ also was expressed in cells outside this region including cells along the outer edge of the retina, adjacent to the rpe , a region containing mitotic progenitors cells . the pattern of rxrγ expression is similar, though more widespread, in embryos examined at  <dig> and  <dig> hpf . note that at  <dig> hpf, the rxrγ+ outer edge of the retina was becoming laminated and populated with cells that will differentiate as photoreceptors, though it also contained proliferating progenitors . in embryos examined at  <dig> hpf, rxrγ expression in the onl was restricted to the region near the cgz, and was found in cells at the outer edge of the cgz , suggesting a continuing function for rxrγ in the generation and differentiation of photoreceptors beyond the embryonic period . in addition, several cells in the inl expressed rxrγ . these rxrγ+ cells were present in a distribution similar to the expression pattern of yfp transgene in embryos treated with ra at  <dig> hpf and examined at  <dig> hpf .

expression of rarαb mrna was detected at  <dig> hpf in the ventral retina, adjacent to the lens . at later developmental times , this expression domain expanded throughout the developing gcl . in embryos examined at  <dig> hpf, rarαb was expressed in the gcl and in a diffuse pattern in the remainder of the retina, including the onl .

knockdown of rarαb alters ra signaling and reduces the number of rods in the retina
the expression patterns for rxrγ and rarαb are consistent with potential functions for these receptors in mediating the effects of ra on photoreceptor identity and differentiation. to gain further insight into the roles of endogenous ra signaling, and to test the hypothesis that rarαb mediates the effects of endogenous ra signaling on photoreceptors, a morpholino oligonucleotide against the rar subtype rarαb  <cit>  was injected into one-cell stage embryos carrying rare-yfp. in all of these experiments we co-injected an antisense morpholino against p <dig>  in order to suppress mo-related cell death  <cit> . embryos injected with the rarαb/p <dig> mo combination will be referred to as rarαb morphants. rarαb knockdown resulted in a large reduction in the number of cells expressing yfp in the ventral retina at  <dig> hpf , suggesting that rarαb is required for some of the endogenous ra signaling within the developing retina. the effects of rarαb knockdown on rod photoreceptor development were then evaluated. embryos from our wildtype  line were injected with the rarαb/p <dig> mo combination and retinal tissue sections examined at  <dig> hpf with an antibody to rod opsin . rods were quantified by determining on a sample of tissue sections the average number of rods in the central and dorsal retina per section . in these rarαb morphants knockdown of rarαb caused a significant reduction in the average number of rods per section . these results suggest that knockdown of rarαb by antisense mo results in a partial knockdown of ra signaling in the retina, which in turn affects the generation of rod photoreceptors.

the expression of additional markers for retinal cell differentiation was also tested on rarαb morphant retinas. there were no significant changes in the numbers and distribution of zpr1+ red and green cone cells  or islet-1+ cells , indicating selective effects on rods and not a general developmental delay. together these results suggest that development of rod photoreceptors is particularly sensitive to rarαb knockdown.

rarαb may mediate the effects of exogenous ra on rod development
we next tested the hypotheses that rarαb is required for 1) increases in retinal ra signaling, and 2) increases in rod development in response specifically to exogenous ra. rare-yfp embryos were injected with the rarαb/p <dig> mo combination at the one-cell stage, were treated with ra beginning at  <dig> hpf, and examined at  <dig> hpf for yfp expression and photoreceptor development. rarαb knockdown resulted in a reduction in yfp expression in the retina . treatment of rare-yfp, rarαb morphants with ra at  <dig> hpf resulted in upregulation of yfp expression in all the layers of the retina by  <dig> hpf , suggesting that rars  in the retina other than rarαb are capable of mediating increased signaling in response to exogenous ra.

rod photoreceptor development was then assayed in sh , rarαb morphants treated with dmso  or with ra . ra-treated rarαb morphants did not display a statistically significant increase in the average number of rods per section as compared to those treated with dmso . the distribution of cone photoreceptors, as assessed by zpr- <dig> staining, was also not notably different in ra-treated vs. dmso-treated rarαb morphants . wildtype embryos injected with the p <dig> mo alone and treated with ra at  <dig> hpf showed a significant increase in the average number of rods per section , indicating that p <dig> knockdown did not interfere with a robust effect of exogenous ra on rod development. collectively these results support a role for rarαb in mediating effects of exogenous ra on rods.

discussion
sustained high levels of ra signaling modify photoreceptor fate
treatment of zebrafish embryos with  <dig>  μm ra beginning at the time of retinal neurogenesis  resulted in increased densities of rod photoreceptors and correspondingly decreased densities of cone photoreceptors. local and global pattern attributes  of the enhanced rod mosaic and the depleted red cone mosaic collectively suggested that the retinal progenitor population competent to generate photoreceptors, generated more rods, possibly at the expense of red cone photoreceptors. assessment with other rod and cone-specific markers supported this hypothesis. alternative hypotheses, such as accelerated/decelerated differentiation of specific cell types, widespread but selective cone cell death, or the generation of photoreceptors of mixed phenotype, were either discounted or poorly supported. a parsimonious explanation for these results is that sustained ra treatment beginning at the time of retinal neurogenesis influences retinal progenitors and photoreceptor precursors, favoring a rod fate over a cone fate, with the spatial positions of the 'missing' cone photoreceptors being anomalously occupied by additional rods.

several transcription factors have been shown to alter the fates of rods vs. cones. in mouse, absence of either nrl, or nr2e <dig>  results in a retina with photoreceptors expressing only cone markers and having ambiguous photoreceptor morphologies  <cit> , and there is evidence that nrl activates nr2e <dig> to suppress the development of cones  <cit> . two other nuclear receptors, rxrγ and trβ <dig>  are required to suppress expression of the s-cone opsin in mice, favoring the production of cones expressing m-opsin  <cit> . a compelling example of photoreceptor fate manipulation by a single transcription factor is provided by the zebrafish tbx2b mutant, in which there is a replacement of uv cones with rod photoreceptors, and the 'new' rods have an entirely unambiguous identity although they occupy the spatial positions of uv cones within the photoreceptor mosaic  <cit> . tbx2b is expressed in the developing retina well in advance of photoreceptor neurogenesis, suggesting that intrinsic factors controlling photoreceptor fate may exert their effect on progenitor cells rather than upon immediately postmitotic precursors.

the present study now provides evidence that an extracellular signal - ra - can influence the fate of retinal progenitor cells in the zebrafish. somewhat similar to the situation with tbx2b, ra has these effects only when administered in advance of photoreceptor neurogenesis. however, sustained high levels of ra signaling, up to and including the time of photoreceptor terminal mitosis, are required. this finding, together with evidence for induced ra signaling within proliferative cells and new rod photoreceptors, suggests that the developmental trajectory of retinal progenitors can be influenced by extrinsic as well as intrinsic factors. it is interesting that only one other 'extracellular' signaling mechanism has been demonstrated to disrupt the formation of the photoreceptor mosaic in zebrafish: the notch signal transduction pathway  <cit> . these effects were obtained by treating zebrafish embryos with pharmacological inhibitors of notch signaling at  <dig> hpf or earlier, well in advance of photoreceptor neurogenesis.

an unresolved question is the relationship between embryonic rod and cone progenitors  <cit> . a recent study from our laboratory  <cit>  found that in zebrafish embryos both rods and cones, as well as rod and cone precursors, express an identical suite of "photoreceptor-specific" transcription factors including rx <dig>  neurod, crx, and nr2e <dig>  suggesting that additional factors are required to specify rod vs. cone fate. it is possible that the mechanism controlling photoreceptor fate decisions in zebrafish is stochastic, and depends in part on the relative strength of competing local extracellular  cues to impel a progenitor toward the rod program of development. this model is consistent with further results of the present study, demonstrating that rarαb knockdown causes a reduction in endogenous ra signaling and the number of rod photoreceptors without a significant alteration of other retinal cell types.

the local strength of an ra signal therefore may be a factor influencing rod vs. cone cell fate decisions in the zebrafish retina. the enzymes involved in ra synthesis in the vertebrate retina are expressed in ventral and dorsal domains, suggesting endogenous ra exists in a gradient across the retina  <cit> , with its lowest level in the central retina. the use of the rare-yfp reporter line corroborates that in zebrafish a strong ventral domain of endogenous ra signaling exists  <cit> , which is also the location of the initial patch of rod and cone photoreceptors  <cit> . a smaller patch of rods forms in the dorsal retina. in contrast, the central retina , initially develops few rods. treatment with exogenous ra during retinal neurogenesis may disrupt the endogenous gradients of ra, increasing the number of retinal progenitors that assume a rod photoreceptor fate and decreasing the population available for cone genesis. in rare-yfp embryos treated with exogenous ra, some of the yfp+ cells that are mitotic are in the position of potential rod progenitor cells , and the numbers of yfp+ rods may correspond to the additional rods in ra-treated retinas . similarly a loss of ra signaling in rarαb morphants reduces the number of photoreceptors precursors that ultimately assume a rod fate.

pleiotropic effects of prolonged high levels of ra signaling
the ra treatment used in this study resulted in a complex retinal phenotype, with effects on photoreceptor fate as discussed above, but also on laminar position of photoreceptors, and retinal cell survival. the ectopic photoreceptors in ra-treated retinas  may have resulted from the fate-influencing activity of ra, such that cells positioned to become inner retinal neurons instead expressed photoreceptor genes. surprisingly, many of the ectopic photoreceptors could be labeled with cone-specific markers, suggesting that the cone-to-rod fate influencing effect of ra is limited to cells that ultimately reside in the onl. alternatively, ra may affect cell movements of photoreceptor precursors, causing some cells to migrate in a basal direction rather than into the onl. related to this speculation is that the effects of ra on retinal cell survival were most pronounced within the inl, further indicating specific effects of ra upon this cell population. exogenous ra may result in cell death in the inl due to the generation of nonviable cells of abnormal phenotype; alternatively, ra may have some other selectively toxic effect on cells of the inl. it is also possible that the apparent effects of ra on photoreceptor fate are indirectly mediated by a tissue disorganizing outcome of ra toxicity. indeed, we were unable to assess the effects of ra during retinal neurogenesis independently of ra's effects on retinal cell survival. however, in the rarαb morphants, exogenous ra failed to significantly alter the production of rod photoreceptors, providing compelling evidence that the effects of exogenous ra are mediated at least in part by ra signaling via specific ra receptors.

cellular ra signaling in response to exogenous ra
endogenous ra signaling in the vertebrate retina exists in distinct, separate dorsal and ventral domains  <cit> , suggesting that any effects of endogenous ra signaling on photoreceptor development outside of these domains must be indirect. in contrast, exogenous ra leads to global changes in photoreceptor gene expression in the retina  <cit> , or to changes in the production and positioning of specific photoreceptor cell types  suggesting that the ability of retinal cells to respond to ra is more widespread. our results with the rare-yfp line are consistent with global, as well as direct effects of ra on photoreceptor development, as exogenous ra treatment leads to widespread upregulation of the transgene. multiple cell types are capable of engaging in ra signaling, including mitotic cells, rod and cone photoreceptors, rpe, müller glia, and inner retinal neurons. increases in ra signaling occur on a rapid temporal scale that indicates no requirement for upregulation of signaling machinery. a conclusion from these results is that many cells in the retina possess receptors and coactivators capable of generating a cellular response to ra. a more speculative inference is that presumptive photoreceptors that experience prolonged ra signaling during retinal neurogenesis are driven toward a rod rather than a cone fate.

retinoic acid receptors and endogenous ra signaling during retinal neurogenesis
the complete family of rar and rxr genes in zebrafish has been identified  <cit> . in the present study we clarified the retinal expression patterns of rarαb and rxrγ. during retinal neurogenesis, rxrγ mrna appears in a strong ventronasal domain, and then is expressed in cells of the inl . later in development, rxrγ mrna is transiently expressed in outer retina. the rxrγ-expressing cells of the outer retina at  <dig> hpf likely correspond to retinal progenitors fated to become photoreceptors or müller glia, and the rxrγ-expressing cells of the outer retina observed at  <dig> hpf correspond to newly-differentiating rod and cone photoreceptors  <cit> . after formation of the embryonic retina, rxrγ expression becomes limited to the edge of the cgz , the major source of new retinal neurons during larval and adult growth  <cit>  and within the most recently-generated cells of the onl. rxrγ is therefore a candidate for mediating ra signaling in retinal progenitor cells and cells of the onl. our data are consistent with those obtained from mouse and chick models, where rxrγ is expressed in developing cone photoreceptors  <cit> . interestingly, the apparent peak of expression of rxrγ in the outer retina  precedes photoreceptor opsin expression in the majority of photoreceptors  <cit>  , making unambiguous colocalization studies in rods vs. cones unfeasible, and suggesting roles for ra signaling over the time of photoreceptor determination as well as differentiation.

rxrs act as homodimers or as heterodimers with other nuclear receptors such as rars or thyroid hormone receptors . similarities in retinal phenotypes of rxrγ null as compared to trβ <dig> null mice led to the suggestion that these two nuclear receptors operate together to influence cone photoreceptor gene expression  <cit> . however, the binding partner for rxrγ in the developing retina are not clearly known. in addition, rarα has been shown to mediate ra signaling in the mouse retina  <cit> . the results of the present study found a zebrafish homologue of rarα, rarαb, is expressed early in neurogenesis in the rgc layer, and at low levels throughout the retina at later stages . therefore rarαb is also considered a candidate for regulating endogenous ra signaling in the retina.

targeted knockdown of rarαb resulted in a reduction, though not absence, of the endogenous expression of reporter in the rare-yfp line . this is in agreement with knockout studies of rarα in mice, in which the absence of rarα was associated with the elimination of expression of an ra signaling reporter transgene  <cit> . the role of rarα in retinal cell differentiation is more ambiguous. in mice, knockout of rarα has no effect on retinal morphology or retinal cell differentiation. in the present study using zebrafish, knockdown of rarαb resulted in a significant reduction of the number of rod photoreceptors in the central and dorsal retina. these distinct results in mouse and zebrafish may reflect differential subfunctionalization of the ra receptor subtypes in the two model organisms. alternatively, the experimental endpoints available in zebrafish  may be more sensitive for the detection of the function of rarα. we suggest that, in the zebrafish, rarαb and an unknown binding partner mediate the activation of a rod neurogenesis program in retinal progenitor cells in response to ra. this mechanism was tested further by treating rarαb morphants with exogenous ra to determine if knockdown would block an increase in the number of rods. exogenous ra resulted in a widespread upregulation of ra signaling in rarαb morphants, but not in a significant increase in the average number of rods. we interpret this to mean that the rarαb receptor is not essential for mediating ra signaling in response to exogenous ra, but does play a role in regulating rod production in the zebrafish retina.

the presence of retinoid receptors in the developing onl, together with the capacity of differentiating rods, cones, and progenitor cells to respond directly to exogenous ra, indicates a significant role  for endogenous ra in regulating photoreceptor development. defining these endogenous roles has been remarkably elusive. in teleost models, reduction of ra synthesis has been accomplished by knocking down expression of β,β-carotene- <dig> '-oxygenase   <cit> , or of the apc gene, which also indirectly reduces ra synthesis  <cit> , or of the vax <dig> transcription factor gene, which alters the distribution of ra-synthesizing enzymes  <cit> . in each of these models the disruption of ra synthesis results in disruption of photoreceptor morphology and of expression of photoreceptor markers  <cit> . temporally-selective reduction of ra synthesis by treating embryos with the pharmacological inhibitor citral over the time of photoreceptor differentiation resulted in reduced rod opsin expression  <cit> . in the present study we have uncovered a role for a specific ra receptor, rarαb, in mediating the effects of endogenous, as well as exogenous, ra upon photoreceptor development. however, we note that, in the rarαb morphants, rarαb is chronically depleted over a protracted developmental period, similar to the situation of chronic ra depletion in bcox and apc morphants  <cit> . therefore, while these studies collectively provide compelling evidence that endogenous ra signaling, and specifically rarαb, are required for normal photoreceptor development, interpretation of the phenotypes is complicated by the consideration of early roles for ra signaling in eye formation. in the present study we have used a more targeted approach by knocking down the rarαb receptor, which avoids the effects of a global reduction in ra synthesis. however, an indirect role for rarαb in regulation of rod production cannot be ruled out.

dynamic roles for ra during vertebrate retinal development
overwhelming evidence from several animal models supports numerous functions for ra signaling during the development of the vertebrate eye  <cit> . a collection of in vitro and in vivo studies specifically demonstrates important activities of ra signaling with respect to photoreceptor development. these include: a) ra promotes the rod fate at the expense of other, non-photoreceptor retinal cell fates  <cit> ; b) ra accelerates or decelerates the rate at which differentiating photoreceptors express specific markers  <cit> ; c) ra promotes photoreceptor survival  <cit> , and d) ra recovers photoreceptor differentiation in ethanol-treated embryos  <cit> . the results reported here now also support a role for ra in promoting the rod photoreceptor fate at the expense of cone fates. we suggest that temporal shifts in the role of ra signaling, and by implication the functional, molecular targets of the ra signaling machinery, underlie these distinct experimental outcomes. retinal progenitors competent to generate photoreceptors may assume a transient state of plasticity that can be influenced by extrinsic factors such as ra, or intrinsic factors such as tbx2b  <cit> , resulting in altered fate of their progeny. differentiating photoreceptors may also experience a period of sensitivity to extrinsic factors such as ra, which regulate the rate at which they express photoreceptor-specific genes  <cit> . this model predicts that targets of ra signaling will be at least partially distinct in retinal progenitor cells as compared to differentiating rod and cone photoreceptors. this model is consistent with a molecular mechanism recently demonstrated in mouse retina, in which post-translational modifications of nuclear hormone receptors modulates their activity in a dynamic manner  <cit> . our ongoing experiments are aimed at identifying cell-type-selective molecular targets in order to further reveal mechanisms through which ra controls photoreceptor development.

CONCLUSIONS
the principal conclusions of this study are: 1) exogenous ra influences the fates of retinal progenitors when delivered over a sustained developmental period beginning prior to photoreceptor terminal mitosis; 2) exogenous ra also influences photoreceptor laminar position, and causes significant retinal cell death; 3) many cell types within the retina, including those undergoing mitosis, can engage in ra signaling, and therefore are capable of responding directly to ra; 4) two ra receptors, rxrγ and rarαb, are expressed within the embryonic retina in a pattern consistent with roles for these receptors in mediating the effects of ra on photoreceptors; and 5) knockdown of one of these receptors, rarαb, diminishes ra signaling in the retina and causes a specific reduction in the number of rod photoreceptors. these conclusions, together with those of prior studies in the zebrafish and other vertebrates, indicate dynamic, pleiotropic roles for ra signaling during eye and photoreceptor development. we propose a model for zebrafish photoreceptor determination and differentiation that includes shifting states of ra-sensitive plasticity within retinal progenitor cells and developing photoreceptors.

