BACKGROUND
neuropathic pain is one type of chronic pain and originates by definition from a lesion of the nervous system . it is a devastating and difficult to manage disease mainly because the underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood. indeed, several types of cells and highly complex interactions of multiple pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis . in this context work on animal models has emphasized the important contribution of differences in protein expression to neuropathic pain induction and maintenance . within this cocktail proteases are receiving growing interest  <cit>  because of their enormous destructive potential and the irreversibility of their action .

in our study we focus on a distinct group of proteases, the cathepsins , which are cysteine proteases mainly localized in lysosomes/peroxisomes but are also found in extralysosomal sites  <cit> . there are  <dig> human members  and in mouse  <dig> additional members  in this group of enzymes  <cit> . they play a vital role in normal cellular protein metabolism such as the regulation of key protein kinases and phosphatases, and the induction of specific cytoskeletal rearrangements, which may account for their involvement in intracellular signaling, vesicular trafficking, and structural stabilization  <cit> . hence, it is not suprising that cat are implicated in the manifestation of a number of diseases, including cancer, arthritis, morbus parkinson, morbus alzheimer and age-dependent inflammation  <cit> . recent studies suggest that the activation or breakdown of the endosomal/lysosomal proteolytic system might also be involved in pain pathophysiology. thus, in different chronic animal pain models an upregulation of some members  of the cat family along the ascending nociceptive pathway has been reported  <cit>  and cats has even been implicated in neuropathic hyperalgesia and allodynia  <cit> .

with these strong implications for a role of cat in neuropathic pain pathogenesis in mind we decided to study the spatiotemporal expression pattern of two of these proteases, the cats and the more recently identified catx, during the phases of pain induction and maintenance in a rat neuropathic pain model, the transection of the 5th lumbar spinal nerve. cats is a well-described cathepsin originally identified from lymph nodes and spleen  <cit>  and is well known for its crucial function in the control of antigen presentation  <cit> . catx, on the other hand, has only recently been localized in the central nervous system  <cit>  and its expression pattern in pathological situations implies a role in degenerative processes  <cit> .

RESULTS
cellular and spatiotemporal expression of cats and catx in normal and l5t spinal cord
in unlesioned adult rats cats- and catx-immunoreactivities were found in cells of both grey and white matters  throughout the entire length of the spinal cord. most cats-immunopositive cells were of small size and distributed uniformely . while cats-immunopositive neurons were rare, catx-immunoreactivity was found in nearly all neurons  and only in few small cells . the immunoreactivities were associated with spherical granules within the cytoplasm of cells, sparing the nucleus .

the first changes of cats- and catx-immunoreactivities were already notable  <dig> d after l5t. for both proteins we observed upregulations that were restricted to the ipsilateral fasciculus gracilis, the dorsal horn and layer ix in the ventral horn in the lumbar segment . within these regions, the number of small cats- as well as catx-immunopositive cells increased substantially . moreover, we found a numerical increase in cats-immunopositive neurons, while the number of catx-immunopositive neurons was constant. interestingly, numerous small cats as well as catx-immunopositive cells engulfed large motoneurons in the ventral horn . within the following days the ipsilateral increase in immunopositive cells in the fasciculus gracilis spread caudocranially to the upper sc segments and reached the gracile nucleus at  <dig> w after injury . at that time-point this nucleus exhibited morphological signs of degeneration .

upregulation of cats and catx protein levels and increase in enzyme activities
we next demonstrated that the changes in cats- and catx-immunoreactivities are reflected by changes in the levels of the respective proteins and, above all, that these are also reflected by a change of activity. therefore, we first analyzed the protein levels of catx and cats in the spinal cord of sham versus l5t animals at  <dig> d after injury, a time point when the increase in immunoreactivities in the spinal cord was at its maximum .

western blot analysis  revealed the proforms of cats  and catx , as the most prominent bands, while the prepro- and mature forms were below the detection level. the proforms of both enzymes were detected in all segments analyzed  of the adult rat spinal cord . the l <dig> nerve transsection produced an upregulation in all sc segments for cats as well as catx . the strongest increase in protein content was found in the t segment for both enzymes , while the increase in the l and c-segments was substantial  but lower than in the t segment . moreover, our western blot analysis showed that in all sc segments the level of catx is more than twice as high as the level of cats. these results were confirmed in a second experiment with  <dig> animals per group .

this data is supported by measurements of catx activity. cats activity assays were not performed since the assay suffered from the lack of a specific substrate and a specific commercially available inhibitor for the enzyme, leaving doubts about the specificity of the assay in complex protein mixtures. at  <dig> d after l5t catx activity increased strongly and highly significant  in the lumbar segment . catb activity was not significantly changed .

characterisation of cats- and catx-expressing cells
concurrent with the upregulation of cats and catx a strong gliosis appeared in the affected regions. in the ipsilateral fasciculus gracilis we observed numerous ed1-immunopositive macrophages , while in the ipsilateral dh and vh pt66-immunopositive microglia and gfap-immunopositive astrocytes were more abundant than in the contralateral side .

to determine the phenotype of cats and catx cells in vivo we performed double immunofluorescence. the majority of cats-immunopositive cells expressed the microglia-marker pt <dig> or the astrocyte-marker gfap , while only a small number of neurons were cats-immunopositive . in contrast, catx-immunoreactivity colocalizes only with single glial cells  but was more abundant in neurons . all ed1-immunopositive macrophages expressed both proteins .

discussion
the dorsal spinal cord is the first relay station in sensory perception, which receives, transmits and modulates the signals from peripheral nerves. recent research has uncovered that peripheral nerve injury triggers cascades of systemic, cellular and molecular changes  <cit> . moreover, there is ample evidence that these dynamic changes contribute to prolonged abnormal pain sensations. in the current study we analysed the participation of two cysteine proteases, the cats and catx, in the molecular processes underlying the induction and maintenance of neuropathic pain. our results clearly show that immediately after surgery, concurrent to the onset of mechanical allodynia, both proteases, cats and catx, are upregulated in the spinal cord. moreover, the upregulation of catx protein was accompanied by a substantial increase in activity. in contrast to the increase in the proform level that of the catx activity was highly significant. this apparent contradiction might be explained by either an increase of the active form of catx, that is still below the detection level of the western blot, or a concomitant regulation of endogenous cathepsin inhibitors, the cystatins or thyropins  <cit> . in fact there is recent evidence in favor of the idea that the cathepsin inhibitors are also regulated during persistent pain states  <cit> .

both, cats and catx, are widely expressed in the brain  <cit>  and have been implicated in several neurological conditions such as alzheimer's disease  <cit> , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  <cit>  and age-related inflammation  <cit> . recently, cats has also been implicated in neuropathic hyperalgesia and allodynia. using the gene chip technology cats mrna was found to be upregulated in the ipsilateral l <dig> and l <dig> drg in the psl and cci model  <cit> , while in the snl or l5t model, cats mrna expression was regulated in the drg  <cit>  and in the spinal cord  <cit> . extending the latter results, we were able to detect the regulation of cats protein levels and added a new cathepsin, catx, to the list of regulated proteases in pain pathology.

our immunohistochemical analysis, following the temporal development of neuropathic pain, supports the view that the upregulation of cats and catx expression is dynamic and proceeds along the fasciculus gracilis up to the medulla oblongata. immediately  after transection cats and catx expressions increase. for both proteins this increase is restricted to the fasciculus gracilis, the dorsal horn and the layer ix in the ventral horn in the lumbar segment. as early as  <dig> d after injury the upregulation in the fasciculus gracilis spread cranially and reached the gracile nucleus at  <dig> w after injury. at that time point this nucleus exhibited morphological signs of degeneration. we never found cathepsin upregulation on the contralateral side of the lesion or in sham operated animals. this characteristic spatio-temporal pattern suggests that the upregulation of cats/x expression accompanies the degenerative process of the transected axons  <cit> .

whether the cathepsins contribute to the mechanism of degeneration and are causally involved in the pain processing or whether the differential expression is an epiphenomenon is difficult to answer on the basis of the data provided here. however, there is recent evidence that cats is directly involved in the pain process by modulating the cytokine response  <cit> . cathepsins display rather diverse physiological actions. cats for instance is well recognized for its crucial function in the control of antigen presentation  <cit>  and its role in the degradation of the extracellular matrix. in contrast to cats, little is known about the physiological function of catx. but the high expression of catx in antigen-presenting monocytes/macrophages  <cit> , glial cells  <cit>  and dendritic cells  <cit> , its upregulation in the gastric mucosa of patients with helicobacter pylori gastritis  <cit>  and in the plasma of patients with multiple trauma  <cit>  as well as its involvement in the production of bradykinin potentiating peptide  <cit>  also imply a role in inflammatory processes.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest a strong regulation of both, cats and catx, in the spinal cord of an animal model of neuropathic pain. whether the cathepsins contribute to the mechanism of degeneration and are causally involved in the pain processing or whether the differential expression is an epiphenomenon is difficult to answer on the basis of the data provided here. further experiments such as application of specific cathepsin inhibitors are required before the exact role of single cathepsin subtypes in the pain process can be unraveled.

