BACKGROUND
pseudomonas syringae comprises a large and well-studied group of plant-pathogenic bacteria
 <cit> . they infect a broad range of host plants and are subdivided into more than  <dig> different pathogenic variants called pathovars
 <cit> . p. syringae possesses a number of well-studied virulence and pathogenicity factors such as the type iii effector trafficking system, various phytotoxins, different mechanisms suppressing the plant defense, or synthesis of exopolysaccharides
 <cit> . exopolysaccharides play a variety of roles in virulence and pathogenicity not only in pseudomonas but also in other biofilm-producing organisms
 <cit> . the two major exopolysaccharides produced by p. syringae pv. glycinea are alginate and levan
 <cit> . levan is a β- polyfructan with extensive branching through β- linkages, while alginate is a copolymer of o-acetylated β--linked d-mannuronic acid and its c- <dig> epimer, l-guluronic acid
 <cit> .

p. syringae pv. glycinea pg <dig> causes bacterial blight of soybean plants. like some other pseudomonas species, this organism utilizes sucrose as a carbon source with the help of the enzyme levansucrase , in the process releasing glucose and forming the exopolysaccharide levan. pg <dig> produces no alginate due to a native frameshift mutation in the algt gene and hence, the exopolysaccharide matrix of this strain is mainly composed of levan
 <cit> . additionally to several draft genome sequences
 <cit> , the complete genome sequences of three p. syringae pathovars are available, namely pv. tomato dc3000
 <cit> , pv. phaseolicola 1448a
 <cit>  and pv. syringae b728a
 <cit> . these strains serve as excellent model organisms to study plant-microbe interactions. like in some other p. syringae pathovars, the pg <dig> genome contains three copies of the lsc gene, of which two – lsca and lscc – are chromosomally encoded while lscb is plasmid-encoded. of the three copies, only lscb and lscc have been shown to be expressed while no expression was observed for lsca under the tested growth conditions since a mutant, pg <dig> m <dig>  lacking lscb and lscc but containing lsca was levan-negative
 <cit> . interestingly, the orf coding for lsca is fully functional since this gene from pv. glycinea, and its homologues from pv. phaseolicola and pv. tomato, could be expressed from recombinant promoters in escherichia coli <cit> . even though lscb is predominantly extra-cellular and lscc is predominantly retained in the periplasm, the two enzymes are 98% identical at the amino acid level
 <cit> . there are only five amino acid residues different, four of which are conserved changes. since the enzymes are highly similar in their structure as well as function, all experiments in this study were done using lscb only.

as reported by srivastava et al. <cit> , nucleotide sequence comparison of the lsca variants with those of lscb/c variants of p. syringae pathovars showed that the first 48-bp of the n-terminus of the orf lscb/c were absent in lsca. in silico removal of this n-terminal region increased the identity from  <dig> % to 93% at the amino acid residue sequence level between lsca and b/c variants. the comparison also showed that a ~450-bp upstream region, which is highly conserved in all lscb/c variant loci, is missing upstream of lsca. this region spanning from −450-bp to +48-bp with respect to the translational start site of lscb/c was predicted to be a pro-phage borne dna based on sequence similarities and hence was termed phage-associated promoter element 
 <cit> .

p. syringae is the only lsc-synthesizing organism having multiple gene copies coding for this enzyme. the rationale for the occurrence of multiple lsc gene copies, some of which carry upstream papes, remained obscure and prompted the current study, during which the transcriptional start site of lscb/c was determined to be -339 bp upstream to the translational start codon. subsequently, the pape with or without the n-terminal coding sequence was fused to lsca. additionally, the upstream region of lsca was fused with the coding sequence of lscb while lscb and lsca with their native upstream sequences served as controls. all fusion constructs were expressed in the levan-negative mutant pg <dig> m6
 <cit> , and tested for their levan formation ability by zymographic detection followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight  analysis as well as by western blotting. furthermore, the expression of the fusions at the mrna level was checked by qrt-pcr analysis. in addition, a pcr approach with cdna was undertaken to show that the expression of lsca is also cryptic in other p. syringae pathovars.

RESULTS
determination of the transcriptional start site of lscb
the coding regions and upstream sequences of lscb/c are highly identical to each other . as shown by srivastava et al., a deletion construct ending at position −332-bp with respect to the lscb translational start codon does not lead to levan formation in levan negative mutant pg <dig> m <dig> while the construct ending −440-bp leads to levan formation in the same mutant
 <cit> . consequently, primer extension experiments using total rna from pg <dig> cells and a set of reverse oligonucleotide primers were used to determine the transcriptional start site  of the lscb gene. resolving the extension products on a polyacrylamide gel resulted in a clear signal at nucleotide position −339-bp upstream of the translational start codon of lscb . the experiments were repeated for lscc giving identical results .

qualitative analysis of lsc fusion proteins
the fusion constructs were introduced to the levan-negative mutant pg <dig> m <dig> and were first analyzed for their levan forming ability on sucrose supplemented mannitol-glutamate agar plates. both, the pg <dig> m <dig> mutant complemented with lscb
upn
a and lscb
up
a, showed levan formation indistinguishable from that of the pg <dig> m <dig> mutant complemented with lscb . in contrast, pg <dig> m <dig> complemented with lsca
up
b was levan negative, same as pg <dig> m <dig> transformed with lsca, thus, suggesting that the upstream region of lscb mediates expression of downstream located genes while that of lsca does not.

characterization of lsc fusion proteins
to verify the molecular sizes of lsc encoded by the individual fusion constructs, a western blot analysis using lsc-specific antibodies was performed . under denaturing conditions, it was interesting to observe that lscbupna migrated at an intermediate rate i.e. faster than lscb but slower than lscbupa. the signal for lscbupa was weaker than those representing lscb or lscbupna suggesting that the n-terminus of lscb might contribute to the expression level or stability of lsc. in contrast, protein samples of pg <dig> m <dig> transformed with lsca or lscaupb did not show any signal specific for lsc at all thus confirming that lack of levan formation was due to lack of the corresponding protein.

to check for the enzymatic function of lscs encoded by the individual fusion constructs, zymographic detection was done with non-denatured total protein samples of transformed mutants . the above reported levan forming ability of transformants m <dig>  m <dig> and m <dig> could be attributed to the enzymatic functioning of proteins or fusion proteins. as expected, native protein samples derived from m <dig> or m <dig> did not exhibit any in-gel levan production . an interesting observation was the altered electrophoretic mobility of the enzymatically active proteins. the lscbupna migrated slower as compared to lscb even though the predicted molecular masses of both proteins were almost identical  suggesting possible differences in the respective protein charges. in accordance with the western blot results, lscbupa seemed to be less expressed than lscb or lscbupna suggesting an important role of the n-terminus for transcriptional or translational processes.

maldi-tof analysis
the altered electrophoretic migration rate of lscbupna as compared to lscb during the native gel protein separation suggested that the two proteins were indeed different although their predicted protein sizes were almost identical. to demonstrate that lscbupna produced a unique and novel enzyme and to show that the other two transformants indeed also produced the intended lsc proteins, we subjected the levan-forming fusion proteins to maldi-tof analysis. the peptides recovered in the maldi-tof analysis are shown in figure 
 <dig>  the recovered peptides gave rise to an overall good coverage in the protein sequences . some of the peptides recovered were unique to each protein . e.g., peptides sfvqevydygyipam from lscbupna and sfvqeeydygyipam from lscb were located at the same position, namely 413– <dig>  in the respective amino acid sequences of these proteins but had different masses,  <dig>  da as compared to  <dig>  da, indicating they were from different proteins. similar differences were observed for the other peptide sequences shown in the figure 
 <dig> indicating that the fusion constructs indeed led to the synthesis of novel fusion proteins or of the proteins intended despite the presence of similar upstream regions.

analysis of lsca fusion protein expression by qrt-pcr
the difference in the amount of levan produced by lscbupa as compared to lscbupna and lscb in the zymogram prompted us to check if this correlated at the rna level. samples were grown in hsc medium at 18°c and harvested at od <dig> of  <dig>  since lsc transcription is maximum at this optical density
 <cit> . the total rna was extracted from the cells and the expression of lscb and lsca
up
b was checked by lscb-specific primers while that of lsca, lscb
upn
a and lscb
up
a was checked by lsca-specific primers. the results showed that, considering the standard deviation obtained for the samples, the lscb
upn
a had expression levels similar to lscb  further supporting the results of the western blot and zymogram. on the other hand lscb
up
a had only 60% expression as compared to lscb. as was the trend seen in the western blot and zymogram, lsca and lsca
up
b had no expression. this indicated that even though the upstream region of lscb is sufficient to promote the expression of lsc, the expression level is enhanced by the presence 48-bp n-terminus of lscb.

analysis of native gene expression of lsca in p. syringae pathovars
lack of expression of lsca had been shown before in p. syringae pv. glycinea pg4180
 <cit> . however, this has not been experimentally proven for other p. syringae pathovars. consequently, possible expression patterns of lsca variants were also analyzed in the three p. syringae pathovars pv. phaseolicola 1448a, pv. syringae b728a and pv. tomato dc <dig> using cdna synthesis and pcr. no amplicon was detected in any of the four strains as shown in figure 
 <dig> indicating that none of the lsca variants are expressed. the specificity of the primers was demonstrated by amplifying the lsca genes from corresponding genomic dna, all of which gave amplicons of the expected sizes. the accuracy of reverse transcription was checked by amplifying a cdna of a pg <dig> m <dig> transformant carrying a recombinant lsca gene under the control of plac, where lsca is known to be expressed
 <cit> . successful cdna synthesis of total mrna was also demonstrated by pcr amplifying the cdna derived from the mrna of the hexr gene, a hexose metabolism regulator
 <cit> . gene hexr gave an amplicon of expected size  indicating correct cdna synthesis.

discussion
genomic co-existence of three highly conserved genes coding for levansucrase is a feature unique to the plant pathogen p. syringae despite the fact that numerous other bacterial species harbor just a single copy of this gene in their genomes. artificial expression of lsca from p. syringae under the control of the plac had been shown previously
 <cit> . the same study also showed that lsca could not be expressed under its own promoter. major differences between lsca and the natively expressed genes lscb and lscc are not found in the coding sequences but in their upstream dna regions. the upstream regions of lscb and lscc represent a possible pape
 <cit> . we previously hypothesized that this pape might harbor regulatory sites required for expression of levansucrase and general sugar metabolism in p. syringae. herein, the pape of lscb was fused to the coding sequence of lsca and thus proven for its transcriptional activity in p. syringae.

the nucleotide sequence of the predicted pape consists of two parts, the upstream region of lscb and the first 48-bp coding for the n-terminus of lscb. the importance of these 48-bp of the orf for the expression was tested by generating fusion constructs of the upstream region and lsca with or without these coding nucleotides. transformants carrying either of the two fusion constructs produced levan similar to the pg <dig> m <dig> mutant complemented with lscb. western blotting, zymographic detection, and qrt-pcr analyses confirmed these results but also allowed a more detailed view; native lscb and the lscb
upn
a fusion had similar mrna expression levels while that of the fusion lscb
up
a, which lacked the 48-bp of n-terminal lscb-coding region, had less. consequently, one might speculate that although the -450 bp upstream dna region of lscb, which includes the tss as determined in this study, is sufficient for expression of lsca, the first 48-bp of the lscb orf increase the level of its expression. since our respective results of western blotting and zymographic detection of lsc activity were indistinguishable from each other, it could be concluded that the n-terminus of lscb might not be involved in altering of enzymatic activities.

a peculiar observation was the electrophoretic migration of the individual proteins or fusion proteins in polyacrylamide gels. the observed faster migration of lscbupna as compared to lscb under denaturing conditions could potentially be attributed to the apparent mass shift for two proteins with nearly identical molecular masses as described earlier
 <cit> . interestingly, the migration of lscbupna was significantly slower than that of lscb under native conditions. this finding might demonstrate that modest changes in the protein’s surface charge might result in significant alterations of electrophoretic mobility
 <cit> .

although the different migration rates of the proteins or fusion proteins under native or denaturing conditions suggested that the synthesized proteins were indeed different from each other, a maldi-tof analysis of each of the proteins was conducted using protein samples from zymograms. the produced levan surrounding the proteins did not seem to impact mass spectrometric analysis. the mascot score for each of the identified proteins was above the significance threshold of  <dig>  the sample from the pg <dig> m <dig> sample gave lscb from p. syringae pv. phaseolicola 1448a as the first significant match which was in line with the high homology of the respective genes in the close relatives pv. glycinea and pv. phaseolicola
 <cit> . the sample from pg <dig> m <dig> which should synthesize only lsca gave the first significant match as lsca from p. syringae pv. glycinea race  <dig> strain. this proved that the lscb
up
a fusion actually synthesized an active lsca and confirmed earlier findings that artificial expression of lsca of pg <dig> leads to levan formation
 <cit> . although the majority of obtained peptides for the sample representing lscbupna were lsca-borne as expected, the unique n-terminal  <dig> -da peptide nsplasmsninyaptiwsr could be detected. this peptide is a consequence of the presence of the nhei restriction site coding for the amino acid residues alanine and serine. oxidation of methionine, which was chosen as a variable modification parameter, added another 16 da to the peptide mass which subsequently increased the mass of the nsplasmsninyaptiwsr fragment to  <dig>  da. this mass was exactly the same as the mass of a recovered peptide which did not find a match during the ncbi search since the respective fusion peptide is not present in the database. thus, the synthesis of the lscbupna fusion protein could also be proven.

the majority of previous lsca-related studies have been performed with p. syringae pv. glycinea pg4180
 <cit> . however, thus far, there was no evidence for a lack of lsca expression in other pathovars of p. syringae. since the genomes of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola 1448a, pv. syringae b728a and pv. tomato dc <dig> are fully sequenced
 <cit> , template-specific oligonucleotide primers for cdna-based mrna detection could be designed. although mrna samples were extracted during different growth stages, namely, early-logarithmic and late-logarithmic phase, no amplicons could be detected in any of the strains suggesting that lsca variants were not expressed. pcr amplification, using respective genomic dna as template, proved that the primers were binding correctly. an independent gene, hexr, coding for a conserved hexose metabolism regulator protein hexr, was chosen to see if the total mrna had been reverse transcribed correctly
 <cit> . this pcr amplification gave correct sized amplicon of 880-bp for all the four strains demonstrating the accuracy of the used method. pcr amplification was also performed on the cdna obtained from mrna samples of pg <dig> m <dig> containing lsca under the control of p
lac
. this experiment gave the same-sized amplicon as for genomic dna again proving the accuracy of the method.

in summary, we propose that lsca could be an ancestral lsc variant in p. syringae as suggested by srivastava et al.
 <cit> . during evolution, the inactive promoter perhaps did not allow expression of lsca after this gene had potentially been introduced to an ancestral p. syringae. an evolutionary gene duplication of lsca followed by an insertion of a prophage-borne pape might have led to a new lsc variant, i.e. lscb which in turn got duplicated yielding lscc or vice-versa. as a result of this evolutionary process, two functional and expressed lsc genes emerged in the plant pathogen, for which utilization of sucrose, and perhaps levan formation, might be particularly important. the advantage of an additional in planta fitness-increasing and possibly virulence-promoting factor
 <cit>  could have helped this organism to selectively establish itself as a potent plant pathogen. as a consequence of this hypothesis, one could speculate on a loss of the supposedly non-expressed lsca during further evolutionary steps, a phenomenon also previously hypothesized by smits et al.
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the differential expression of levansucrases in p. syringae was long known, but not tested. in this study, we have potentially solved the previously unexplainable phenomenon that p. syringae is the only organism possessing multiple levansucrase-encoding genes. we demonstrated the importance of the upstream region as well as the n-terminus of lscb/c required for the expression of lsc in p. syringae. the upstream region of lsca does not seem to promote lsc expression. with careful controls, herein we also demonstrated that lsca is not expressed in other p. syringae pathovars.

