BACKGROUND
introgression can play a key evolutionary role in plants  <cit> , but has until recently been considered rare and controversial in animals  <cit> . this is largely because hybrids between animal species are rare, but may also stem from a belief that hybridization and introgression between species is unnatural  <cit> . hybrids are usually rare on a per individual basis, but species undergoing occasional interpecific hybridization are common. existing surveys suggest that around 10% of animal species, and 25% of plant species hybridize  <cit> : for instance, 9% of bird species  <cit>  and 11% of european butterfly species  <cit>  are known to hybridize with at least one other species. even if occasional, natural hybridization can lead to successful introgression, with important consequences in ecology, evolution and conservation  <cit> . however, hybridization in nature does not guarantee that genes will pass between species, because hybrids are typically selected against, and may be completely infertile or inviable. to determine whether hybridization leads to introgression, we must investigate the patterns of distribution of alleles among hybridizing species. shared alleles in descendent species may have been inherited as pre-existing polymorphisms from their joint ancestors, as well as via recent gene flow since speciation. these two routes to allelic sharing, which both result in genealogical polyphyly at the species level, are hard to distinguish on the basis of genetic data.

recently, two classes of molecular methods have been used to test for introgression. both rely on the idea that introgression in some genomic locations will be prohibited by reproductive isolation or divergent natural selection, while at other loci introgressing alleles will establish more freely. in fact, without heterogeneity of divergence across the genome, it will typically be difficult to discriminate recent speciation from recent gene flow. the first method examines genotypic data at multiple low-resolution loci, such as chromosomal morphs, allozymes, microsatellites, amplified fragment length polymorphisms  or single nucleotide polymorphisms , for heterogeneity of divergence in allele frequency. alleles that flow freely will have their frequencies homogenised across species, while alleles whose introgression is blocked by divergent selection will retain strong frequency differences. thus, heterogeneity in allele frequency differences among loci suggests that on-going gene flow as a likely explanation for similar allele frequencies at some genes in pairs of taxa that hybridise  <cit> . a second approach, adopted in this paper, employs dna sequence data, coupled with a statistical approach based on gene genealogies and coalescence theory, to test whether shared haplotype polymorphisms could have been inherited from a common ancestor or are more likely due to introgression since speciation  <cit> .

heliconius butterflies are a rapidly radiating, tropical group, well known for diverse warning colors and müllerian mimicry  <cit> . around 35% of the species in this group are known to hybridize in nature  <cit> . this study concentrates on heliconius cydno and h. melpomene, which co-occur throughout central america and the northern andes  <cit> . although closely related, separating approximately  <dig>  million years ago  <cit> , they are not classical 'sibling species' . nor are they host races, ecological morphs or members of a recent island radiation. unusually for studies of introgression, we have chosen two species that are partially sympatric, continental taxa differing strongly in morphology, as well as in larval and adult ecology  <cit> . these species diverged in colour pattern due to müllerian mimicry  <cit> : heliconius melpomene mimics the geographically widespread red, yellow and black h. erato, while h. cydno mimics the black and white or yellow h. sapho and h. eleuchia  <cit>  in the northern andes and central america. the two are not even strictly sister species, since a number of other morphologically distinct species, such as h. heurippa, h. pachinus, h. timareta, and h. tristero, appear more closely related to h. cydno than to h. melpomene  <cit> . nonetheless, natural hybrids occur in most areas of range overlap. the frequency of hybridization is rare , but hybrids of both sexes are viable, and, although f <dig> hybrid females are sterile, in accordance with haldane's rule, males are fertile and produce viable backcross progeny with either parental species  <cit> . furthermore, about half the hybrids collected from the wild are backcrosses, identifiable by their colour pattern phenotype  <cit> . introgression mediated by fertile hybrids therefore seems likely  <cit> .

to test the importance of introgressive gene flow between the two species, we sequenced multiple haplotypes of four unlinked loci using a geographic sampling regime designed to reveal unusual genealogical patterns due to introgression. we chose sympatric populations of h. cydno chioneus and h. melpomene rosina from panama, which are known from a few specimens to hybridize occasionally in the wild, and an allopatric french guiana population of h. melpomene melpomene that does not overlap with h. cydno, and whose mtdna is also known to be divergent relative to other h. melpomene populations  <cit> . the french guiana population acts as a control for population divergence and the high variance of coalescence time expected. if introgression were occurring at a particular locus, we would expect sympatric haplotypes to be unusually similar, while at the same time the allopatric population of h. melpomene can be used to confirm that evolutionary divergence occurs normally at the same locus. we sequenced dna from four unlinked loci: one mitochondrial region , and intron-spanning regions of a sex-linked locus tpi , autosomal mpi , and ci ; for details see table 1). these loci were selected because it was reasoned that mitochondrial genes and nuclear non-coding regions would diverge rapidly enough to provide high resolution between closely related taxa  <cit> . the nuclear loci are all known to be on different linkage groups  <cit> , providing a scatter of loci across the genome with which to detect introgression.

RESULTS
the genealogical pattern at each locus
details of the data and models of evolution are given in table  <dig>  as expected if allelic coalescence has occurred more recently than the split between the two species, the maximum likelihood genealogy for co is consistent with reciprocal monophyly for h. melpomene and h. cydno, with  <dig> – <dig> % net divergence between species compared to <  <dig> % uncorrected divergence within populations, and  <dig> % net divergence between h. melpomene races . there was no evidence for recombination at this locus , as expected for mitochondrial sequences  <cit> . a previous parsimony study of co found french guiana  and panama  haplotypes of h. melpomene to be distinct , and suggested that the french guiana clade was sister to a clade including panama h. melpomene and h. cydno  <cit> , making h. melpomene paraphyletic with respect to h. cydno  at this locus. our results differ in that although melpomene paraphyly has a marginally greater likelihood, mutual monophyly cannot be rejected . paraphyly of h. melpomene, as found by brower  <cit>  using a parsimony analysis, is however strongly rejected by equal-weighted parsimony bootstrapping on our data. the difference between the two analyses is probably due to additional information provided by the greater length of mitochondrial sequence we used . we therefore show the constrained, mutually monophyletic tree .

the genealogical pattern for tpi is somewhat similar in some respects to that for co, in that mutual monophyly of h. cydno and h. melpomene seems likely, with  <dig> – <dig> % net divergence between the two species at this locus, compared to  <dig> % between races within h. melpomene . there are several examples of homoplasious indels in the tree, as expected if recombination had taken place within these haplotypes. there is additional evidence from a statistical test for recombination in both h. melpomene , and h. cydno  from panama. in contrast to co, tpi yields an almost reverse maximum likelihood genealogy in which h. melpomene forms a monophyletic group within a paraphyletic heliconius cydno. but again, the evidence for paraphyly does not stand up: there is less than 50% parsimony bootstrap support for a paraphyletic tree over a monophyly-constrained tree, and likelihood support for paraphyly is also weak . therefore, we again represent the genealogy as the most likely mutually monophyletic species tree .

in contrast, mpi demonstrates a clear lack of reciprocal monophyly between h. cydno and h. melpomene: net divergence between these species within panama  is much less than between french guiana and panama populations of h. melpomene . two indels inferred to be homoplasious are found in french guiana h. melpomene, suggesting that recombination occurs and a test for recombination confirms this . however, no evidence for recombination was found in h. melpomene, h. cydno, or combined haplotypes from panama . the vast majority of indels conform to the estimated genealogy, suggesting recombination is rare . the maximum likelihood genealogy suggests that many identical or nearly identical sequences are shared between the two species in panama, both of which populations are strongly differentiated from h. melpomene from french guiana . four very short mpi sequences, with a  <dig> bp deletion spanning most of the intron, were also identical across taxa . these sequences are placed basally by maximum likelihood because of the lack of phylogenetic information. a tree search constrained to be mutually monophyletic between the two species is strongly rejected .

the existence of some very short alleles and high rates of divergence among haplotype groups within each taxon might suggest that divergent duplicate loci are being sequenced. however, a battery of tests confirm that mpi acts as a single-copy nuclear, coding marker which can be mapped readily in crosses . similar results have recently been obtained with the same primers by a number of other workers, showing that the results here are not anomalous  <cit> .

the genealogical pattern for ci is more complex. as with mpi, net divergence is low between h. cydno and h. melpomene in panama , and rather higher between geographic races of h. melpomene  and between h. cydno and french guiana h. melpomene . however, there are no fixed differences between any pair of taxa, and the numbers of shared polymorphisms appear to be roughly equal between all comparisons, both within and between species at this locus .

unlike mpi, ci shows many inferred homoplasies, both of single base pairs and of indels: in addition to the apomorphic indels shown,  <dig> inferred insertion/deletion events involve  <dig> homoplasious indels, too numerous to be shown in fig.  <dig>  these homoplasious events are presumably mainly due to recombination , which negates the validity of representing the ci genealogy as a strictly bifurcating tree as in the likelihood analysis . indels are expected to be less prone to reversal or homoplasy than single-base changes. at the ci locus, seven out of  <dig> indels not subject to homoplasy or reversal supported groups of french guiana melpomene melpomene, while of the remaining three, two are autapomorphic, one supports a  haplotype pair. one indel supports a grouping of h. cydno with a single associated h. melpomene sequence that lacks the indel . these contrasting patterns suggest either multiple ancestral polymorphisms, or introgression of haplotypes and recombination both within and between the two species in panama, but a lack of gene flow between either of these and h. melpomene melpomene sequences from french guiana. several groups of ci haplotypes from french guiana h. melpomene melpomene form distinct clades, but overall there is strong evidence against mutually monophyletic separation between cydno and melpomene . thus the pattern seems similar to that for mpi, but closely similar or identical haplotypes at this locus are rarer between than within species. thus, if introgression explains similarities among haplotypes of the sympatric species pair, it may be more ancient than at mpi.

bayesian analysis of genealogy and introgression
the strong polyphyly of mpi and ci genealogies between the two species suggests that selective introgression at these loci may be the cause. to examine this possibility we employed the bayesian 'isolation-migration'  algorithm of hey & nielsen  <cit> . the im test deals with pairs of taxa only, so we examined only sympatric h. melpomene rosina and h. cydno chioneus from panama. we carried out analyses on three modified datasets to conform with the assumptions and limitations of the im algorithm . firstly, we obtained a dataset that is as complete as possible obtained by deleting highly indel-laden haplotypes and indel polymorphic regions  – for example, the short intronless sequences at mpi could not be used in this analysis. two additional datasets were sampled from this basic dataset, by removing apparent recombinant regions or haplotypes . in the event, all three analyses gave broadly similar results. we calibrate the analyses via neutral substitution rates obtained from an insect mitochondrial dna clock calibration  <cit>  to obtain approximate per base pair neutral substitution rates  for each locus, times since speciation , effective population size measured as a product of mutation rate and total population size , and per locus bidirectional introgression rates . the absolute values of these parameters are of course of some interest, but are highly dependent on the clock calibration of brower  <cit>  based on a shorter sequence of mtdna, which may therefore be somewhat unreliable. what are of more interest here are the relative values for introgression  between the species at different loci. the results are shown in tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and fig.  <dig> 

overall, the results suggest that substitution rates  for the three nuclear loci are three to four-fold higher than the rate for the mitochondrial region. this may seem rapid for nuclear genes, but the comparison is between mitochondrial coding sequence and largely intronic nuclear sequence , and the result agrees approximately with a broader comparative study in heliconius in which third base pairs in codons of the co mitochondrial region were shown to diverge at approximately the same rates as intronic sequences in two of the nuclear genes studied here , overall, and apparently even faster at low divergences similar to those found here . only weak information is available from the genealogical data about time of divergence, but speciation is inferred to have taken place more than about a million years ago  and most likely around  <dig>  million years ago. effective population sizes  are estimated to be about three to four-fold larger in h. cydno than h. melpomene rosina, but the latter species' population size would undoubtedly have been estimated to be larger if the more divergent h. melpomene melpomene sequences had been included. using the im reduced datasets as better estimates of population size without recombination within each locus, the overall inferred effective population sizes correspond to about  <dig> – <dig>  individuals for h. melpomene rosina, and  <dig> – <dig>  million individuals for h. cydno using the mitochondrial rate calibration of brower  <cit> . very little information is available to estimate the ancestral population size , as can be seen from the graphs in fig.  <dig> 

of most importance here, bidirectional introgression rates  for each locus apparently identify a single outlier, mpi, which has m at least an order of magnitude higher than at any of the other loci. the lower tails of the posterior probability distributions of m for co, tpi, and ci are never complete even at the lowest values sampled, so we follow hey & nielsen  <cit>  in inferring a lack of evidence for introgression at such loci.

discussion
the genealogies obtained compared with other available data
the maximum likelihood genealogy for the co region, based on all h. cydno and h. melpomene and outgroup data now available from genbank  suggests paraphyly of h. melpomene, but with an amazonian/french guiana clade of h. melpomene outside a paired sister group consisting of a clade of western south american, central american and french guiana h. melpomene, and a clade containing h. cydno. nonetheless, monophyly is again not rejected overall , and parsimony bootstrap support for paraphyly of melpomene is < 50%. similarly, monophyly is not rejected at tpi, even when all available genbank data for this locus  are taken into consideration. for mpi, in contrast, genealogical polyphyly remains highly supported when we employ data from the entire genbank record . for instance, a recent study from a different laboratory demonstrated sequences from melpomene in each of the haplotype groups i-ii and iv of fig.  <dig> <cit> . the presence of h. melpomene sequences within haplotype group i is especially significant as only h. cydno haplotypes are found in this group in the present study , almost certainly due to the small number of haplotypes we sampled in group i. no other data from these taxa are yet available for the ci locus. in conclusion, all other available data lend further support to the genealogical patterns we find here.

gene flow or ancestral polymorphism?
why have mpi and ci not acquired fixed differences since speciation of h. melpomene and h. cydno, while coi/coii and tpi have done so? two major explanations seem possible:  retention of ancestral mpi and ci polymorphism, and lack of its retention in coi/coii and tpi, or  selective introgression of mpi and/or ci alleles. ancestral polymorphism initially seems plausible because the effective population size  should be higher for autosomal mpi and ci than for sex-linked tpi and maternally inherited coi/coii. however, given a 1: <dig> sex ratio, ratios of ne among the three gene regions  are not large: for example, average coalescence time for mpi or ci should be only  <dig> -fold of that of tpi on this basis. zero introgression explanations would also require extremely low rates of substitution within each ancestral mpi allelic group  to explain the presence of identical and near-identical intron sequences  in species that split over  <dig> million years ago. however, lack of divergence seems highly unlikely, because rates of divergence at mpi and ci are approximately three times faster than rates at coi/coii  as estimated here, and when tested among more distantly related species of heliconius  <cit> . also divergence is normal between geographic populations of h. melpomene – see below. thus, even if the mpi haplotype groups i-iv had been retained as ancestral polymorphisms, we would have expected strong interspecific divergence within each haplotype group.

the second hypothesis, recent introgression at mpi , but not at the other loci, is on balance more likely. the most convincing evidence of introgression in panama is provided by the comparison between geographic populations within melpomene. at mpi and ci, h. cydno and h. melpomene share haplotype groups and have low divergence within panama, while net divergences between races of melpomene are similar to those at other loci . the allopatric french guiana h. melpomene melpomene population acts as a control for divergence at these loci, and so the much lower net divergence between h. melpomene rosina and h. cydno in panama  compared with divergence between either taxon and h. melpomene from french guiana is clearly aberrant.

additional evidence comes from nucleotide polymorphisms . the ratio of fixed differences to shared polymorphisms is expected to increase with time since a split between populations. for co and tpi, our data are consistent with an ancient split between h. melpomene and h. cydno, and a much more recent split, or ongoing introgression between the two h. melpomene races. only at mpi are a large number of polymorphisms shared between h. cydno and h. melpomene, and then only in sympatric panama populations. a g test of homogeneity in the frequencies of shared polymorphisms versus fixed site differences between h. cydno and h. melpomene in panama strongly rejects the hypothesis that divergence and polymorphisms accumulated in the same proportions within each gene, as expected under neutral population divergence in total isolation . some loci show many fixed differences and few local polymorphisms; others show the opposite. this striking pattern can be explained most simply as a result of recent or ongoing interspecific gene flow in panama only, leading to sharing of mpi and possibly ci polymorphisms between species, but not at other genes.

finally, the im analysis  <cit>  suggests exchange of mpi haplotypes between the two species in panama, but no evidence of gene flow at other loci. instead of being due to gene flow, im suggests that polyphyly in the genealogies of ci may be due to ancestral polymorphism inherited from a common ancestor, or possibly due to ci haplotype introgression in the distant past. in only the most reduced dataset  for ci is there a relatively flat distribution of posterior probability for higher migration levels . in view of the stronger clustering of ci haplotypes by species than at mpi, a conclusion of little evidence for introgression at ci seems warranted. the analysis therefore provides evidence for introgression only for mpi haplotypes, where effective gene flow is about  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per generation .

loci embedded in divergently selected genomic regions may be less likely to cross the species boundary than others  <cit> . our data are consistent with linkage maps and knowledge of sterility between h. melpomene and h. cydno. female hybrids between the two species are sterile  <cit> , which should prevent mitochondrial transfer. . tpi may have a similar genealogy to that of coi/coii because the gene is syntenic with z-linked female sterility in crosses  <cit> . ci maps to linkage group  <dig>  <cit> , which also contains an important locus causing fixed colour pattern differences between the two species. introgression is thus likely to be inhibited in this locus by strong mimetic selection against intermediate or introgressed colour patterns  <cit> . in contrast, introgression of autosomal mpi haplotypes  between h. cydno and h. melpomene may occur more readily because it is unlinked to any loci known to be associated with sterility or other divergently selected traits.

the use of a color pattern 'toolbox' of switch genes shared between multiple species has been suggested as a means by which similar, homoplasious colour patterns spread throughout the h. melpomene – silvaniform clade of the genus heliconius  <cit> . many of these species hybridize in nature  <cit> . for example, h. timareta, h. tristero and h. heurippa from the eastern andes are considered separate species, although analyses of mitochondrial sequences place them with clades of h. cydno  <cit> . the taxa in this group are mostly müllerian mimics of other heliconius, and may have obtained their red-marked color patterns via hybridization and selective gene flow from local races of h. melpomene  <cit> . occasional introgression may thus have allowed wholesale transfer of multilocus, ready-made mimetic adaptations. our finding of introgressed autosomal haplotypes between two members of this subgroup provides molecular evidence for the possibility such a claim.

inferring history and species status from limited sequence data
the data presented here also illustrate the difficulties of reconstructing phylogeny of closely related species from dna sequences. for this study, finished sequence was obtained from  <dig> individuals, and from 43– <dig> haplotypes for each nuclear gene. for each individual, cloning stages must be added so that some  <dig>  extra bp dna had to be sequenced per individual, or about  <dig>  bp total to obtain reliable sequences for just four loci sequenced in every individual. of the loci used, two  agree with prior morphologically-based understanding of species delimitation, showing no significant deviation from reciprocal monophyly. two loci strongly reject the same phylogenetic interpretation, of which one  shows potential evidence for ancient gene flow and/or abundant ancestral polymorphism, and the other  shows clear evidence for ongoing introgression between the species in sympatry and differentiation between geographic races. still another locus tried  was inconclusive, although we hypothesise fixed differences and reciprocal monophyly for this locus   too, since h. cydno apparently lacks priming sites in h. melpomene and other related taxa. previous conclusions that h. cydno is nested within guiana and panama melpomene clades  <cit>  appear on current data to be incorrect, and may result from a lack of resolution due to the smaller coi/coii fragment used earlier. however, although mutual monophyly is not ruled out using the co and tpi fragments studied here, maximum likelihood genealogies of both genes suggest that species paraphyly is as, or more, likely. at the same time, convincing evidence for polyphyletic genealogies at ci and mpi show that introgression and ancestral polymorphisms within panama may often mimic patterns concluded from the earlier mitochondrial data. whether h. melpomene and h. cydno are mutually monophyletic is therefore no longer even a sensible question at the species level – the answer depends in which part of the genome we are interested.

two loci examined here show no evidence for introgression . of the two loci showing potential evidence for introgression via polyphyly, mpi demonstrates fixed allelic differences, with no french guiana alleles found within panama clades, and little homoplasy between haplotypes; at ci, in contrast, haplotypes are mixed freely among races of melpomene, as well as between species, and there is abundant evidence of recombination among haplotypes both within and between species. although we did not expect such strong differences beween loci a priori, it is clear that there are many other differences in the evolution of the introns sampled at the four nuclear loci. the intron at mpi is characterised by major splits between highly divergent haplotype groups maintained as polymorphisms , each haplotype group associated with particular indels, and showing little evidence of recombination. tpi and ci show many polymorphic indels, and strong evidence for recombination between haplotypes. introns at ddc, in contrast,  show strong sequence conservation, and are readily alignable even with distantly related species such as h. himera , while the highly divergent intronic sequences from tpi or mpi are impossible to align between erato-group and melpomene-group species of heliconius  <cit> . ddc also has few indels, and shows no evidence for recombination, even in its intronic sequences. a major finding of this study has been to demonstrate how idiosyncratically different genes can evolve. in this respect, our results are concordant with those obtained both for other sympatric, regularly hybridizing insect groups  and also in a largely allopatric radiation of three sibling species between which hybridization is unlikely and introgression not observed . a 'species phylogeny' of closely related taxa such as these at best provides an artificial consensus of multiple conflicting genealogical patterns, rather than a meaningful representation of actual lineage diversification.

this study also highlights the difficulty of delimiting species on the basis of limited sequence information. in our populations, a short mtdna barcode sequence could be used to assign individuals to clades each having fixed differences, and these clades could then be labelled as belonging either to h. melpomene or to h. cydno on the basis of already established biological, ecological and morphological traits. however, a priori attempts to define species boundaries on the basis of the mtdna marker will normally fail: we might decide that all strongly supported branches of the mitochondrial tree in fig.  <dig> were separate species , or we might lump all h. melpomene with h. cydno into a single species. we would be most unlikely to hit on the biologically relevant current species classification, which reflects the fact that h. cydno and h. melpomene are sympatric, morphologically and ecologically differentiated, and show strong mate choice and unisexual hybrid sterility, while french guiana haplotype groups form an evolutionary continuum with the panamanian taxa across the northern coast of south america. genealogical paraphyly or polyphyly at individual loci are simply not very good means of lumping taxa together as species  <cit> .

thus the recent tendency to split geographic forms into species based on fixed mitochondrial differences  <cit>  but see  <cit>  is inadequate without investigating a panel of nuclear genes as well. oddly, this is similar to the criticism leveled by zink  <cit>  himself against the subspecies erected based on morphological characters: when such markers or characters are used to delimit taxa, the resulting taxon predicts little about the behaviour of the rest of the genome. yet taxonomic inflation caused by elevation of populations to species level based on mtdna data is surely a worse problem for taxonomy and conservation than difficulties at the subspecies level  <cit> .

the considerable interlocus variation in mode of evolution and genealogical history demonstrates that large numbers of sequenced loci will be needed in order to investigate and identify phylogeny and species boundaries reliably, and even then will provide only a consensus of genealogies, because a 'true' species phylogeny is not possible when genealogies conflict. in particular, taxon delimitation based on mitochondrial sequences alone will give little insight into the behaviour of nuclear genes. it could be argued that heliconius is a special case, but very appreciable per species rates of hybridization are found both in heliconius butterflies and in many bird groups currently undergoing mtdna-based species delimitation and taxonomic inflation  <cit> . we argue that morphological, ecological, and behavioural data, coupled with geographical distribution data , will remain superior to dna sequences for species delimitation  <cit> , at least until larger numbers of loci can be readily analysed using a truly 'genealogical genomics' approach.

CONCLUSIONS
this work adds to a small but growing body of dna sequence evidence showing that genetic material may pass regularly between closely related animal species in nature, millions of generations after speciation  <cit> . this work supports the hypothesis that introgressive hybridisation could make a significant contribution to adaptive evolution in heliconius and in animals generally. if it is generally true that closely related, non-sibling, ecologically distinct animal species are often permeable to introgression, the nature of such species, their ecology, causes of speciation  <cit> , phylogeny reconstruction  <cit> , as well as conservation issues concerning hybridizing populations  <cit>  all require re-evaluation. in particular, phylogenetic reconstruction and diagnostic tests for species status employing single genes must be used with great caution  <cit> . species boundaries in radiating groups, even in 'normal' continental species such as heliconius, appear to remain porous long after divergence.

