BACKGROUND
the vaginal microbiota of healthy women of reproductive age is dominated by lactobacilli. their proportion in this habitat is consistently higher than 70%, in some cases being practically exclusive  <cit> . the evidence compiled about the mutualistic role of lactobacilli on the mucous membranes, together with their harmlessness, has promoted their use as probiotic agents  <cit> . isolates obtained from feces, vaginal exudates and even mucous membranes resulting from surgery, have been tested for epithelial adherence, acid, bacteriocin and h2o <dig> production and lack of transmissible antibiotic resistances with the aim of understanding the basis of their interaction with the mucosal surfaces and, ultimately, using them as probiotic agents  <cit> .

adherence to the epithelium of the cavity to be colonized is of paramount importance to compete with colonization by potential pathogens and to avoid sweeping by the circulating fluids. impairment of adherence by treatment of microbial or epithelial cells with proteases, lipases or periodic acid suggested that the bacterial adhesins and cellular receptors are proteins, lipids or polysaccharides respectively  <cit> . furthermore, identification of the proteins secreted by the bacteria and those anchored to its cell wall has provided lists of polypeptides putatively involved in mucous adherence. curiously, this approach has identified enzymes related to sugar catabolism, such as glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and enolase  <cit> .

cellular receptors that bind bacteria have to be both ubiquitous on the surface of the epithelial cells while showing enough variability as to account for the observed organotropism shown. these conditions are met by proteoglycans , which are made up of specific protein cores covalently bound to linear polysaccharides named glycosaminoglycans . the gags are built of repeat disaccharide subunits, whose composition allows their classification into different groups: i) heparin/heparan sulphate , containing glucuronic acid  and n-acetyl glucosamine ; ii) chondroitin/dermatan sulphate , where glca is replaced by n-acetylgalactosamine ; iii) keratan sulphate, with galactose and glcnac, and iv) hyaluronic acid , with the same disaccharide unit as hs, but unmodified and devoid of the protein stem.

during their biosynthesis, all gags but ha undergo different modification reactions that can involve n-deacetylations, epimerizations and various o-sulfations. the structure of the gag chains expressed is regulated and dynamically adapted. to perform this task, multiple isoenzymes can perform the catalysis  <cit> . each isoenzyme shows particular substrate specificity, and their expression vary depending on the cells, the tissues, the state of development and the physiological and pathological conditions.

a variety of functions have been ascribed to pgs, including cell adhesion and migration, organization of the cytoskeleton and of the extracelullar matrix , regulation of proliferation, differentiation and morphogenesis, and tissue repair and inflammation  <cit> . furthermore, they act as co-receptors for multiple soluble ligands including cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, enzymes and enzyme inhibitors, thus collaborating in intercellular communication and tissue differentiation  <cit> .

pgs in general and especially those with heparan sulphate  have been proposed as the receptors that facilitate recognition and binding between eukaryotic membranes and microbial pathogens, including bacteria, viruses and protozoa. their role as receptors for neisseria meningitidis <cit> , n. gonorrhoeae <cit> , mycobacterium tuberculosis <cit> , enterococcus faecalis <cit> , listeria monocytogenes <cit> , streptococcus and staphylococcus <cit> , brucella <cit> , escherichia coli <cit>  and even intracellular parasites such as chlamidia pneumoniae <cit>  have been described. besides this, it seems that binding of group a streptococci to gags leads to a cytoskeleton conformational change that allows pathogen penetration  <cit> . the requirement of gags for viral infection has been demonstrated, among others, for papilloma virus  <cit> , herpes virus  <cit> , and hiv  <cit> . finally, it is known that gags act as receptors for toxoplasma gondii <cit> , leishmania <cit>  and plasmodium <cit> . however, the microbial ligands involved in most of these processes have not yet been identified. this role of pgs as the eukaryotic receptors for many pathogens is the basis of our initial hypothesis which suggests the same function of these molecules when interacting with autochthonous no pathogenic microorganisms such as lactobacilli.

in this report we provide data on the involvement of gags in attachment of lactobacillus salivarius lv <dig>  isolated from a human vaginal exudate, to cultures of hela cells. based on these data, a bacterial adhesin was identified which, once purified, significantly interfered with attachment of the lactobacilli to hela cell cultures.

RESULTS
interference of gags on hela cell-lactobacillus salivarius lv <dig> adhesion
to study the role of gags on lv <dig> adhesion to hela cells, addition of commercial preparations of hs, heparin, cs a or cs c to hela to cell monolayers was performed immediately before the addition of exponentially growing l. salivarius lv <dig> cells. the results showed a decrease in the adherence between them . this depletion, although being dose dependent, does not follow a linear correlation. the estimated dissociation constants  were of  <dig>  nm for hs,  <dig>  nm for cs a,  <dig>  nm for cs c and  <dig>  nm for heparin, which indicates that the affinity of the bacteria for the different receptors varied markedly, up to two orders of magnitude between hs and heparin. however, care must be taken with this interpretation, as the kds are approximate values. surprisingly, cs b did not produce any inhibitory effect, and even promoted a slight increase in the adhesion . remarkably, the combined use of these gags dramatically increased the inhibition, reaching values up to 85% and 90% at total concentrations of  <dig> and 100 μg/ml respectively, although this effect was not strictly additive .

effect of cell surface gags digestion on adherence
to investigate further the adherence of lv <dig> to the gags, cell surface gags were removed by digestion with bacterial lyases, and the effect of this treatment on the binding of the bacteria was determined. treatment with chondroitinase abc, which degrades the three cs variants, resulted in reduced binding , slightly lower than that observed for high concentrations of the gags in the competition experiment. furthermore, the concurrent degradation of heparan sulfate with heparinase i, which cleaves at the linkages between hexosamines and o-sulfated iduronic acids, heparinase iii, which cleaves at the linkages between hexosamine and glucuronic acid, and heparinase ii, which cleaves with lower selectivity linkages between hexosamines and uronic acid residues , resulted in a decrease in binding comparable to that obtained in competition experiments . moreover, the simultaneous degradation with chondroitinase and heparinases produced an additive effect that reduced the binding of the bacteria .

differential effect of gags obtained from different cell types on adherence interference
to study the influence of the cellular type, gags were extracted from hela and ht- <dig> cell cultures and used in adherence assays. the results showed that the molecules isolated from human epithelial cells inhibited the binding of the lactobacilli more efficiently than commercially available gags, from pig or beef tissues . gags from ht- <dig> and hela cultures were three and ten times more effective than the heterologous ones. finally, soluble hs and cs purified from hela cells have similar effects on the adhesion of l. salivarius lv  <dig> to hela cells .

identification and testing of bacterial adhesins able to bind gags
to identify the bacterial proteins involved in the interaction between l. salivarius lv <dig> and eukaryotic gags, the proteins of the bacterial envelope were solubilised and subjected to affinity chromatography, using heparin as the ligand. the fractions eluting at concentrations higher than  <dig>  m nacl were tested for their ability to interfere with the hela – l. salivarius binding. those showing high activity were subjected to anion exchange chromatography. one of the fractions recovered showed a high interfering activity while presenting just one conspicuous protein band upon sds-page analysis . this protein was identified by maldi-tof  analysis as a soluble binding protein of an abc transport system due to its homology with the protein oppa of lactobacillus salivarius ucc <dig>  . the gene encoding for l. salivarius lv <dig> oppa was cloned in e. coli, overexpressed and purified by passage through a heparin affinity column. the purified protein was used in interference adhesion assays . the results obtained show that oppa significantly interferes with the attachment of l. salivarius lv <dig> to hela cultures in a dose dependent way, thus confirming its role as an adhesin in the interaction between both cellular types.

discussion
pgs are ubiquitous, being present in all cell types and in the ecm. the enormous structural diversity of their gag chains and core proteins mediates specific interactions between many molecules. because of these characteristics, they play an essential role in the interaction between cells. in addition, these molecules present properties which suggest that they might be part of the receptors that allow the attachment of the normal microbiota to the mucous epithelia that line the digestive tract and the vagina. in fact, many pathogenic microorganisms use these molecules as specific receptors and in bacterial internalization during the infective process  <cit> .

the gags are involved on hela cell-lactobacillus salivarius lv <dig> adhesion
to test the probiotic bacteria-pg receptor hypothesis, a model was devised that involved hela cells, a line derived from human genital epithelium, and a vaginal strain of lactobacillus salivarius, which was previously shown to adhere to hela cells  <cit> . however, caution should be taken when interpreting these results, as hela cell line has been found to be unstable and its gene expression profiles differ from those in normal human tissues  <cit> .

the experiments involved the gags hs, cs a, and cs c, usually present on the cell surface as part of pgs such as syndecans, glypicans, betaglycan or different isoforms of cd <dig>  heparin  and cs b  were also included in the studies. the results indicate that all these gags with the exception of cs b were able to efficiently interfere with l. salivarius binding, the effect ranging between 50% and 60% for heparin and cs a and c respectively. their combined effects were nearly additive, the mixture of all species rising to 90% inhibition of the bacterial binding. these data were confirmed by the observation that enzymatic elimination of surface gags resulted in blockage of l. salivarius attachment to the hela cell cultures.

however, residual attachment always remained after gag interference or digestion suggesting that other eukaryotic receptors may be involved. in fact, cell-associated ecm proteins such as fibronectin, laminin and collagen have been identified as receptors, especially for pathogenic bacteria  <cit>  and also for vaginal and intestinal lactobacilli  <cit> . in addition, direct binding between lactobacilli and glycolipids of the epithelial cell membranes appear to contribute to the attachment, in a process mediated by divalent cations  <cit> . finally, non-specific factors might also contribute to cell to cell adherence, especially superficial hydrophobicity established between membrane exposed patches of the eukaryotic cell and components of the gram positive cell wall, especially teichoic acids  <cit> .

l. salivarius lv  <dig> has different affinity for the different gags
in spite of the general effect of gags on bacterial attachment, different molecules displayed apparent disparate interference constants. among the group of css, characterized by being composed of uronic acid linked to the third carbon of n-acetylgalactosamine, cs c appears to be  <dig> times more active than cs a. conversely, cs b generated a binding increase. this might be due to the different sulfation patterns shown; cs a and c are sulfated at c- <dig> and c- <dig> of the galnac moieties respectively, while cs b is usually more extensively sulfated . additionally, the glca residue present in cs a and c is epimerized to idoa in cs b, which confers greater conformational flexibility on the molecule  <cit> . the glucosaminoglycans are represented by hs and heparin and are composed of uronic acid linked to the fourth carbon of glucosamine. in spite of their fundamental similarity, heparin displays an apparent affinity that is lower than that of hs. the main difference between these two molecules is that hs displays idoa rich regions of very high sulfation that can extend from two to eight disaccharide units and are separated by  <dig> poorly sulfated glca rich disaccharide moieties  <cit> . heparin, on the other hand, shows more extensive sulfation and uronic acid epimerization . taken together, these data indicate that the regiochemistry of the sulfation is crucial for affinity of the binding as evidenced by the difference between the cs sulfated at c- <dig> or c- <dig>  or the significant difference between the oversulfated heparin and the hs. furthermore, the epimerization of the uronic acid seems also to be crucial, based on the difference in behavior induced by idoa-rich species, such as heparin and, particularly, cs b.

the high affinity of particular bacteria for hs and heparin has been observed with several pathogens. for instance, both molecules bind strongly to pneumococci, penicillium, enterococci and listeria <cit> . conversely, heparin displays greater affinity for chlamydia <cit>  while hs does so for pseudomonas <cit> . the css are high affinity receptors for pneumococci <cit>  or spirochetes <cit>  although they do not bind to chlamydia, penicillium, pseudomonas or listeria <cit> . interestingly, ds usually shows a different behavior compared to other molecular forms of galactosaminoglycans, acting as receptor in chlamydia, penicillium or leptospira <cit> , although, to our knowledge, this is the first communication on an increase of bacterial binding in the presence of this molecule in solution.

the gags obtained from different cell types have different effect on adherence
the fine structure of the gags differs according not only to their nature, but also to the developmental phase and the physiological and pathological conditions as well as to the cellular type. this is especially noticeable for hs, but also for cs/ds  <cit> . gags isolated from hela and ht- <dig> cells notably increased the inhibition of binding in comparison to the commercial forms, which were isolated from bovine kidney , bovine trachea , shark cartilage  and porcine mucosa .

oppa protein is an adhesin involved in lv  <dig> adhesion to hela cells
once the nature of the main eukaryotic cell receptors was known, identification of bacterial adhesins became easier because the prior could be employed as affinity ligands for the latter. in this way, using heparin as ligand, we identified oppa, which strongly interfered with hela – l. salivarius attachment in a concentration dependent manner. however, a plateau was reached which suggests that other adhesins may exist and that they recognize non-overlapping receptors as happens with borrelia burgdorferi, which presents  <dig> adhesins capable of gag binding  <cit> .

oppa is an externally exposed extracellular lipoprotein carrying a peptidase ii signal for covalent anchoring to the membrane  <cit>  to which diverse roles have been ascribed; it acts as the substrate-binding protein of the oligopeptide transport system in lactobacilli  <cit> , but has also been implicated in cytoadhesion of mycobacterium hominis and treponema denticolaria to eukaryotic cells through interaction with plasminogen and fibronectin respectively  <cit> . furthermore, it has been found to interact with fibronectin and collagen in lactobacillus casei bl <dig> and other oppa orthologues from lactobacilli such as mapa from l. reuteri are able to interact with caco- <dig>  <cit> . the oppa-mediated cytoadhesion of m. hominis to hela cells seems to be dependent on the atpase activity of the protein  <cit> . these precedents and the data reported here on adhesion to gags, indicate that oppa is a multifunctional protein that mediates the interaction of the bacteria with its environment. attachment to the substrate may be a means of accessing peptides that will subsequently be internalized  <cit> , especially for multiauxotrophic organisms such as the lactobacilli.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the adherence of l. salivarius lv <dig> to hela cells is, at least in part, mediated by the interaction of the bacterial oppa protein and the gags present on the eukaryotic surface.

