BACKGROUND
auxin is a major plant hormone that regulates concerted plant growth as it is involved in diverse plant developmental processes 
 <cit>  such as apical dominance 
 <cit> , root formation 
 <cit>  and growth-related tropisms 
 <cit> . in general, the manifestation of auxin-mediated responses is ascribed to the encoded activity of auxin responsive genes 
 <cit> .

the transcriptional response to auxin is primarily mediated through cis-regulatory auxin response elements  
 <cit> . these elements are bound by auxin response factors  
 <cit>  that act with aux/iaa proteins to regulate auxin dependent gene transcription, whereby aux/iaa proteins repress arf activity at low cellular auxin concentrations 
 <cit> . auxin mediates the interaction of aux/iaa repressor proteins with the scftir <dig> auxin receptor complex that marks the repressor proteins for degradation by the 26 s proteasome. thus, increasing auxin concentrations lead to a de-repression of arf-tf target genes 
 <cit> . auxres were first discovered and characterized by foot-printing analysis within the psiaa4/ <dig> promoter of pisum sativum 
 <cit> . later, they were shown to function in a soybean gh <dig> promoter 
 <cit> . although it could be demonstrated that auxres are sufficient to provide auxin-responsiveness 
 <cit> , they have been found to occur and function as composite elements in a genuine promoter context 
 <cit> . therefore, it has been postulated that auxre coupling elements might have a modulating effect in the transcriptional response to auxin 
 <cit> .

recently it has been pointed out, that a member of the arabidopsis r2r <dig> myb tf family, namely atmyb <dig>  interacts with atarf <dig> and synergistically promotes the expression of an auxin-responsive reporter construct 
 <cit> . in line with these findings, arabidopsis myb <dig> mutant plants exhibit a down-regulation of several auxin-responsive genes which harbour multiple, putative myb related elements  in their promoters 
 <cit> . in comparison to wild type  plants, myb <dig> and the auxin receptor mutant tir1- <dig>  show a similar decrease in auxin-controlled lateral root density under potassium-deprived conditions 
 <cit> . hence, it has been concluded that atmyb <dig> plays a role in altering auxin responses during transition from nutrient-sufficient to nutrient-deficient conditions by presumably modulating the plant’s sensitivity to auxin 
 <cit> .

besides mres, bzip response elements  have also been reported to be potential quantitative elements in auxin-mediated transcription. the well-characterised auxin-responsive soybean gmgh <dig> promoter, for instance, contains three composite units, encompassing auxres and adjacent or partially overlapping g-box related elements . emsa studies confirmed that a recombinant g-box specific basic leucine zipper  tf can bind to these gres 
 <cit> . a similar promoter organisation was found for the auxin-responsive gmaux <dig> gene in which the gres were bound by two soybean g-box binding factors, sgbf- <dig> and sgbf- <dig> 
 <cit> , which however have not been functionally characterized, yet. in tobacco, auxre and gre composed modules were located in the promoter of the ntgh <dig> gene and at least two gres were recognised by the tobacco bzip factor ntbzi- <dig>  that regulates ntgh <dig> transcription and auxin-related growth responses 
 <cit> .

despite these observations it is yet unknown whether modules of auxre, zre and mre cis-elements frequently occur in auxin-responsive promoters and, thus, may contribute to a common regulatory mechanism in auxin-mediated transcription.

to address this question, we conducted with the novel motif mapper cis-element analysis tool a genome-wide bioinformatic analysis of auxin-responsive promoters in a dicot  and monocot  model plant. these analyses confirmed that specific singular and composite motif-modules, consisting of auxres, zres, mres or a g-box related myc <dig> element, are significantly enriched in the promoters of auxin-inducible genes and in some auxin-regulated gene families. in particular, an enrichment of a gre-auxre bipartite module was found. transient protoplast transfection assays experimentally underlined the relevance of gres as quantitative modulators of auxin-induced, auxre-mediated transcription.

RESULTS
promoters of gmgh <dig> homologs from several monocot and dicot plant species exhibit zre and mre motifs in close proximity to auxres
previous studies have suggested that zres and mres might play a considerable role in the regulation of some auxin-inducible gh <dig> promoters 
 <cit> . especially, gre and tga motifs , which are bound by g-box binding factors  and tga-tfs 
 <cit> , were frequently found to reside near auxres. similar observations were made for mres with respect to the arabidopsis gh <dig>  and gh <dig>  genes 
 <cit> .
cis
-element analyses

cis-elements with envisaged role in auxin-mediated transcription were compiled and organized into three classes: bzip response elements , b3-type tf-related elements  and myb/myc related elements . the corresponding references are indicated.

in order to elucidate whether this phenomenon is specific for these genes or might be a general feature of early, auxin-responsive gh <dig> promoters, we identified homologs of the soybean gmgh <dig> in several monocot  and dicot  plant species. for the homology search, considerably low blast scores  were chosen to restrict the dataset to likely ortholog and paralog candidates. on the basis of the gh <dig> protein sequences, a neighbour-joining phylogram was created using a physcomitrella patens gh <dig>  as the outgroup. the corresponding gh <dig> promoters  were scanned using both watson and crick words for the consensus auxre motif  
 <cit> , which we call aux <dig>  and its less stringent variant, named aux <dig>  
 <cit> . furthermore, the promoters were scanned for three different zres  found to be bound by bzips 
 <cit> , and two mres; mre <dig>  and mre <dig>  
 <cit>  .

the resulting phylogram revealed that the analysed mre motifs were frequently distributed throughout the gh <dig> promoters tested . especially, the mre <dig> motif occurred at a high frequency and at least once in every promoter, whereas mre <dig> showed a lower overall abundance, but was still present in a relevant proportion .
 <cit>  from several plant species were compiled and the corresponding predicted protein sequences were rooted to physcomitrella patens ppgh3- <dig>  to create a neighbour-joining phylogram. the −1000 bp promoter sequences of the corresponding gh <dig> genes were manually co-plotted, in 5’ to 3’ orientation onto the phylogram. the location of specific zre, mre and auxre cis-elements  are given using the presented colour code. the indicated boxes divide the phylogram into the zre-rich  and zre-poor  clade. the average number of cis-elements per promoter within the clades  is given next to the motif colour code. the position of the soybean gh <dig>  and its related arabidopsis homolog , used in this study is highlighted in grey. the indicated scale reflects the number of amino acid substitutions per site.

concerning the distribution of the zres, it was observed that the majority of the promoters closely related to gmgh <dig> contained one or more of these elements. only a small number of them  did not contain any zre. with respect to zre motif abundance, a relationship between protein homology and promoter organisation was observed. more precisely, it was possible to demonstrate that closely related gh <dig> proteins can be separated in two more or less distinct clades according to the occurrence of zres in their corresponding promoter sequences. the only exceptions were a gh <dig> homolog from lotus japonicus  and three closely related gh3s  which form a minor sub-clade. they were found on protein homology level within the envisaged zre rich or poor clades. however, regarding motif abundance they should be located in the respective other one. moreover, it was notable that promoters from the gh <dig> homologs of all tested plant species were either rich or poor of zres, indicating that these two groups of gh3s might be differently regulated. a closer inspection of zre abundance showed that gre- and tga-motifs were the most prominent zres, whereas the ac-motif occurred relatively rare in the gh <dig> promoters, albeit with a higher frequency in the zre rich clade. finally, it should be pointed out that zres and mres were often found close to auxre motifs within a flexible spacing of around 100 bps.

in summary the results from this promoter cis-element analysis demonstrate that defined gh <dig> subclasses exhibit a conserved distribution and abundance of specific auxre, zre and mre motifs in their promoters that is congruent with their protein phylogeny. this indicates that gre, tga and mre cis-elements might co-operate with auxres in the regulation of specific auxin-responsive gh <dig> genes. in order to examine whether this clustering of auxre, zre and mre motifs is conserved in auxin-responsive promoters, we analysed their abundance and distribution on a genome-wide scale.

a real randomization algorithm was designed to detect significantly enriched or depleted cis-elements and combined motif-modules in selected promoter datasets
to identify enriched motifs and motif combinations in specific promoter datasets, appropriate control promoter datasets are required. therefore, we designed a randomization algorithm for the motif mapper software 
 <cit>  which enabled statistical evaluation of motif enrichment in a specific promoter dataset compared to a randomly composed dataset. the determination of significant enrichment or depletion of certain cis-elements or cis-element combinations in a given dataset is quite challenging. the difficulty arose in how to define the number of cis-elements and modules as accurate as possible. many algorithms are available capable of searching for de novo or user defined modules 
 <cit> . some of them function reliably with metazoans, such as toucan <dig> 
 <cit> , while other algorithms require clusters of co-expressed genes. however, we intended to develop a simple, but effective method for testing the significant occurrence of various motifs and modules at the same time in unprocessed lists of genes without prior clustering. therefore, we decided to test for motif and module enrichment in comparison to a real randomized, full genomic promoter dataset for each individual species without superimposed modelling. the features of this algorithm were integrated into the graphical interface version of motif mapper  and are presented in the following section.

module description
we used word matching while allowing alternative bases to be represented by international union of pure and applied chemistry  letters 
 <cit> . modules can be composed of any number of motifs, with any defined or flexible spacing between them. previous work has suggested that some cis-motifs have a 5’ to 3’ bias with respect to the transcriptional start site of a gene 
 <cit>  but the full significance for tf recognition is still unknown. in order to explore if composite modules could also have a 5’ to 3’ bias, cis-element modules were analysed in both orientations, while allowing the single embedded cis-motifs to be identified on both strands as watson or crick words. in contrast to other bioinformatic approaches, there is no need to extrapolate the relationships between multiple motifs a priori. for any set of genes of size n, the algorithm extracts a random set of size n for any number of repetitions. we found that  <dig> random extractions yield reliable results in a reasonable amount of time. using this approach, it is possible to calculate the significance of four parameters simultaneously:  the number of promoters with a motif ;  the average number of motifs per promoter ;  the total number of motifs and  the variance of the average number of motifs per promoter, which indicates whether or not a specific motif is equally abundant within the promoters of a given promoter dataset. the algorithm output includes three dataset values:  the actual input dataset,  the average of the random datasets and  the obtained p-values. the random sampling is sufficient to yield gaussian background distributions from which p-values can be effectively calculated using a z-score. since a complete genomic population distribution is present, this method can be used to calculate for both motif enrichment and depletion of normally and near-normally distributed cis-elements. some dataset parameters for the gre motif are shown for illustration in figure 
 <dig> a, b with respect to its random background distribution.

false-positive error rate
to evaluate the quality of the randomization process, the algorithm enables the user to return both the randomization indices  and the values of the four parameters used for calculating the p-values. the randomization algorithm was able to deliver gaussian distributions from the background  and overall, most individual promoters were called only  <dig> to  <dig> times  indicating that the sampling of the genomic background dataset was sufficient. the false-positive error rate was determined by screening  <dig> times, randomly composed datasets of various sample sizes  for various motifs and calculating the probability that a given motif is termed enriched by mistake. figure 
2d shows the false-positive error rate for two p-value cut-offs  for the gre and two mre motifs in the arabidopsis genomic promoter dataset. the individual sequence of a motif and its presence in the background population can strongly affect the false-positive error rate. for example, the mre <dig> motif exhibited a high false-positive error rate for large dataset sizes when scoring parameter i . this is because we employ a gaussian z-statistic presumption which requires that the underlying background distribution for the analysed motifs is gaussian, which is for the highly abundant mre <dig> in the arabidopsis and rice genome not the case. for that reason we included further parameters as e.g. parameter ii  which exhibits for mre <dig>  a gaussian distribution pattern. nevertheless, we recommend to adhere for uncorrected p-values to an α ≤  <dig>  or less for this parameter.

the number of promoters with a motif is in general a reliable significance parameter
it is in principle assumed that a set of genes which are co-operatively regulated by the same type of tf require that their associated promoters contain the corresponding tf-binding site at least once. furthermore, we can assume that this cis-element should be in either all or a significant proportion of the tf regulated promoters. in accordance with this, we observed that parameter i  carried the most significant relation for cis-element enrichment or depletion in a specific dataset. in the exceptional case that a motif was highly abundant in the analysed genomic promoter dataset, e. g. mre <dig> as described in the previous section, parameter ii  was consulted to meet the gaussian presumption and to obtain meaningful results regarding an enrichment or depletion of such a cis-element. for that reason, we drew our attention in the majority of cis-element distribution analyses to parameter i as the most relevant observation parameter but also presented parameter ii as positive or negative motif density for abundant motifs.

bioinformatic cis-element analysis of auxin-responsive promoters from arabidopsis reveals that auxin-inducible, but not repressible promoters, are enriched for specific composite cis-element modules. to analyse the distribution of auxre, zre and mre cis-elements in all auxin-responsive promoters on a genome-wide scale, we made use of publicly available atgenexpress arabidopsis microarray datasets to initially identify auxin-regulated genes. the microarray data applied was part of an auxin time-course experiment with 7-days-old arabidopsis col- <dig> wt seedlings 
 <cit> . samples from mock and 1 μm iaa  treated plants were taken at  <dig> ,  <dig> and 3 h after treatment onset. after normalization, genes significantly 2-fold induced or repressed at the respective induction time points compared to the controls were identified to obtain a nearly exhaustive list of auxin-responsive genes. for nearly every regulated gene call, corresponding promoter sequences were assignable, giving the selected promoter dataset good coverage . subsequently the promoter sequences were grouped into  <dig> classes, taking into account whether their corresponding genes were up- or down-regulated after the different induction periods. the resulting groups were then scanned for the presence of specific auxres, zres and mres  and their significant enrichment or depletion was determined using the previously described real randomization algorithm. the cis-element list, which has already been used in the promoter cis-element analysis of the gh <dig> promoters, was expanded for the genome-wide analysis by the ry motif , which is bound by arf-like b3-type tfs 
 <cit> , and a myc <dig> tf binding site , which strongly resembles a consensus g-box  that is bound by bzips 
 <cit> .

concerning module compositions, all possible motif combinations between members of the auxre-, zre- and mre/myc-motif classes were tested. in order to capture the majority of putatively functionally interlinked motifs, large- or narrow-spaced cis-element modules were assessed with a flexible spacing of maximal 100 bps between the individual motifs. the determination of this flexible window size was based on the observation that zre and mre motifs frequently resided near auxres in auxin-responsive gh <dig> promoters , which is consistent with previously published zre-auxre 
 <cit>  and mre-auxre 
 <cit>  module discoveries. moreover this spacing should cover the vast majority of postulated plant cis-element modules 
 <cit> . to take account of multiple testing errors that result from analysing several motifs and motif combinations, the actual p-values were corrected for all determined parameters by applying a bonferroni correction factor. only corrected p-values of an α ≤  <dig>  were retained.

figure 
3a - c illustrates the results from this genome-wide cis-element analysis. at first sight it became apparent that the analysed auxre, zre and mre/myc motifs and composite motif-modules were disproportionately more enriched in auxin-inducible rather than repressible promoters. a closer examination of the single enriched motifs revealed that, as expected, the typical arf-like b3-type tf binding sites such as aux <dig> and aux <dig>  but also the ry motif, were strongly enriched in the auxin-inducible promoters at early or late induction time-points. regarding the bzip-tf binding sites , it was obvious that the single gre motif as well as gre-auxre associations occurred in significant, higher frequency . although the bipartite motif-module showed no orientation specificity to 5’ or 3’ positioning in general, the gre-auxre module seemed to be preferred compared to the auxre-gre module constellation . other zres, like the tga- and ac motif, were per se and in combination with other motifs, generally not enriched or even depleted , indicating that among all auxin up-regulated arabidopsis promoters, the gre motif seems to be the most preferred bzip binding site.

examining the abundance of the mres it was noticeable that the single mre <dig> cis-element was rather depleted in the auxin-regulated promoters. however, both analysed mre motifs  occurred at a significantly higher frequency in combination with the gre motif . moreover, mre <dig> associations with the ry b3-type tf binding site could be found.

finally, the myc <dig> motif  was highly enriched as single motif or myc2-auxre module in the promoters of auxin up-regulated genes . as this site closely resembles a gre , it remains to be disclosed which kind of tf binds in the context of auxin-induced transcription.

while figure 
3a, b illustrate which motifs or modules were enriched, they do not determine which of the tested motifs were most abundant in the analysed dataset. therefore, all significantly enriched motifs  were additionally ordered with respect to the quantity of promoters in which they occurred. as it has been reported, in agreement with our results , that mres and gres reside in individual promoters near auxres 
 <cit>  and, thus, might synergistically contribute to auxin-mediated transcription, we expanded the analysis to include triple motif modules of all three motif classes. an excerpt of the results which display the cis-elements which are present in at least 5% of the analysed promoters are presented as an occurrence list of single motifs and bi- or tripartite motif-module combinations at each time point  and are summarized in the following remarks.
a. thaliana


enrichment of cis-elements in the promoters of significantly  auxin-induced genes determined by parameter i. the analysis discriminates between early  or late  responding genes. asterisks indicate enrichment with respect to parameter ii. the number of analysed promoters as well as that of promoters containing at least one of the presented motifs or modules is given in parentheses. an extended list of enriched motifs which also considers cis-elements which are present in less than 5% of the analysed promoters can be found in additional file 
 <dig>  presented modules  exhibit a variable but maximal spacing of 100 bps between each embedded motif. sequences and abbreviations of cis-elements are given in table 
 <dig> 

single motifs
the well-characterized auxres  and the relatively rare ry motif  were highly enriched in early or late auxin-inducible promoters, respectively. besides these, the gre and its related myc <dig> motif were listed in the set of early and late auxin-inducible promoters among the top  <dig> most abundant cis-elements. the tga motif, which has been shown to be frequently present in the promoters of the early auxin-responsive gmgh <dig> homologs, was slightly depleted as a single motif within the set of all arabidopsis auxin-inducible promoters in this analysis. however, it should be considered that this depletion was calculated on the basis of parameter i  compared to a randomized background dataset. in fact, several promoters within the dataset of auxin-inducible genes still contained this motif.

bipartite motifs
gre-auxre associations were the predominantly enriched bipartite motif combination within the group of early  auxin-inducible promoters. however, this association was also highly abundant in promoters that responded 1 h or 3 h after auxin treatment. furthermore, it was noticeable that myc2-auxre cis-regulatory units were generally enriched in early to late, and gre-mre modules in rather late, auxin-inducible promoters. consistent with the observation that slight variations of the consensus auxre  have been commonly found in auxin-responsive promoters 
 <cit>  the majority of gre-auxre and myc2-auxre combinations were not associated with aux <dig> but to aux <dig> 

tripartite motifs
examining the distribution of tripartite modules of zre, mre/myc <dig> and auxre motifs, it was apparent that gre-aux1/2-mre1/ <dig> combinations could be found in early auxin responsive promoters . notably, in all of these modules the gre motif resided next to an auxre, whereas the position of the mre motif in this module seemed to be more variable. however, in 80% of the gre, auxre and mre tripartite modules, the mre motif also resided near an auxre.

by summing up these results it can be pointed out that the auxin-inducible promoters revealed an enrichment of single aux1/ <dig>  gre, myc <dig> and ry cis-elements. moreover, in particular gre, myc <dig> and mre motifs were frequently associated with auxres.

cis-elements and modules of auxres, zres and/or mre/mycs are also enriched in auxin-inducible promoters from rice
to assess whether the cis-element distribution observed in the arabidopsis auxin-inducible promoters is evolutionary conserved, we analysed a publicly available microarray dataset from the monocot plant oryza sativa. in the corresponding work 
 <cit> , transcript preparations from 7-days-old rice seedlings treated with auxin for  <dig> and 3 h were pooled and compared to those of non-induced plants. since the experiment contained no induction time series, only up- or down-regulated genes could be identified. after normalization, these genes were classified with respect to a significant 2-fold expression difference, resulting in the identification of  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated genes . the compiled promoter lists were subsequently analysed for single motifs and double and triple motif combinations as it has been done for the arabidopsis dataset . this analysis revealed, that auxin-inducible rice promoters exhibited an enrichment of zre-, mre- or auxre-motifs and composite modules, rather than those which were repressed after the hormone stimulus. more precisely, not only the single aux <dig> and ry elements were significantly enriched, but also the gre and tga motifs; however some of them only with respect to enhanced motif density. concerning the bipartite modules, it was similar to the arabidopsis auxin-inducible promoters that gre and myc <dig> associations with arf-like b3-type tf binding sites  were highly enriched. in contrast to results obtained with arabidopsis though, composite tga-mre <dig> modules were overrepresented in rice. these results are also reflected in the ordered promoter lists in which the enriched motifs and modules that at least appear once in ~ 5% of the analysed promoters were sorted according to the number of promoters in which they occur . in this list, the single ry element outranked all other motifs followed by the gre-, aux <dig> and tga cis-elements that were enriched with respect to parameter ii. referring to the bipartite motif modules, the auxre-gre, mre-gre and auxre-myc <dig> combinations were highly abundant. within the group of complex tripartite modules, gre, auxre and mre <dig> containing modules were most preferred, although tga, auxre, mre module combinations were also enriched, in which the tga motif substituted the gre cis-element.
 <dig> 
o. sativa


enrichment of cis-elements in promoters of significantly  auxin-induced genes was determined by parameter i, whereas asterisks indicate an enrichment with respect to parameter ii. the number of analysed promoters as well as that of promoters containing at least one of the presented motifs or modules is given in parentheses. an extended list which also includes more rare motifs and modules can be found in additional file 
 <dig>  presented modules  exhibit a variable, but maximal spacing of 100 bps between each embedded motif. sequences and abbreviations of cis-elements are given in table 
 <dig> 

comparative analysis of enriched cis-elements and modules from arabidopsis and rice displays a conservation of specific cis-regulatory elements
in order to examine whether specific motifs or composite modules are conserved in auxin-induced promoters of arabidopsis and rice, we performed a comparative analysis of the promoter occurrence of each enriched cis-regulatory element. unfortunately, the available microarray data from the auxin-induction experiments from arabidopsis and rice were differently designed so that comparable datasets had to be determined. as the number of genes which were not induced after 1 h but explicitly after 3 h of auxin application was rather small in the arabidopsis dataset, we decided to compare the dataset of the 1 h up-regulated genes from arabidopsis to that of the combined  <dig> to 3 h dataset from rice . although we cannot exclude that rice and arabidopsis plants respond differently to the auxin application, a comparison of these datasets resulted in a largely concurrent set of enriched motifs in both analysed plant species.

this comparison revealed that the enrichment of single aux <dig>  gre and ry motifs within the promoters of auxin up-regulated genes is evolutionary conserved between the dicot and the monocot model plant. considering the bipartite motif combinations, several modules that were highly enriched in the arabidopsis dataset were also present in the ordered promoter occurrence list of rice. most noticeable were gre, auxre containing modules as well as gre, mre1/ <dig> and myc <dig>  aux <dig> motif combinations, that appeared at various positions in the occurrence lists of both angiosperm plant species. with respect to the tripartite modules, the gre-auxre-mre <dig> or its related mre2-auxre-gre module were found to be enriched in arabidopsis or rice. although even more module combinations of these three binding sites were significantly overrepresented in auxin-inducible promoters from both species, it was striking that in all of them the gre motif was located near an auxre.

besides these similarities the most distinct difference in terms of motif enrichment related to the tga cis-element. it was found to be frequently abundant in the promoters of gmgh <dig> homologs  and was occasionally enriched as single motif and in composite bi- and tripartite-motif modules with mres and/or auxres in the promoters of auxin up-regulated genes from rice. in contrast, it was not overrepresented in the auxin-responsive promoters from arabidopsis.

distinct motifs and composite cis-regulatory modules are enriched within promoters of auxin-induced arabidopsis gene families
to create a more detailed profile which auxin-responsive genes might actually be regulated by which specific type of motif or module, we analysed the promoters of well-characterised auxin-regulated gene families such as the gh3saux/iaas and saurs which are described to be early auxin-responsive 
 <cit>  . however, all of them also include some late responsive members 
 <cit> . in addition, the family of the auxin-related arf genes was studied as an example of an auxin-related, but largely constitutively expressed gene group 
 <cit>  . in the following section an overview of the results from this gene family specific cis-element analysis is given .
cis
-elements and modules in promoters of auxin-responsive gene families from 
a. thaliana


given is the significant motif and module enrichment or depletion in the promoters of auxin-related gene families regarding parameter i, whereas asterisks indicate an enrichment with respect to parameter ii. the number of analysed promoters as well as that of promoters containing at least one of the presented motifs or modules is given in parentheses. an extended list which takes account of more rare motifs  can be found in additional file 
 <dig>  presented modules exhibit a variable, but maximal spacing of 100 bps between each embedded motif. sequences and abbreviations of cis-elements are given in table 
 <dig> 

gh3s – the promoters of the arabidopsis gh <dig> gene family were enriched for the single myc <dig> motif and bipartite myc2-auxre modules. in the group of tripartite modules, the gre-aux2-mre <dig> was enriched and outranked other motif combinations. although tga motifs were found to be depleted in the set of all auxin-induced promoters , they were significantly enriched as tripartite aux2-tga-mre <dig> or myc2-aux2-tga modules within the arabidopsis gh <dig> promoters.

aux/iaas – the single myc <dig> and auxre cis-elements were significantly overabundant in the arabidopsis aux/iaa promoters. moreover, modules of myc2-auxre and myc2-gre were found with higher frequency. regarding the complex tripartite modules, several constellations of mre1/2-auxre-gre associations were most prominent.

saurs – in arabidopsis, the promoters of the saur gene family were significantly enriched for the single myc <dig> and aux <dig> motifs. this conservation also persisted in the bipartite modules of myc <dig> and auxres.

arfs – the promoters of the arf gene family displayed no significant enrichment for the cis-elements and modules that were analysed. obviously the transcriptional control of this, in general constitutively expressed gene family 
 <cit> , is not dependent on the presence of these cis-regulatory elements.

in conclusion, it could be demonstrated that the analysed auxin-regulated gene families from arabidopsis showed in part distinct, but also common cis-regulatory elements . noticeable in this respect was the observation that the primarily early auxin-responsive gene families, such as the gh3s, aux/iaas and saurs exhibited an enrichment of the single myc <dig> as well as myc2-auxre modules, which were missing in the promoters of the mainly, constitutively expressed arf genes. furthermore, it has to be noted that gre, auxre and mre1/ <dig> containing tripartite modules were frequently enriched in the promoters of the gh <dig> and aux/iaa gene families, but not in the saurs or arfs. taken together, these observations suggest a certain dependency of specific cis-elements in the regulation of distinct auxin-regulated gene families and early auxin-responsive gene classes.

mutations in the gre cis-elements within a gre-auxre module of the arabidopsis gh <dig>  promoter lead to a significant reduction of its auxin-responsiveness
the previously described cis-element analyses repeatedly indicated that particularly gre-auxre modules are highly enriched and conserved in auxin-inducible promoters. in order to validate the bioinformatic based assumption that gre and auxre cis-elements co-operate in auxin-mediated transcription, we inspected the promoters of the early auxin-responsive arabidopsis gh <dig> genes for the presence of gres. atgh <dig>  is a close homolog of the well-characterised soybean gmgh <dig> and harbours several gres in its promoter in close vicinity to auxre- and mre cis-elements and to the transcriptional start site  . in fact, some of them also form the gre-auxre-mre tripartite module, which was shown to be frequently enriched in atgh <dig> promoters .

to analyse the effect of the gre motif on auxin-mediated transcription, a short synthetic atgh <dig>  derived promoter region containing one gre and two auxre cis-elements was constructed which we termed graux module . multimers of this module were fused to a minimal promoter and the gus reporter gene, allowing expression analysis by transient protoplast transfection assays. whereas a single graux module construct exhibited a slightly, but not significantly higher reporter gene expression in the presence of low exogenous auxin concentrations, multimerisation strongly enhanced auxin-responsiveness . notably, all constructs showed a similar background expression under non-inductive conditions .

to assign the influence of the gre motif within the graux module, cis-element specific mutational derivatives of the 4-times multimerised construct were analysed. by this means, it was demonstrated that mutations in the core sequence of the gre-motif resulted in a ~ 50% reduction of the auxin-triggered inducibility, while mutations in the auxres alone or in combination with a mutated gre led to complete auxin insensitivity . as we have demonstrated that auxin-inducible promoters are in general enriched for gre-auxre modules, this functional analysis underpins that they are certainly potential quantitative elements in auxin-regulated promoters.

discussion
in this work, we have presented a genome-wide cis-element analysis of bzip- , myb/myc-  and arf-tf  related binding sites in auxin-responsive promoters from arabidopsis and rice. we could demonstrate that specific cis-elements and/or composite modules, which encompass typical binding sites for these tfs, are enriched in auxin-inducible promoters of the tested angiosperm plant species. most prominent and concurrent in this respect, is the enrichment of the single gre and aux1/ <dig> motifs as well as their related bi- and tripartite-module organisations, in which they are also commonly associated with mres. moreover, a substantial enrichment of the relatively rare ry cis-element and of myc2-auxre modules was observed. the evolutionary conservation of these cis-acting elements in the analysed monocot and dicot model plants, that exhibit considerable differences in their species specific genome structure in terms of the gc content, affirms that they might be part of a common regulatory mechanism in auxin-responsive transcription. ensuing studies are of importance to define the relevance and function of the identified motifs and to disclose which sets of auxin responsive genes are regulated by them. in our work a detailed gene family specific cis-element analysis revealed that especially promoters from early auxin-responsive gene classes are enriched for bipartite myc2-auxre and tripartite gre-auxre-mre modules. in fact, we demonstrated that mutations in the gre motifs within a promoter construct derived from the early auxin-responsive atgh <dig>  gene result in a severe reduction of its auxin-triggered inducibility.

the applied randomization algorithm determines motif enrichment to predict the functional relevance of regulatory cis-elements
in the presented cis-element analyses, we focused on the enrichment and distribution of specific motifs in auxin-responsive promoters to predict their cis-regulatory importance. however, the validity of the bioinformatically founded hypotheses is based on and limited by the main assumption that all or a relevant proportion of target genes, that are regulated by the same type of tf, should contain the tfs’ cognate binding site in their promoters. this is certainly not mandatory as individual tfs might co-operatively regulate their target genes by interacting with other dna-bound transcriptional regulators 
 <cit> . besides this it has to be considered, that inherent algorithm limitations can negatively affect p-value determination for motif enrichment or depletion. in this study almost all analysed cis-elements were normally  distributed in the background population, generated by the applied randomization algorithm. hence, accurate p-values for determining motif enrichment could be calculated using gaussian z-statistics. however, extremely rare and extremely overabundant motifs  follow different distributions  as they are non-normally distributed. this hampers reliable distribution analysis as the p-values delivered by the randomization algorithm become inaccurate. therefore we provide additional significance parameters such as parameter ii  to take account of this limitation. despite these general restrictions, we have demonstrated that the employed motif mapper cis-element analysis software and the integrated randomization algorithm proved to be straight-forward and effective for accessing the significance of the tested cis-element and composite cis-element module distributions. in contrast to other more complex cis-regulatory module scanners that require clusters of tightly co-expressed genes and/or sets of orthologous genes 
 <cit> , the algorithm performed well in noisy, unclustered datasets. this is possible as the algorithm simply defines the number of motifs and/or modules in the genomic, randomized and experimental datasets to determine motif enrichment or depletion without seeking for optimal concurrent cis-elements to explain a given dataset clustering in its entity. therefore, any association of genes can be chosen  and analysed for any type of cis-element or module distribution. the user only needs to provide a complete, genomic set of promoters of which several are now available, a specific promoter subset of interest and a list of normally distributed cis-elements and/or motif combinations that should be tested.

zre and mre cis-elements are potential quantitative auxre coupling elements
specific zre, mre/myc <dig> and auxre-related motifs and composite modules were found to be significantly enriched in the auxin-responsive promoters from arabidopsis and rice . the most outstanding in this respect are the single auxre, gre- and the relatively rare ry-motifs, which were enriched in the promoters from all auxin up-regulated genes from arabidopsis and rice, followed by the myc <dig> element, which was enriched in the arabidopsis auxin up-regulated promoters and the mre <dig>  which was most frequent in the auxin-inducible promoters from rice. however, the relevance of some of these motifs in terms of enrichment was more pronounced and of others, only concrete in association with additional motifs. particularly, the mre motifs were frequently enriched in a modular structure with auxres and/or gres in the auxin-inducible promoters from both analysed species . thereby, the mre <dig> seemed to be preferred compared to mre <dig>  whereas this could be partially explained by the fact that the mre <dig> motif is slightly rarer than mre <dig>  the observation that mres frequently resided near auxres , especially in tripartite gre-auxre-mre motif combinations , suggests that mres are a relevant integration platform for myb-tf activities in auxin-mediated transcription. in fact, this assumption is supported by experimental data provided by shin and co-workers 
 <cit> . consistent with our findings, they were able to show that atmyb <dig> effectively interacts with atarf <dig> and other arfs to synergistically promote target gene expression 
 <cit> . this indicates that mres likely function as coupling elements for auxre-mediated transcription in both, monocot and dicot plant species.

similar observations can be made for specific zre motifs. some of them occurred in high frequency in the context with adjacent auxre elements. in this respect, the bipartite gre-auxre or tripartite gre-auxre-mre <dig> modules were the by far most dominant combinations in early auxin-inducible promoters from both species . in particular the tripartite module was found to be enriched in early auxin responsive gene families, such as the gh3s or aux/iaas . in fact, the experimental validation of the functional relevance of the gre motif as quantitative auxre coupling element by mutational cis-element analysis revealed that it at least significantly contributes to the auxin-mediated induction of the atgh <dig>  gene .

consistently, it has been reported that g-box like motifs are associated with auxres in the early auxin-responsive promoters of the soybean gh <dig> and aux <dig> genes and that they synergistically promote transcription 
 <cit> . furthermore, it was demonstrated that a tobacco ntgh <dig> gene harbours multiple gre-auxre repetitions in its promoter and that the bzip factors ntbzi- <dig> and ntbzi- <dig>  which had been implicated to regulate specific auxin responses, bind to them 
 <cit> . the homologous arabidopsis group c/s <dig> bzip transcription factors have been characterized to be involved in reprogramming transcription in response to low energy stress 
 <cit> . therefore, it is tempting to speculate that these tfs might integrate information about the cellular energy homeostasis into auxin-specific expression patterns.

myc <dig> and ry binding sites are strongly enriched cis-elements in auxin-responsive promoters with yet undefined relevance
based on the cis-element analyses of auxin-responsive promoters from arabidopsis and rice we detected a significant enrichment of myc <dig> and ry cis-elements in auxin-inducible promoters . concerning the myc <dig> motif, we observed a strong enrichment of the single and bipartite myc2-auxre module in the auxin-inducible promoters from arabidopsis and more precisely, in the promoters of the early auxin-responsive atgh3ataux/iaa and atsaur gene families . consistent with this, pufky and co-workers 
 <cit>  revealed in an unbiased approach that myc <dig> motifs were overrepresented in small clusters of auxin-inducible promoters from arabidopsis compared to their expected genomic frequency. moreover, nemhauser and co-workers 
 <cit>  described that myc2-related cis-elements are overabundant in promoters of auxin- and brassinosteroid- responsive genes. even though these findings suggest that the myc <dig> motif might be involved in modulating the expression of auxin-responsive genes, its function is yet unclear. recently, it was reported that the myc2-motif is enriched in promoters from diurnally regulated genes and that it is sufficient to confer the observed circadian expression pattern in vivo 
 <cit> . as many growth related processes, which are mainly mediated by auxin, are also interconnected with the circadian clock 
 <cit> , the myc2-element might provide a molecular link between these systems. however, as the myc2-  and the gre  motif share high sequence similarity, it has to be addressed which type of tf actually binds the promoters in this context.

regarding the single ry motif, we have demonstrated that it is enriched in auxin-inducible promoters from arabidopsis and rice, even though it was only present in 3% of all arabidopsis and 7% of all rice promoters. the ry motif or sph/ry-box 
 <cit>  was reported to be involved in abscisic acid  signalling 
 <cit> . it is known to be bound by members of the b3-type tf superfamily, which also includes arf tfs. one of these members, which directly binds the ry cis-element, is abi <dig>  which contains three basic domains, originally designated b <dig>  b <dig> and b <dig> 
 <cit> . whereas the b <dig> domain was demonstrated to be necessary for ry binding 
 <cit> , the b <dig> domain appears to be responsible for recruiting bzip tfs 
 <cit> . an example of such interplay between abi <dig> and bzip tfs was described by alonso and co-workers 
 <cit> , which reported that these tfs synergistically promote the expression of seed maturation genes, including seed storage and dehydration-responsive genes. based on these observations it is conceivable that ry binding tfs might functionally interact with bzips in auxin-responsive gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
in order to adjust auxin-controlled growth and developmental processes in plants in response to the diversity of fluctuating environmental cues, integrative cis-regulatory elements are needed to quantitatively modulate auxin-dependent gene expression, which is mediated by the well-characterised qualitative auxre motif. indeed, modular organisations of gre- and mre-motifs in association with auxres were found to be highly enriched and evolutionary conserved and appeared to synergistically contribute to auxin-inducible expression. the finding that myc <dig> and ry motifs were highly enriched in auxin-responsive promoters, further increases the combinatorial, integrative opportunities in auxin-mediated transcription. these results demonstrate the potential of bioinformatic approaches to generate working hypotheses on putatively relevant cis-regulatory elements in order to design experiments to characterize their predicted functions.

