BACKGROUND
scrapie is a neuro-degenerative transmissible disease, known since the 18th century, that affects small ruminants and belongs to the group of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies . diseases of this group are characterized by the accumulation in the brain of an anomalous form of the prion protein , that induces nervous clinical signs leading to death. bovine spongiform encephalopathy  and creutzfeldt-jakob disease are two other members of this group that respectively affect cattle and human. bse was first described in  <dig>  <cit> . in the following year, field studies allowed epidemiologists to identify its major transmission mode, meat and bone meal  <cit> , and a first set of control measures were taken to break the transmission cycle. ten years later, laboratory studies and epidemiological features showed that bse agent was the probable cause of a new form of creutzfeldt-jakob disease in human  <cit> , and a second set of control measures were taken, for public health protection. during bse epidemic, european sheep were probably exposed to food contaminated by the bse agent. experimental studies have shown that sheep may be infected by bse agent  <cit> , and that the clinical signs are then identical to those of scrapie  <cit> . furthermore, transmission experiments have shown the possibility of an horizontal transmission of bse agent among sheep  <cit> .

if sheep flocks have been exposed to bse agent, a "sheep bse" could thus exist and propagate silently, clinical cases being identified as scrapie cases  <cit> . the potential threat for public health induced by such a propagation led european animal health authorities to launch screening programmes for detecting bse cases in small ruminants. to date, these programmes failed to detect bse in sheep, but allowed to identify a tse case in a goat, the agent signature of which could not be distinguished from that of bse  <cit> . distribution of pathological changes in the brain as well as western blot profiles allow to distinguish two scrapie types: classical scrapie and atypical scrapie. epidemiological studies suggest that the aetiology and epidemiology of these two scrapie types are different, the infectious nature of atypical scrapie being uncertain  <cit> . the present study is specifically dedicated to classical scrapie, and the word 'scrapie' will be used below for 'classical scrapie'.

genetic variations of susceptibility to scrapie have been described in numerous studies  <cit> . these variations are associated with the polymorphism of prp gene, and individual susceptibility to scrapie may be characterized by three codons of this gene  <cit> . despite available data are sparse, genetic susceptibility profiles to bse in sheep seem similar to those of scrapie. selection programmes have thus been launched in several european countries, that aim at eliminating the most susceptible alleles to decrease circulation of scrapie agent as well as the potential circulation of bse agent in sheep  <cit> .

besides large abattoir or fallen stock screening programmes  and genetic selection programmes , an intermediate approach centred on the flock may be proposed. as for other transmissible diseases, existence of a procedure to substantiate flock freedom from scrapie would allow defining objectively a subset of population considered as scrapie-free, a distinction that could be the basis of measures oriented towards public health or animal health. if a circulation of bse agent in sheep flocks were demonstrated, such a qualification procedure would probably become mandatory, and form the basis of scrapie eradication plans, similar to those dedicated to other transmissible diseases such as tuberculosis or brucellosis.

however, a first particularity of scrapie is that unlike other transmissible diseases, no live animals tests are currently used in the eu for routine diagnostic, as tests are performed on brain samples. therefore, scrapie can only be routinely diagnosed on slaughtered or dead animals. for other transmissible diseases, the status of a herd can be determined by testing all the animals living in that herd. but for scrapie, the status of a flock can only be based upon test results obtained from animals leaving the flock, that represent the remaining animals.

a second particularity of scrapie is that evidence of freedom from disease can not only be based on negative test results obtained on a sample of animals from the flock, but also on genetic data. knowledge of the genotypes of the tested animals is necessary to interpret results of diagnostic tests: a negative result obtained from a genetically susceptible animal brings more evidence of scrapie freedom than a negative result obtained from a genetically resistant animal . ideally, if live animals tests could be routinely used and if a full knowledge of flock genetics were available, animals of the most susceptible genotypes should be tested first to detect disease presence. however, in practice, it is not the case, and this situation leads to a paradox for flocks with a majority of genetically resistant animals: while in such flocks, the probability to be free from scrapie should be considered as high even if no animal has been tested for disease detection, performing diagnostic tests on the flock animals does not bring significant evidence of scrapie freedom as these animals are genetically resistant. substantiating scrapie freedom through disease detection surveys would then be more difficult in resistant flocks than in susceptible flocks.

the objective of this study was to propose a framework for solving the preceding paradox, that allowed defining and comparing several practical approaches  for substantiating scrapie freedom in a flock. these took into account scrapie specificities and differed according to how results of diagnostic tests were combined with genetic data to provide evidence of freedom from scrapie. two sources of genetic data were considered: genotyping exams that may be performed on some of the flock animals, and flock pedigree  that may also allow to derive genotype-associated probabilities for non-genotyped animals  <cit> .

feasibility of the proposed qualification strategies was quantified, in terms of probability for a scrapie-free simulated flock to be classified as such within a reasonable time. the corresponding durations were evaluated, as well as the associated costs: numbers of diagnostic tests and genotyping exams performed. the strategy for which the associated cost is the lowest was finally determined, as well as how this one varies according to the unitary costs of genotyping exams and diagnostic tests.

RESULTS
qualification strategies
a qualification strategy was defined by a specific combination of a testing scheme, a genotyping scheme and a level of information about flock pedigree. two testing schemes were used: either no diagnostic test is performed, or all the culled animals are tested. three genotyping schemes were considered: all the animals may be genotyped, leading to a full knowledge of the flock genetics; genotyping exams may be restricted to culled animals, or to founders animals. founders animals are animals born in another flock, or animals of which one of the parents or both has been sold or culled . the third genotyping scheme thus supposes the pedigree is known: two information levels about flock pedigree were considered, the pedigree being either completely known or non-documented.

combining the preceding testing schemes, genotyping scheme and information levels about flock pedigree led us to define six qualification strategies:

-two genotyping-oriented strategies in which full genetic knowledge is available , with  or without  diagnostic test performed on the culled animals,

-two diagnostic-oriented strategies in which a diagnostic test and a genotyping exam are performed on each culled animal, the flock pedigree being either known  or unknown ,

-two pedigree-oriented strategies in which the flock pedigree is fully known and founders animals are genotyped, with  or without  diagnostic test performed on the culled animals.

whatever the strategy, we assumed that, as soon as the flock is involved in a qualification process, rams used for mating are genotyped, and the farmer does not introduce any ram of the most susceptible genotype in his flock.

success or failure of the qualification process
in the simulations performed, two strategies always succeeded in a susceptible population : a genotyping-oriented strategy  and a pedigree-oriented strategy . in both cases, genetic or pedigree knowledge is complemented by diagnostic tests on culled animals. performing these diagnostic tests appeared essential, as the parallel versions of strategies for which no diagnostic test is performed  showed either a low success rate  or a constant failure . performing diagnostic tests was however clearly not sufficient, as diagnostic-oriented strategies showed very low success rates . strategy b <dig>  based on testing and genotyping of culled animals, always failed. knowledge of the flock pedigree brought limited added value and the success rate remained low  for strategy b <dig> 

amean values when qualification succeeds.

results obtained in simulated flocks from a susceptible  and from a resistant population  according to the qualification strategy:  full genotyping with  or without  negative test results for culled animals,  genotyping and negative test result for each culled animal with  or without  known flock pedigree, and  genotyping of founders animals with known flock pedigree with  or without  negative test result for culled animals). the design prevalence is 1%.

in a resistant population, strategies a <dig> and c <dig> were again those for which success rate was the highest: 94% . their performances appeared very close, as both strategies failed in the same three simulated flocks. performing diagnostic tests appeared less essential than in a susceptible population, as strategy a <dig> showed a significant success rate: 86%. this rate remained however low for strategy c <dig> . diagnostic-oriented strategies always failed.

duration of the qualification process
in a susceptible population, strategies a <dig> and c <dig> were the only strategies for which high success rates were achieved. qualification successes were obtained between the 4th and the 9th year , with an mean value of  <dig> years . distributions of the qualification process duration were very close , and in 62% of the  <dig> simulated flocks, both durations were identical. absolute difference was ≤ <dig> year in 96% of simulated flocks.

in a resistant population, mean duration of the qualification process was  <dig> years with strategies a <dig> and c <dig>  i.e.  <dig> years shorter than in a susceptible population. distributions of the qualification process duration  showed that, if average durations are identical, the earliest successes were obtained with strategy a1: qualification succeeded at the 1st simulated year in approximately 15% of simulated flocks, duration being ≤  <dig> years in about one quarter of the simulated flocks. conversely, with strategy c <dig>  no qualification success was obtained at the 1st year, and very few at the the 2nd year. for both strategies, the longest observed durations were  <dig> years. finally, with strategy a <dig>  average qualification was  <dig> year longer than with strategies a <dig> and c <dig> . distribution of qualification durations  appeared comparable to the distribution obtained for a <dig>  the final proportion of qualification successes being lower.

costs of qualification process
in a susceptible population, with strategies a <dig> and c <dig>  approximately  <dig> diagnostic tests were performed, on average, before qualification succeeded. with strategy c <dig>  the number of genotyping exams was however much lower than with strategy a <dig> . the strategy with the lowest cost was thus strategy c <dig>  whatever the genotyping/diagnostic test unitary costs ratio . in particular, even if the cost of a genotyping exam is very low , strategy c <dig> remained the strategy with the lowest cost in approximately 3/ <dig> of simulated flocks.

in a resistant population similar results were obtained when comparing average costs with strategies a <dig> and c <dig> : average number of diagnostic tests were very close  but the average number of genotyping exams was  <dig> times higher with strategy a <dig>  strategy a <dig>  represented however a possible alternative for which the number of genotyping exams was close to that performed with strategy a <dig>  but for which no diagnostic test was performed. the identity of the strategy with the lowest associated cost was thus more variable when the genotyping/diagnostic test unitary costs ratio changed . if the cost of a genotyping exam was less than half that of a diagnostic test, the strategy with the lowest associated cost was a <dig>  in particular, if the unitary cost of genotyping exams was very low , strategy a <dig> was the less costly strategy for 60% of simulated flocks. conversely, if the cost of a genotyping exam was more than half that of a diagnostic test, the strategy with the lowest associated cost was c <dig>  strategy c <dig> had an intermediate position between a <dig> and c <dig>  but its success rate was low.

discussion
most of the methods for demonstrating the absence of a transmissible disease have been developed at the zone or the country level, but they can be applied at the flock level. these methods are entirely or partly based upon random surveys in the studied population, designed to detect the disease if it is present at a given level . if the survey fails to detect any infected animal, one can state with a certain probability that the disease level is below the design prevalence, and, in practice, the population is considered disease-free. several studies have been published for computing sample size considering either a diagnostic test of perfect sensitivity and specificity  <cit> , or an imperfect diagnostic test  <cit> .

a common assumption of the preceding approaches is that, when the disease is present, all the tested animals have the same probability to be found infected. this assumption is not always the case. several tests with different sensitivities may be used on different animals  <cit> . individual variations of test sensitivity may also exist. for bse, as infection evolves slowly in the infected animals, the probability for an infected animal to be test-positive increases with age  <cit> . these variations may be taken into account by weighting each negative diagnostic result by the corresponding sensitivity, considering both individual sensitivity variations and tests sensitivity variations. for example, bse negative test results obtained from old animals  bring more evidence of disease freedom than negative test results obtained from young animals . this approach may be adapted to scrapie, considering genetic variations of susceptibility as individual variations of the probability to detect the disease when a flock is infected. negative test results obtained in animals of susceptible genotypes should then bring more evidence of disease freedom than negative test results obtained in animals of resistant genotypes. however, this leads to a paradoxical situation in which, for substantiating disease freedom, a greater amount of testing is needed in resistant flocks than in susceptible flocks, despite the fact that the probability of disease freedom is a priori higher in resistant flocks than in susceptible flocks.

to solve this paradox, a possible approach would be to combine random survey results with another source of data aiming at evaluating overall flock susceptibility to infection . a flock would then be considered scrapie-free either on the basis of a very low flock susceptibility level , or on the basis of the negative results of a random survey, or on the basis of a combination of the two preceding data sources using methods such as stochastic scenario trees  <cit> . however, instead of considering two separate sources of evidence for scrapie freedom, we chose to adapt the probabilistic framework in order to solve the preceding paradox. the proposed approach may be used for finite populations, when individual susceptibility to infection can be considered as being binary, and when individual characteristics allow to compute, for each animal of the flock, the probability to be susceptible to infection. the survey aiming at detecting disease is then modelled as an hypergeometric process that allows taking into account both the flock susceptibility  and the amount of testing done. in particular, the proposed approach accounts for the fact that if the flock susceptibility level is low , the probability that the number of susceptible animals is below the design prevalence may be high enough for substantiating scrapie freedom without performing any diagnostic test.

several qualification strategies are proposed for demonstrating a flock is free from scrapie : genotyping-oriented strategies, diagnostic-oriented strategies and pedigree-oriented strategies. results show that genetic data play a central role for substantiating freedom from scrapie, as the diagnostic-oriented strategies fail in most cases. thus performing diagnostic tests and genotyping exams on all culled animals does not allow demonstrating scrapie absence within a reasonable time horizon . oppositely, two strategies show close and satisfactory performances: a genotyping-oriented strategy in which all the flock animals are genotyped and a pedigree-oriented strategy in which only founders animals are genotyped, the flock pedigree being known. in both cases, diagnostic tests are performed on culled animals. these two strategies are successful in the vast majority of cases. four years on average are required to demonstrate disease freedom in a resistant population , and six years in a susceptible population . the pedigree-oriented strategy is however the less costly and, more generally, results show that knowing the flock pedigree always brings a significant added-value, as it allows reducing the amount of genotyping exams. if not routinely recorded, documenting the flock pedigree should thus be encouraged. in the proposed approach, knowledge of flock pedigree is assumed perfect; the model can however be easily modified to take into account incomplete or imprecise knowledge of flock pedigree.

global cost for substantiating freedom from scrapie depends upon the unitary costs of genotyping exams and of diagnostic tests. considering a reasonable domain for the ratio between these two unitary costs  allows to show that, in a susceptible population, a dominant strategy exists: the pedigree-oriented strategy described above is the less costly in the vast majority of cases. the situation is less clear in a resistant population. a genotyping-oriented strategy, solely based upon the realization of genotyping exams on all the flock animals, becomes a valuable alternative to the preceding pedigree-oriented strategy. in particular, when the cost of a genotyping exam is less than half the cost of a diagnostic test , this genotyping-oriented strategy becomes the lowest-cost strategy.

CONCLUSIONS
while performed for a single flock type and two genetic contexts, our study shows that it is possible to demonstrate that scrapie is absent from a flock. however, there is no general strategy that would always minimize the costs, and in practice, the choice of a qualification strategy should be adapted to genetic conditions , as well as to the respective costs of diagnostic tests and genotyping exams. the duration before scrapie freedom is demonstrated remains long  and lasts several years.

nevertheless, qualification schemes could be useful tools for scrapie control programmes. in the case of voluntary control programmes, the practical interest of such schemes remains to be investigated, by comparing potential benefits brought by a qualification  with costs induced by qualification procedure. however, if a circulation of bse agent in sheep flock were demonstrated, scrapie control programmes would probably quickly become mandatory . as for other infectious diseases, qualification schemes could then be used to classify flocks according to their status, a classification upon which control measures could be based.

