BACKGROUND
bovine spongiform encephalopathy , which affects cattle and several other food animal species  <cit> , belongs to the transmissible spongiform encephalopathy  group of fatal neurodegenerative diseases affecting humans and animals  <cit>  and can be transmitted within and between species by ingestion or parenteral inoculation  <cit> . tses which include, amongst others, scrapie in sheep and goats, sporadic creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in humans and chronic wasting disease  of deer  <cit>  are all characterised by long incubation periods leading to clinical neurological manifestations. the pathological changes can usually be linked with the conversion of the normal host-encoded membrane associated prion protein  to abnormal disease-associated isoforms  and their accumulation in the nervous system and, depending on the host species and the tse agent involved, the lymphoreticular system  <cit> . detection of prpd in tissues by various laboratory methods is the current approach for a definitive diagnosis of any tse  <cit> .

ten years after the first report of bse in cattle  <cit>  variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease  was diagnosed in humans in the uk  <cit>  and is invariably fatal  <cit> . ingestion of bse contaminated bovine products was subsequently linked to the development of vcjd  <cit>  resulting in greatly intensified surveillance and research in both humans and food animals  <cit> .

during the 1980s uk farmed deer were fed relatively large amounts of proprietary concentrate feed containing ruminant derived meat and bone meal  due to the market demand for well grown breeding stock. additionally, some free ranging estate deer, park deer and cervids of many different species kept in uk zoological collections were also fed similar proprietary concentrate feed . it is highly unlikely that these concentrates were free from bse contaminated mbm suggesting that uk deer have been exposed to infectious material. surveys of several thousand deer brains have so far revealed no evidence of any sub-clinical tse infection in deer in europe. this is despite the presence in north america of cwd, a highly infectious tse which specifically affects deer including the elk , a sub-species of european red deer, and is currently the only tse maintained in free ranging populations  <cit> . however, the european surveys have either not concentrated on farmed populations, been regionally restricted, had limited numbers or have not specifically targeted clinical neurological suspects  <cit> .

RESULTS
in the present study  <dig> european red deer , the most commonly farmed cervid species in the uk, were challenged intracerebrally  with bse positive bovine brain material and a further  <dig> deer received sterile saline by the same route. all deer on the study were methionine homozygous at codon  <dig> of the cervid prion protein  <cit>  equivalent to codon  <dig> in humans  <cit> . all six bse-inoculated animals developed a variable range of neurological clinical signs including ataxia, anorexia, circling and apparent blindness along with failure of seasonal change of coat, weight loss and 'panic attacks' between 794– <dig> days post-challenge . the panic attacks comprised various episodes of mania of differing severity and duration, which in the first and last animals to develop clinical signs resulted in self trauma requiring euthanasia on welfare grounds. five of the affected deer were euthanased and one  died of inhalation pneumonia. with the exception of very little intra-thoracic or abdominal adipose tissue, which was apparent in all animals, gross lesions were present only in the animal that died of inhalation pneumonia. severe consolidation of the right apical lung lobe was present with red/green discolouration, the tissue was very friable and a low-viscosity purulent material oozed from the cut surface. also, blood was present in the caecum of this animal.

deer 1– <dig> challenged i/c with bse agent in chronological order of developing clinical signs. deer  <dig> and  <dig> challenged i/c with sterile saline – negative control animals.pme = post-mortem examination n/a = not applicable-negative, + mild, ++ moderate, +++ severe

spongiform change characterized by vacuolation of both neuronal perikarya and grey matter neuropil was prominent in the brains of all six clinically affected deer . optically empty, round or oval vacuoles were present in neuropil while neuronal perikaryonal vacuoles were sometimes loculated and sometimes contained membranous debris. the appearance and distribution of the vacuoles are thus indistinguishable from those of other classical tses, including cwd. lesions predominantly affected the brain stem, thalamus and striate body, as well as the molecular layer of the cerebellum and cerebrocortical layers v and vi.

immunohistochemical labelling of prpd
accumulation of prpd in the bse infected deer was restricted to the central and peripheral nervous systems, including all levels of the spinal cord, the autonomic ganglia, peripheral and cranial nerves, the enteric nervous system and the sensory retina. essentially the same neuroanatomic pattern and types of prpd accumulation were found with each of the two antibodies  that were used. prpd deposits were more inconsistent and less intense in the first deer to show clinical signs compared with the other five, possibly due to its shorter incubation period . prpd was found to accumulate in all anatomical areas of the brain though levels were relatively lower in the cerebral cortex. typically, only grey matter was involved, with the most prominent accumulations being of the fine particulate type, with some more coarse and linear deposits in severely affected areas . granular deposits of prpd within the cytoplasm of neurons were prominent, especially throughout the brainstem and thalamic nuclei, though they were less conspicuous in the striate body and cerebral cortex. in the cerebellum, accumulation of intra-neuronal prpd was conspicuous in the deep nuclei and, distinctly, in the golgi neurons of the granular layer, but not in the purkinje cells . intracellular deposits of prpd were also noticeable in astrocytes and microglial cells in areas of heavy neuropil involvement. in the cerebral grey matter, the prpd around glial cells produced a diffuse stellate pattern of accumulation. very little prpd accumulation was present around blood vessels in cerebral white matter or as intra-astrocytic granules in the cerebellum. prpd was not detected in lymphoreticular tissues, skeletal muscle, kidneys or any of the other organs examined.

western immunoblotting
western immunoblot analysis of individual samples of cerebellum from the  <dig> clinically affected deer using antibody l <dig> after treatment with proteinase k showed a glycosylation pattern of protease-resistant prp  in which the di-glycosyl fraction predominated  with some minor variations in labelling intensity between animals. the deer di-, mono- and unglycosylated bands migrated significantly  further than the corresponding bands in both the cattle and experimental ovine bse samples, which in turn migrated significantly more than ovine scrapie. none of the bse-infected samples, irrespective of the species of origin , reacted with antibody p <dig> in an identical western immunoblot but the sample of scrapie infected ovine brain did . the lack of labelling by antibody p <dig> is a recognised method of differentiation between ovine bse and scrapie derived prpres  <cit> . additionally, all cervid samples did label with antibody p <dig> in the absence of proteinase k treatment indicating that prpc is detected by this method in all species examined . this absence of detection of cervid prpres after proteinase k treatment by the p <dig> antibody is consistent with immunoblot characteristics of other experimental ruminant bse infections and some experimental sheep scrapie sources such as ch <dig>  <cit> .

discussion
this is the first report of the successful experimental transmission of bse to any species of deer and the first report of any tse in european deer. european red deer were chosen because in the uk they are the cervid species most commonly given supplementary proprietary feed under both farmed or free-ranging estate management and therefore are the species most likely to have been exposed to bse contaminated mbm prior to its exclusion from animal feed. additionally, they are very closely related to the north american elk which is susceptible to cwd  <cit> . the resultant clinical signs in the bse challenged red deer were similar to those reported in both naturally acquired and experimental cwd in cervids in north america, including death due to secondary inhalation pneumonia  <cit> . as such, we believe it would not be possible to differentiate bse, if it occurred naturally, from cwd in deer by routine clinical examination in the field.

the vacuolation pattern found in the brains of the bse challenged red deer is similar to that reported in cattle with bse except that the mesencephalon appeared to be more affected in the latter  <cit> . sheep orally infected with bse also developed a similar vacuolation pattern which favours the brainstem  <cit>  as do mule deer  and elk with clinical cwd  <cit>  such that the patterns of vacuolation in the brain are unlikely to provide a simple method to distinguish between individual bse or cwd infections in deer.

prpd labelling by ihc in tissues from the clinically affected i/c bse challenged red deer showed it to be restricted to the central and peripheral nervous systems. this suggests an incubation-period related centrifugal spread of infectivity from the brain and associated prpd accumulation through the nervous system. overall, the immunohistochemical features of bse in red deer after i/c transmission are similar to those reported for cattle, sheep or goats naturally or experimentally infected with bse, in which there is prominent intra-cellular prpd accumulation as well as widespread particulate labelling in areas of grey matter neuropil, including that surrounding the soma of neurons and their processes along with linear and multifocal stellate reticular forms associated with glial cells  <cit> . following high dose oral challenge of cattle several studies have also shown an inconsistent presence of bse infectivity or prpd labelling in some peripheral nerves, peyer's patches and tonsils  <cit> . however, the infectivity in both neural and non-neural tissues from bse affected deer following oral challenge is yet to be determined. sheep that have been challenged orally with bovine derived bse differ from both cattle and i/c challenged red deer in that they show extensive labelling of prpd in lymphoid tissues in addition to the peripheral and central nervous systems  <cit>  similar to deer with cwd  <cit> .

in contrast to our findings in bse infected red deer where prominent intra-neuronal labelling of prpd was found, intra-neuronal deposits are reportedly rare in cwd affected animals and when present are mild and scattered within and between neurones of different nuclei; mainly in the brainstem  <cit>  and the cerebellar deep nuclei  <cit> . however, detailed descriptions of the neuropathology of different cwd sources are few and it is not clear whether cwd consists of a single or many tse strains. whether bse in deer can be readily distinguished by ihc epitope mapping  <cit>  or prpd profile  <cit>  will require additional study.

differentiation of bse from cwd in deer would appear possible by ihc as prpd is restricted to the nervous system in bse yet present in the lymphoid tissue in cwd. however, the red deer in this study were experimentally challenged by the i/c route and we cannot be certain of the distribution of prpd in deer exposed to natural, presumably oral, challenge with bse.

western immunoblot analysis of the brains from the  <dig> affected red deer showed that the prpres pattern of i/c cervid bse has similarities to cattle bse including a relatively fast migrating aglycosyl band and predominance of the di-glycosyl band . the greater intensity of labelling of deer  <dig> may be due to it dying, and therefore reaching a terminal end point, rather than a clinical end point where animals were euthanased at an agreed severity of clinical signs, as occurred in the previous four affected deer. also, deer  <dig> was the only female in the bse i/c challenge group, however, we are uncertain if this had any effect on prpres glycoprofile or levels of accumulation. the significantly  greater migration of all three protease resistant bands  in the red deer samples compared to the cattle and sheep bse suggests some host adaptation of bse prpres propagated within the red deer nervous system. the altered biochemical properties suggests the possibility of alternative truncation of the prp molecule within deer compared with the bovine or ovine host.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that european red deer are susceptible to i/c challenge with the bse agent resulting in a disease that is clinically indistinguishable by routine clinical examination from that reported for cwd  <cit> . thus strong measures to prevent the spread of cwd to europe are essential as even small numbers of cwd cases could result in the need for extensive testing of deer tissues destined for human consumption.

the susceptibility of uk red deer to natural, presumably oral, exposure is still uncertain. the absence of prpd in lymphoid tissues in the present work might appear to limit the risk to humans of infection from venison and other non-neuronal edible deer tissues and also limits the maintenance of natural infection in the environment. however, the susceptibility of peripheral tissues to infection cannot be ascertained from i/c challenge and must await the outcome of parallel oral challenge experiments.

