BACKGROUND
one fundamental topic in modern evolutionary ecology is the understanding of the genetic mechanisms underlying adaptation of organisms to changes in their environments. several attempts to identify the molecular basis of adaptation have already been made for a variety of organisms: e.g.  xia et al.  <cit>  have found differences in nucleotide diversity patterns at drought-related candidate genes in two species of tomatoes indicating local adaptation.  concerning animals, feldman et al.  <cit>  found that adaptive evolution of the garter snake to toxic prey has occurred independently via the de novo acquisition of beneficial mutations in the skeletal muscle sodium channel.  in the british peppered moth biston betularia, a single core sequence has been identified to carry a signature of strong selection that is responsible for industrial melanism  <cit> .

with the increasing availability of next-generation sequencing  technologies, it is possible to investigate the burning questions regarding mechanisms underlying adaptations also for non-model organisms with a well-understood ecology  <cit> . the first ecological model organism whose genome has only recently been released is daphnia
 <cit> , a globally distributed grazer of algae and cyanobacteria. its ecoresponsive genome  <cit>  and well-studied ability to adapt to many biotic and abiotic factors  makes it the perfect system with which to study evolutionary and adaptive processes on the genetic level  <cit> .

especially daphnia’s ability to adapt to cyanobacteria and their toxins has been extensively studied during the last years  <cit> . cyanobacteria negatively affect daphnia by reducing somatic growth  <cit>  and inhibit feeding  <cit> . also a decline in daphnia biomass due to cyanobacteria has been observed in several field studies . however, the generality of this negative correlation between cyanobacterial and daphnia biomass has recently been questioned in an experiment  <cit>  and in several field studies  <cit> , demonstrating that daphnia have the potential to adapt to increasingly tolerate dietary cyanobacteria. cyanobacteria and their toxins are becoming more and more of an ecological threat due to global warming and eutrophication  <cit> , and new solutions for the management of freshwater ecosystems are needed. therefore, it is a key issue to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms of daphnia’s ability to tolerate cyanobacterial toxins and to therefore possibly suppress cyanobacterial blooms  <cit> . toxic cyanobacterial secondary metabolites that frequently occur in cyanobacterial blooms are the well-studied microcystins and serine protease inhibitors  <cit> . both toxin types have been shown to negatively affect daphnia
 <cit> .

identifying candidate genes is a major issue in genetics of adaptation. for cyanobacterial protease inhibitors, these candidate genes are easy to determine, as digestive proteases are the direct targets of protease inhibitors. schwarzenberger et al.  <cit>  found that the tolerance of different daphnia genotypes depended on the residual activity of proteases; increased gene expression and enhanced activity of the non-inhibited protease type also seemed to play a role. von elert et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that tolerance to cyanobacterial protease inhibitors was acquired by remodelling the affected digestive protease type.

however, in the case of microcystins, candidate genes are not as easily identified. from in vitro studies it has been proposed that protein phosphatases  <dig> and 2a are direct targets of microcystins in daphnia
 <cit> . however, it remains unclear which major physiological pathways are affected by a putative binding of microcystins to these protein phosphatases, and which of the associated elements cause the difference in tolerance among different daphnia genotypes. pflugmacher et al.  <cit>  proposed that a glutathione-microcystin conjugate formed in vitro by glutathione s-transferase  might be the first step in detoxification of microcystins in daphnia. however, only one of twelve gst genes was found to be up-regulated in response to dietary microcystins in a recently published d. pulex microarray study  <cit> , calling the role of gst as a mechanism of tolerance into question. in the same microarray study, several oxidative stress genes were up-regulated in d. pulex after ingestion of a microcystin producing cyanobacterium  <cit> . oxidative stress responses have been observed in different aquatic organisms after exposure to microcystins  <cit> . however, it remains unclear whether the regulation of these genes in daphnia was due to the microcystins or rather a general response to the ingestion of cyanobacteria. it is also not known whether these genes might explain tolerance to microcystins. the ingested cyanobacterium also contained other secondary metabolites; therefore the effects on gene expression could not exclusively be attributed to microcystins in this study  <cit> . due to the importance of daphnia as a global grazer of cyanobacteria and its capability to control cyanobacterial blooms, it is now essential to identify the candidate genes that are regulated after ingestion of microcystins. it is also essential to investigate the involvement of these candidate genes in microcystin tolerance by separating the effects of the pure microcystins from general cyanobacterial responses.

different from asselman  <cit> , who only used a microcystin-producing cyanobacterium in a daphnia microarray study, we here measured gene expression in transcriptomes of one tolerant clone of d. magna, which was fed with either 100% of a green alga or 90% of this alga with 10% of the wild-type strain of m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> that produces both microcystins and protease inhibitors, or with 10% of its microcystin-free mutant. this cyanobacterial system, which only differed in microcystin-production, allowed disentangling effects on gene expression of d. magna due to microcystins from gene expression effects caused by dietary protease inhibitors. we pair-wise determined differentially expressed genes due to the different food sources and calculated significantly affected kog-categories. from these kog-categories we chose several candidate genes for microcystin tolerance from the comparison of green algal food/ food mixture with the wild-type strain and green alga/ mutant. by measuring differences in gene expression via qpcr in four d. magna clones from two ponds with or without cyanobacteria we were investigating the underlying molecular mechanisms of microcystin tolerance and local adaptation.

RESULTS
for the transcriptome analyses we chose a clone of daphnia magna  that has been shown to be relatively tolerant to dietary microcystins and was therefore assumed to have distinct mechanisms for coping with dietary microcystins. in order to avoid differences in juvenile development, growth and reproduction between the cyanobacterial treatments,  we only added 10% of cyanobacterial carbon to the food mixtures. a significant reduction in somatic growth rate  was observed in comparison to high quality food, while no differences in d. magna growth between microcystin-containing and microcystin-free cyanobacterial food was found . this indicates that d. magna was still able to cope with such a low concentration of microcystins without additional detectable costs besides costs associated with feeding on cyanobacteria in comparison to control food. for each pair-wise comparison between food treatments, more than  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were found: cm: 1178; cw: 1651; mw:  <dig> . due to a very strict database search of d. magna against the d. pulex genome  only around 20% of these de genes were assigned to functional genes. this very low number probably also resulted from the fact that a high number of genes might be lineage specific for d. magna ). additionally, some of the de genes might be improperly predicted by cufflinks. however, the strictness of the database search ensured a high probability for the correct prediction of gene names and functions of the de genes. additionally, this strictness also enables to generalize our results for other daphnia species, since these genes are probably more conserved than de genes that were excluded. in all comparisons with wt, more de genes were down-regulated than up-regulated . several serine proteases  were regulated in response to dietary trypsin inhibitors produced both by the wild-type and the mutant of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig>  this finding corroborates earlier findings with the same d. magna clone  <cit>  obtained by qpcr.figure  <dig> 
venn diagrams of all de genes  and genes that could be assigned to gene ids from the wfleabase  of the three comparisons. cw: all de genes in the comparison between d. magna grown on 100% c. klinobasis and d. magna grown on 10% wild-type m. aeruginosa pcc <dig>  cm: all de genes in the comparison between d. magna grown on 100% c. klinobasis and d. magna grown on 10% mutant m. aeruginosa pcc <dig>  mw: all de genes in the comparison between d. magna grown on 10% wild-type m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> and d. magna grown on 10% wild-type m. aeruginosa pcc <dig>  overlapping planes share de genes; i.e. these de genes appear in more than one comparison. the unequal diameters of the circles in the venn diagrams result from different numbers of de genes.



the de genes which could be assigned to d. pulex genes were assigned to kogs and kog-categories  <cit> . kog categories, which were highly significantly affected by dietary microcystins , contained genes which were involved in transport processes: intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport  and secondary metabolites biosynthesis transport and catabolism . a total of  <dig> atp-binding cassette  proteins were identified in the d. pulex abc-transporter gene family, and many of them were assigned to drug efflux transporters homologous to other species  <cit> . it has been suggested that the increased expression of abc transporters constitutes an adaptive mechanism enabling organisms to be resistant to drugs and toxicants  <cit> . here, in d. magna, many transporter genes were down-regulated in response to dietary microcystins, which suggests that these transporters are involved in microcystin up-take rather than in excretion. gene regulation of these transporter genes was probably partly responsible for the observed higher number of down-regulated in comparison to up-regulated genes in the treatments with the microcystin-producing cyanobacterium. however, a permease was up-regulated in daphnia, which is in accordance with the finding that permeases have been shown to extrude cytotoxic compounds out of yeast cells  <cit> . whereas transporter genes were clearly identified as novel candidate genes for microcystin tolerance, no previously suggested candidates from in vitro studies  were differentially expressed in response to microcystins. the finding that no gst gene was differentially expressed in our transcriptome is in line with asselman et al.  <cit>  who have found only one gst to be up-regulated. both findings indicate a minor relevance of conjugation to glutathione for inducible tolerance to microcystins.table  <dig> 
gene names, accession numbers from wfleabase.org  and primer sequences used in qpcr analyses


d.pulex
d. magna


three differentially expressed transporter genes were chosen for candidate gene expression analyses with qpcr. these genes were a transporter of the abc superfamily , a multidrug/pheromone exporter  and a permease of the major facilitator superfamily. four d. magna clones were chosen for this gene expression study: two clones showed a low tolerance to dietary microcystins , while the other two clones had a high tolerance to the wild-type strain of m. aeruginosa that produces microcystins . in the qpcr analyses, the abc superfamily and the multidrug/pheromone exporter genes were significantly down-regulated in three of four clones in response to supplemented pure microcystin lr , which confirmed the results from the transcriptome study. for both genes, one of the clones with low tolerance did not regulate gene expression at all, whereas the two tolerant clones showed the strongest down-regulation of gene expression. additionally, an expected significant increase in permease gene expression was observed only in one of the tolerant clones . it is quite likely that the decrease in abc-transporter and multidrug-transporter gene expression leads to lower production of transporter protein, which in turn results in a lower up-take of microcystins into the cells. a higher production of permeases might on the other hand cause a stronger excretion of microcystins from the cells.figure  <dig> 
juvenile somatic growth rates of four clones of
d. magna
from two different populations with  or without  naturally occurring cyanobacteria. d. magna were either grown on 100% chlamydomonas klinobasis or on 90% c. klinobasis and 10% of either the wild-type strain of microcystis aeruginosa pcc <dig> or its microcystin-free mutant. different letters indicate significant difference between treatments for each clone separately .
relative gene expression of three transporter genes  of four
d. magna
clones from two different populations with  or without  naturally occurring cyanobacteria. d. magna were grown on 100% c. klinobasis with either control liposomes or with liposomes supplemented with microcystin lr. asterisks indicate significant differences  in gene expression in relation to gene expression on control liposomes .



since the two tolerant clones showed a higher transporter gene regulation in response to supplemented microcystin lr than the other clones, we concluded that the regulation of transporter genes actually plays a role in tolerance to dietary microcystins. interestingly, both tolerant clones and the clone used in the transcriptome stemmed from the same population with frequent cyanobacterial blooms  <cit> . therefore, local adaptation of this population to microcystins due to higher transporter-gene regulation is plausible. another strong indication of the involvement of transporter genes in adaptation to microcystins is a particularly high number of gene duplications observed in several abc-transporter subfamilies  <cit> . for example, gene family expansions in phenotypically important genes have been shown to be responsible for adaptation of insects to insecticides  <cit> . future work should therefore address the role of transporter genes in local adaptation of daphnia to microcystins in natural systems, as well as how these adapted populations might be used for the management of lakes with frequent cyanobacterial blooms.

CONCLUSIONS
until recently it has been impossible to identify the genetic mechanisms underlying adaptive traits in non-model organisms. whereas adaptations to natural environments have been demonstrated in ecologically relevant organisms, the genetic basis of adaptation has mainly been investigated in genetic model organisms whose adaptations to environmental variability are of minor interest. in the case of daphnia, studies identifying genes that account for adaptive traits are scarce, and are based on qpcr analyses of candidate genes which were identified on the basis of a-priori knowledge of their function  <cit> . by using a transcriptome-wide approach, we have been able to answer the question as to which genes are involved in microcystin tolerance. not only did we find new candidate genes, but also demonstrated that the regulation of these genes clearly accounts for the tolerance of daphnia to microcystins. in most adaptation studies, changes in dna sequences  were identified to constitute the genetic mechanism. here, we suggest that in some cases adaptation of individuals or populations might arise from the adapted organism’s ability to differential express few important genes.

we here confirm that with the knowledge of the ecological background of an organism and a smart experimental design the huge amount of sequences produced in transcriptome approaches can be minimized to few genes with high potential. by releasing new ecoresponsive genomes, with daphnia as a first example, and with the ever-increasing application of ngs approaches, it is now possible to link well-studied adaptive traits to the discovery of the underlying genetic mechanisms.

