BACKGROUND
novel molecular signatures specific to particular taxonomic or organismal groups have possible applications for advancing of our understanding of the species within them. in addition, emerging strategies for protein engineering and drug design exploit molecular evolutionary information of proteins  <cit> . approaches such as targeting evolutionary conserved residues and domains in proteins to modify the interaction of enzymes with other compounds have been reported  <cit> . an example is the development of the drug raltegravir, which targets the conserved reaction core domain of integrase of the human immunodeficiency virus   <cit>  and provides a treatment for patients with resistance to conventional classes of drugs against human immunodeficiency virus  infections. however, compared to the focus on conserved proteins, there has been very limited attention to exploring variation in protein sequences and structures linked to insertion/deletion events in homologous proteins among different groups of organisms. depending on their location and size, insertions and deletions can have a significant effect on the structure and function of proteins, resulting in significant diversity and reflecting the adaptation of an organism to a specific mode of existence or environment  <cit> . therefore, insertions and/or deletions unique to particular groups of organisms could advance our understanding of such groups at a molecular level and provide useful genetic, biochemical or physiological markers and targets for drug design.

insertions and deletions  in coding sequences have been reported to be the result of one or more mutation processes, including dna mispairing  <cit> , crossover  <cit> , transposition  <cit> , and/or others  <cit> . however, the precise processes and mechanisms remain to be determined. despite their effects on sequence diversity, indels are considered to be relatively rare events compared to point mutations  <cit> . indels are also less likely than substitutions to be selectively neutral and are proposed to be under constant selective pressure and are frequently deleterious  <cit> . many proteins are under substantial functional and structural constraints, thus limiting substitutions at the amino acid level  <cit> . indels accumulated during evolution, not deleterious to a species or a group of species, can change protein structures and function  <cit>  leading to adaptations to new environments  <cit> .

the paucity of information on indels, particularly those conserved across different phyla, has limited our understanding of protein function and evolution in relation to the adaptation of organisms to particular environments or hosts. interestingly, preliminary study of proteins inferred from genomic data sets for parasitic nematodes suggested the presence of nematode-specific proteins and indels compared with other metazoa , which emphasizes the need to undertake extensive investigation for different evolutionary groups. a systematic, comparative bioinformatics analysis of sequence and structural differences in proteins could thus provide unique insights into evolutionary and functional aspects of proteins in parasitic organisms, particularly in relation to host adaptation and ecology. from an applied perspective, such analyses could also identify indel events that might be further explored for the rational design of drugs to such unique targets. this latter statement is particularly pertinent to parasitic nematodes, because of widespread problems with drug resistance  <cit>  and the need to find new intervention strategies, including drugs and vaccines  <cit> .

nematodes represent one of the largest phyla of animals, yet many remain poorly described. thus far, more than  <dig>  have been described  <cit> . although there are many uncertainties regarding the evolution of nematoda, a molecular phylogeny, based on the use of a ribosomal subunit gene, has proposed five main clades   <cit> . these clades reflect the diversity in biology and ecology within nematoda and suggest that the adaptation to parasitism has occurred multiple times during their evolution. in contrast to free-living nematodes, such as members of the genus caenorhabditis, many parasitic nematodes cause diseases in plants and animals and are thus of major socioeconomic importance. for instance, hundreds of millions of people are infected with geohelminths , such as ancylostoma duodenale and/or necator americanus, trichuris trichiura and ascaris spp.  <cit> , causing serious adverse effects on human health, particularly in children. similarly, parasitic nematodes of livestock, such as cattle and sheep, also cause substantial economic losses worldwide, with billions of dollars spent annually on the treatment and control of nematodes. in addition to the socioeconomic impact that these parasites have, there is potential for the emergence of resistance against the main classes of nematocidal compounds used to treat the diseases they cause  <cit> . therefore, there is a significant need to work towards discovering new compounds to control these parasites.

genomic technologies can assist in this discovery effort. for example, expressed sequence tag  sequencing projects provide a resource for the prediction of new drug and vaccine targets . recently, the projects conducted at washington university with its collaborators have succeeded in generating ~ <dig>  expressed sequence tags  from  <dig> species of nematodes representing four of the five clades of the nematoda. the amount and depth of this dataset enabled us to carry out a systematic analysis of insertions and deletions in proteins inferred from these transcripts by comparing to proteins from a range of other organisms . the present study conducted a comprehensive comparative analysis to identify indels specific to nematode proteins and their relationships with molecular function and organism adaptation. this initial analysis provided a foundation for "indel-based" drug design in nematodes, while elucidating possible mechanisms of nematode parasitism, adaptation and protein evolution.

RESULTS
taking advantage of the abundance of nematode sequences accumulated from several nematode sequencing projects, and the large evolutionary distances between some sequences, the present study characterized insertions and deletions  unique to nematode proteins. distinct from most previous studies  <cit> , which combined data on indels, the present analysis considered both insertion and deletion events by comparing nematode proteins with those of their homologues in other eukaryotic  organisms. we defined insertions unique to nematodes as gaps common to all other eukaryotic sequences, and nematode-unique deletions as gaps absent from any other sequence. to ensure the reliability in the identification of insertions and deletions, we focused the analyses on the  <dig> families with  <dig> or more homologues available from other metazoa and at least one fungus. these families contain  <dig>  polypeptides  in nematodes. the average length of the peptides inferred from est contigs and genomes was  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids , respectively. for a protein family to be considered in the present analysis, it had to represent at least  <dig> different species . hence, only alignments that represented both caenorhabditis and parasitic nematodes were evaluated, thus eliminating bias due to length differences. we studied the evolution of the insertions and deletions in nematodes via a detailed analysis of insertion and deletion events that were shared among different lineages or clades. the relationships of these indels were studied by examining the inferred function of their corresponding proteins. also, the associations between the presence of indels and different tropic ecology  as well as the parasitic mode of existence were studied.

uneven insertions and deletions
est databases  <cit>  provide a large amount of sequence data for nematodes. a total of  <dig>  translations of contig-level est consensus sequences  originating from  <dig> nematode species, were complemented with complete datasets  generated in five genome sequencing projects . hence, a total of  <dig>  polypeptides/proteins from  <dig> nematode species were used for the subsequent analysis . the systematic analysis  defined  <dig>  homologous families, of which  <dig>  were common to at least three species . by focusing on the nematode protein families with homologues in other eukaryotic organisms, we were able to define nematode-specific indels, employing fungal sequences as outgroups. within these  <dig>  families of proteins, the defined number of deletions  was significantly greater  than the number of insertions . in addition, the deletions  tended to be longer than the insertions   .

subsets of protein families  representing at least two species from each clade of the phylum nematoda  were selected , in order to conduct an analysis of indel events in relation to the proposed molecular phylogeny of nematoda. for the  <dig> families,  <dig>  deletions and  <dig> insertions were identified, with a significant bias  toward deletions, and, again, the deletions tended to be larger. the indels could be classified into  <dig> groups based on whether they were common or restricted to clade or lineages . the distribution of indels of the  <dig> families  showed limited numbers of indels at the internal nodes , suggesting that the majority of the indels identified evolved after the separation of the clades. the largest number of indels belonged to sequences representing clade v . for each clade, < 3% of indels were common to all members. under the assumption that indels shared by all members of a lineage occurred at its last common ancestor , the present data indicated that shared insertions tended to be more basal than shared deletions . seven of  <dig>  of the shared insertions were generated at the lca, in contrast to < 6%  for deletions . more insertions than deletions occurred at the lca of all nematodes and the lcas of clades iii, iv and v, whereas more deletions occurred across all other lineages, which is consistent with the tendency of nematode proteins to have more deletions than insertions.

evidence of a link between indels and the adaptation from free-living caenorhabditis to a parasitic mode of existence
we investigated indels based on their trophic ecology, i.e. fln , ppn , and apn . these three groups of nematodes had a limited number of common indels . the free-living caenorhabditis nematodes had in common ~10% of deletions and ~30% of their insertions. interestingly, free-living nematodes had more insertions compared with parasitic nematodes  . the ratio of insertions to deletions for free-living nematodes was  <dig> , whereas for nematodes parasitic in animals and plants, the ratios were lower . also, caenorhabditis spp. shared more insertions  than deletions . there were only three deletion events  and one insertion event  common to all parasitic nematodes. the proteins associated with the shared insertion were inferred to be involved in fatty acid synthesis . the three deletion events were linked to proteins associated with genetic information processing , and environmental information processing . because these deletion events were shared only by parasitic nematodes representing different clades, they are likely linked to an adaptation to parasitism. to examine whether these shared, unique indels might represent novel molecular features that warrant further exploration , we mapped  the deletion of the protein family homologous to mitochondrial carrier protein to the structure of its bovine homologue  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows that there is a deletion of an entire helix, including its terminal loops, from the nematode proteins. unfortunately, there is no structural data available for the other protein families.

a, common indels, conserved among all members of a group and specific to that group of nematodes,

b, restricted indels, restricted to a group of nematodes but not conserved among all of its members.

interested in proteins with common indels that might relate specifically to a parasitic mode of existence, we classified the protein families with indels common to fln, ppn, or apn, according to the panther protein classification system. table  <dig> lists the top ten processes based on the number of assigned protein families and grouped them according to the trophic ecology of the species . while the highest percentage of families were mapped to "nucleotide metabolism", there was no significant difference among the three different types of nematodes. in contrast, there was a significant difference among nematodes in the number of mappings to the electron transport and lipid metabolism . in both these categories, ppn had an increased number of families compared with fln and apn. approximately 22% of the ppn protein families were associated with these two functional classes, compared with < 10% for free-living and animal-parasitic nematodes .

a, functional classification is based on the panter protein classification system  <cit> ;

b, only proteins families with indels common to a nematode group are included.

mapping indel events identified in protein families to cellular pathways
the frequencies of indel events in particular protein families involved in cellular pathways were inferred, in order to explore possible links to biological function and the adaptation of nematodes to their environment and/or hosts. the kegg pathway database enables associations to metabolic and regulatory pathways, and was therefore used for this analysis. according to kegg analysis, four main types of pathways were identified: genetic information processing, cellular processes, metabolism, and environmental information processing. the lowest frequencies of insertions and deletions were linked to proteins involved in genetic information processing, whereas the highest frequencies were associated with cellular processes , with a difference of ~50% between them. the differences among deletions and insertions were statistically significant . a complete list of all kegg mappings is available as additional file  <dig>  examining sub-pathways, transcription was the least represented , whereas endocrine signaling and immune system had the highest representation  . the differences in frequency and size of indels within proteins involved in single pathways versus proteins involved in multiple pathways were also investigated. this analysis included >  <dig> families homologous to multi-pathway proteins and >  <dig> families homologous to other proteins, and revealed that the average frequencies of both insertions and deletions of the multi-pathway families were ~30% higher than those of others   and the differences were highly significant .

discussion
the present, systematic analysis of indels in proteins of nematode origin has provided useful information to make inferences about protein evolution and function and could have important implications for the identification of novel genetic, biochemical or physiological markers and targets for drug design.

it is known that indels are distinct from point substitutions, and their evolution is affected by distinct influences  <cit> . the present results support the proposal that insertions and deletions relate to distinct evolutionary processes. the number of deletions is significantly higher than that of insertions, and the sizes of deletions are larger than those of insertions. a previous study also found more deletions in coding sequences in mammals  <cit> . it appears that mutational bias is one cause of these increased deletions. analyses of non-coding genomic sequences have revealed a mutational process biased toward deletions  <cit> , and the present results indicate that similar mutational mechanisms might apply to the protein-coding sequences. however, the observed larger size of deletions cannot be explained by mutational bias, since deletion and insertion mutations have similar sizes  <cit> . so, the role that natural selection and adaptation have played here is unclear. from the structural perspective, proteins are more flexible with insertions than deletions  <cit> , although single-residue deletions can be tolerated  <cit> . therefore, deletions, particularly larger ones, are not expected to be maintained, which contrasts current observations. it is likely that function-related selection has played a role. such selection has been identified in a primate sperm ion channel protein  <cit> . both the increased number of deletions at the terminal nodes  and the increased common deletions  among parasitic nematodes further suggest that the function-related selection is associated with recent species adaptation. nonetheless, the observed, larger number of deletions and their larger sizes  indicate a size decrease in nematode transcriptomes during evolution. this size reduction in nematode transcriptomes seems to be consistent with a tendency for their genomes to be smaller than some other metazoa, such flatworms  <cit>  and birds  <cit> .

the biased distributions of indels on different functional pathways  further demonstrate the selective forces on them, and suggest the association between increased indels and functional adaptation. proteins involved in genetic information processing are believed to have stringent selective constraints, and are under strong "purifying selection"  <cit> . accordingly, these proteins have the least number of insertions and deletions per protein . depending on the function, some proteins are under positive selections and accumulate more insertions and deletions  <cit> . the present study showed that nematode proteins involved in cellular processes  including endocrine signaling pathways and immune system  had 50% more deletions and insertion than those involved in genetic information processing. this information agrees with the findings of previous studies  <cit> . rapidly evolving genes are also considered to be frequently associated with the immune and endocrine systems in other organisms  <cit> . these systems are considered to be key to a specific molecular interaction with the environment where a rapid adaptation to a food source  <cit>  or host may be required. overall, the present results suggest that proteins bearing sizable nematode-specific indels are functionally grouped. furthermore, adaptation can lead to an increase of protein sequence changes, including substitution, insertion, and deletion  <cit> . the high rates of insertion and deletion events in proteins involved in multiple pathways might also be viewed as an evidence of functional adaptation, as suggested by recent research  <cit> . although a relaxed selective pressure can also lead to such high rates, it is unlikely here. the selective pressure on these proteins is assumed to be greater because they are involved in multiple pathways and potentially interact with more proteins. their substitutional rates tend to be lower  <cit> . thus, increased indels in proteins involved in multiple pathways is suggested to be due to their positive role in an adaptation of nematodes to their host and environment.

more direct evidence for roles of nematode-specific indels in adaptation comes from a comparison of their distributions in different groups of nematodes. the number of indels common to plant parasitic nematodes, compared with other nematodes, is higher for proteins involved in electron transport and lipid/fatty acid/steroid metabolism . the higher number could be related to the adaptation of ppn to their specific lifestyle, which includes different stages capable of surviving aerobic and anaerobic environments. adaptation of these energy metabolism related functional classes is important for parasites. direct biochemical evidences of adaptation with these two classes have been observed  <cit> . these detected common indels can be one of the reasons for those observed biochemical changes, and suggest that ppn are likely to use indels as a strategy for their adaptation as well as lateral gene transfer  <cit> . nonetheless, given the nature and potential bias of our data, the upcoming parasitic nematode genome data  <cit>  will enable us to perform more comprehensive studies which will lead to more firm conclusions.

there is a very limited number of indels occurring on internal nodes , although these internal nodes do not represent short evolutionary times. for example, the internal branch leading to the split of clade v, iv and iii stands for more than  <dig> million years  <cit>  . if all indels were retained and their rates are constant, the numbers of indels of these internal branches are expected to be in the same order of magnitude as the terminal branches. the extremely low observed numbers of insertions and deletions on internal nodes could reflect that nematodes have higher indel rates, and thus the number of newly generated indels is higher that the older indels. thus, sequence comparisons can only detect fewer shared indels. however, it is also possible that an indel burst occurred in the evolution of the nematoda during a recent adaptation to their life niches.

in addition to insights into fundamental aspects of indel events in proteins, including their evolution and roles in adaptation, this study might assist in the design of intervention strategies against nematodes. indels common to all parasitic nematodes could provide drug targets for broad control. on one hand, if they are restricted to nematodes, specific targeting will not affect the regular functionality of the homologous proteins in the hosts. importantly, these indels might also be crucial for the survival of parasites . using indels to design effective drugs has been successfully explored by nandan et al.,  <cit>  who designed a compound that targeted a  <dig> residue deletion in the ef-1α protein of the protozoan parasite leishmania donovani. the compound attacks the parasite by blocking this protein without affecting the human homologue. it is likely that the indel used for drug design should be located on the surface of a protein or should relate to a unique structural component of a protein. sizable deletions uniquely shared by all parasites could possess similar characteristics and become a target for these approaches as well. one such example is the deletion of an entire helix on a functionally important mitochondrial carrier protein . hence, the identified conserved nematode-specific molecular signatures have possible applications for advancing our understanding of the nematodes.

CONCLUSIONS
genomics studies of parasites in the phylum nematoda have been mainly restricted to est-derived partial proteomes  <cit> . the analysis varied from comparison between two species, to a pan-phylum analysis. numerous laboratories around the world have contributed to >  <dig>  ests from more than  <dig> species. nematologists currently also have available genome sequences from four nematode species including two parasites. the first annotated genome of a parasitic nematode, brugia malayi, contained over  <dig>  genes  <cit>  and the plant parasite meloidogyne incognita over  <dig>  genes  <cit> ; both studies have identified potential new anti-parasitic drug targets. however, as the cost for the next-generation sequencing technologies decreases substantially, the sequencing of complete genomes of many eukaryotic species, including parasitic nematodes selected mainly due to their importance to health, evolution and ecology, can be foreseen in the near future. in the next five years, collaborative projects at the genome center at washington university and the wellcome trust sanger institute will increase the available parasitic nematode sequences by another order of magnitude, adding a total of  <dig> draft genomes supplemented by millions of cdna reads via pyrosequencing. however, we anticipate that complete annotated genomes for parasitic nematodes are still 2– <dig> years away. until then, the transcriptomic data will remain the main source of information for the investigation of nematodes at the molecular level. these est-derived partial proteomes represent mainly abundantly transcribed sequences and therefore lack or have reduced representation of some gene classes and are thus inappropriate for certain type of analyses, such as "gene loss" which is due to lack of evidence rather than true loss.

however, several pan-phylum analyses have been facilitated by the wealth of transcriptomic data from over  <dig> nematode species spanning the phylum nematoda. the first pan-phylum analysis  <cit> , was one of the most complete analyses of the genetic diversity of a single phylum yet attempted, and was full of surprises. this report showed that the c. elegans genome contains only a relatively small fraction of the genetic diversity of nematodes. despite the availability of the genomes of two caenorhabditis species and numerous ests, the nematode gene-space appears far from thoroughly sampled because the addition of each new species to the analysis yielded a linear increase in new gene discovery. the same dataset of  <dig>  ests clustered into  <dig>  genes and comprised of  <dig> , <dig> codons were used for a comprehensive codon usage analysis  <cit> . this latter study demonstrated that codon usage similarity in nematoda usually persists over the breadth of a genus but then rapidly diminishes even within each clade. this analysis together with an analysis by cutter et al.  <cit>  based on the same dataset, established the major evolutionary forces responsible for determining observed codon usage bias in nematodes including directional mutation pressure, translational efficiency, and effective population size. finally, recently wasmuth et al.  <cit>  have analyzed nematode protein families and distinct domains and found preponderance of genetic novelty in the phylum, i.e. an ongoing "invention of novelty".

these pan-phylum analyses suggest that nematode proteins and their transcriptomes have experienced drastic changes, and specific changes can be related to functional diversification, speciation and species adaptation  <cit> . among the nematode-derived proteins, there are two intriguing groups,  nematode-specific proteins, which are inferred to be of crucial importance for understanding nematode evolution and parasitism  <cit> ;  proteins that have sufficiently diverged in the host as to be functionally absent or altered. the current pan-phylum study has focused on systematic analysis of the latter group and identified a biased distribution in molecular features  in the nematode proteins, which assist in elucidating the mechanism of genome size decrease in nematodes. by examining the insertions and deletions common to different nematodes and the functions of the relevant proteins, the present study infers an important role of indels in nematode adaptation. the detected indels shared by different groups of nematodes warrant further investigation as potential targets for the development of compounds against parasitic nematodes.

