BACKGROUND
alternative polyadenylation site selection is an important source of transcript diversity in higher eukaryotes. the resulting 3' untranslated region  variants may differ by their cellular localization, stability or translational efficiency, thus contributing to tissue-specific or developmental stage-specific regulation of gene function  <cit> . for at least 50% of genes in mammalian genomes, several polyadenylation sites are present and mrnas with different 3'utr regions can be produced from a single gene  <cit> . alternative poly sites are commonly classified into tandem poly sites that locate in the same 3'-exon, and sites located in different exons  formed by alternative splicing  <cit> . alternative 3' ends involving different 3' exons may impact the coding sequence and therefore have obvious functional consequences. however, the actual functional impact of tandem poly sites, producing 3' ends that differ solely by the length of the 3' utr, is still largely unknown.

analysis of tissular biases in poly site usage has suggested a frequent tissue-specific regulation of 3' variants in human  <cit> . recent studies have re-examined alternative polyadenylation in the light of comparative genomics  <cit> . features such as the presence of multiple cleavage sites, distribution of poly signal variants and nucleotide composition of flanking regions were reported to be similar in human and mouse  <cit> . in addition, the numbers and organization of polyadenylation sites in human and mouse orthologs showed significant correlations, suggesting that some alternative polyadenylation patterns are evolutionarily conserved. these studies, however, did not directly address the conservation and functional significance of individual poly sites. here, we further exploit the tools of comparative genomics to identify and characterize functional alternative polyadenylation sites in the human and mouse genome.

in order to study the evolutionary conservation of poly sites, we need to reliably identify homologs of each alternative poly site in a given gene. we introduce here a method to perform this assignment using both multiple alignments of 3'utr regions and est mapping of polyadenylation sites. the functional analysis of conserved and non-conserved poly sites was then carried out based on est counts and cdna/est library information. this resulted in the identification of about  <dig> poly sites conserved between human and mouse genes. comparing the processing efficiency, tissue-specificity and spatial location of conserved and non-conserved poly sites, we identified the characteristic features of conserved sites and estimated the ratio of alternative poly sites under selective pressure. this analysis was complemented by a listing of conserved poly sites with possible tissue-specific usage.

RESULTS
identifying conserved and non-conserved poly sites
we performed a complete mapping of all 3' ests and full-length cdnas onto the human and mouse genomes. after clustering est and cdna hits, potential poly sites were identified based on several quality criteria including the presence of at least two ests/cdna ending at site, reduced dangling ends in blast matches, lack of potential internal priming tract in downstream genomic region and presence of a canonical or variant poly signal near 3' end. we identified a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  candidate poly sites in the human and mouse genome, respectively which were then mapped to flanking ensembl-annotated genes.

alternative poly site may be found in tandem in the same 3' exon, or in different 3' exons when associated to alternative splicing. we want to avoid the latter case, as poly site usage may be dictated first by alternative splicing, which is itself conserved to some extent for specific genes in animal genomes  <cit> . to avoid interference from alternative splicing, we only considered poly sites located in the 3'-most exon, and following the 3'-most stop codon in case of alternative splice forms. this retained  <dig>  poly sites for  <dig>  human genes and  <dig>  poly sites for  <dig>  mouse genes. the resulting estimate of  <dig>  poly sites/gene is comparable to previous ones  <cit>  with a slight increase for mouse imputable to an expanded mouse est database.

to compare poly sites located on ortholog gene pairs in human and mouse, we aligned 3'utr regions of all  <dig>  ortholog pairs and we defined as "conserved" those human and mouse poly sites displaying aligned poly signals and est/cdna support in both species . poly sites with est/cdna support whose poly signals were not aligned were considered as non-conserved , even when the cleavage site itself was properly aligned . multiple aggregated cleavage sites occurring after a single poly signal  sites in our procedure) were discarded. we obtained a total of  <dig>  conserved poly sites and  <dig>  non-conserved poly sites. the conserved/non-conserved ratio is about  <dig>  in either species. among conserved poly sites,  <dig> were single sites and  <dig> were multiple sites from  <dig> orthologous gene pairs. by our definition, 20% of human genes have a conserved poly site and  <dig> % of human genes have multiple conserved poly sites. figure  <dig> shows that conservation is higher in single poly sites  than in tandem poly site . this suggests that alternative poly sites are evolutionally less conserved than single poly sites. the complete list of human/mouse conserved poly sites is presented in additional file  <dig> 

number of sites and position in utr
tian et al.  <cit>  have reported that poly site configurations  tend to be conserved between human and mouse. the conservation of the number of tandem poly sites in homologous gene, however, was not assessed. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of poly site numbers in human and mouse orthologous pairs, for genes having one or more sites, conserved or non-conserved. numbers of poly sites are significantly correlated in orthologs . in other words, a human gene with multiple poly sites tends to have multiple poly sites in mouse too, suggesting that a selective mechanism acts on the number of alternative polyadenylation sites.

do conserved tandem poly sites show any positional preference in the 3'utr region? we examined all tandem poly sites, and classified them as "proximal" or "distal" according to their position relative to the stop codon. for genes with an odd number of sites, the site located in the central position was excluded . figure  <dig> shows relative locations of conserved and non-conserved tandem poly sites. in both human and mouse, conserved sites tend to occur more often in the proximal part of the utr, while non-conserved sites tend to occur more often in the distal part.

processing efficiency
we estimated the relative processing efficiency  of poly sites based on est counts, normalized in such a way that the highest est count of all poly sites from the same gene had a value of one. this eliminates biases resulting from different est coverage in different genes and between human and mouse . figure 5a compares the human/mouse correlation coefficients of re in conserved poly sites  and in  <dig>  sets of randomly selected non-conserved sites from orthologous genes . the relative efficiency of conserved poly site is correlated between human and mouse, while that of non-conserved sites from orthologous genes is not.

tissue specificity
we then analyzed the tissue specificity of poly sites based on the evoc expression ontology system  <cit> . version  <dig>  of evoc maps each of the  <dig>  human est libraries to a formalized tissue description. as a mouse version of evoc was not available at the time of the study, we further mapped  <dig> mouse est libraries using the same formal description system . we obtained for each poly site the number of different tissues in which the site is observed, among the  <dig> possible top-level evoc tissue categories. since tissue counts are highly dependent on est coverage, we normalized tissue counts versus an expected number of tissues obtained from a random est sample of same size. our measure of tissue specificity is the log ratio of observed vs. expected number of tissues. about 10% of tandem poly sites have a tissue specificity below - <dig>   and <3% above  <dig>  . non-conserved poly sites showed no correlation in tissue specificity , while conserved sites had weakly correlated tissue specificities . this observed difference is not significant based on a t-test performed after fisher's z-transformation of the r value .

to circumvent possible gene-level expression biases, we measured a "relative tissue specificity" , by assigning a value of  <dig> to the poly site with the broadest tissue distribution in a gene. each gene thus has at least one site with rts =  <dig>  the distribution of other sites is shown in figure 7b. interestingly, very few sites have a rts below  <dig> . the fact that most sites have a rts close to  <dig>  that is close to the broadest possible tissue distribution for this gene, means variations in tissue specificity between successive poly sites in a gene are generally limited. we used the median rts to distinguish "broad" from "narrow" sites . sites with an rts above median  are said to display a "broad" tissue distribution while other sites are said to display a "narrow" tissue distribution. based on this definition, broad and narrow tissue distributions are equally frequent among conserved and non-conserved sites . broad and narrow tissue distributions are also equally distributed among major and minor sites .

spatial preferences vs. efficiency or specificity
we examined the relationship between the spatial organization of tandem poly sites and site efficiency or specificity. poly sites were classified as major/minor or narrow/broad as described above, and their spatial organization was observed in genes containing two or more tandem conserved sites. a "conserved usage pattern" was recorded when successive tandem sites had the same efficiency and/or specificity pattern in human and mouse orthologs . we observed that 53% of genes with tandem conserved poly sites had a conserved efficiency pattern , significantly higher than expected by chance . comparing expected and observed values,  <dig> genes would have a poly site efficiency pattern under selection. this tendency is not observed for tissue specificity:  <dig> gene pairs have a conserved tissue specificity pattern vs.  <dig> expected by chance.

in figure 8b, we focus on genes containing at least one conserved major site, as a surrogate for sites existing prior to human-mouse divergence. we then observe how such sites are associated to flanking conserved  or non-conserved  sites, using flanking non-conserved sites as surrogates for emerging sites. interestingly, while emerging minor sites are as frequent on the 5' or 3' side of existing major sites , pairs of conserved sites  are twice more often 5'minor/3'-major than 5'-major/3'-minor. this suggests that selection of alternative poly sites favors the pattern 5'-minor/3'-major over the pattern 5'-major/3'-minor.

differentially processed poly sites
we define here as differentially processed those alternative poly sites with a significantly biased usage in any tissue class, as compared with other poly sites from the same gene. differential usage was measured using a fisher test as previously reported  <cit> . using a bonferroni correction for multiple testing, five conserved and  <dig> non-conserved sites are differentially processed in human .

we examined the relationship between differential processing and site efficiency or tissue specificity. consistently with a recent study of tissue-specific polyadenylation  <cit> , minor sites are more often differentially processed than major sites . although this study did not identify tissue biases in major sites, we do observe a few occurrences  of major sites with differential processing. differential processing is also much more frequent in non-conserved than in conserved sites .

expectedly, there is a high correlation between differential usage and the "narrow" or "broad" status of a site. differentially processed sites are about three times more often of the narrow type than of the broad type . although counterintuitive, some poly sites can be at the same time differentially processed and of broader usage, because our specificity measure is relative and always classifies as broad the site with the broadest tissue usage, even when usage is restricted to a single tissue.

a list of differentially processed, conserved poly sites is presented in additional file  <dig>  differentially processed sites are observed in all tissue classes . the apparent overrepresentation of urogenital and nervous systems is not significant when est library coverage is taken into account. est coverage is not sufficient either to provide interspecies confirmation of tissue biases. no conserved site is found differentially processed in both human and mouse after bonferroni correction.

conserved sequence motifs around conserved sites
as our criteria for poly site conservation imply a correct alignment of poly signals, we suspected that conserved sequences around poly signals could also contribute to poly site conservation. this region is known to contain elements such as the use  and dse , two u-rich elements involved in the control of poly site efficiency  <cit> , as well as a number of potential regulatory motifs of unknown function  <cit> . a possible explanation for proper signal alignment and increased cleavage efficiency at conserved poly sites could be related to the occurrence of such control elements in both human and mouse orthologs. although downstream regions appear slightly more u-rich in conserved sites than in non-conserved sites , indicative of stronger dse elements  <cit> , we could not find overrepresented sequence motifs occurring in more than a few conserved sites. therefore, there is no widespread cis-regulatory element that would explain poly site conservation.

discussion
we introduced here a definition of conserved poly sites as sites supported by 3' ests or full length cdnas in ortholog gene pairs and located downstream of a properly aligned aauaaa or variant signal in the pairwise 3' utr alignment. applying this rule to human and mouse orthologs, we observed  <dig>  conserved poly sites, i.e. about 22% of the human sites tested. only a third of the human/mouse orthologous gene pairs contains one or more conserved sites by this definition.

gene ontology  term analysis suggests links between alternative polyadenylation and specific functions. as previously reported  <cit> , genes with tandem poly sites are enriched in terms "intracellular"  and "protein transport" . now, if all tandem sites are used as a reference, genes with conserved tandem sites are further enriched for terms "nucleus"  and "ubiquitin cycle" . the nucleus encompasses evolutionally conserved dna and rna processing machineries. alternative polyadenylation may be more conserved in genes within such cellular systems. the ubiquitin cycle is also well conserved among eukaryotic genomes and involves genes containing highly conserved 3' utr elements in vertebrates  <cit> . this is consistent with posttranscriptional regulations involving this region and hence with a selective pressure for conserved tandem poly sites.

among genes with tandem poly sites , the most frequent patterns involve either only non-conserved sites  or a single conserved site flanked by non-conserved sites . there are only about  <dig> genes with two or more conserved poly sites. when comparing the efficiency and specificity of poly sites in a tandem configuration, a general picture emerges where conserved sites generally show a higher efficiency and fewer instances of differential processing than non-conserved sites. the majority of minor or tissue-specific sites are non-conserved, suggesting that alternative polyadenylation is most frequently a species-specific event. this is reminiscent of what was observed for alternative splicing. modrek et al.  <cit>  reported that, for skipped exons, major forms are more often conserved than minor forms, thus suggesting that alternative splicing is more often species-specific as well.

we found that processing efficiency was significantly correlated between human and mouse at conserved sites. again, this pattern is reminiscent of that observed for alternative splicing. looking at conserved alternative splicing events, kan et al. observed strong correlations of human/mouse expression levels that were suggestive of functional alternative splicing events  <cit> .

we observed that the spatial organization of major/minor poly sites in a gene is conserved more often than expected by chance. this suggests that, for some genes, specific usage patterns of alternative poly sites were established prior to the human/mouse divergence and were maintained by selection. we estimate this should concern no more than one hundred genes.

the large number of non-conserved poly sites, especially among tandem sites, suggests that gain/loss of alternative poly sites is a frequent event in mammalian genomes. new poly signals may arise from duplications, insertion events or point mutations. the latter is probably a more parsimonious hypothesis when considering the au-rich nature of non-coding human sequences and the presence in utrs of au-rich elements such as the ares, resembling poly signals. however, new signal arising from point mutation are most likely deprived from enhancing elements and hence should produce transcript isoforms in very small quantities, especially if located downstream of a strong site. on the other hand, poly sites resulting from duplication or insertion of a functional signal and its associated enhancing elements maybe readily functional and able to compete effectively with alternative sites.

are new alternative sites selectively neutral and what is their fate? novel 3' variants can be non-neutral for instance when containing regulatory motifs such as mirna targets or destabilization elements, or when affecting translation efficiency through the sheer effect of 3' utr size  <cit> . our observation that tandem poly sites are generally less conserved than unique sites suggests that most novel sites are quickly lost and therefore are either neutral or deleterious. interestingly, spatial patterns of the type 5'-major/3'-minor are underrepresented in conserved tandem sites . this is consistent with a model where novel poly sites arising 3' to existing sites tend to be lost more quickly, unless stronger than existing 5' sites. through the accidental occurrence and loss of novel poly sites in the 3' utr, natural selection would thus tend towards a topology involving a minor short isoform and a major long isoform, which is indeed the most frequent topology observed for polyadenylation isoforms  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we used comparative genomics to identify and characterize functional polyadenylation sites in the human and mouse genomes. a genome-wide computational analysis of alternative polyadenylation sites allowed us to identify about  <dig> conserved poly sites. conserved sites display a higher processing efficiency than non-conserved sites, but display no difference in tissue distribution. we focused on tandems of conserved sites and sought biases in site usage and position in utr. the 5'/3' order of major and minor sites in conserved tandems is more conserved than expected by chance, suggesting that selective pressure acts on poly site usage and therefore that resulting alternative transcripts may have functional significance. some unanticipated patterns deserve further scrutiny, such as major sites with a predicted differential usage, or conserved sites that yet are of the minor or tissue-specific type. transcripts displaying such unexpected poly site usage patterns could be prioritized for experimental validation.

