BACKGROUND
outbreaks caused by fungal diseases have increased in frequency and are a recurrent threat to global food security  <cit> . one example is blast, a fungal disease of rice, wheat, and other grasses, that can destroy enough food supply to sustain millions of people . until the 1980s, the blast disease was not known to affect wheat, a main staple crop critical to ensuring global food security. in  <dig>  the disease was first reported on wheat  in paraná state, brazil  <cit> . it has since spread throughout many of the important wheat-producing areas of brazil and to neighboring south american countries including bolivia and paraguay. in south america, blast is now a major threat to wheat production . currently, wheat blast affects as much as  <dig> million hectares, seriously limiting the potential for wheat production in the vast grasslands region of south america.

blast diseases of grasses are caused by fungal species from the pyriculariaceae  <cit>  and can occur on  <dig> grass species  <cit> . however, a high degree of host specificity exists among and within these fungal species  <cit> . in south america, wheat blast is caused by isolates of magnaporthe oryzae  known as pathotype triticum . the rice-infecting isolates of m. oryzae are genetically distinct from wheat-infecting isolates and generally do not infect wheat . typical symptoms of wheat blast on spikes are premature bleaching of spikelets and entire heads . severely infected wheat heads can be killed, resulting in severe yield losses  <cit> . the disease is generally spread by infected seeds and airborne spores, and the fungus can survive in infected crop residues and seeds  <cit> . little is known about the physiology and genetics of the wheat blast pathogen, and our understanding of the molecular interactions of this pathogen with wheat remains limited.

in february  <dig>  wheat blast was detected for the first time in asia with reports of a severe outbreak in bangladesh relayed through local authorities and the media  <cit> . although wheat is not a traditional crop in bangladesh, its cultivation has expanded in recent years, making it the second major food source after rice  <cit> . the outbreak is particularly worrisome because wheat blast could spread further to major wheat-producing areas in neighboring south asian countries, thus threatening food security across the region. here, we report our immediate response to this plant disease outbreak. to rapidly determine the precise identity and likely origin of the outbreak pathogen, we applied field pathogenomics, in which we performed transcriptome sequencing of symptomatic and asymptomatic leaf samples collected from infected wheat fields in bangladesh  <cit> . to promote the project and recruit experts, we immediately released all raw sequence data through a dedicated website open wheat blast . phylogenomic and population genomic analyses revealed that the bangladesh wheat blast outbreak was probably caused by isolates belonging to the south american wheat-infecting lineage of m. oryzae. we conclude that the wheat blast pathogen was most likely introduced into asia from south america.

RESULTS
geographical distribution of the wheat blast outbreak in bangladesh
the total area of wheat cultivation in bangladesh in  <dig> was about  <dig>  ha . wheat blast was observed in eight southwestern districts, viz., pabna, kushtia, meherpur, chuadanga, jhenaidah, jessore, barisal, and bhola . out of a total  <dig>  ha of cultivated wheat in those eight districts, an estimated 15 % were affected by wheat blast.fig.  <dig> geographical distribution and severity of the wheat blast outbreak in eight southwestern districts of bangladesh. the map depicts the intensity of the  <dig> wheat blast outbreak across bangladesh. the percentage of affected area and the total area  under cultivation are shown for each district based on the color chart



the severity of wheat blast and associated yield losses varied among districts. the highest percentage of infected wheat fields was observed in meherpur  followed by chuadanga , jessore , jhenaidah , bhola , kushtia , barisal , and pabna  . yield losses in different affected districts varied. the highest average yield loss was recorded in jhenaidah  followed by chuadanga , meherpur , jessore , barisal , pabna , kushtia , and bhola . although the average yield loss was lower than 51 % across districts, yield losses in individual fields were as high as 100 %. importantly, 100 % of government-owned bangladesh agricultural development corporation  seed multiplication farms in the affected districts  were completely cleared by burning to destroy pathogen inocula by decision of the ministry of agriculture . farmer wheat fields that were severely affected  were also burned.

wheat blast symptoms in the field
to examine disease symptoms in affected wheat fields, we collected samples from the affected districts. major symptoms associated with the epidemic included completely or partially bleached  spikes similar to symptoms reported for brazilian wheat blast epidemics  <cit>  and symptoms reported from bangladesh in  <dig>  <cit> . the pathogen attacked the base or upper part of the rachis, severely affecting spikelet formation above the point of infection. complete or partial bleaching of the spike above the point of infection with either no grain or shriveled grain was common in all areas affected by wheat blast . we commonly observed bleached heads with traces of gray, indicative of fungal sporulation at the point of infection . in severely infected fields, we also found typical eye-shaped necrotic disease lesions with gray centers in the leaves of some wheat plants   <cit> . head infections during the flowering stage resulted in no grain production , whereas infection at the grain filling stage resulted in small, shriveled, light in weight, and discolored  grains   <cit> .fig.  <dig> symptoms of blast disease in spikes, leaves, and seeds of wheat in a farmer’s field in jhenaidah in bangladesh, and a micrograph showing two conidia of magnaporthe oryzae. a a completely bleached wheat spike with traces of gray from blast sporulation at the neck  of the spike. b complete bleaching of a wheat spike above the point  of infection. c two completely bleached spikes with traces of gray  and a lesion  from blast sporulation at the base. d typical eye-shaped lesion  and dark gray spots on a severely diseased wheat leaf. e mild blast disease-affected slightly shriveled wheat seeds. f severe blast-affected shriveled and pale wheat seeds. g a severely infected rachis with dark gray blast sporulation at the neck  and severely damaged spikelets. h micrograph of two conidia isolated from the infected spike of wheat. scale bars in e and f = 1 cm and in h = 10 μm



to determine whether the spike and leaf symptoms on wheat were associated with infection by blast fungi , we examined infected plant samples using a light microscope. a hallmark of blast fungi is the production of asexual spores that have a specific morphology consisting of three-celled pyriform conidia  <cit> . microscopic analyses revealed that gray colored lesions observed on both spikes and leaves carried large numbers of three-celled pyriform conidia from aerial conidiophores . this indicates that the fungus present in these lesions belongs to the pyriculariaceae, consistent with a previous report  <cit> . however, molecular taxonomy tools are needed to determine the species identity.

strains isolated from infected wheat samples cause symptoms of wheat blast on artificially inoculated wheat
to confirm whether the fungus found on infected wheat leaves is able to cause the observed symptoms, we isolated ten strains  using a single-conidia isolation method . on potato dextrose agar  plates, the predominant morphology of the isolates was gray to white aerial mycelia with an olive or brown center . after 14– <dig> days of inoculation, the center of the culture became black . artificial inoculation of wheat seedling leaves using conidia of two isolates  produced characteristic symptoms five days after inoculation . initially, a diamond-shaped, water-soaked lesion in green leaves was observed , which gradually turned into an eye-shaped lesion, with a tan or gray colored center . at a later stage, the spots enlarged, spread to entire leaves, and killed the leaves . no difference in symptoms was observed on wheat seedlings of the cultivars shatabdi and prodip and between the two isolates . similar disease symptoms and sporulation were observed on leaves of artificially inoculated goosegrass   and barley  . terminal infection stages were characterized by a massive production of hyaline to pale gray, pyriform, and asexual conidia on aerial conidiophores. conidia formation was observed on all infected wheat , barley , and goosegrass  leaves . under the same conditions, no visible symptoms or sporulation of conidia were observed microscopically on leaves of artificially inoculated rice . these results are consistent with those of castroagudin et al.  <cit>  showing that wheat-infecting m. oryzae can infect seedlings of barley but is largely asymptomatic on rice. the pathogenicity of wheat blast on e. indica is also consistent with reports that e. indica is a major alternate host in south america  <cit> . e. indica is also a common weed in the highlands of bangladesh and may similarly serve as a alternate host of wheat blast. understanding the role of alternate hosts in disease cycles and epidemics of wheat blast will be key in formulating effective disease management strategies.fig.  <dig> reinoculation of seedlings with fungal strains isolated from infected wheat seeds. germinated conidia, growth of mycelia, infection, and sporulation of strains used to artificially inoculate wheat, barley, and goosegrass. a a germinated three-celled pyriform conidia  with hyphal growth on water agar medium. b, c culture of isolate btjp 3- <dig> on pda plate; upper  and reverse side . d photograph showing a diamond-shaped, water-soaked lesion  on a green wheat seedling leaf five days after conidial inoculation. e, f development of an eye-shaped lesion with a gray center  on wheat leaves. g, h a gradual progression of symptoms  on wheat leaves. i–l light micrographs showing massive conidia production  on aerial conidiophores  on artificially infected leaves of wheat cultivars prodip  and shatabdi , goosegrass , and barley . photographs were taken by a camera attached to a microscope at 100× magnification. scale bars in j, k, and l indicate 50 μm



transcriptome sequencing of wheat leaf samples from bangladeshi fields
we used field pathogenomics  <cit>  to identify which blast fungus species was present in infected wheat fields in bangladesh. we collected samples of both symptomatic and asymptomatic leaves from wheat fields in different regions of bangladesh, including meherpur and jhenaidah districts, and extracted total rna from four pairs of symptomatic  and asymptomatic samples  . we prepared and sequenced rna-seq libraries using illumina technology, yielding  <dig>  to  <dig>  million 101-bp pair-end reads with an average insert size of 419 bp. next, following data trimming, we aligned high-quality reads to both the m. oryzae wheat blast fungus br <dig> and wheat genomes  <cit> . sequence reads from all samples with disease symptoms aligned to the br <dig> genome, ranging from  <dig> – <dig>  % of the total reads . by contrast, only a minor proportion of the reads from the asymptomatic samples aligned to the br <dig> genome . between  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of total reads aligned to the wheat genome sequence . we obtained similar numbers when considering the reads aligning to m. oryzae and wheat transcriptomes . variation in percentage mapped reads of host and fungal transcripts among symptomatic samples is most likely explained by differences in the disease severity and infection stage among field collected leaves. the finding that on average  <dig>  % reads per sampled transcriptome aligned to the wheat blast genome br <dig> indicated that m. oryzae is present in symptomatic  wheat samples from bangladesh.fig.  <dig> transcriptome sequencing of infected leaves from farmer fields reveals magnaporthe oryzae transcripts in symptomatic samples. a comparison of sequence read mapping data from the four sample pairs to the genomes of wheat blast fungus m. oryzae br <dig>  and wheat . b, c scatter plots of fragments per kilobase of transcript per million  values from sample pair 7-f <dig>  and 12-f <dig>  aligned to the combined transcriptomes of wheat and m. oryzae br <dig>  transcripts from wheat  are shown in light gray and transcripts from m. oryzae br <dig>  are shown in blue




bangladesh wheat blast outbreak was likely caused by a wheat-infecting south american lineage of m. oryzae
we used phylogenomic approaches to determine how related the fungal pathogen detected in wheat leaf samples from bangladesh is to m. oryzae lineages infecting cereals and grasses. we also performed population genomics analyses to gain insight into the geographic origin of these bangladeshi isolates using a set of sequences from wheat-infecting m. oryzae isolates collected in brazil over the last 25 years. we first determined the taxonomic affiliation and phylogenetic position of wheat-infecting bangladeshi samples. to this aim, we extracted predicted transcript sequences from the assembled genomic sequences of 20 m. oryzae strains isolated from infected rice , wheat , foxtail millet , eleusine spp., lolium spp., and eragrostis spp.  <cit>  . we identified  <dig> groups of sequences with orthologous relationships across the  <dig> reference transcriptomes and the two bangladeshi isolates that had the largest number of genes represented in their transcriptomic sequences. we aligned orthologous transcripts, processed alignments, and inferred a maximum likelihood genealogy based on the concatenated sequences using raxml  <cit> . the bangladeshi isolates clustered with high bootstrap support  with wheat-infecting isolates of m. oryzae , indicating that the emergence of wheat blast in bangladesh was caused by isolates belonging to the known m. oryzae wheat-infecting lineage, and not by an unknown pyriculariaceae species or a novel m. oryzae lineage.fig.  <dig> the origin of the bangladesh wheat blast fungus. a maximum likelihood genealogy inferred from the concatenation of aligned genomic data at  <dig> orthologous groups of predicted transcript sequences. scale bar represents the mean number of nucleotide substitutions per site. b population genomic analyses of transcriptomic single nucleotide polymorphisms among m. oryzae isolates from wheat in brazil and bangladesh. the network was constructed using the neighbor-net algorithm. the scale shows the number of informative sites



given that the bangladesh outbreak was caused by isolates related to known wheat-infecting lineages of m. oryzae, our next step was to infer genealogical relationships between bangladeshi and south american wheat blast samples. we performed population genomics analyses using transcriptomic single nucleotide polymorphisms  identified by aligning sequence reads to the m. oryzae reference genome 70- <dig>  <cit> . we included all four symptomatic samples from bangladesh and a diverse collection of 23 m. oryzae wheat-infecting isolates sampled from brazil, the main wheat growing country affected by wheat blast . as the wheat blast isolates from brazil were sequenced from genomic dna, we restricted the analyses to transcriptomic snps genotyped at high confidence in the symptomatic bangladeshi sample  <dig>  retaining a total of  <dig>  snps. since the reproductive mode of wheat blast populations can be mixed, including both sexual and asexual reproduction  <cit> , we chose to build a neighbor-net network that takes into account potential recombination among genotypes. the network analyses identified small groups of near-clonal genotypes , whereas all other isolates appeared genetically distinct and displayed reticulate evolution. the bangladesh outbreak isolates grouped as a near-clonal genotype that was most closely related to a group of brazilian wheat-infecting isolates from minas gerais, são paulo, brasília, and goiás . systematic analyses of recent wheat-infecting isolates from brazil and neighboring countries will be needed to ascertain the most likely infection route from south america. also, additional phylogenomic work, based on deeper sampling of the diversity of grass-infecting m. oryzae, will provide further insight into the genealogical relationships among host-specific lineages and the timing of lineage splitting/merging events.

CONCLUSIONS
our rapid open source genomic surveillance approach has revealed the precise identity of the infectious bangladeshi fungus as the known wheat-infecting m. oryzae lineage and indicated that it most likely originated from south america. this finding calls for intensive monitoring and surveillance of the wheat blast pathogen to limit its further spread outside south america and bangladesh. in addition, our finding indicates that the knowledge acquired to manage wheat blast in brazil using disease resistant cultivars  and fungicides  <cit>  can be directly applied to the bangladeshi epidemic.

