BACKGROUND
the antigen-binding variable regions of antibody molecules draw combinatorially from a set of somatically encoded v, d, and j gene segments  <cit> . mathematically, this strategy allows for ~ <dig>  possible heavy chain  and ~ <dig> possible light chain  vj combinations, for a total of ~ <dig>  million possible heavy-and-light chain pairings  <cit> .

much work in immunology and structural biology has gone into studying how antibody sequence and structure affect antigen specificity  <cit> . in each antibody, contact with the antigen is made by six short regions, three on each heavy and light chain. these are known as the complementarity-determining regions . cdr <dig> and cdr <dig> lie entirely within the v segment, while cdr <dig> spans the d segment and flanking parts of v and j . in general, heavy chain contributes more than light chain to antigen binding and specificity, and cdr <dig> contributes more than cdr <dig> and cdr <dig>  <cit> . hence heavy chain vdj  segment usage is a major determinant of antigen specificity.

there are other determinants. the part of an antigen that an antibody binds is called an epitope; the part of an antibody that an epitope binds is called a paratope. single antigens may have multiple epitopes, and single antibodies may have multiple paratopes  <cit> . moreover, nontemplated nucleotide insertions and deletions at gene segment junctions, together with cdr hypermutation, expand antibody diversity and antigen binding possibilities far beyond what is available through vj combinatorics alone  <cit> . hence vj segment choice and sequence-level modification provide coarse- and fine-tuning, respectively, for antigen specificity, but different vj and sequence combinations may well bind the same antigen.

these considerations and substantial experimental data  argue against a strict one-to-one relationship between antibody sequence and antigen specificity. however, they do suggest the possibility that antigens may have signature antibody repertoires. here a repertoire is defined as a set of antibodies, defined by gene segment usage, that is produced in a population of people against a given specificity. a specificity comprises a single epitope, a set of epitopes on a single antigen, or a set of antigens.

to date several studies have addressed this idea in particular instances by sequencing antibodies specific for particular antigens. in one such study, circulating b cells from seven infants vaccinated against hemophilus influenzae type b  were affinity enriched aganst hib capsular polysaccharide ; rearranged vj heavy and light chain gene libraries were then constructed and screened for hib ps-specific antibodies  <cit> . the antibodies recovered all used the same vh segment  and only two jh and two vl and jl segments, consistent with previous studies  <cit> . this is consistent with the pattern seen in natural antibody populations, allowing consideration of data from this in vitro "scrambling" approach.

repertoires against other antigens have also been shown to have restricted segment usage, although the degree and pattern of restriction vary. for example, using a technique similar to that described for hib ps, the repertoire against streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 23f ps was found to be dominated by four vh segments, which account for  <dig> percent of the repertoire's observed vh diversity; four jh segments ; and two vl-kappa segments   <cit> . for comparison, the repertoire against s. pneumoniae serotype 6b ps was found to be dominated by three vh segments  and three jh segments , but was found to lack strong vl-kappa restriction   <cit> . association patterns among segments and chains were also found to vary.

in all, repertoires for over a dozen antigens have been studied individually, with various aims and to various extents, mainly through enrichment and cloning or through screening of phage-display libraries  <cit> . the aim of the present study is to analyze these repertoires as a group in order to better understand the specificity of antibody responses. the practical goal is to explore the possibility that in the future, large-scale sequencing of antibodies in an individual may be used as a fingerprint, or "pan-scan," of that person's antigen exposure.

RESULTS
we analyzed vdjh segment usage for the  <dig> best-represented natural human repertoires in the imgt database . these comprised  <dig> antibody sequences . six repertoires were directed against infectious agents, while  <dig> were directed against autoimmune agents .

number of sequences, gene segments, and gene segment combinations in the repertoires of all specificities in the data set. specificities associated with infectious agents listed first; species names within parentheses . abbreviations: e. histolytica, entameba histolytica; hbv, hepatitis b virus; ps, polysaccharide; s. pneumo, streptococcus pneumoniae; ds, double-stranded; mag, myelin-associated glycoprotein; pl, phospholipid; tpo, thyroid peroxidase.

gene segment usage patterns
genome-level diversity was well represented among the repertoires as a group. all but one  of the vh and d gene segment families were represented, and the majority of individual vh , d , and jh  gene segments appeared in at least one sequence. vh and d gene families were represented about as often as in a previous study of healthy individuals  <cit>  , as were individual jh gene segments . however, individual vh gene segments were used more variably .

these observations are consistent with there being more than one vdjh combination used in antibodies with a given specificity . they also suggest either that our set of repertoires is a good representation of at least the kinds  <cit>  of antigen or antigen patterns encountered naturally, or conversely that b cell populations of the healthy individuals sampled in the previous study  <cit>  comprise clones expanded against specificities similar to the ones included in our present analysis. these possibilities are not mutually exclusive.

the data did not allow conclusive generalization about whether or not, for a given repertoire, vh, d, and jh segments are combined randomly or with some bias. this is because the number of antibodies sequenced in a given repertoire was small  relative to the number of vdjh combinations that could in principle be constructed from the vh, d, and jh segments that appeared in that repertoire .

for only one of the  <dig> repertoires – the repertoire for thyroid peroxidase – was there a tight, statistically significant correlation between the observed frequencies of vdjh combinations and the frequencies that would be expected if segments were combined at random . the repertoire for s. pneumoniae strain 6b polysaccharide also showed a tight correlation, but this correlation fell short of statistical significance . no tight, statistically significant correlation was observed for any other repertoire. these findings are consistent with the conclusion that vh, d, and jh segments are not joined at random in at least  <dig> of these  <dig> repertoires, but more sequencing is needed to settle this issue.

overlap in gene segment usage
from a practical perspective, for repertoires to serve as signatures for particular specificities, the overlap in gene segments or in vj combinations among different repertoires must be low. to estimate this overlap quantitatively, we calculated the percent overlap between each pair of specificities in the data set .

we found that for any two specificities picked at random from our set, the probability was  <dig> percent that their repertoires' vh gene segment usage overlapped by half or less . adding d and jh segment information decreased the overlap markedly: of the  <dig> pairwise comparisons between different specificities in our data set, only four  showed more than  <dig> percent overlap: between dsdna and rhd , thyroid peroxidase  and factor viii , tpo and phospholipid , and phospholipid and integrin gpiib/iiia  – all autoimmune specificities. although not random in segment usage, autoimmune antibodies may share common features that result from impaired negative selection. overall, for any two specificities chosen at random, the probability was  <dig>  percent that their repertoires' vdjh combinations overlapped by  <dig> percent or less .

given the large number of possible vdjh combinations  and the relatively small size of the data set , it is reasonable to ask whether or not such a small amount of overlap is likely to occur by chance. probability calculations show that it is not. the two most common human haplotypes allow a maximum of  <dig>  and  <dig>  possible functional vdjh combinations, respectively; the probability that the small amount of overlap observed in our data should arise by chance is p =  <dig>   and  <dig>   for these two haplotypes, respectively . note that nonrandom association among vh, d, and jh segments means that only a fraction of these  <dig>  or  <dig>  possible combinations are actually observed. the smaller the number of combinations, the higher the probability that repertoires will overlap by chance. hence the small amount of overlap observed in the data is even less likely to be the result of chance than these calculations suggest. the probabilities are therefore upper limits.

if the specificities analyzed in this study are indeed representative of the specificities to which human beings are exposed , this finding suggests that vdjh-defined sequences may be able to distinguish dependably among a wide variety of specificities.

simulating detection
for repertoires to be of practical use, it must be possible to detect when certain vdjh combinations are present at a higher-than-background frequency. this may indicate, for example, prior or ongoing exposure to an infectious agent or the presence of a response to a vaccine  <cit> . ideally detection should be possible even when this frequency is barely above background – that is, when the signal-to-noise ratio is low.

to test whether enrichment might be detectable, we ran computer simulations for each specificity. these were done briefly as follows . for each specificity, we assembled several sets of sequences that were each enriched for sequences of that specificity's repertoire.  the collection of these sets was our "reference collection" for the test . the strategy was to see if test sets could be assigned as exposed or unexposed by comparing their patterns of vdjh combinations to the ones from the reference collection. if antibodies in a test set had a similar pattern and prevalence of vdjh combinations as those in the reference collection, the test set was assigned as "exposed." if the patterns were dissimilar, the test set was assigned as "unexposed." assignment was performed with the aid of a computerized algorithm .

we tested this approach for each specificity by seeing how well exposed and unexposed sets could be assigned. in clinical infections, b cells specific for an infectious agent rarely exceed 5– <dig> percent of the total b cell population. therefore, as a conservative test, the sets in the reference collection had only 1– <dig>  percent of their vdjh combinations purposely drawn from the repertoire for the given specificity. for example, in testing for exposure to hiv gp <dig>  of  <dig>  vdjh combinations determined for a set in the reference collection, only 10– <dig> would be guaranteed to be combinations that appeared in the hiv gp <dig> repertoire; the rest would be from the repertoires of s. pneumoniae serotype 6b ps, double-stranded  dna, and the other  <dig> specificities. note that in this approach not all combinations are guaranteed to appear in any one set; however, the more frequently a combination appears in the repertoire – the higher its prevalence – the more likely  it is to appear in a given set. also, the larger the reference collection, the more likely that less prevalent combinations will also appear in at least one set.

a training collection for each specificity was assembled comprising  <dig> exposed and  <dig> unexposed sets. an additional  <dig> test sets, whose exposed/unexposed status was known to us but not to the algorithm, were presented for assignment. performance was measured by sensitivity and specificity . figure  <dig> shows results for two typical simulations. sensitivity generally reached between  <dig>  and  <dig>  when exposure-specific antibodies/sequences were five percent of the total; specificity was higher . sensitivity was improved by increasing the size of and enrichment in the sets in the reference collection. 

discussion
the majority of modern clinical tests assay for just one analyte at a time  <cit> . they determine the presence or absence of the analyte, and sometimes its quantity, but provide no information about other analytes. for example, a nucleic acid test for hiv- <dig> determines whether or not hiv- <dig> rna is present in blood, and how much, but provides no information about, for example, the presence of antibodies to cmv. although such tests are the mainstay of modern medicine, conceptually, they are limited to providing a " <dig> questions," yes-or-no approach to diagnosis.

the major exception is the standard culture-based method for diagnosing bacterial infections. in this method, the first step is to apply a clinical sample to standard culture media to see what grows  <cit> . this method is powerful in that it presupposes little about the identity of the bacteria: it can distinguish among many bacteria with a single test, and often reveals the presence of species that were clinically unexpected. conceptually, this is an open-ended, "what-is-there" approach to diagnosis. it is of general interest in medicine to develop more diagnostic techniques that use this approach.

antibodies play a crucial role in protective immunity and immunopathology, and also are important in surveillance against cancer  <cit> . the relationship between antibody gene sequence and epitope specificity is complex, but several studies have shown that certain gene segments and gene segment combinations are used preferentially against specific epitopes, antigens, or sets of antigens – what we here call "specificities"  <cit> . the identity and frequency of gene segments or combinations define antibody repertoires.

in this paper we have analyzed the growing, albeit limited, data that exists on vdjh combination defined repertoires to see whether they might one day provide an open-ended diagnostic for antigens to which a person has been exposed. for statistical confidence, we analyzed only those specificities for which at least eight antibodies have been sequenced and annotated for vh, d, and jh gene segment use. a similar amount of systematic data for immunoglobulin light chains and t cell receptors is still unavailable, and so the present analysis was limited to immunoglobulin heavy chains.

our data set represented nearly every gene segment family, and at frequencies similar to those seen in two healthy individuals in a previous study  <cit> . one interpretation is that this reflects an intrinsic bias in the frequency with which different vdjh combinations are formed or expressed. another interpretation is that the specificities in our data set are representative of the exposures that shape repertoires in healthy individuals, since certain types of antigens – bacterial polysaccharides, for instance – select for certain canonical structures in antibodies, and segments of the same gene family are more likely to produce similar structures  <cit> . these two interpretations are not mutually exclusive.

the narrowness or breadth of the repertoires for individual specificities  could simply reflect the number of epitopes per specificity. for example, the antibodies against factor viii, which formed a narrow repertoire, are known to have been raised against relatively well defined domains of factor viii that comprise few epitopes  <cit> , while antibodies against dsdna, which formed a broad repertoire, were not raised this way  <cit> .

the fact that the same vdjh combinations were recovered from multiple individuals in many repertoires  suggests that despite genetic differences, different individuals may often use the same or at least overlapping sets of vdjh combinations in the antibodies they make against a given epitope. these could be called "public" or "semi-public" combinations  <cit> . such commonalities might shed light on the evolutionary forces – repeat exposure to particular infectious agents, for example  <cit>  – that may have shaped and maintained germline gene segment diversity. further sequencing experiments using specificities defined at the epitope level would be useful to determine how often and to what epitopes public and semi-public combinations occur. the more frequent public combinations turn out to be, the more narrowly defined specificities can be and remain detectable, and vice versa.

repertoires' vdjh combinations overlapped rarely , and less often than would be predicted by chance . specifically, for any two specificities chosen at random, chances were  <dig>  percent that they overlapped by  <dig> percent or less. this suggests that determining vdjh usage for a sampling of antibodies can be used to identify exposure to a particular antigen or set of antigens with reasonable specificity.

to further explore this idea, we conducted a set of simulation experiments to see whether individuals could one day be diagnosed as being exposed or not exposed to a given specificity  by assaying for enrichment of certain vdjh combinations. we show that even at modest levels of enrichment, which represents an increased frequency of b cells specific to a certain exposure, and using just  <dig> reference sets as the "gold standard" for exposure, assignment of unknown sets as either exposed or unexposed was possible with a high degree of sensitivity and specificity. in principle, such a sequence-based method has the advantage of being able to detect patterns of exposure even when the specificity of the antibodies or the identity of the offending agent is completely unknown. this "open-ended" approach is most useful for the early detection of emerging diseases, and will become practicable as improvements in sequencing technology make it possible to use in the clinic  <cit> . data on antibody titers and functionality will doubtless add to the utility of this approach.

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, this study is the first to our knowledge that investigates the relationship between antibody specificity and vdjh segment usage for a large number of sequenced antibodies. further sequencing studies should make it possible to refine the conclusions presented here, and also to assess the contribution of light chain in antibodies and of alpha and beta chains in t cell receptors to antigen specificity in human immune responses. whether or not large-scale sequencing will prove useful as a future diagnostic tool will depend on these further studies.

