BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions are central to most biological processes including for example cellular communication, gene regulation, and immune response  <cit> . the complexity of these processes, coupled with the intricate interaction networks that biomolecules form in a cell, requires proteins to be able to selectively bind to other proteins. indeed, erroneous or disrupted protein interactions can be the causes of a number of diseases  <cit> . elucidating the fundamental biophysical principles that govern molecular recognition and drive protein association is therefore a topic of primary importance in biomedical research. however, at present the energetic determinants of affinity and specificity in protein interfaces are still poorly understood and fundamental problems relating to the recognition process are yet to be solved. 

knowledge of the three-dimensional  structure of the complex provides much valuable information on the architecture and chemistry of a protein-protein interface, including the identity of residues in contact, the size and shape of the interface, the number of hydrogen bonds, and the presence of bound water molecules. on its own, however, the structure does not fully clarify the details of the energetics of binding, nor does it determine to what extent each residue modulates complex formation and contributes to the overall affinity and specificity. for example, understanding how particular amino-acid mutations affect binding would help explaining the causes of some diseases and possibly suggest a strategy to treat them  <cit> . for a more accurate description of protein-protein interaction and its effects, e.g., on a pathway or on a whole biological system, structural and thermodynamic analysis provide complementary information and both are necessary  <cit> .

the thermodynamics of protein-protein interactions can be probed experimentally by alanine scanning mutagenesis  <cit> . interface amino-acids are systematically replaced with alanine and the induced changes in binding free energy measured. as alanine amino acids do not have a side-chain beyond the β-carbon, this procedure in effect tests the importance of individual side-chain groups for complex formation, providing a map of the so-called functional epitope . results from a number of experiments indicate that only a small subset of contact residues contribute significantly to the binding free energy. these residues have been termed "hot spots" and if mutated they can disrupt the interaction. for the majority of interface residues instead, the effect of an alanine mutation is minimal .

in recent years, several computational approaches have been developed to predict hot spot residues in a protein complex structure . accurate predictive models provide a valuable complement to experimental studies and add to our understanding of the factors that influence affinity and specificity in protein-protein interfaces. in addition, they potentially have important applications in the field of drug discovery. protein-protein interfaces are in fact emerging as a prospective new class of therapeutic targets. although dealing with protein binding epitopes is more challenging compared to, e.g., enzyme binding pockets, a number of studies have been successful in developing  small molecules that bind at hot spots and inhibit complex formation. reliable hot spots predictions can therefore represent the first step in rational drug design projects  <cit> .

most computational methods predict hot spots by simulating an alanine substitution and estimating the induced changes in binding free energy . one class of methods is based on molecular dynamics  simulations  <cit> , which makes them computationally rather expensive and difficult to apply on a large scale. a second class instead relies on empirically calibrated free energy functions  <cit> , which include terms such as van der waals and electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonds and solvation energy. these terms are then combined linearly, with weights adjusted in order to best fit experimental mutagenesis data. as energies are evaluated on static structural configurations , these latter methods are computationally much faster and reported results appear comparable to those from md simulations  <cit> . more recently, machine learning approaches have also been applied to the problem of detecting hot spot residues  <cit> .

in this paper, we propose a novel computational strategy to predict hot spot residues at protein-protein interfaces. similarly to other energy-based methods, we consider the basic terms that contribute to hot spot interactions . rather than writing an explicit energy function from which we can then calculate ΔΔg, we treat them as input features of a machine learning algorithm. the rationale beyond our approach is that the exact functional form for ΔΔg is not known but it is reasonable to assume that it would incorporate these terms. given a set of training examples of alanine mutation data, we use machine learning methods to deduce the functional properties of ΔΔg.

we consider two conceptually different machine learning methods, support vector machines   <cit>  and gaussian processes   <cit> . we compare our results to previous methods and in particular to the predictions of the robetta server  <cit>  for the same set of mutations. robetta is a well established energy-based method which has become the de facto standard of comparison in the field. we show that our approach is significantly more accurate in identifying hot spots . among the tested methods, we find the best performances using transductive support vector machines , a semi-supervised learning version of svms. we investigate also the problem of estimating the actual value of ΔΔg induced by an alanine mutation. this proves to be a rather challenging problem. results from both svm regression and gp models are comparable and in some aspects superior to those from the robetta server. however they are also comparable to those obtained by simple models built by ordinary linear least squares fitting . we point out shortcomings and limitations of our as well as other energy-based models.

RESULTS
the problem we have investigated is the prediction of hot spot residues at a protein-protein interface, given the structure of the complex. basic thermodynamic considerations show that in order to correctly estimate the binding free energy change ΔΔg upon alanine substitution one should in principle consider its effects on the unbound state as well. let a and b denote the unbound monomers and ab the complex. for convenience, we assume that the alanine mutation occurs on protein a. we further denote with  the wild-type molecules and with  the mutated molecules. we can then write

   

   

from which follows

   

equation  highlights the dependence of ΔΔg on both the bound and unbound states. in general, it is therefore not possible to explain binding free energy differences entirely in terms of changes or deletions of atomic contacts across the interface as mutations can destabilise the unbound state as well  <cit> .

previous computational methods evaluate the free energies for the wild type and mutated proteins on both bound and unbound structures and deduce ΔΔg from these through eq . in principle four distinct free energy calculations are required which can be computationally demanding . in our approach we aim instead to estimate directly ΔΔg without calculating the free energy g in the four different states. we consider only the complex structure and make no attempt to model the unbound and/or mutated structures. the input variables to the machine learning algorithms are basic energy terms  calculated from the complex structure.

we distinguish contributions from different structural regions in the protein complex  and we associate to each of them  <dig> input features, corresponding to the basic energy terms mentioned above. it can be expected that side-chain atoms of the mutated residue contribute significantly to ΔΔg as these are the atoms that are "cancelled" by an alanine mutation. in fact it can be shown  that if structural changes due to binding and to mutations are neglected, side-chain inter-molecular energies are the only contributions to ΔΔg. the latter hypothesis however can not be expected to hold in general and therefore we have included other energy contributions as well.

the environment energy describes the  interactions of those atoms that are located nearby the mutated residue. it aims to represent implicitly the plasticity of the local environment and its ability to rearrange. local sequence and structure information are typically included as input features in a related problem, the prediction of stability changes upon mutations in monomeric proteins  <cit> . in the hot spot prediction problem, the inclusion of these terms describing the local environment possibly finds further justification in the o-ring hypothesis  <cit> . by analysing a large set of data it has been suggested that one important characteristic of hot spots is that they are surrounded by a set of residues  whose role is to shield them from the solvent. the environment energy might therefore capture this effect.

prediction of hot spot residues
we discuss first the binary classification problem, i.e. the problem of predicting if a residue is a hot spot  or not . support vector machines  are widely used tools in computational biology and well suited for the task . as input features we consider the  <dig> terms associated with side-chain inter-molecular and environment inter-molecular energies . a summary of the results is reported in table 1a according to various performance measures. the precision p is the fraction of true hot spots among the set of residues predicted to be hot spots; the recall r is the fraction of correctly identified hot spots relative to all those present in the data set; the f <dig> score is a weighted average of the precision and recall; the matthews correlation coefficient  is a commonly used measure of the quality of binary classifications . 

the results are significantly better than the ones expected for a random model. for example, the svm classifier predicts a total of  <dig> hot spots of which  <dig> are true positives. our data set consists of  <dig> alanine mutations of which  <dig> are hot spots. choosing randomly  <dig> residues would therefore return  <dig> ±  <dig> true positives as can be estimated from a binomial distribution. the f <dig> score for a random predictor is f1ran≤  <dig>  and f1ran =  <dig>  if the recall is equal to the fraction of hot spots in the data set, i.e. rran =  <dig>  . for the svm classifier we obtain f <dig> =  <dig>  ±  <dig> . similarly, the matthews correlation coefficient mcc =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  is significantly greater than zero, which is the random baseline. a simple chi-square test, χ <dig> = n × mcc <dig> =  <dig>    <cit> , returns a highly significant result .

in  experimental hot spots are defined as those residues for which ΔΔg ≥  <dig> kcal/mol, in  a threshold of  <dig> kcal/mol is used. svm: support vector machine, tsvm: transductive svm, gp: gaussian processes, : robetta scores  which are greater than xth are considered as predicted hot spots. mcc is the matthews correlation coefficient . results for svm, tsvm and gp have been obtained with a 16-fold cross-validation scheme. results for robetta have been retrieved from the server at .

results quoted in table 1a have been obtained through a 16-fold cross-validation strategy. we have verified that they are robust with respect to the cross-validation scheme employed, i.e. by using a more stringent 12-fold cross-validation the results do no change appreciably . as can be expected they tend to be slightly worse but the difference does not appear to be significant. a further control is to apply the models on their training sets and check if statistically the predictions are much better than on the test set. we have verified that the performances on the training sets are only marginally more accurate but still comparable to those on the test set . these considerations about the 12-fold cross-validation and the performances on the training sets suggest that there is no over-fitting of the data in our analysis and that the svm model generalises to unseen data as quoted in table 1a.

one concern related to the data set is that it contains a large number of immunoglobin domains and this might introduce a bias in the predictions. ideally, to verify the extent of this problem, one should group all the immunoglobin domains in the same fold family when performing cross-validation and check if this affects significantly the performances. in practice this is not feasible, as the data set is relatively small and clustering the immunoglobins together would result in one fold dominating the database. however a first indication that there is no such bias towards predicting mutations on immunoglobins more accurately comes from the results of the 12-fold cross-validation. in this case, most  of the immunoglobin containing complexes are clustered together and the results do not change significantly. a second, a posteriori check is to analyse classification predictions separately for complexes containing an immunoglobin domain and those without. if there were a bias, we would expect a better performance on the former compared to the latter class but instead we obtain p =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , r =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , f <dig> =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , mcc =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and p =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , r =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , f <dig> =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , mcc =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  respectively.

it is instructive to analyse in more detail what are the major contributions to the prediction accuracy of the svm model. for example we have trained the svm separately with the side-chain and the environment features, denoted respectively svm-sc and svm-env. the results are reported in table  <dig>  although both models individually perform reasonably well, it is clear that their combination is superior. in particular, it seems that adding the environment terms to the side-chain terms improves the precision p, reducing the number of false positive .

svm-sc: only side chains terms included; svm-env: only environment terms included.

as our svm models are based on a linear kernel, the scoring function that discriminates hot spots from neutral residues is a simple linear combination of the energy terms. the associated weights can be computed based on the svm models and are reported in table  <dig>  the weights roughly reflect the level of correlation that exists between the observed ΔΔg values and each energy term . they provide a first indication about the relative importance of each of the  <dig> features. for example, the side-chain van der waals term emerges as the most important one, whereas electrostatic terms appear to contribute only marginally.

we report the absolute value of the weight associated to each feature in the scoring function as determined by svm and tsvm, together with the threshold that defines the decision boundary.

to further validate these insights, we have trained the svms excluding one energy term at a time. omission of the side-chain van der waals potential leads to a consistent drop in accuracy, confirming the importance of this term. similar outcomes are also observed when side-chain hydrogen bond, side-chain desolvation or environment desolvation potentials are excluded , suggesting a critical role of these  <dig> energy terms in determining hot spot residues. on the contrary, the two electrostatic terms, environment van der waals and environment hydrogen bond potentials do not appear to be strictly necessary and their omission does not significantly affect the quality of the predictions .

here, only features that if omitted lead to a decrease in performance are reported .

the limited contributions from the electrostatic terms can be ascribed to their weak correlations to the target outputs, i.e. to the observed ΔΔg values . the non essentiality of the environment van der waals and hydrogen bond potentials seems instead to derive from the fairly high correlation existing between these two terms and the environment desolvation potentials . it suggests that if one of these two terms is missing the latter can effectively substitute for it . it is important to underline that these results do not imply that the mentioned  <dig> terms play no role and can be altogether ignored. indeed omission of pairs of features can lead to a significant decrease in the performance.

the importance of the side-chain van der waals term agrees with the observation that hot spot atoms form good packing interactions with the partner proteins  <cit> . the side-chain hydrogen bond term was found to provide a major contribution also in  <cit> . the role of the desolvation potential seems to support the o-ring hypothesis and the importance of shielding the interactions from the solvent. exclusion of the solvent leads to a lower effective dielectric thereby increasing the strength of an interaction. in this respect it is somewhat surprising that electrostatics does not emerge as a key component in our model. although a similar result was found in ref  <cit> , it is possible that a better description of electrostatic effects is required, for example either by solving the poisson-boltzmann equation or through the generalised born model. 

the above considerations indicate that although some terms are more important than others there is no single feature that makes a dominant contribution. rather, it seems it is the balanced combination of terms in the svm model that allows the detection of hot spots. this possibly provides a justification of why this prediction problem is hard. it also support the claim that there is no simple patterns of hydrophobicity, shape or charge that can be used to identify hot spots  <cit> .

to further examine the reliability and usefulness of our approach, we have compared our predictions with the predictions of the robetta server on the same set of mutations. the server returns an estimated value for ΔΔg based on an all-atom free energy function. it can then be turned into a binary classifier by labelling a residue as a predicted hot spot if ΔΔgcalc ≥ xth kcal/mol, where xth is some threshold value. in the following we denote with  such a classifier. given our definition of hot spots, a natural choice is xth =  <dig>  we have however also explored other values for xth because robetta in its original implementation defines hot spots using a threshold of  <dig> kcal/mol and is therefore not optimised for our hot spot definition. we find indeed that more accurate predictions are obtained by setting xth =  <dig> . results are reported in table 1a. by comparing them to those for our svm approach, it can be deduced that the latter yields a substantial improvement. we emphasise though that the comparison is not entirely fair: the robetta method has been designed to predict the actual value of ΔΔg and as we will discuss below this a considerably more difficult problem than binary classification.

as mentioned above, in the original robetta paper  <cit>  a threshold of  <dig> kcal/mol was used to define experimental and predicted hot spots. with this definition, our data set is more balanced with respect to the number of positive and negative examples, respectively  <dig>  and  <dig> . we have trained and tested our method with this hot spot definition as well and we report a summary of the results in table 1b. interestingly, in this case we obtain the best predictions by including the side-chain intra-molecular energy terms as well. compared to the robetta server , our method appears to perform marginally better but the difference might not be statistically significant and it is certainly less pronounced than in the case of a  <dig> kcal/mol threshold .

recently, a machine learning approach to predict hot spot residues has been presented  <cit> . it is based on decision trees and trained on features such as geometrical shape and biochemical properties . the predictive performance of the method has been estimated to be p =  <dig> , r =  <dig>  and f <dig> =  <dig>  . comparing methods on the basis of quoted results is problematic as data sets and cross validation strategies differ. the data sets of alanine mutations used in  <cit>  and in our investigation are not identical but they do overlap substantially . the higher performance scores we obtain might therefore reflect a genuine improvement in hot spots prediction accuracy. the reason behind this improvement possibly lies in the inclusion of the environment energy terms in our method. indeed results for svm-sc in table  <dig> appear comparable to those reported in  <cit> . besides svms, we have also tested gaussian processes  models for the classification task but found results with overall lower accuracy .

after our manuscript was submitted and while still under review, two new studies on the same problem of hot spot prediction at protein-protein interfaces have been published  <cit> . it is not straightforward to assess how our method performs compared to them. we note for example that on data sets assembled from asedb the reported f <dig> score for the methods in  <cit>  and  <cit>  are respectively f <dig> =  <dig>  and f <dig> =  <dig> . however, on the same two data sets robetta <dig> achieves respectively f <dig> =  <dig>  and f <dig> =  <dig> , which are both substantially higher than the value it obtains on our data set . this suggests that our method and those in  <cit>  and  <cit>  can not be compared on the basis of the quoted results alone. 

we have experimented with introducing unlabelled data in the training set, a problem that is often refereed to as semi-supervised learning. unlabelled data can sometimes improve a classifier by providing a more reliable decision boundary, for example by requiring that it lies  in region of low density. transductive svm have been developed to work in a semi-supervised learning setting and take advantage of the information content in unannotated data. in our case unlabelled data correspond to interface residues for which ΔΔg is not known. as reported in table 1a, we find tsvms return marginally improved predictions although the difference might not be entirely significant. one possible explanation for this improved performance is that the inclusion of unlabelled data makes the training sets in the cross-validation procedia more balanced and statistically more uniform.

we have analysed the hot spot predictions by grouping mutations according to the amino acid type . we observe a good accuracy over all amino acid types, ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . predicted hot spots can e.g. be charged residues such lys and asp or hydrophobic, aromatic residues such as tyr and trp. this suggests that our model is not biased toward a single amino type or property  but rather it captures some composite properties characterising hot spots.

nmut: number of mutations, tp: true positives, tn: true negatives, fp: false positives, fn = false negatives; p: precision, r: recall, f1: f <dig> score, a: accuracy = .

the most accurate predictions are obtained for mutations involving lys. this is a positively charged, polar amino acid capable of forming up to  <dig> hydrogen bonds with the amino group at the end of its side-chain; its side chain contains  <dig> carbon atoms which confer to it a partial hydrophobic character. lys is among the more frequent amino acids in hot spots . as an "extreme" example of a mutation involving lys we show in figure  <dig> the trypsin-trypsin inhibitor complex. the residue lys <dig> from the inhibitor is a hot spot having the largest measured ΔΔg in our data set . our correct positive prediction is driven mainly by the side-chain van der waals and hydrogen bond energies. arginine too is a positively charged, polar amino acid and its side-chain can form up to  <dig> hydrogen bonds. predictions however are not as accurate as for lys with a fair number of false positives. by inspecting these false predictions individually, it emerges that often the positive scores are driven by a large favourable side chain hydrogen bond energy. it is possible that in fact this term is over-estimated as the loss of some of the hydrogen bonds upon alanine mutation might be  mitigated by, e.g., the inclusion of water molecules at the interface.

the number and percentage of amino acids in our data set are shown. the number and percentage of hot spots for each amino acid type is also reported. for a given amino acid type,  is the percentage of hot spots with respect to the residues of that type in the data set ;  is the percentage of hot spots of that type with respect to all hot spots in the data set . enrichment in hot spots is calculated as the ratio of the frequency of a given residue type in hot spots  over the frequency of the same amino acid type in the whole data set . this table should be compared with table  <dig> in  <cit> . note that proline and glycine are not included in our data set.

tryptophan and tyrosine are also common in hot spots  <cit>  . they are both aromatic, hydrophobic amino acid  and are both capable of forming one hydrogen bond . in general, our model appear to predict fairly accurately trp and tyr hot spots . in this respect it is worth noting that  <dig> false positive and  <dig> false negative predictions respectively for tyr and trp are found in the same complex, formed by the interferon-γ receptor and antibody a <dig> . as discussed in  <cit>  this is a difficult case, with the individual monomers likely to undergo significant conformational changes upon binding. indeed predictions for this complex are among the less accurate we obtain . it has previously been noted that tyrosine is much more likely to be found in hot spots than phenylalanine, despite the two residues being similar and with nearly identical volumes. presumably, this is due to the ability of tyrosine  to hydrogen bond. it is reassuring that our model is able to reproduce this empirical observation fairly well .

for some amino acid types, our model has some clear limitations. for example, it performs poorly on mutations involving glu despite it does reasonably well on asp mutations. it has been observed that asp is found more frequently in hot spots than glu and this might be related to differences in side-chain conformational entropy  <cit> . this possibly also explains the low accuracy of our predictions, given that our method does not consider any entropic term. another difficult case is isoleucine. ile is an aliphatic, hydrophobic amino acid and similarly to leu our method predicts no hot spots for this residue. in fact whereas leu is rarely found in hot spots, ile is actually enriched. our model fails to distinguish between these two residues. in theory, one could think of exploiting the amino acid identity as input feature too and of building a model for each different amino acid. in practice, at present this is not feasible as there are not enough mutational data available.

prediction of ΔΔg values
we turn now to the more complicated regression problem, i.e. the prediction of the actual value of ΔΔg induced by an alanine substitution. we have found beneficial in this case to include the intra-molecular energy terms as well. the results are summarised in table  <dig>  both svm regression and gp models compare favourably to the the robetta server, although the difference is probably only marginal. figure  <dig> shows the scatter plot of the predicted versus the observed ΔΔg, both for svm regression and for the robetta server. svm regression returns a lower root mean square error and an higher correlation coefficient. on the other hand, the regression line in figure  <dig> is closer to the ideal case  for the robetta predictions. notice that for some choices of hyper-parameters svms do return solutions with slope and intercept of the regression line closer to the robetta ones. for these solutions the root mean square error and correlation coefficient are also similar to those derived from robetta.

svm: support vector machine, gp: gaussian processes, llsf: linear least squares fit, llsf: linear least squares fit with inter-molecular side-chain van der waals as only input, llsf: linear least squares fit with inter-molecular side-chain van der waals and hydrogen bond as inputs. rmse stands for root mean squared error, r for correlation coefficient and mcc for matthews correlation coefficient .

all tested methods appear limited in the accuracy they can achieve. for example, if < ΔΔg > is the average outcome of an alanine mutation simply by predicting ΔΔg = < ΔΔg > independently of the input features, one would obtain a rmse =  <dig>  kcal/mol. of course in this case the correlation coefficient would be zero but this simple consideration suggests that root mean square errors of the order of those both we and other methods obtain are not extraordinary. in fact our results are comparable to those from a model built with an ordinary linear least squares fit  as reported in table  <dig>  compared to llsf, svm regression might still be slightly more accurate possibly because it is less sensitive to the effect of outlying points.

we have investigated also "minimal" version of the llsf models, based on only one or two energy terms as inputs. this analysis highlights which are the major contributions to the models and reveals that, similarly to the binary classification problem, the most important term is the packing of the mutated side-chain against the partner protein. a model based on just the side-chain inter-molecular van der waals energy achieves results that are worse but still comparable to the full model . adding the hydrogen bond term the accuracy improves only marginally. we suggest therefore that the simple side-chain van der waals model could be used in future as a benchmark to gauge advancements in this regression problem. 

progress in this field will probably require the development of novel approaches. based also on our results, it seems likely that it will involve modelling of both the mutated and unbound structures. this indeed might be the major limiting factor in our strategy. some improvements might also be expected by a more accurate description of the different energy terms. for example a more rigorous treatment of solvent effects on electrostatics might be necessary. additionally, terms can be introduced to explicitly account for the structural plasticity and adaptability of hot spot regions, e.g. by means of normal mode analysis or dynamical simulations. it is also possible that the addition of evolutionary information can lead to more reliable predictions. indeed, in a recent investigation it has been highlighted that hot spots tend to establish conserved physico-chemical interactions across homologous interfaces  <cit> . however, in order to achieve major improvements it will be essential to rely on a larger data set of alanine mutations.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have presented a novel computational approach to identify hot spot residues in protein-protein interfaces, given the structure of the complex. basic energy terms are used as input features of machine learning algorithms such as svms. we have shown that we can identify hot spot residues with reasonable accuracy, substantially improving over, for example, the robetta server  <cit> . the prediction of the actual value of ΔΔg is instead still problematic. at present there seems to be no computational method that is able to predict the consequences of an alanine mutation to within chemical accuracy  and that at the same time is quick enough to be applied on a large scale.

we have developed an hybrid scheme that attempts to combines the strengths of machine learning and energy-based methods. although so far these two approaches have mainly been applied separately to biomolecular problems, the results of our investigation indicate that there can be substantial benefits to be gained by their integration. interestingly, a recent paper has applied somewhat similar concepts to the prediction of stability changes upon mutation in monomeric proteins  <cit> , by combining attributes derived from a knowledge-based potential  with machine learning algorithms.

the prediction of hot spot residues is a difficult but important problem. it represents a test of our understanding of the physical basis of affinity and specificity in protein-protein interactions. it is conceivable that progress on these aspects will lead to advancements in the docking problem as well, i.e. the prediction of the structure of a complex given the structures of the constituent proteins. for structural prediction purposes however the goal is to be able to locate hot spot residues in unbound proteins. encouragingly, two recent studies have reported some success in predicting hot spots without prior structural knowledge of the complex  <cit> . it would be interesting to verify if an approach conceptually similar to the one presented here could be applied to detect hot spots in unbound proteins as well. there is evidence that binding residues are often located in energetic unusual environments and contribute unfavourably to protein stability  <cit> , suggesting that energy features might indeed prove effective. 

the methodological approach we have outlined here is in principle rather general and could be applicable to other problems as well. for example it should be almost immediate to test it on monomeric proteins. the effects of alanine mutations in this case could be evaluated both in terms of stability changes and of modifications to the folding pathway . more general mutations could also be assessed although in this case it might be necessary to model the new amino acid. with regard to the docking problem mentioned above, in recent years many efforts have been directed towards the development of computational methods that can discriminate near-native structures among decoy sets. a classifier trained on energy features might be apt to the task. another interesting and extremely challenging problem is the prediction of the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters which characterise the interaction between a ligand and a protein  <cit> . combining physical potentials and machine learning algorithms might provide important insights which can then have implications, e.g., for the rational design of drug compounds.

