BACKGROUND
a major challenge of microarray analysis is to detect genes whose expression in a single or small number of tissues is significantly different than in other tissues. accurate identification of such tissue-specific genes can allow researchers to deduce the function of their tissues and organs at the molecular level  <cit> .

several methods have been used for this purpose  <cit> . of these, schug et al.  <cit>  demonstrated the effectiveness of using shannon information theoretic entropy for ranking genes according to their tissue-specificity, from restricted  expression to average  expression. however, there is also a severe disadvantage. the entropy does not explain to which tissue a gene is tissue-specific, only measuring the degree of overall tissue specificity of the gene. hence further analysis to identify specific tissues is needed. although schug et al.  <cit>  proposed a new statistic  based on entropy to estimate the degree of a gene's specificity on a particular tissue, the issue of redundancies remains where top-ranked genes as specific to tissue a are also top-ranked as specific to tissue b. we assert such genes are not specific to a or b, but rather are genes specific to both a and b. for example, we observed that two of the top five probesets specific to liver were also found in the top five probesets specific to gall bladder  <cit> . the issue of such redundancies is a concern with any ranking-based method, such as pattern-matching  <cit> , when the number of interrogated tissues increases. methods of identifying genes specific only to objective tissues are needed.

unlike ranking-based methods, methods based on outlier detection are free from the issue of redundancies because they identify tissues corresponding to both over- and under-expressed outliers for each gene  <cit> . therefore, these methods can treat equally various types of tissue-specific genes:  'up-type' genes selectively over-expressed in a single or small number of tissues compared to the others,  'down-type' genes selectively under-expressed, and  'mixed-type' genes selectively over- and under-expressed in some tissues. although the mixed-type is possible, the first two types  of expression patterns are particularly important because those genes may be associated with fundamental biological phenomena and may contain particular tissue-specific diagnostic markers. using outlier-detection-based methods, however, ranking genes according to their degree of overall tissue-specificity is difficult.

this complementary relationship between ranking-based and outlier-based methods led us to develop a combined approach, roku. roku analyzes any type of tissue-specific genes  in two steps. first, it ranks genes according to overall tissue-specificity using shannon entropy, and second, for each gene, it identifies specific tissues whose observations are regarded as outliers using a method of kadota et al.  <cit> . we applied the method to both synthetic and real gene expression data and demonstrated its utility by comparison with other methods.

RESULTS
definition of tissue-specific genes
we first show typical examples of various types of gene expression patterns. we here divided tissue-specific genes into two levels, a narrow sense and a broad sense. genes over-expressed in a small number of tissues but unexpressed or slightly expressed in others, such as those shown in figs. 1a and 1c, are defined as tissue-specific genes in a narrow sense, while genes over- and/or under-expressed in a small number of tissues compared to other tissues are defined as tissue-specific in a broad sense . we focused here on the latter case and wanted to identify such expression patterns . we use two terms  interchangeably throughout this paper.

data processing and its effect on shannon entropy calculation
when one gene vector x =  is given, the entropy h can be calculated by equation  <dig> . the range of h is from  <dig> whose gene expression is perfectly restricted in a single tissue  to log <dig> whose gene expression pattern is flat in all the interrogated tissues . we therefore rely on the low entropy score for the identification of tissue-specific genes. the black scatter plots in fig.  <dig> are synthetic expression observations for n tissues . the entropy h for each gene vector x is given by the number in black above the figures. clearly, direct calculation of the entropy for raw gene vector x works well only for detecting tissue-specific genes in a narrow sense  but not for those in a broad sense . the h scores  of tissue-specific genes in a broad sense are close to the maximum value  and cannot identify those genes as 'tissue-specific'.

to detect tissue-specific genes in a broad sense, we introduce a simple method that processes a given gene vector x and makes a new vector x'. data processing is done by subtracting the one-step tukey biweight and by taking the absolute value of equation  <dig> . the tukey biweight yields a robust weighted mean able to resist 50% of outliers  <cit> . the scatter plots of processed vectors are shown in red in fig.  <dig>  the entropy scores, h, for the processed vectors to obvious tissue-specific genes in a broad sense  are considerably lower than those for x. this is because the relative expression levels for specific tissues  become high after data processing. for example, the value  for tissue  <dig> in fig. 1e becomes  <dig>  after data processing. since the base-line value is  <dig>   in this case, such high values decisively contribute low entropy to the gene expression pattern. also, entropy scores, h and h, to non-specific  genes are quite similar and close to the maximum  . these results demonstrate the adequacy for our strategy for detecting tissue-specific genes in a broad sense at least on typical/hypothetical expression data.

analysis of real data
to further investigate the validity of our method , we applied the method to a public gene expression matrix consisting of  <dig> normal human tissues and  <dig>  probesets  <cit> . briefly, roku  processes each probeset expression vector and makes a processed vector x',  calculates the entropy h, and  assigns specific tissues to each probeset whose observations are detected to be 'outliers' . we compared the performance of roku to that of schug's method, which directly uses the original/non-processed vector x for measuring the entropy h  <cit> . the two entropy scores  and h) for all probesets are available in the additional file .

to compare the agreement of top-ranked probesets between roku and schug's method we analyzed the percentage of common probesets in a top-ranked set of ~ <dig>  probesets. about 80% of ~ <dig>  top-ranked probesets are common, indicating that roku does not change the rank of probesets drastically . one way to compare the effect of the data processing used in roku to that used in schug's method is to sort probesets in order of increasing magnitude by the difference between the two entropy scores  - h) calculated by the two methods. since roku outputs relatively low entropy to each probeset compared to schug's method as a whole , the average value of  - h) tends to be negative: - <dig>  .

there are  <dig> probesets satisfying h > h: processed expression vectors are less tissue-specific than the original vectors. visual evaluation for those probesets showed no probeset exists whose entropy score is improperly assigned, i.e., no obvious tissue-specific probesets exist. these results demonstrate the data processing strategy used in roku successfully estimated/ranked probesets by their overall tissue specificity on real data. we verified such trends in other microarray datasets .

note that roku is inferior to schug's method  in rare cases. for example, consider a gene expression pattern of constant high expression in n/ <dig> tissues and low expression in other tissues. roku gives the processed expression pattern as 'flat' and h = log <dig>  accordingly, roku cannot distinguish such differential expression patterns from constant expression patterns because it gives the same entropy scores for the two patterns. in other words, h is not useful for identifying non-specific genes. nevertheless, this disadvantage is not a problem for detecting the tissue-specific expression patterns we focused on. we also observed that there was no probeset suffer from this disadvantage in the real data set.

detection of specific tissues as outliers
as mentioned earlier, the entropy does not indicate which tissues are specific though it can rank genes according to their degrees of overall tissue specificity. to identify such specific tissue when they exist, roku employs an outlier-detection-based method proposed by kadota et al.  <cit>  . regardless of over- and/or under-expressed outliers, it can return specific tissues corresponding to outliers for each gene. accordingly, an outlier matrix can be constructed  that corresponds to the original gene expression matrix by applying the method. genes with any expression pattern of interest can be detected using the outlier matrix. the outlier matrix is also available in the additional file .

for example, roku identifies  <dig> probesets specific to lung and  <dig> probesets specific to fetal lung and of course no redundancies exist between the two sets by virtue of the advantage of the original method  <cit> . since roku is a combined method consisting of calculation of an entropy and assignment of specific tissues to each gene, roku can compensate for the disadvantage of the original method  <cit>  by assigning an entropy score h: roku can rank genes with particular tissue-specific patterns by their overall tissue specificity. we compared the performance of roku to that of schug's qt statistic  <cit>  which can also rank genes specific to a tissue t.

fig.  <dig> shows the top-ranked gene expression profiles specific to  lung and  fetal lung identified by roku's h statistic and schug's qt statistic  <cit> . the qt statistic for a tissue t in a gene expression vector x is defined as qt = h - log <dig> . clearly, roku can detect probesets whose expression patterns are specific only to each of the objective tissues  while schug's q statistic cannot. this is because a low qt statistic indicates that gene x is relatively highly expressed in a small number of tissues including tissue t, but does not always indicate whether the expression pattern of x is specific only to the tissue t. indeed, both probesets  identified by schug's qt statistic include another tissue in addition to the objective tissue. we analyzed this trend in the top-ranking probesets . we assert that these probesets are not specific to lung  but are specific to both lung and fetal lung. although the choice of which method should be used is, of course, dependent on individual research purposes, our method  is superior to schug's q statistic for detecting genes specific only to tissues of interest.

of  <dig>  probesets analyzed,  <dig>  exhibit one or more specific tissues. we observed that most of them consist of specific up-expression patterns, such as figs. 1c and 1d . this is probably because the distribution of gene expression levels from the dataset we used here roughly follows an exponential distribution in which the probability of a gene's expression observation decays exponentially . still we appreciate the merit of roku being able to detect genes with various types of tissue-specific expression patterns, as shown in fig.  <dig> 

effect of different quantification algorithms on gene ranking
as discussed in grant et al.  <cit> , a serious issue regarding any method is the choice of quantification algorithms, such as mas <dig>  <cit>  or rma  <cit> ; different choices can output different subsets of top-ranked genes. we compared the influence on gene ranking when the same raw data are mas5-quantified and rma-quantified. fig.  <dig> shows the percentages of common probesets in a top-ranked set of ~ <dig>  probesets between mas <dig> data and rma data, by gene ranking using roku  and schug's method . although both methods  output relatively low percentages of common probesets, especially in the  <dig> top-ranked probesets , the percentages for roku were consistently higher than those for schug's method. this result indicates gene ranking based on roku is more robust against data transformation than schug's method.

there are some ways for extending this work. first, we used an outlier-detection-based method  <cit>  for the detection of specific tissues. some other methods, such as sprent's non-parametric method  <cit>  and its derivative, could be applicable. the outputs of these methods vary with the selected parameters. a comparative study of these methods is the next task. second, the current work did not discuss the statistical significance of observed differences in gene expression. we plan to combine the significance analysis, such as a method of sharov et al.  <cit> , with the current method.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we propose a novel method  for the detection of genes with tissue-specific expression patterns. roku was developed to compensate for the disadvantages of two conventional methods  <cit>  by combining the advantages of the two. using synthetic expression data, we demonstrated its potential applicability for the detection of various types of specific expression patterns. although most of the detected tissue-specific genes in real microarray data exhibit one type of expression pattern , the entropy-based gene ranking by roku outperforms the two original methods. roku can be a powerful tool for selecting genes specific to tissues of interest.

