BACKGROUND
the pleiades promoter project  addresses two major challenges identified in gene therapy – first, the delivery of dna to specific cell types to reduce side effects from treating healthy cells and second, controlled delivery of dna to a specific locus in the genome to avoid insertional mutagenesis. the goal for the project is the generation of human dna promoters less than  <dig> kb in length  that drive gene expression in brain regions important in neurological conditions. to achieve this goal, we have first identified genes with enriched expression in different regions of the adult mouse brain. regional expression patterns within the brain tend to be conserved between orthologous human and mouse genes  <cit> . additionally, as regulatory sequences in tissue-specific genes tend to be highly conserved  <cit> , human mini-promoters are expected to drive regional gene expression in transgenic mice based on earlier studies  <cit> . therefore, promoter regions from orthologous human genes will be assessed in the mouse brain for the ability to drive regional expression.

selection of the most optimal genes for promoter design necessitates detailed assessment of gene expression patterns. an invaluable resource to identify genes expressed in the mammalian brain is the serial analysis of gene expression  technique  <cit> . a modern improvement of tag-based expression analysis is longsage, which produces longer transcript tags  better suited to unique mapping onto cdna and genome sequences  <cit> . as part of the mouse atlas of gene expression project  <cit> , longsage was used to profile transcriptomes of  <dig> tissues of mouse strain c57bl/6j at various stages of development  <cit> . for the pleiades promoter project  <cit> , a scion of the mouse atlas project, we have generated new longsage data on gene expression in the adult mouse central nervous system to identify genes that display enriched expression in key brain regions.

while longsage provides a rich perspective on gene expression patterns, we extended our data mining efforts to include other large information sources. the pubmed database  <cit>  provides an unparalleled compendium of text from the scientific literature. in order to facilitate extraction of key information from medline abstracts or full-text articles in pubmed, natural language processing tools are routinely employed to semi-automate the process of literature mining  <cit> . in this study we investigated an approach to specifically and automatically identify associations between genes and brain regions from the literature. we further analysed expression data from the allen brain atlas , a high-throughput in situ hybridization platform that has assayed expression for ~ <dig>  genes in the adult mouse brain  <cit> . here, we report the successful utilization of a combination of gene-finding tools, including sage analysis, text mining and aba expression data, to identify genes displaying regionally enriched expression in surrogate regions of therapeutic interest within the mouse brain.

RESULTS
identification of brain region-enriched gene expression by longsage
to identify regionally enriched gene expression within the brain of the adult mouse strain c57bl/6j, we used the precision of laser capture microdissection   <cit>  to isolate component tissues and construct sage libraries from  <dig> brain regions as well as the whole adult mouse brain for comparison . as shown in table  <dig>  these libraries have been sampled to a depth of >  <dig>  tags each, a level shown to be adequate for the discovery of medium-to-high level transcripts  <cit> . bioinformatics analysis of differential gene expression was performed as described in methods. since the majority of transcripts were detected in multiple libraries, we employed a heuristic approach to identify and rank expression patterns . for each brain region, we ranked genes from 1– <dig> based on the level and pattern of expression in descending order. expression specificity of a ranked list of  <dig> sage-identified genes was then confirmed by examining related literature information and allen brain atlas in situ hybridization data. based on this collective information, region-specific or region-enriched genes were further considered.

amanually dissected; all others were laser capture microdissected

brepresents filtered data

* tl = target library , otl = off-target library 

of the  <dig> genes identified as displaying regionally enriched expression in this study,  <dig> genes  displayed expression patterns listed in table  <dig>  only  <dig> genes were found in a single library and five of these  were determined to be tissue-specific at a statistically significant level .

complexity of the adult mouse brain transcriptome and sage-based analysis of transcriptome similarity of brain regions
as an indication of complexity of the adult mouse brain transcriptome, within the  <dig> pleiades libraries  expression was observed for  <dig>  genes of the total  <dig>  genes detectable within the mouse atlas . in contrast, the allen brain atlas  contains expression patterns of approximately  <dig>  genes across the entire adult c57bl/6j mouse brain ; of these genes, roughly  <dig> %  were detectable in the  <dig> pleiades libraries. furthermore, the pleiades libraries provided about 8%  additional genes to the total number of genes detectable by aba.

we also analyzed sage data to measure transcriptome similarity between selected tissues. the premise was that tissues would cluster together or diverge based on the degree to which their genes are differentially expressed. hierarchical clustering was done based on unweighted average distance between formed clusters , the results of which are displayed in the form of a dendrogram . a pattern of divergent tissue clusters consistently emerges: a cluster of neuronal tissues and several discrete single tissue clusters including ependymal layers, cerebellum white matter and cerebellum purkinje cell layer. among neuronal tissues, the ventral and medial thalamus consistently clustered tightly together and had the lowest expression divergence between any two pairs of tissues. additionally, visual cortex, primary motor cortex, amygdala , amygdala , and dorsal striatum also clustered together. segregation of the ependymal tissue into a separate single cluster makes sense given its non-neuronal nature  <cit> , and the cerebellar white matter is composed of myelinated axonal processes. clustering is usually sensitive to the specific expression divergence measure used. however, we tried several empirical measures, as well as different p values for selecting differentially expressed genes, and observed that the main pattern of clustering outlined above remains unchanged.

literature mining strategy to rapidly identify genes associated with brain regions of interest
we included in the present analysis several additional brain regions and cell-types, for example, blood-brain barrier, barrington's nucleus, astroglia etc., for which sage libraries had not been constructed. therefore, to expand our set of genes with regionally enriched expression for all brain regions, we then scrutinized literature from pubmed. we obtained a list of medline records using boolean logic with search term combinations indicated in table  <dig>  to facilitate retrieval of publications from a large literature database such as pubmed, we also developed a semi-automated literature mining strategy  based on natural language processing. in this approach we looked for the appearance of a gene name or synonym and a brain region in a sentence. of the  <dig>  million sentences searched,  <dig>  occurrences of a brain region term were found;  <dig>  mouse genes names, or the names of their human orthologs, were found to appear within the same sentence as a brain region .

the candidature of literature-mined genes was verified by assessing available expression data  in publications, and confirmed with in situ hybridization data from the allen brain atlas . in addition to promoter-reporter fusion data from the literature, reporter expression data for bac  transgenic mice, when available from the gensat database  <cit> , was also considered as complementary evidence of expression .

data mining genes showing regionally enriched expression from allen brain atlas
the entire allen brain atlas  data set can be searched via a web-based application  <cit> . we used this feature to examine expression patterns of genes identified as regionally enriched by sage and/or the literature. this verification was particularly apt for sage because aba in situ hybridization patterns were also derived from the same mouse strain c57bl/6j. we also employed the aba anatomic search tool to identify additional genes whose expression patterns cluster within brain regions of interest. while this approach short-listed genes for major regions  of the mouse brain listed under anatomic search, we also searched within these regions to identify expression in sub-regions of interest, e.g. within pons for genes expressed in locus coeruleus. recent introduction of the alternative aba search tool, neuroblast, also proved to be useful. we used neuroblast to retrieve genes co-expressed with a seeded  gene in a region of interest. identification of regionally enriched co-expressed genes in this manner is indispensable in subsequent identification of shared regulatory elements for efficient mini-promoter design.

thus, sage analysis of the adult mouse brain transcriptome combined with meta-analysis using data mining resources described above identified  <dig> genes as showing regionally enriched expression . a summary of the meta-analysis that supports regionally enriched expression is presented ; where available, this file includes examples of supporting aba images downloaded from the aba website 

*also listed as a cortex-specific gene

‡also listed as a striatum-specific gene

identification of over-represented go terms among genes with region-enriched expression
the gene ontology  resource  <cit>  is a powerful tool to identify common functions shared by genes identified by high-throughput gene expression methods such as sage. we searched for over-representation of go terms among our set of genes from each of three ontology classes: biological process, molecular function and cellular component . of  <dig> genes in our selection, we found annotations for  <dig> genes in the whole mouse genome set of  <dig> annotated genes . from this list, we determined the top  <dig> statistically over-represented go terms . annotations for the test selection of genes were compared with go annotations of the whole mouse genome. significant biological processes involved nervous system development, transmission of nerve impulse, cell-cell signaling, neurogenesis, behavior etc. significant molecular functions involved neuropeptide hormone activity, sequence-specific dna binding, neurotransmitter receptor activity, steroid hormone receptor activity, neurotransmitter transporter activity etc. products of some of these genes also tended to be localized in the extracellular region, plasma membrane, synapse, or within transcription factor complexes. thus, it appears that many of the genes we identified have established neurological functions, which accounts for their regionally enriched expression. it is noteworthy that we found  <dig> transcription factor encoding genes representing  <dig> of  <dig> regions/cell-types of interest . this information combined with identification of regulatory sequences within promoters of selected genes will aid the design of mini-promoters specific for each brain region. because our selection of the  <dig> genes was biased towards those with known functions, we also carried out go analysis on genes expressed in each of  <dig> sage libraries . specific neurological functions were less apparent among over-represented go terms for these larger sets than for the  <dig> genes presented in this study.

discussion
targeting gene therapy to specific regions of the brain requires the application of well-defined promoters that can drive expression in a region-specific manner. in this study our goal was to identify regionally enriched transcripts in sub-structures/cell-types of the mouse brain with a particular focus on those brain regions associated with diseases. we were encouraged by findings from the aba project that above background level expression was found for ~80% of genes assayed – and approximately 70% of genes have been localized to fewer than 20% of all brain cells – suggesting that gene expression is clustered in small brain regions  <cit> . for a variety of reasons we believe that human orthologs of regionally enriched mouse genes would be good candidates to design promoters from. first, at the genomic level, approximately 99% of mouse genes have an ortholog in the human genome  <cit> . second, it has been shown that 84% of human-mouse orthologous gene pairs show significantly lower expression divergence than that of random gene pairs  <cit> . in another comparable study within the milieu of neurogenomics, it was demonstrated that there are significant constraints on the evolution of gene expression and nucleotide sequence of region-specific genes in the brains of humans and mice  <cit> . in general, transcripts that are regionally enriched in mice also appear to be regionally enriched in humans – further emphasizing conservation of mammalian brain gene expression. nonetheless, we are exercising caution in assuming global conservation of expression across species as divergent as mouse and human, and will be testing multiple candidate genes for each region.

our study profiles region-enriched gene expression within  <dig> key areas of the adult mouse brain by longsage analysis. for the small number of brain regions for which we had no sage data we interrogated the literature and the aba directly. we used several expression indicators including sage tag abundance and specificity, in situ hybridization, promoter-reporter fusion data etc. to assess candidacy of genes. our data mining strategy was to start with sage-identified genes ranked on the basis of specificity and expression level, confirmed with supporting evidence from the literature, aba or gensat. although we prioritized finding genes displaying absolute regional specificity , for our data mining strategy to be practicable we did not limit ourselves to this level of stringency – especially for the brain nuclei e.g. basal nucleus of meynert, barrington's nucleus etc. therefore, we also selected genes that displayed the highest level of regional enrichment with the idea that promoters of such genes can be manipulated to produce desired specificity of expression, as reported by machon et al. for the mouse dach <dig> gene  <cit> . compared to ubiquitous expression of the native dach <dig> gene, a transgene with  <dig>  kb of dach <dig> regulatory sequence restricts β-galactosidase reporter expression within the mouse brain to the neocortex. deletion analysis of this  <dig>  kb fragment further delimited cortex-specific activity to a minimal  <dig>  kb promoter region. from a total of about  <dig>  mouse genes  <cit> , we have identified a set of  <dig> genes displaying regional enrichment of expression.

analysis of sage data to delineate transcriptome similarity among  <dig> selected brain tissues revealed segregation of a large cluster of neuronal tissues from discrete single clusters of non-neuronal tissues  and the neuronal outlier cerebellar purkinje cell layer. this pattern of tissue clustering appears to be borne out by unique tissue composition at the very least. among neuronal tissues, tight clustering of the ventral and medial thalamus regions is possibly a reflection of common diencephalic origin, although from a functional standpoint the two tissues can be considered to be different. the expression signature of a tissue may either independently confer tissue uniqueness, or itself depend on unique tissue composition, the surrounding cellular environment, or a combination of factors.

other studies have also demonstrated the utility of gene expression patterns in assessing cytoarchitectural distinctness of rodent brain regions. during review of this manuscript another study was published that employed sage gene expression profiling to identify region expression in  <dig> regions of the adult mouse brain  <cit> . interestingly, regional enrichment of some transcripts was found to be conserved in the human brain. microarray analysis of gene expression patterns in  <dig> neural tissues in the mouse central nervous system has mapped discrete brain domains based on such expression patterns  <cit> . importantly, it was revealed that embryological imprinting is still evident in the adult brain. microarray analysis has similarly identified molecular markers for neuronal subtypes in the adult mouse forebrain  <cit> , in brain regions in each of eight strains of inbred mice  <cit> , as well as in the adult rat cns  <cit> . fang et al. have shown that the most regionally discriminative genes are associated with one of four specific factors: regional myelin/oligodendrocyte levels, resident neuron types, neurotransmitter innervation profiles, and ca+2-dependent signaling and second messenger systems  <cit> .

by assessing over-representation of go terms within our set of regionally expressed genes, we identified commonalities in molecular functions, cellular locations and involvement in key biological processes. this offers the promise of a unique set of molecular markers for each region/cell-type, and could potentially provide a mechanistic explanation of unique functions performed by discrete brain regions. because of the disease application of our work, we were assured by the over-representation of genes involved in neurotransmitter synthesis, reception and degradation. importantly, we have also identified many regionally expressed transcription factor-encoding genes. this is consistent with previous findings of suzuki et al. who have identified region-specific transcription factors in  <dig> mouse brain regions by using medium-scale real-time rt-pcr  <cit> .  they reported that 90% of known transcription factors display significant expression in at least one brain region. additionally, it was found that  <dig> of over  <dig> transcription factor and co-regulator genes, mapped by in situ hybridization in the brains of developing mice, show restricted expression patterns adequate to describe the anatomical organization of the mouse brain  <cit> . 

the identification of brain region-specific transcription factors is a prelude to explaining expression patterns of similarly enriched genes regulated by these factors. armed with this knowledge, we can now search for evidence of transcription factor co-regulation of genes by availing of existing repositories of regulatory sequence collections  <cit> . in particular, the pazar system  <cit>  has been employed to integrate transcription factor data and annotated regulatory sequences from the pleiades promoter project. additionally, given that much is already known about pathways that activate transcription factors, it would now be possible to identify pathways with which genes regulated by these transcription factors are associated. indeed, a regulatory network comprising  <dig> important basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors and  <dig> target genes within the mouse brain has now been constructed  <cit> . from the perspective of the pleiades promoter project, the identification of dna-binding elements, transcription factors and pathways influencing their interaction will stand in good stead for efficient mini-promoter design.

we encountered challenges during in this study that are deserving of mention. in literature mining, curation was obfuscated by the existence of numerous synonyms for either mouse or human genes, references to a single protein rather than two distinct isoforms, or different genes with the same synonym. furthermore, where genes were not represented on either aba or gensat it was not possible to confirm expression, but nonetheless such genes were retained based on level and specificity of expression indicated by the literature or sage. additionally, for a good number of genes there was low correlation between expression detected by sage and in situ hybridization. despite the depth of sampling, expression of many genes was not detected by our sage procedure; for e.g pde1b <dig>  which has been shown to be strongly expressed in the striatum by in situ hybridization on aba and in the literature  <cit> . also, hcrt appeared to be hypothalamus-specific by sage but aba indicated enrichment in the hypothalamus with low level, widespread background expression. although our sage procedure and aba in situ hybridization profiled gene expression from the same mouse strain c57bl/6j, lack of correlation between the two could be due to inherent differences in the way rna is processed and/or detected in these procedures. nonetheless, hcrt was retained in our study after considering significance of expression in sage analysis  and the description of minimal promoters in the literature  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully identified genes displaying region-enriched expression in the mouse brain by the application of sage and data mining from a variety of publicly available sources. these genes represent useful molecular markers that could potentially aid in unraveling the functions of representative brain regions/cell-types. importantly, for the pleiades promoter project, identification of these genes has brought us closer to our goal of designing well-defined human promoters for gene therapy. indeed, we have further identified promoters of human orthologs of a subset of these mouse genes, and are now gearing up to test expression of reporter genes in transgenic mice . ultimately, it will be of great interest to determine for how many of these promoters the mouse pattern of regional enrichment is recapitulated within the human brain, and which of these successfully remediate the disorders they may be designed for.

