BACKGROUND
arterial spin labelling  is a non-invasive technique for the measurement of cerebral blood flow , enabling investigators to study brain perfusion with magnetic resonance techniques . recent advances in arterial spin labelling techniques allow the practical acquisition of cbf estimates with wide spatial coverage of the brain using multi-slice or 3d acquisitions  <cit> . this has made of asl a very promising technique for the systematic investigation of the physiology and functional determinants of brain perfusion, and of individual differences in baseline cbf at rest  <cit> .

several studies have described the spectral components of time series in asl data  <cit> . this study is concerned with the spatial patterns of covariation in the residual images of linear models fitted to quantitative perfusion images obtained with the continuous arterial spin labelling  technique, as implemented by  <cit> . a previous study investigated the principal components associated to subject-to-subject spatial variance, and described acquisition-to-acquisition variance  <cit> . study of spatial covariation is of interest for two reasons. firstly, it gives insight on the interplay of brain physiology with respect of vascularisation, and the signal acquired with this imaging technique. secondly, knowledge of spatial covariation is important to experimenters because it constitutes a violation of the stationarity assumption on the random field that models spatial covariation of residuals after smoothing  <cit> . under this assumption, residuals are spatially distributed like smoothed white noise. concretely, the violation of this assumption means that under the null hypothesis the estimated effects are likely to reflect the pattern determined by the most important patterns of covariation, rather than a random set of blobs scattered across the brain. therefore, when inspecting images of the estimated effects, knowledge of the form these images are likely to take even if the null hypothesis is true can assist in evaluating the spatial patterns produced by an experiment or an observational study, and distinguishing between sources of variation due to vascularisation and those due to the variable of interest.

here, we refer to acquisitions as to images of cbf values computed from applying a compartment model to two scans, one with and one without labelled spins  <cit> . in a study of baseline perfusion at rest, acquisition-to-acquisition variance arises from variation from one estimated perfusion image to the other within subjects. in a study in which participants carry out a task in the scanner, acquisition-to-acquisition variance is constituted by the residual variance arising from one estimated perfusion image to the other within experimental conditions/factor levels. figure  <dig> displays maps of acquisition-to-acquisition variance, collected from participants resting quietly in the scanner with closed eyes for  <dig> min, and therefore originated from a study of the first type. one can see that this variance shows differences of one order of magnitude across the brain, and that these differences follow anatomical features such as the course of large vessels  <cit> . high variance also occurs at the edges of the brain and in ventricles, where the model used to estimate perfusion may not hold . because the reasons for high variance in these areas and near large vessels may differ, it is conceivable that spatial covariance may show different intensities depending on the mechanism at the basis of variance. specifically, we would expect high variance at the edges of the brain to arise because of high variation from one voxel to the next leading to low spatial covariance, while near large vessels groups of voxels may tend to assume largely different values from one acquisition to the other, giving rise to larger spatial correlations.

in this study, patterns of spatial covariation will be identified by carrying out a principal component analysis of the estimated acquisition-to-acquisition variance shown in figure  <dig>  the sample consists of a total of  <dig>  <dig> images collected from  <dig> participants, and because of its size should yield a quite reliable eigendecomposition. to characterize the origin of these components further, the relation of the main components of variation with global cbf levels will be investigated.

RESULTS
principal component analysis
the first component explained about 10% of the variance, and contained variation shared by all voxels, shown by the coefficients of the component being of the same sign over the whole volume. this mode of variation was determined by the perfusion level of the acquisition in the whole volume, as is shown by the high correlation of the score of this component with global cbf values . areas of high acquisition-to-acquisition variance, visible in figure  <dig>  were represented in the spatial pattern of this component, which loaded with different intensity depending on overall acquisition-to-acquisition variance. taken together, the evidence presented in these figures shows that when global cbf of the acquisition is high, the computed regional cbf at the large vessels is even higher than the average level; furthermore, also perfusion in the cortex increases more than in the white matter. however, the variation of the first component appears to affect the calcarine and medial occipital cortex more than other cortical areas and as anticipated by their vicinity to large vessels . furthermore, the high variance at the edges of the brain and in ventricles of figure  <dig> is underrepresented. outside the brain parenchyma, high spatial covariation is observed in the space between the hemispheres and in the sylvian scissure.

the second and third components, each accounting for about 5% of the variance, captured variation located along the course of main vessels. the dissociation between anterior and posterior areas visible in the comparison between these two components reflects the main subdivision of branches stemming from the internal carotids and the vertebral artery. the fourth component, accounting for about  <dig> % of the overall variance, reflected dissociation between the brain parenchyma as a whole and the high-variance edges. in these components, association with global cbf was negligible , in contrast to the first component. no component up to the 10th was noted to reflect right-left asymmetries in perfusion.

discussion
in this study, the pattern of spatial covariation in the acquisition-to-acquisition variance in casl images was investigated using principal component analysis in a large sample of images. the results obtained here reflect the effectiveness and accuracy with which this technique could be implemented in our laboratory, and are certainly of limited generalizability to future techniques that may seek a more accurate estimation of cbf. however, the casl imaging protocol implemented here represents a pragmatic approach to cbf estimation , and its adoption may be informed by the results presented here.

the first component of variation captured changes in the overall intensity of the quantitative cbf estimate in each acquisition. these changes affected gray more than white matter and large vessel areas more than the rest of the brain parenchyma. an important aspect of this component of variation is its high correlation with global perfusion levels . even if the spatial pattern of covariance is somewhat different, this component is in this respect analogous to the first component obtained by the principal component analysis of subject-to-subject variance, which also captures changes of global perfusion levels  <cit> . the finding that the first component is associated with global perfusion levels in both subject-to-subject and acquisition-to-acquisition sources of variance suggests that many factors, now affecting variation between subjects, now affecting variation between acquisitions, may have a common effect on global perfusion levels. what one then sees is that differences in global perfusion levels affect brain regions with distinct but characteristic spatial patterns, depending on whether these factors have acted between acquisitions or between subjects. this observation is relevant for the application of procedures that, with the aim of reducing this source of variance and increase testing power, correct for global cbf values  <cit> .

the second and third components reflected a vascular factor, consistent with the predominant dissociation between the anterior and posterior regions due to the two main sources of arterial supply, internal carotids and cerebral artery. this source of variation may ensue from labeled spins that have not yet reached the capillary bed, or from interactions between the timing of the labeling pulse and the rhythm of blood flow. these components reflect the interplay of brain physiology, specifically of large vessels, and the signal acquired with this imaging technique. in contrast, variation at the edges of the brain is underrepresented in covariance patterns, loading strongly only on the fourth component. this is consistent with the observation of the noisy character of the data at the brain edges.

the relative importance of the first three components, accounting together for over 20% of the total variance, shows that residual variation across voxels in this type of images is affected by important violations of the stationarity assumption on the gaussian random field modeling residual variation. furthermore, the spatial pattern of these components follows anatomical boundaries, such as the anterior and medial temporal lobe, the medial occipital and calcarine cortex, the insula , and the subgenual portion of the anteromedial prefrontal cortex. when averaging these images, some combination of these patterns, apparently following anatomical structures, may arise just by chance, as was demonstrated in the case studies. the anteromedial part of the temporal lobe and the lower half of the medial aspect of the brain hemispheres appear to be particularly affected. note also that the apparently homogenous high variance of the medial aspect of the brain hemispheres visible in the sagittal slice of figure  <dig> is in fact produced by the superposition of spatially characterized patterns.

CONCLUSIONS
using principal component analysis, we investigated the patterns of spatial covariation arising from changes in the global estimated perfusion levels and their interplay with vascular anatomy.

