BACKGROUND
mathematical models of biochemical systems are becoming essential in systems biology to complement and extract information from time series. this information can be of two types. on the one hand, if the structure of the molecular circuit that executes the process of interest is known, models can be used to infer the numerical parameters that govern the dynamics of the system  <cit> . on the other, models can be used to infer the structure of the system from time series data .

in either case, to obtain a useful model, we face different challenges:  defining the system’s mass flow structure , , deciding the appropriate mathematical representation ,  estimating the parameters that make the model response consistent with experimental data , and  inferring the system’s regulatory structure. in addition, once the model is well defined, it should be able to predict systemic responses under yet untested experimental conditions .

the four challenges described in the previous paragraph are often addressed in independent steps. current solutions to the first challenge are generally based on compiling information about the system and using that information to create the stoichiometric matrix for the system one wants to analyze . to solve the second challenge we need to define kinetic functions that describe the dynamic behavior of the dependent variables of the system. if the kinetic functions are unknown, approximate formalisms that have a solid theoretical support can be used to describe the dynamic behavior of the system within a given accuracy  <cit> . the third challenge is typically formulated as an optimization problem that minimizes the sum of squared residuals between the measured and simulated data . the type of optimization problem being faced and the technical challenges to be solved depends upon the biological model of choice, upon the experimental data available, and upon the specific mathematical formalism used  <cit> . in many practical applications, the target biological system is described through nonlinear ordinary differential equations . hence, the parameter estimation task gives rise to dynamic optimization problems that are hard to solve. the fourth challenge could in principle be addressed in the same way as the first. however, despite the enormous amount of biological information available in public databases, regulatory signals are, in general, poorly understood and hardly ever properly characterized in vivo. regulatory signals appear in a model as parameters accounting for the influence that metabolites others than the substrates of a reaction have on its velocity. hence, parameter fitting can also be used to address the fourth challenge. however, the overwhelming majority of parameter estimation methods assumes a given structure and considers a fix regulatory scheme . this simplification is motivated by the difficulty in identifying regulatory effects, a task for which a myriad of alternative kinetic models must be explored  <cit> .

traditional methods for the selection of biological systems have mostly applied regression or chi-squared-based criteria   <cit> . however, information-theoretic criteria such as the akaike’s information criterion   <cit>  or the bayesian information criterion   <cit> , are now perceived as important measures to assess quality of fit. aic is often preferred over bic becaue it has a more immediate connection to the theory of information  <cit> . aic captures the trade-off between the complexity , and accuracy of the fitting. smaller aic values imply a better approximation to the model sought.

in this work we propose a strategy to simultaneously address the four challenges described above that relies on the use of mixed-integer dynamic optimization  methods. our approach adopts a structured mathematical framework to represent the kinetics of the processes that is flexible enough to reproduce a set of plausible network topologies . the power-law  <cit>  and the saturable and cooperative formalisms are examples of such general kinetic representations  <cit> . based on this type of general kinetic modeling framework, we develop our systematic parameter estimation method that provides as output a set of potential reaction and regulatory topologies for the target network along with the associated model parameters. we illustrate the capabilities of our approach using the gma kinetic representation, a canonical model structure that uses the power-law kinetic formalism  <cit> .

RESULTS
as a proof-of-concept, we have tested the capabilities of our approach through its application to a case study taken from voit and almeida  <cit> . the system considered is a four-constituent pathway branched with six velocities and two regulatory signals. x
1
 is generated from x
0
, and its production is inhibited by x
3
 which is produced from x
1
 via intermediate x
2
. x
1
 yields also x
4
, which promotes the degradation of x
3
 .

parameter estimation when the regulatory structure is known
we shall first show that the proposed method is capable of appropriately identifying the model parameters using dynamic data when the regulatory structure is known. this is the classical parameter estimation problem that is solved in many applications. to this end, we first produce dynamic data without error from the reference system using a specific set of parameter values. then, this in silico data is labeled as experimental and we use the proposed method to estimate the model parameters. we define a dynamic optimization model that contains a set of dynamic differential equations describing the system’s kinetics. this dynamic model is reformulated into a nonlinear program  using orthogonal collocation on finite elements. this nlp does not contain binary variables because we assume that the regulatory signals are known. the aforementioned nlp was implemented in gams  <dig> . <dig> and calculated with conopt  <dig> a on a pc/amd athlon at  <dig>  ghz using a single core. the nlp features  <dig> variables and  <dig> constraints, and was solved in  <dig>  cpu seconds. as expected, we obtain estimated parameters values that are very close to the original ones , and a least square error of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> 

data is error free .

non-linear kinetic models, like the gma representation, have a certain degree of plasticity that allows different parameter sets to fit the same data. clear parameter trends are obtained by fixing a given parameter and fitting the remaining ones. as an example, figure  <dig> shows the results of fixing f
32
 at different values and fitting the other parameters. all the points in the figure lead to residuals below  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  indicating that it is possible to obtain good fits with different parameter sets. similar patterns are obtained if we choose to fix any other parameter of the set.

as observed, the model is rather flexible, as there are many combinations of parameters values leading to very low residuals and essentially the same fit to the data. in practical terms, this means that given an experiment and an estimation procedure, we could obtain different parameter sets that closely reproduce the experimental measurements, but that differ from the actual values with which the dynamic profile was generated in silico. thus, estimated parameter values don’t help comparing the obtained fit with the reference model. in practice, the residual error and the resulting time profiles should be used to assess the fit.

we will now consider the effect of noisy data on fitting the model, as such noise plays a key role in evaluating any proposed method for identifying the regulatory structure of a network. to explore the influence of random experimental uncertainty, we generated  <dig> dynamic profiles from the reference model by introducing statistical noise. for this, we applied monte carlo sampling assuming that every data point follows a normal distribution with standard deviation values of  <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig> and 10% of the actual nominal value. for comparison purposes, we use the same perturbation experiment as in the previous example. table  <dig> shows the parameter values and the associated residuals obtained for four of the samples generated, while figure  <dig> depicts the profiles associated with a standard deviation of 10%. we can appreciate that despite the different parameter values, the various fitted models lead to similar residuals. note that although the regulatory structure is fixed, we obtain parameter values representing either positive or negative regulatory effects  of x
4
 on v
5
. this is a consequence of the “experimental error” introduced in the noisy data. that error may force the estimation procedure to an optimum involving a set of parameter values that may be different from the set that generates the noiseless data. in addition, as seen above, different parameters sets can be used to produce similar time courses. this means that there are coupled parameters in the system, which may also contribute for the estimation of regulatory interactions with reversed signals.

we solved a total of  <dig> problems, each corresponding to a different replication, generated randomly see additional file 1: table s1). the table shows the  <dig> cases for which the residual error is low.

in general, even in simple cases as the one considered here, it will be difficult to obtain a consistent estimation from a single time-series. identifying the parameter set that is more likely to be the correct one requires simultaneous fitting to additional time-series, resulting from more than one set of experiments. by doing so, we will constraint further the admissible parameter sets . in table  <dig>  we show the results of fitting three different experiments with experimental error. each experiment corresponds to an alternative perturbation on the initial concentration of metabolite x
3
 . these perturbations force the system to move across different dynamic regimes, producing additional information that helps in the identification of appropriate parameter values. as observed, the estimated parameters are more consistent over the various experiments. they are also closer to the actual parameter set selected for generating the data. note, however, that it is still possible to find solutions involving alternative regulatory topologies with good fit to data .

we solved a total of  <dig> problems, generated randomly. see additional file 1: table s <dig> 

identifying the regulatory structure
performance using error free data
after testing the capabilities of the method when the structure is known, we studied its ability to identify the regulatory topology of the model. to this end, we explore the performance of the method using one experiment with low experimental error . larger errors result in a wider set of alternative structures and for simplicity’s sake we shall not discuss them here.

in order to simplify the search, we fix a maximum of two metabolites  as potential variables affecting each velocity.

we note that it is typical to have some a priori knowledge about the biological system one is interested in. the complexity of the regulatory interactions in the identification problem is reduced if such knowledge can be used to constrain further both, the number of potential regulatory signals in the model and their signs . in such cases, we can introduce specific constraints for the relevant parameters to be fitted. for example, in our case kinetic-order corresponding to the substrates of a reaction must be positive.

the minlp model that simultaneously fits the parameters and infers probable regulatory interactions was implemented in gams  <dig> . <dig> and solved with the solver sbb in the same computer as before. the model has  <dig> binary variables,  <dig> continuous variables and  <dig> equations. the solution time was in the order of few minutes for each simulation.

our algorithm identifies a set of compatible systems, since the model has enough flexibility to play with the regulatory structure as well as the kinetic parameters when minimizing the residuals. the method identifies topologies that are quite close and that show very small residuals, but it is unable to uniquely identify the original topology . as an example, in figure  <dig>  we compare three completely different regulatory structures that produce almost indistinguishable results and similar fitting to the actual dynamics, leading to residual values of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  .

in figure  <dig> we show the dynamic profiles associated with three different topologies identified by the minlp. a complete list of network topologies and associated kinetic parameters and residuals is provided as . with three time series, the method identifies not only the actual topology, but also several structures that contain the original one . again, we obtained slightly different parameter sets in each case, since the model flexibility is rather large.

additional remarks
the use of mido techniques combined with orthogonal collocation allows posing the parameter estimation task as an algebraic optimization problem that can be efficiently solved using standard minlp algorithms. orthogonal collocation shows some appealing properties , but has the drawback of increasing the model size because it adds auxiliary variables and equations that increase the problem complexity. our mido approach, however, can be solved by any mido algorithm, and it is not restricted to the use of orthogonal collocation and minlp reformulations.

a key point in our method is the selection of an appropriate starting point to initialize the minlp algorithm. standard minlp algorithms typically solve an initial nlp where the binary variables are relaxed. if this nlp does not converge, the entire algorithm might fail. an initialization strategy that works well in practice is to integrate first the original kinetic model for some parameter values, and then use the dynamic profiles generated in silico to provide a starting point for the nlp solver. another method consists of solving an auxiliary model where we relax some constraints through the addition of slack variables, and then minimize the summation of the slacks in order to obtain an initial feasible point. with this relaxed model, we can identify a feasible  solution for the initial nlp.

even if the minlp model converges, there is still the issue of getting trapped in local optima during the search. to avoid this, we can run the optimization algorithm from different starting points generated randomly. this strategy does not guarantee convergence to the global optimum, but tends to produce high quality solutions in short cpu times. in contrast, deterministic global optimization methods provide a rigorous interval within which the optimum should fall, but tend to lead to large cpu times .

in our case, we initialize the nlps by solving a set of relaxed problems from different starting points and then pass these results to the first nlp solver. this approach provides feasible points from which the model converges to solutions with low residuals.

in general, due to the nonconvex nature of the reformulated minlp, the nonlinear branch and bound implemented in sbb outperforms the outer-approximation used by dicopt. this is because the supporting hyperplanes defined in the master milp solved by dicopt may chop-off feasible solutions due to the noconvex nature of some nonlinear inequalities.

we note that nonlinear models are hard to handle, and even more so when they contain binary variables. standard nlp solvers can solve problems containing up to hundreds of thousands of variables and constraints. on the other hand, the computational burden of mido  models is rather sensitive to the number of binary variables. for the type of problems we are dealing with, it is difficult to provide a bound on the number of binaries above which the algorithm might fail. in practice, however, we found that this approach efficiently for less than one hundred binaries .

from a practical viewpoint, we face the challenging problem of discriminating between compatible regulatory structures for a given data set. on a worst case scenario, our method provides a ranked set of alternative regulatory topologies that can be tested and validated experimentally. if appropriate additional time-series data are available, the set of admissible solutions for testing can be further constrained and reduced. our method finds a set of alternatives that are consistent with the dynamic data available and that can be further refined using additional information and expert knowledge on the system. . for instance, kinetic-orders that correspond to substrates of a reaction may be safely restricted to be positive. similarly, if we are fairly sure that a given metabolite does not participate in a reaction, its kinetic-order should be fixed to zero.

our method can also be used to explore hypotheses about the regulatory structure of a system. for instance, we can force some parameters to take negative values, thereby representing inhibition effects, and then perform the optimization so as to determine if the fitting is good enough. furthermore, we can follow the same procedure in order to identify regulatory effects that are consistent with this hypothesis.

in addition, we note that our approach can be easily adapted in order to work with other model selection criteria besides aic. we remark, however, that the assessment of different selection criteria would deserve a comprehensive study that is beyond the scope of this work.

the simple examples presented in this paper show that estimating parameters in dynamic kinetic models is far from being an easy job and that models based on the power-law formalism facilitate the estimation task. although this formalism is suitable for a wide variety of problems, one may argue that it may present some limitations. as an alternative, we can use extensions of this framework such as the saturable and cooperative formalism  <cit> , which takes into account saturation effects. in both cases, a key point is the possibility of using a canonical mathematical formalism that facilitates the automatic search of alternative regulatory patterns. the method described here would be applicable to such models via recasting of the saturating and cooperative formalism into a power law  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have proposed a rigorous approach based on mathematical programming for the simultaneous identification of the regulatory signals and estimation of the kinetic parameters of models of biochemical networks. our approach is based on the use of mixed-integer dynamic optimization  models that minimize the akaike criterion, and that can be solved by standard optimization algorithms. particularly, we solve this mido by reformulating it as a mixed-integer nonlinear program  using orthogonal collocation on finite elements, which makes it possible to apply standard minlp solution algorithms in an iterative fashion in order to identify a set of plausible network topologies and associated kinetic parameters.

it is noteworthy that the difficult task of parameter estimation in nonlinear models becomes really complicated as the size of the models increases. therefore, such estimation typically requires customized solution procedures. one key point is to use the appropriate initial conditions to ensure convergence of the calculations.

the proposed method can contribute to fill the lack of information on the regulatory signals that are in play in a given metabolic scenario. although we cannot deal with genome-wide models, we have shown that dynamic profiles can be processed to provide clear hypothesis on the underlying regulatory structure. this is an important step towards completing essential information on different metabolic processes that are poorly understood.

