BACKGROUND
parkinson’s disease  is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by, among others, loss of dopamine neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta  <cit> . this degeneration results in a dopamine depletion within the frontal-striatal circuits, leading to hypo-excitation of cortical areas, including the frontal lobes  <cit> . as a consequence, characteristic clinical motor symptoms arise, such as bradykinesia, resting tremor, and rigidity. besides these motor symptoms, patients with pd often suffer from non-motor symptoms, such as sleep disturbances, autonomic problems, neuropsychiatric symptoms , and cognitive dysfunction  <cit> . the latter includes attention problems, visuospatial deficits, and executive dysfunctions, such as set-shifting difficulties  resulting in cognitive rigidity.

set-shifting is defined as a mental process that is necessary to switch attention from one action or rule to another action or rule  <cit> . although numerous studies employed the wisconsin card sorting task   <cit>  to investigate set-shifting, more recent investigations have shown that task performance on the wcst not only depends on set-shifting capacities, but also on other cognitive constructs, such as working memory  <cit> , concept formation, and rule learning  <cit> . also, the use of dopaminergic medication influences task-performance on set-shifting tasks in patients with pd  <cit> . these potential confounding factors might have resulted in spurious findings in behavioural performance and neuronal activation, thereby providing an inaccurate view on set-shifting in pd: various authors have noted set-shifting difficulties in pd patients in association with cortical and subcortical activation differences as compared to controls , but it has been noted that these are hard to disentangle from the effects of other cognitive deficits, motor deficits, effects of dopaminergic medication and/or withdrawal, and mood  <cit> . we recently developed a new set-shifting task with a higher construct validity and used this task to study set-shifting in early stage pd patients, who were not using dopaminergic medication  <cit> . we showed equal behavioural performance across groups, but during task performance pd patients, compared with controls, showed hyper-activation of the bilateral ppc and right sfg and hypo-activation of the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex . we concluded that the hypo-activation of the vlpfc was compensated for by the hyper-activation of the ppc and other task-related brain areas, thereby forestalling behavioural deficits.

neuro-imaging studies have suggested that striatal dopamine depletion results in a decreased synchronization  between brain areas  <cit> , both during rest  and task performance  <cit> . we recently found supporting evidence for this hypothesis, based on fmri data from the same patients and controls as the present study during a working memory paradigm  <cit> . we found that early stage pd patients hyper-activated task-related areas during working memory processing, but showed a reduced inter-regional connectivity. we interpreted the hyper-activation as compensation for the reduction in task-related network connectivity.

in order to gain more insight into the changes in task-related functional connectivity in early stage pd in relation to set-shifting, and relate them to our preceding findings concerning changes in task-related activity, we investigated the task-related functional connectivity of the bilateral dlpfc, bilateral sfg, and bilateral ppc, using psycho-physiological interaction analysis   <cit> . we hypothesized that the functional connectivity between task-related brain areas would be decreased in early stage pd patients compared with matched healthy controls.

RESULTS
functional connectivity dlpfc
during set-shifting in the control group, the left dlpfc showed positive coupling with the precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex  and left angular gyrus . no significant negative coupling was found. in the pd group the left dlpfc showed task-related positive coupling with the precuneus and the right dorsomedial prefrontal cortex   and negative coupling with the bilateral premotor cortex and pre-supplementary motor area  . group comparisons showed that the control group, compared with the pd group, had stronger positive coupling between the left dlpfc and the contra-lateral insular cortex . pd patients, compared with controls, had more negative coupling between the left dlpfc and the sfg and primary motor cortex .fig.  <dig> positive coupling of the dlpfc, superior frontal gyrus and ppc in hc and pd. t-statistic images of positive connectivity in the  contrast, corrected for mean rt on shift trials. a voxel-level threshold of p < . <dig> is used with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels. the images are overlaid on ch2better mni template with mricron, coordinates are in mni space. the coloured bar indicates the z-value

fig.  <dig> negative coupling of dlpfc and superior frontal gyrus. t-statistic images of negative connectivity in the  contrast, corrected for mean rt on shift trials. a voxel-level threshold of p < . <dig> is used with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels

fig.  <dig> group interaction results. a left dlpfc hc > pd : increased coupling between the left dlpfc and the right insular cortex in healthy controls compared with pd patients. on the right is depicted the estimate of the right insular cortex peak voxel comparing healthy controls with pd patients. b left dlpfc pd < hc : more negative coupling between the left dlpfc and the sfg in pd patients compared with healthy controls. on the right is shown the estimate of the sfg peak voxel comparing healthy controls with pd patients. c left superior frontal gyrus pd > hc : increased coupling between the left sfg and the bilateral perirhinal cortex in pd patients compared to healthy controls. the connectivity difference with the left perirhinal cortex spreads into a larger region encompassing mostly white matter in the left temporal cortex. on the right the estimate of the right perirhinal cortex peak voxel comparing healthy controls with pd patients is shown. d right superior frontal gyrus hc > pd : greater negative coupling between the right sfg and dorsal acc in pd patients compared with healthy controls. on the right the estimate of the dorsal acc peak voxel comparing healthy controls with pd patients is shown. e right superior frontal gyrus pd < hc : more negative coupling between the right sfg and the dorsal acc, primary motor cortex, parietal cortex and precuneus in pd patients compared with healthy controls. on the right the estimate of the primary motor cortex peak voxel comparing healthy controls with pd patients is shown



regarding the right dlpfc, the control group showed positive coupling between this seed region and the left angular gyrus and the pcc . in the pd group the right dlpfc showed positive coupling with the right dmpfc  and negative coupling with the left premotor area . no group differences were found. table  <dig> provides an overview of the results.table  <dig> results of the gppi analyses in the contrast “successful shift > successful repeat”: left dlpfc and right dlpfc

results of the connectivity analyses: comparison of the pd and hc groups on the successful shift > successful repeat contrast. all areas were significant at an uncorrected threshold of p < . <dig>  with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels


hc healthy controls, pd parkinson’s disease, ba brodmann area



functional connectivity sfg
during set-shifting in healthy controls the left sfg showed positive coupling with the precuneus, bilateral angular gyrus, bilateral dmpfc, posterior cingulate cortex and visual cortex . in the pd group the seed region showed positive coupling with the pcc and right perirhinal cortex  and negative coupling with the primary motor cortex . group comparisons showed greater coupling between the left sfg and the right perirhinal cortex in pd patients compared with controls .

in the control group the right sfg showed positive coupling with the precuneus, bilateral frontal polar cortex, bilateral angular cortex and right lingual gyrus . in the pd group, no positive coupling was found, but the seed region showed negative coupling with the dacc and the primary motor cortex . group comparisons showed greater positive coupling with the dacc in controls compared with pd patients . pd patients, compared with controls, showed more negative coupling between the seed region and the dacc, primary motor cortex, the precuneus and the ppc . table  <dig> displays an overview of the results.table  <dig> results of the gppi analyses in the contrast “successful shift > successful repeat”: left superior frontal gyrus and right superior frontal gyrus

results of the connectivity analyses: comparison of the pd and hc groups on the successful shift > successful repeat contrast. all areas were significant at an uncorrected threshold of p < . <dig>  with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels


hc healthy controls, pd parkinson’s disease, ba brodmann area



functional connectivity ppc
in both the controls and pd patients , the left ppc showed positive coupling with the precuneus. in the healthy controls the seed region also displayed positive coupling with the left angular gyrus, dlpfc, and dmpfc . no negative coupling was found in either group. in addition, no significant group differences were found.

the right ppc showed positive coupling with the precuneus in both the pd  group and the control group. in the healthy controls the seed region also showed positive coupling with the left angular gyrus and the dmpfc . we found no negative coupling and no group differences for the right ppc seed. table  <dig> displays an overview of the results.table  <dig> results of the gppi analyses in the contrast “successful shift > successful repeat”: left ppc and right ppc

results of the connectivity analyses: comparison of the pd and hc groups on the successful shift > successful repeat contrast. all areas were significant at an uncorrected threshold of p < . <dig>  with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels


hc healthy controls, pd parkinson’s disease, ba brodmann area



discussion
this study investigated differences in task-related functional connectivity between early-stage pd patients and matched healthy controls, using a simple feedback-based set-shifting paradigm. main effects showed coupling between nearly all seed regions and various key areas involved in cognitive functions, such as the precuneus, the angular gyrus, and the dmpfc in both the pd group and the healthy controls. overall, pd patients, compared with controls, showed less positive functional connectivity, or more negative functional connectivity, between the seed regions and task-relevant network areas. these findings are in accordance with a recent working memory study in the same study sample  <cit> , and suggest that in early stage pd the normal communication between different task-related brain regions is disrupted during task-performance. we hypothesize that dopamine depletion results in an altered synchronization between task-related brain areas, by either diminishing positive functional connectivity or a maladaptive negative functional connectivity. we propose that the hyper-activation of the individual task-related brain areas that we found in our previous study  <cit>  is a form of compensation for the disrupted functional connectivity of the task-related network.

we found decreased positive functional connectivity between the left dlpfc and the right insular cortex in early stage pd patients when compared with controls. sridharan et al.  <cit>  argue that the right insular cortex is important for switching between a network that becomes active during rest  and a network that becomes active while performing cognitive tasks . our data suggest that the left dlpfc in pd patients is less well connected with this important regulatory brain area. in addition, the pd patients showed a decrease in positive coupling of the left sfg with the dacc and an increase in negative coupling of the right sfg with the right dacc. the dacc is connected with the sfg, especially the pre-sma, and these areas together are important for error detection. in addition, the dacc interacts with the dlpfc and together with the pre-sma, these three areas are likely involved in cognitive control functions  <cit> .

we found increased negative functional connectivity of the left dlpfc with the sfg in pd patients. this latter area is essential for the planning of movement and cognition, and is normally connected with the dlpfc  <cit> . rowe and colleagues found positive coupling between the prefrontal cortex and the pre-sma in healthy individuals during an attention-to-action task, while this coupling was absent in pd patients  <cit> . together, these findings suggest that in pd these important functional connections of the dlpfc with the sfg are disrupted. in addition, in pd compared with controls, the right sfg showed increased negative coupling with left motor cortex. we speculate that the increased negative coupling between the right sfg and the primary motor cortex, might contribute to the increased reaction times during both successful shift and successful repeat trials that we described in our previous article  <cit> .

we found no between-group differences in task-related functional connectivity when using the left and right ppc as seed regions. in our previous study, we found that the parietal cortices displayed hyper-activation, and combined with our present findings, this suggests that the function of the parietal cortex is still relatively preserved in our patient sample, and might be less influenced by the dopaminergic depletion, in contrast to the frontal lobes  <cit> , possibly as a result of the early stage of the disease in our pd patients.

previous studies have shown that, due to the pd-related pathology, neuronal cell assemblies desynchronize  <cit> , which can be measured as a decrease in positive, or increase in negative, functional connectivity at the level of neuronal oscillations and of brain activation, in rest , during motor tasks  <cit> , and during cognitive task performance  <cit> . our results are line with these previous findings, and suggest that the initial striatal dopaminergic depletion in early stage pd results in a disrupted task-related functional connectivity between neuronal assemblies. we postulate that the disruption in task-related functional connectivity can be compensated for by hyper-activation of the individual brain areas, thereby forestalling cognitive decline. we speculate that when this hyper-activation can no longer compensate for the disrupted connectivity between neuronal assemblies, the hyper-activation will convert into hypo-activation and the set-shifting deficits will become apparent at the behavioural level.

strengths and limitations
this study is the first to explore changes in functional connectivity during a set-shifting task in pd patients. the differences in connectivity that we report cannot be attributed to behavioural differences, as we based our contrast on the correctly answered items only. furthermore, we studied, to our knowledge, the largest group of unmedicated pd patients during a set-shifting task, thereby excluding the potential confounding effect of dopamine replacement therapy, and used a simple feedback-based paradigm to reduce the influence of other cognitive constructs on task performance and neural activation. however, these methodological strengths also make it difficult to compare our results with previous studies. to be maximally sensitive to small, yet meaningful results in this rare population of a cognitively intact group of early stage and medication-free pd patients, we report our results at an uncorrected threshold; to diminish the risk of false positive findings we used a priori defined regions of interest and raised our voxel-level significance threshold from p = . <dig> to . <dig> with an extent threshold of  <dig> voxels. it remains important that our results are replicated before being able to make any definite statements.

CONCLUSIONS
we investigated task-related functional connectivity changes in unmedicated early stage pd patients during a feedback-based set-shifting task. in conclusion, we found altered coupling between seed regions and task-relevant interconnected network areas in pd patients, when compared with controls. these results, together with our previous finding of intact behavioural performance and hyper-activation, support the hypothesis that in pd there is disrupted functional connectivity between task-related brain areas. to further expand our understanding of this process, longitudinal studies should be performed to see how task-related functional connectivity and activity change over time, how they are modified by dopamine replacement therapy, and how these modulations relate to cognitive performance.

