BACKGROUND
biofouling is a colonisation process that begins from the very same moment a material surface is immersed in seawater and leads to the development of complex biological communities. this undesirable accumulation of biological material causes severe economic losses to human activities in the sea, from deterioration of materials, structures, and devices, to increases in fuel consumption and loss of maneuverability in ships  <cit> . in a simplified model, there are four main stages in the biofouling process: i) adsorption of organic matter onto the material surface, creating a conditioning film; ii) arrival of the so-called primary colonizers  that form complex, multispecies biofilms; iii) settlement of spores of macroscopic algae and other secondary colonisers; and iv) settlement of invertebrate larvae  <cit> . even though it is not necessarily a sequential process, it is generally accepted that the formation of an organic layer and a biofilm is the first step to biofouling  <cit> .

since the ban on the use of organotin compounds, particularly bis- oxide , established by the international maritime organization  that finally entered into force in september  <dig>  there is a clear need for alternative antifouling compounds. we have recently started a screening program for the search of novel antifouling molecules. in doing so, one of the most striking issues is the great diversity of conditions currently employed in lab-scale assays , not only when dealing with biofilms, in whose case the optimal conditions should be individually defined for each strain, but even with planktonic cultures  <cit> . it seems evident that this heterogeneity may lead to important differences in the results obtained from in vitro tests. in addition, there is a lack of studies focusing on the effect that these diverse conditions have on the properties of marine biofilms.

even though single-strain laboratory tests do not mimic the real environmental conditions, in vitro models are a useful tool for screening and comparing new products, treatments and materials. to this end, s. algae was chosen as model organism. shewanella spp. are gram-negative, facultative anaerobe rod-shaped uniflagellar bacteria worldwide distributed in marine and even freshwater habitats   <cit> . they play an important role in the biogeochemical cycles of c, n and s  <cit>  due to their unparalleled ability to use around twenty different compounds as final electron acceptors in respiration, which, in turn, provides bacteria the ability to survive in a wide array of environments  <cit> . for this versatility, shewanellae have been focus of much attention in the bioremediation of halogenated organic compounds, nitramines, heavy metals and nuclear wastes  <cit> . their biofilms are also receiving increasing interest in microbial fuel cell applications due to their excellent extracellular electron transfer capability, that includes direct  and indirect mechanisms   <cit> . shewanella spp. biofilms have been found to modulate the settlement  of a variety of macroscopic algae and invertebrates such as ulva spores  <cit> , cypris  <cit> , mussel larvae  <cit> , or sea urchin larvae  <cit> . shewanella spp. produce omega- <dig> fatty acids and other hydrocarbons, probably to increase the fluidity of the cell membrane in cold waters –most shewanella strains are psychrotolerant- or as a result of a mutualist relationship between fish and bacteria living in their intestines  <cit> . indeed, they are being increasingly used as probiotics in aquaculture  <cit>  and, more recently, as a source of hydrocarbon fuels  <cit> . among all the members of the shewanellae family, only s. putrefaciens and s. algae are widely recognized to be pathogenic to human and animals, being involved in soft-tissue infections, ear infections, necrotising fasciitis, abscesses, bacteremia, and many other affections  <cit> . however, there is increasing evidence that point that other shewanella species are also causative agents of human infections  <cit> . for all these reasons, s. algae biofilms are of great interest in bacterial fouling studies as well as in many other fields.

in anti-biofilm assays, the nutritional requirements that promote bacterial biofilm formation may not be the same as those employed in antimicrobial susceptibility testing, thus leading to the use of a different culture medium and frequently higher inocula  <cit> . in order to explore the effect of the culture conditions on the growth and biofilm formation of s. algae, nine media and two incubation temperatures were initially screened. subsequently, the antibacterial activity of known antifouling biocides was determined using different media and inocula. finally, in order to assess exhaustively the morphological and physical properties of s. algae biofilms developed in different media, a detailed examination was conducted by confocal laser scanning microscopy  and atomic force microscopy . over the last few years, afm has turned into a powerful technique not only for studying the morphology of soft materials such as polymers and biomaterials but also for obtaining information about different properties  of the samples. in particular, recent advances in force distance-based afm  have allowed researchers to register three-dimensional quantitative images related to interesting physicochemical properties of living cells  <cit> . peakforce tapping  in liquid media is a novel, cutting edge breakthrough in afm that allows the imaging and quantification of the physicochemical properties associated to every point in a 3d surface immersed in a liquid environment. this is of special interest for biological samples and particularly for marine biofilms, so we have been able to measure these properties directly in natural seawater. in this article fd-afm methods have been used to characterise the morphology of biofilms of s. algae grown in different nutritive media and to obtain quantitative mapping of elastic modulus and adhesion forces of the resulting biofilms.

RESULTS
influence of the culture conditions on bacterial growth and slime production
bacterial growth was initially checked in agar plates of the nine culture media at 20°c, 26°c and 32°c after 24 h in order to qualitatively assess the best range of temperatures. from these initial observations, the lower incubation temperature was ruled out due to poor growth.

media with different characteristics were chosen : marine broth  is a widespread culture medium for marine bacteria that contains high levels of salts as well as trace elements. its main difference with the supplemented artificial seawater medium  and luria marine broth  is the amount of primary sources of carbon and nitrogen, and the trace element content  <cit> . väätänen nine-salt solution  is a complex salt-rich medium that is frequently used in marine microbiology  <cit> . mueller-hinton is the standard culture medium in antimicrobial susceptibility tests, and often it needs to be supplemented with salts  and/or calcium and magnesium  to support the growth of certain bacteria like pathogenic vibrios  <cit>  and halophilic marine strains  <cit> . brain-heart infusion and tryptic soy broth were also supplemented with 2% nacl and designed as bhi <dig> and tsb <dig>  respectively. these nacl-supplemented rich media have been previously employed in the culture of pseudoalteromonas and vibrio species  <cit> . a minimal medium  was included to evaluate the effect of a limiting environment on biofilm formation. the actual starting cell density was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cfu/ml.

figure  <dig> shows the total cell density  and biofilm biomass  in different media at the two selected temperatures. in order to determine the effect of the medium, the temperature and the interaction on the total cell density and biofilm formation, anova tests were performed. without loss of generality for the goal of the study, optical density  values below  <dig>  have been considered as no total cell density/no biofilm formation and have not been taken into account for the anovas purposes . from the results of the anova tests, the culture medium, the incubation temperature and the interaction were highly significant for the total cell density and biofilm formation.

clearly, rich media enhanced not only the growth but also biofilm production. however, higher total cell densities were not necessarily correlated with higher amounts of slime . these rich media contain also high amounts of salts, particularly sasw, for which a marked shift in biofilm production is observed . indeed, salts increase protein adsorption on material surfaces, thus facilitating the establishment of the extracellular polymeric substances  that constitute the biofilm matrix  <cit> . salt ions –cations, particularly-, are known to play important functions in the biofilm formation process of halophylic bacteria as their cytoplasmic enzymes are adapted to high ionic strengths and consequently they have a requirement of charged ions to function properly  <cit> . in this context, ca2+ has been observed to be a requirement for the maintenance of biofilm integrity in certain variants of vibrio cholerae and other marine vibrio species  <cit> , and a triggering factor of the synthesis of class ii proteins in pseudoalteromonas sp., which are expressed only in biofilm cells  <cit> . in pseudomonas fluorescens, mg2+ cation increase cell attachment and condition the structure and further development of the biofilms  <cit> . cations such as ca2+, mn2+, cu2+ or zn2+ have also been found to be essential for the formation of air-liquid interface biofilms in shewanella oneidensis <cit> . in fact, when mh <dig> is supplemented with  <dig> mg/l ca2+ and  <dig> mg/l mn2+ , a shift in biofilm production is observed .

s
. 
algae
values indicate the mean ± sd  od590/od <dig> ratios. od values below  <dig>  were considered as no growth/no biofilm formation and have not been taken into account .

the temperature also exerted a significant influence on both growth and biofilm formation in function of the medium . the influence of the temperature on bacterial biofilm formation is usually species and strain-dependent. for example, stauder et al.  <cit>  positively correlated biofilm production and temperature in a v. cholerae strain, suggesting that higher seawater temperatures increase the persistence of the bacterium in the aquatic environment. similarly, chiu et al.  <cit>  associated changes in the planktonic and biofilm bacterial communities with seasonal variations in water temperature and salinity. in a different study, mcdougald et al.  <cit>  found no correlation between temperature and biofilm formation in clinical and environmental strains of vibrio vulnificus, whereas previous work showed a direct correlation between temperature, salinity and biofilm formation in the same bacterial species  <cit> . in that case, those findings were attributed to strain differences.

the ic <dig> of model antifouling biocides on shewanella algae is influenced by the culture medium and the starting cell density
there is clear evidence that the characteristics of the growth medium as well as the inoculum size may have a great influence on the results obtained from susceptibility tests  <cit> . to explore the effect of these two parameters, changes in the half-maximal inhibitory concentration  of three model biocides on s. algae were studied: the banned tbto, a metal-based antifouling agent  and a non-metal antifoulant . three initial cell densities were employed: the standard inoculum size  prepared as described in the methods section as well as half and double this amount . also, four growth media: mb, lmb, sasw and mh <dig> were selected. in these media s. algae presented different growth values and total biofilm production .

inoculum sizes were determined by plate counts . the stock solutions of the biocides were prepared in dimethylsulfoxide . the maximum percentage of dmso inside a well was  <dig> %. at this concentration, no growth inhibition was observed. table  <dig> summarises the results obtained in this experiment.
 <dig> 
values for three antifouling biocides towards 
s. algae 
cect 5071

 <dig> 
data  are arranged in function of the culture medium and the initial cell density in each case. s = standard inoculum; h = half standard inoculum; d = double standard inoculum.

the effect of the culture medium and the inoculum size on the ic <dig> were assessed by two-way anovas. for tbto, the culture medium and the inoculum size were highly significant, and no interaction was detected. for tralopyril only the culture medium was highly significant. finally, for zinc pyrithione the culture medium, the inoculum size and the interaction were highly significant.

in spite of the diversity of conditions employed in bacterial antifouling bioassays in terms of inocula and media  <cit> , the comparative effect of these conditions on the activity of model antifouling molecules has been poorly evaluated. the need for reproducible positive controls to validate the assays has been underlined previously  <cit> . research in other areas with bacteria that require particular growth conditions such as lactic acid bacteria has highlighted the influence of the culture conditions on the activity of antibiotic standards  <cit> . the results obtained for s. algae show a dependence of the ic <dig> of antifouling biocides on small variations in the inoculum size and on the use of different culture media, which emphasizes the need for a consensus in this regard. a tempting alternative would be the adaptation of clsi standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing to the requirements of biofouling-representative bacteria. it is interesting to note that biofouling is a phenomenon of biological adhesion and consequently, growth inhibition may not be the main endpoint for biological assays  <cit> . consequently, conditions a) supporting bacterial growth, b) promoting biofilm formation and c) mimicking a salt-rich environment would be desirable.

shewanella algae biofilms developed in different media exhibit medium-dependent morphological and nanomechanical properties
the final step in this study sought the answer for two questions: i) how is s. algae biofilm structure affected by the culture medium? and ii) how these different nutrient environments affect the mechanical properties of the biofilms? for this purpose, clsm and afm analysis were conducted on 24-hour s. algae biofilms developed in the four selected media. in order to respect exactly the same substrate as that employed for the initial in vitro experiments, the bottom of the wells of a microtiter plate were mechanically sectioned, sterilised, and used to develop the bacterial biofilms.

clsm analysis revealed significant differences in biofilm thickness, surface coverage and morphology . s. algae biofilms reached almost  <dig> μm thick in sasw . similarly, biofilms developed in lmb and mb surpassed the  <dig> μm thick, even though the surface coverage was notably lower in mb . a completely different structural pattern was observed in mh <dig>  in this medium, s. algae developed comparatively thin biofilms, reaching a maximum of  <dig>  μm, but exhibiting a comparatively high surface coverage . roughness coefficients are indicative of the degree of heterogeneity of the biofilms  <cit> . in fact, these values , which are significantly different in function of the medium in which the biofilms were formed  agree with the visual evidence , and indicate a patchy, heterogeneous biofilm development in mb and sasw, and more uniform biofilm layers in mh <dig> and lmb.

biofilm thickness , surface coverage  and roughness coefficients  were determined from clsm reconstructions. young modulii and adhesion forces were quantified by afm. in this case, at least  <dig> bacteria were individually analysed for each magnitude. data represent the average ± sd.

thus, two trends were observed in biofilm development depending on the medium: a clear trend to a three-dimensional growth, with a variable degree of homogeneity, in mb, lmb and sasw, and a relatively horizontal development in mh <dig>  maximising cell-to-cell and cell-to-substrate interactions. according to this depiction, we will focus on the comparison between mb and mh <dig> since they have been considered representative enough of the two biofilm growth behaviours.

first of all, in order to show the topographic features exhibited by the studied cells at high resolution, the samples were imaged in air after being rinsed and dried. thus, figure 1a shows a representative picture of some s. algae cells attached to the treated polystyrene substrate. since these images were obtained in air, some flagella belonging to neighbouring bacteria adsorbed on the surface could be observed as well. bacterial cells were  <dig> - <dig>  μm in length and  <dig> - <dig>  μm in width. some polishing lines resulting from the disc’s surface treatment are also visible. additionally, in figure 1b, some of these features can be observed in more detail, namely some flagella , topographic details of the bacterial surface and submicrometer particles of eps.

figures 4a-b correspond to afm topographic images recorded in  <dig>  μm filtered seawater  obtained in mb and mh <dig>  respectively. nevertheless, supplementary information  contains the afm results obtained for all the media studied. three-dimensional aggregates formed by bacteria linked to each other can be seen in mb, leaving large bacteria-free areas. conversely, in figure 4b, the substrate appears to be covered by a near continuous and homogenous layer of bacteria and eps. in this case, three-dimensional aggregates are present in a remarkably lower degree. these results revealed a different interaction between the substrate and the bacterial envelope in function of the culture medium. thus, in mh <dig>  bacteria-substrate interaction is clearly favoured in comparison to mb.

on the other hand, figures 4c-d compare the young’s modulus and figures 2e-f the adhesion force quantitative mappings of the same surface area for mb and mh <dig>  in this context, it should be taken into account that the greater the brightness of the patches the larger corresponding values of the magnitudes analysed. in general terms, images show that the higher values in young’s modulus and adhesion force correspond to the bacteria-free substrate areas. note that the higher pikes present in the cross sections  are related to contributions due to bacteria/eps-free substrate. thus, young’s modulus exhibited by bacteria resulted to be significantly larger for those grown in mh <dig> . however, regarding adhesion forces, the situation was exactly the opposite with the higher figures corresponding to mb. in addition, by considering the average size of certain young’s modulus spots, especially those associated with clusters of bacteria present in the topographic image, it can be concluded that these groups of bacteria seem to be surrounded by eps which spreads to the cell-substrate interface .

table  <dig> shows the averaged values of young’s modulus and adhesion forces recorded for individual bacterial cells grown in the four different media. our overall experimental data  confirmed the trend previously described a clear correlation between the rising in young’s modulus and the diminishing in the adhesion response is exhibited when modifying the growth medium. as shown in table  <dig>  values registered for mh <dig> almost doubled those grabbed for mb. anyway, the biofilm developed in mh <dig> showed the highest elasticity values registered. it should be noted that these results obtained for the elasticity properties of the external covering layer of s. algae cells are in the same order of magnitude as those reported for other gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . in fact, significant variations in nanomechanical and physicochemical properties have also been reported for escherichia coli and s. putrefaciens cells depending on the culture conditions and on the ph, respectively  <cit> .

average adhesion forces are shown in table  <dig>  as discussed before, an opposite correlation among data for young’s modulii is observed. thus, figures obtained for mh <dig> were significantly lower than those obtained for mb . regarding this point, it should be noted that whereas young’s modulus is directly dependent on the mechanical behaviour of the outer part of the bacteria under tip indentation, adhesion forces imply specific attractive interactions with the tip. in this sense, it is worth noting that the abovementioned correlation has not necessarily to be like that.

although afm tips have not been functionalised and consequently the adhesion force response recorded is due to non-specific interactions  <cit> , it should be noted that afm tips, bacteria and incubation times remained unchanged in all the experiences carried out. therefore, differences observed for the biofilms grown in the different media reflect unambiguously a significant impact on the physicochemical properties of biofilms. consequently, these results allow us to conclude the substantial effect of modifying the culture medium on the nanomechanical and physicochemical behaviour exhibited by the resulting biofilms.

afm force-distance curve analysis has also been carried out in order to assess kb, the spring constant of the bacteria, which eventually resulted also dependent on the growth medium. thus, figure 5a shows representative force-distance curves registered in seawater for a stiff surface, mica , and for representative single deformable bacteria grown in mb  and in mh <dig> . in this context, considering the relevant differences exhibited by the indentation depths grabbed for mb and mh <dig>  a differential elasticity response can be easily concluded. indeed, envelope belonging to bacteria grown in mh <dig> showed noticeable more rigid profiles than those corresponding to mb .

by combining properly the hertz’s model and hooke’s law, nanomechanical properties of the bacterial envelope can be deduced from the experimental loading force-indentation curves. thus, according to the hertzian model that takes into account the geometry of the tip, the non-linear regime corresponding to the initial part of the indentation curve was fitted to evaluate the young’s modulus of the bacteria indented  <cit> , green lines in figures 5b-c. likewise, from the linear part of the curve obtained from experimental data registered at high loading forces, the kb of the bacteria could be calculated by linear fitting   <cit> . elasticity values obtained were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mpa for mb and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mpa for mh <dig>  as expected, young’s modulus data resulted to be in very good agreement with those previously obtained by pf-qnm . on the other hand, kb values, which ranged from  <dig>  n/m to  <dig>  n/m, are consistent with those obtained for other gram negative bacteria as thoroughly reported  <cit> . moreover, these figures exhibited the same trend showed by elastic modulus when altering the culture medium.

CONCLUSIONS
the influence of the culture medium and the incubation temperature on the total cell density and biofilm formation of shewanella algae cect  <dig> has been studied. the influence of both factors was found to be highly significant. additionally, the culture medium and the inoculum size exerted a significant influence on the values obtained for the ic <dig> of three antifouling biocides. an approach to the unification of criteria in antifouling bioassays involving marine bacteria could be the adaptation of already existing, universally-accepted methodologies to the requirements of test organisms concerning marine biofouling. with regard to bacteria, clsi guidelines constitute the most evident and clear reference.

with this work we have established and characterised in detail a biofilm model for antifouling bioassays. using s. algae cect  <dig> as model organism, we were able to demonstrate quantitatively the influence that the culture medium exerts not only on the biofilm density or thickness, but more importantly, on the biofilm structure and on its nanomechanical and physicochemical properties. clsm showed two clear architectural patterns in function of the medium in which the biofilms were developed. from pf-qnm and fd-afm data it is possible to infer that s. algae cells grown in mh <dig> medium exhibited a more complex outer surface, remarkably stiffer and with a significant higher range of young’s modulus figures distribution, when compared to the other media which showed more similar features in this sense. on the other hand, adhesion forces results evolved in the opposite way thus confirming the differential physicochemical behaviour exhibited by the biofilms in function of the nutrient environment.

