BACKGROUND
leishmaniasis is endemic in many areas of tropical and subtropical america , where it constitutes a significant public health problem. the disease in this region is basically a zoonosis; humans are only incidental hosts in the life cycles of the various pathogenic parasite species  <cit> . in america, zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis  is caused by leishmania infantum   <cit> , and domestic dogs  are established as reservoir hosts. visceral leishmaniasis is endemic in european, asiatic and africa countries, and new areas in which the infection is being disseminated are being identified  <cit> . canine visceral leishmaniasis  exists in about  <dig> of the  <dig> countries in which human leishmaniasis is present, and there are three major foci: china, the mediterranean basin and brazil  <cit> .

control of leishmaniasis in the new world is complicated by the variety of different leishmania species and their diverse clinical manifestations, and by the fact that each parasite species has a unique epidemiological pattern. since a combined risk exists for both canine and human infections in areas where zvl is endemic, there is a need for sensitive and specific diagnostic techniques  <cit> . serological testing can identify exposure to the parasite but cannot indicate an active infection. some years ago, the reference standard for diagnosis was the demonstration of parasite by either microscopy or culture of aspirates from spleen, lymph nodes or bone marrow. however, the overall sensitivity of these methods in humans and dogs is variable and relatively poor  <cit> . direct parasite detection on histological skin biopsies, which can be obtained by an extremely simple surgical procedure, is a good tool for a definitive diagnosis and for clinical follow-up of dogs undergoing treatment. however, examination of routinely prepared histological sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin  is frequently inconclusive, particularly in the skin  <cit> . immunohistochemical detection of leishmania amastigotes in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of canine  <cit>  and human  <cit>  tissues has previously been described and is routinely used in many laboratories. recently, an alternative immunohistochemical method was described that could be a useful tool for epidemiological, clinical and histopathological studies  <cit> . in the last decade, the polymerase chain reaction  was shown to be sensitive and specific for demonstrating leishmania dna. in recent years, pcr has considerably improved the diagnosis of canine leishmaniasis, showing  <dig> to 100% sensitivity in symptomatically or parasitologically confirmed cases  <cit> . a variety of canine tissues including bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, skin and conjunctival biopsy specimens have been used for diagnosis. blood and bone marrow are the most frequently used tissues for pcr diagnosis in dogs; however, the skin is considered an important tissue reservoir of parasites in both healthy and sick leishmania-infected dogs  <cit> . moreover, positive pcr has been shown to be a better indicator in skin  than in bone marrow  or conjunctiva   <cit> . pcr using noninvasively obtained samples will be useful for epidemiological studies and for direct diagnosis of canine visceral leishmaniasis  <cit> .

the aim of this study was to compare three indirect methods for detecting leishmania in canine skin biopsies obtained from different anatomical regions. histopathological , immunohistochemical  and polymerase chain reaction  methods for detection of leishmania were analyzed and their relative efficacies were considered.

RESULTS
histologically, skin samples showed a chronic inflammatory reaction irrespective of anatomical region, but this reaction varied with the animal's clinical status. in general, the reaction ranged in intensity from discrete to moderate. however, an intense inflammatory process was more frequent in some cases. it was detected only in ear skin biopsies from oligosymptomatic and symptomatic animals. in general, the chronic inflammatory reaction was characterized by a mononuclear infiltrate and was diffuse in the upper dermis and focal around vessels, pyli and glands of the deep dermis . parasites were more readily identified in ear biopsies than in biopsies from nose and abdominal samples, but the parasite load determined by optical microscopy  showed no statistical differences. however, there was a tendency towards a higher parasite load in ear skin tissue specimens than in the others . numerous imunolabeled amastigote forms of leishmania were readily observed in skin tissues. moreover, the ihc method improved the he parasite load data . in addition, when we compared the parasite load with the definite clinical status of the animal , the numbers of positive symptomatic dogs were higher than asymptomatic and oligosymptomatic ones.

like the he results, the ihc parasite tissue load data showed no clear relationship to the inflammatory infiltrate. moreover, we found symptomatic animals with an intense inflammatory infiltrate but without amastigotes, and asymptomatic animals with a discrete inflammatory reaction but many macrophages loaded with amastigotes .

the sensitivities of the tests used were calculated using optical microscopy  as gold standard. all  <dig> animals were om positive. pcr was positive in  <dig> dogs, ihc in  <dig> and he in  <dig>  the sensitivities were therefore  <dig> % for pcr,  <dig> % for ihc and  <dig> % for he.

when we compared the pcr, ihc and he methods according clinical status using ear, nose and abdomen skin samples, there was higher positivity for pcr than ihc and he, respectively, for all clinical groups. the asymptomatic positivity was higher for pcr method. however, the sample size was not large enough to qualify for statistical significance .

in according to table  <dig>  considering the three methods together for leishmania detection with skin biopsies from different anatomical regions  we found the following results:  pcr is better than ihc and he for ear skin biopsies ;  nose skin biopsies give statistically different results for all diagnostic methods, pcr detecting more positive cases followed by ihc and he;  abdominal biopsies show no statistically significant results for any of the three methods.

in addition, the comparison of the skin biopsies from different anatomical regions for each diagnosis method  did not show any statistical differences. this means that one anatomical skin region is no more useful than any other for a given test method. index κ was used to calculate the agreement among the three tests. ihc and pcr agreement well for ear  and abdomen  skin tissues, but weakly for nose . pcr and he agreement weakly for ear , abdomen  and nose . ihc and he agreement optimally for ear  and abdomen  and showed good agreement for nose .

discussion
serological techniques for diagnosing leishmania such as the immunofluorescence antibody test , direct agglutination test , enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay , dot-elisa and western blot are widely used. although they are clinically very useful, these methods underestimate the infection rate of leishmania in dog populations in endemic areas  <cit> . for canine visceral leishmaniasis, no technique is 100% sensitive and specific and can serve as "gold standard" for diagnosis  <cit> , but direct observation of the parasite in stained smears or tissue sections must be regarded as conclusive. in the last decade, pcr has had the greatest success because of its high sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . pcr can be carried out using genomic or kinetoplast parasite dna on blood, skin, lymph node, conjunctiva or bone marrow samples from infected animals. however, although blood and bone-marrow are mostly used, skin merits special consideration. dogs naturally infected with l. infantum harbor high numbers of parasites in skin irrespective of the presence of lesions  <cit> . moreover, skin tissue is a good substrate for pcr diagnosis  <cit> .

few publications have considered application of pcr to different canine tissues for detecting leishmania infection. solano-gallego et al.   <cit>  showed that 51% of positive animals were identified from skin analysis versus 32% from conjunctiva and  <dig> % from bone marrow. moreover, pcr results from specimens of skin have demonstrated higher sensitivity  than spleen , liver , lymph nodes  or bone marrow   <cit> . in this work we considered he, ihc and pcr methods for detecting leishmania in three different skin biopsies . all samples utilized were embedded in paraffin and maintained at room temperature. this is important, especially for pcr, because it works even after a long storage time. based on the mo method as "gold standard" for diagnosis, the sensitivities of the three methods were: pcr  <dig> %, ihc  <dig> % and he  <dig> %. the pcr sensitivity value accords with previous work: 60%  <cit> ,  <dig> %  <cit> , 87%  <cit>  and up to 100%  <cit> . we have not found ihc or he sensitivity values in the literature. the use of ihc to detect amastigotes in canine tissues has been reported previously and has undoubtedly proved efficient for diagnosis. in this paper we employed a straightforward and inexpensive immunohistochemical approach for detecting leishmania in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded canine tissues  <cit> . we still do not have conclusive results for absolute sensitivity values, but our data show an increase in the number of positive animals  when ihc is compared to he. indeed, bourdoiseau et al.   <cit>  reported that he is a good tool for describing lesions, but has low sensitivity for detecting leishmania.

in according to table  <dig> pcr was higher positive absolute numbers in asymptomatic and oligosymptomatic dogs and pcr, he or ihc was independent of the clinical status and tissue origin. however, our sample size was not large enough to qualify for statistical significance. thus, we did not find statistical difference among the three methods in respect of the clinical status of the animals or the anatomical region from which the skin biopsy was taken. this could indicates that asymptomatic dogs have parasites in the skin just as symptomatic dogs do, underlining the importance of asymptomatic dogs in the epidemiology of visceral leishmaniasis, as discussed by abranches et al.   <cit>  in portugal, solano-gallego et al.   <cit>  in spain and lima et al.   <cit>  in brazil. solano-gallego et al.   <cit> , for example, showed that pcr was able to detect subclinical canine leishmania infection.

pcr, ihc and he were simultaneously studied in the three different canine skin samples. pcr was better than ihc and he for ear and nose skin samples. as pcr method is able to demonstrate leishmania dna in the investigate samples, it could explained these data.

optical microscopy revealed parasites  easier in ear skin specimens than in nose or abdomen samples. in addition, the chronic inflammatory reaction in ear samples was more intense in oligosymptomatic and symptomatic dogs. on the other hand, pcr detected higher numbers of positive animals, followed by ihc and he; in this case, ihc was better than he. it is important to say that ihc improved the detection of positive infection by almost fifty percent over he, as depicted in fig.  <dig>   <dig>  pcr, ihc and he data on the abdomen skin samples showed no statistical differences. these results corroborated the he and ihc results, because abdomen skin specimens showed lower inflammation and parasite load in all cases.

CONCLUSIONS
taking these results together, we can suggest that pcr was the best method for diagnosing canine infection by leishmania. however, we can not infer what skin anatomical regions is the best for diagnosing the infection. on the other side, ear skin biopsies is a non-invasive procedure and easier to perform than skin biopsies of other anatomical regions. moreover, it is less blood-irrigated and the anatomical location is more comfortable for both the animal and the veterinary practitioner. thus, we think that pcr skin ear biopsy could be used as the best method for diagnosing canine infection by leishmania. however, precautions have to be taken in order to interpret pcr results as a signal of animal infectivity, because pcr positive detection does not necessarily indicate alive parasites in tissues. until now it has not be demonstrated that all pcr positive dogs are infective.

the good agreement between pcr and ihc indicates that ihc can be used as an alternative method. finally, skin samples from ears, nose and abdomen, mainly ears and nose, are a potentially useful tissue source for diagnosing canine visceral leishmaniasis independently of the animal's clinical status.

