BACKGROUND
when european silver eels  venture in the ocean for their  <dig> -km semelparous spawning run to the sargasso sea  <cit> , they are still in a prepubertal stage. sexual maturation has thus to occur during or after this long distance journey. maturation in eels, as in other vertebrates, is regulated by the gonadotropic follicle-stimulating hormone  and luteinising hormone  that are produced by the pituitary. if prevented from undertaking their oceanic migration, gonad development remains blocked by dopaminergic inhibition of pituitary activity as well as the absence of stimulation by gonadotropin-releasing hormone   <cit> . information about natural maturation is lacking, because migrating and spawning eels have never been caught near the spawning grounds. there is however an urgent need for an understanding of eel reproduction, because populations are collapsing on a global scale  <cit> .

investigations on eel reproduction have been mainly focussed on females. they stay  <dig> –  <dig> years in the freshwater before migration, in contrast to 4– <dig> years for males. as a consequence, females reach a ten-fold larger size than males at the onset of migration. the long female growth stage is likely required for a successful production of more than one million eggs, which at spawning time accounts for 40–60% of the body weight  <cit> . as the energy requirements for males are far less than those for females, it is possible that the observed dopaminergic inhibition is sex-specific. we have tested this hypothesis by subjecting male and female eels to a gnrh-agonist , specifically the commercial product gonazon for fish , as well as to stimulation by long-term swimming in seawater  that is supposed to stimulate gnrh excretion by the hypothalamus. recently we found that swimming in freshwater  triggers the enlargement of the eyes and development of oocytes in female eels  <cit> ; all signs of early maturation, suggesting that swimming is a natural trigger for sexual maturation. however, further maturation  was not stimulated by fw-swimming, and may only be stimulated by sw-swimming during natural migration.

RESULTS
males that were either stimulated by three months sw-swimming or by gnrha-injection showed a two- to three-fold higher lhβ expression level than the male starters and resters . both treatments also caused a three- to five-fold increase in gsi  and an induced spermatogenesis . one male swimmer even showed the formation of spermatocytes . in contrast, females were not stimulated by sw-swimming nor by gnrha, and even showed regression of maturation over time as demonstrated by lower lhβ expression , gsi  and oocyte diameters in all groups after  <dig> months . the expression of fshβ did not significantly change under the different treatments in both males and females.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the results show an obvious difference between male and female eels in their response to both sw-swimming and gnrha-injection. in female eels, gnrha is not effective which confirms the conclusions by dufour et al.  <cit>  about prepubertal inhibition.

in contrast to the response of the females, we observed sexual maturation in males upon gnrha-injection, indicating that dopaminergic inhibition is not effective in males. in addition we observed stimulation of sexual maturation in male eels after three months sw-swimming, suggesting that swimming acts via a similar mechanism. swimming may up-regulate gnrh-levels  that subsequently leads to positive effects on lhβ-production in the pituitary  <cit> . this action may be exerted through swimming-induced alterations in cortisol that binds to glucocorticoid receptor – expressing neurons  <cit> . however, in our study stimulation of lhβ-expression in the pituitary only occurred in male eels. since lhβ-expression was not enhanced in females that either swam or received a gnrha-injection, their pituitaries were considered as not sensitized and still under dopaminergic control.

as long-term swimming is required for reaching the spawning site, we conclude that swimming results in natural maturation in males, probably via the release of gnrh. males swam in this experiment for about one sixth of their normal migration distance, so full spermiation can be expected after longer swimming trials. as naturally induced spermiation may result in improved sperm quality, we expect that swimming trials will improve the success of eel breeding.

