BACKGROUND
sheeppox virus , goatpox virus  and lumpy skin disease virus  cause serious pox diseases of domesticated ruminants  <cit> . they are large, complex, double-stranded dna viruses of the genus capripoxvirus, subfamily chordopoxvirinae, family poxviridae <cit> . sppv and gtpv are restricted to much of asia, the middle east and north africa, although clinical cases of sheep pox have also been detected in europe  <cit> . lsdv occurs across africa and in recent years the virus has also been found in several countries of the middle east  <cit> . the world organization for animal health  classifies capripoxviruses  as notifiable diseases, whilst they are also considered as potential bioterrorism agents due to the economic impact of any large scale outbreak  <cit> .

molecular diagnostic tests play an important role in monitoring the spread of these viruses and controlling outbreaks in susceptible livestock. agarose-gel based polymerase chain reaction  assays  <cit> , or more recently developed real-time pcr assays  <cit>  are rapid and highly sensitive tests widely used in diagnostic laboratories. real-time pcr assays can also be used to differentiate lsdv, sppv and gtpv from each other  <cit> . however, poorly equipped and field laboratories face difficulties accessing these molecular techniques that are reliant upon expensive and relatively fragile equipment. a new group of nucleic acid detection assays that exploit isothermal amplification mechanisms have been developed as potential diagnostic tools for use in either the field or low cost laboratory settings. these assay formats include loop-mediated isothermal amplification   <cit>  which is a dna-dependent amplification method that uses a combination of four to six primers targeting six to eight genomic regions, whilst utilising the activity of a strand displacing dna polymerase. the isothermal nature of lamp potentially allows reactions to be performed simply in a water bath or using a heat pack, usually at a temperature between 60-65°c. these factors make lamp an ideal candidate for use as the basis of an inexpensive test for use in the field. lamp assays have been developed for the detection of a wide range of viruses, parasites and bacteria including foot-and-mouth disease virus  <cit> , human immunodeficiency virus   <cit> , malaria protozoan plasmodium in blood samples  <cit>  and escherichia coli <cit> . the aim of this study was to develop and evaluate a lamp assay for the detection of capv dna and to evaluate this assay using different detection formats that might be suitable for use in simple laboratories.

RESULTS
optimisation of the capripoxvirus lamp assay
in initial experiments, all three candidate lamp assays that targeted the rna polymerase subunit rpo <dig>  dna topoisomerase i and the p <dig> regions generated characteristic laddering patterns after agarose-gel electrophoresis  and an increase in fluorescence in a real-time pcr machine . however, these experiments indicated that the p <dig> lamp assay was the most rapid and reliable assay, and therefore this assay was selected for further optimisation and evaluation. the optimum reagent concentrations in the lamp reactions mixes were 1× thermopol buffer , 3 μm internal primers,  <dig>  μm external primers, 1 mm mgso <dig> ,  <dig>  mm dntps , 1 m betaine ,  <dig> u of bst dna polymerase , along with the addition of 2 μl of target dna. using the p <dig> primer set, loop primers were added to the reaction at an optimal concentration of 4 μm. these loop primers decreased the reaction time by nine minutes for a gtpv isolate . restriction enzyme digests were performed on the p <dig> lamp amplification products to confirm that the correct region of the capv genome had been amplified. a restriction endonuclease  was chosen to cut specifically a single site within the target region of the p <dig> lamp assay. after incubation of 5 μl lamp product with bsrg i at 37°c for 75 min, the digested products were visualised on a  <dig> % agarose gel and could be differentiated from the characteristic laddering pattern of the lamp reaction products confirming the sequence specificity of the dna amplicons .

diagnostic performance of the lamp assay
the diagnostic sensitivity of the capv lamp assay was evaluated using  <dig> capv strains that were tested in parallel using the real-time pcr assay used by the oie reference laboratory at the pirbright institute. in comparison to the pcr assay, all of the  <dig> strains generated positive lamp results . two isolates  initially yielded negative results with the lamp assay, but gave positive results when retested with fresh nucleic acid preparations. all of the nucleic acid samples prepared from capv-negative blood and skin generated negative results in the lamp assay. in addition, none of the six related poxviruses tested positive, indicating a high specificity of the lamp assay . using the dilution series of gtpv isolate , the dynamic range of the capv lamp assay targeting the p <dig> region was at least  <dig> log <dig> dilutions and the weakest dilution that could be detected was  <dig> copies/μl for gtpv isolate .

a tp = time to positive .

b ct = threshold cycle value.

simple approaches to detect lamp products
two alternative simple approaches for detecting the lamp products were assessed. these methods offer approaches that might be used to deploy the lamp assay into the field or into simple laboratory settings. a lfd that detects dual labelled nucleic acid products  was evaluated by adding 2 μl of amplified lamp product to 198 μl of the dilution buffer . positive samples could be clearly discriminated from negative samples using the modified internal lamp oligonucleotides containing biotin and fitc . in addition, 5 μl of intercalating dye  also clearly differentiated between negative and positive samples after amplification by the lamp assay.

discussion
this report describes the development of a new lamp assay to detect representative members of the capripoxvirus genus that infect domesticated ruminants. a fast, affordable and reliable test for the detection of capvs is urgently needed in endemic countries to provide local diagnostic capacity to monitor the spread of these viruses. lamp provides an alternative to pcr-based assays and due to its isothermal nature may be more suitable for the detection of capv in front-line or mobile laboratories in developing countries. previously, amplification of monkeypox virus by lamp has been reported  <cit> , along with development of other lamp assays to detect the causative agents of infectious viral diseases of sheep, pigs, goats and cattle  <cit> . more recently, lamp assays targeting conserved genes encoding the poly polymerase small subunit  and p <dig> regions of capv genome using hydroxynapthol blue as an indicator dye have been described  <cit> . in this study, lamp assays targeting the p <dig>  rna polymerase subunit rpo <dig> and dna topoisomerase i were designed and assessed in initial experiments. the performance of one of these assays  was evaluated using a panel of dna prepared from different capvs.

using dna generated from a gtpv isolate, the detection limit of the capv lamp assay was found to be at least 163/μl copies, which is comparable to the diagnostic real-time pcr assay detection limit of at least  <dig> copies/μl  <cit> . this corroborates the findings of other livestock lamp assays which have shown equivalent analytical sensitivity between lamp assays and pcr assays  <cit> . of the eight regions targeted by the lamp oligonucleotides, four  were completely conserved across all of the  <dig> sequences in the alignment, while the remaining sites had a small number of nucleotide substitutions for some of the capv sequences . in view of this sequence heterogeneity among capvs, it is likely that the detection limit for the lamp assay will be different across the capv isolates where sequences mismatches are present in critical regions targeted by the oligonucleotides. the capv lamp assay was able to detect dna from representative strains of sppv, gtpv and lsdv , although sequence data was not available in this current study to assess the influence of nucleotide mismatches upon the signal generated in the assay.

in comparison to real-time pcr, this lamp assay is a rapid method to detect capv dna. although table  <dig> directly compares the results from these two tests, it is important to remember that the individual pcr cycles are longer  than the tp “cycles” used to report the isothermal lamp assay which directly reports the time  for a positive result to be generated. for a real-time capv pcr assay, the overall length of the test is approximately 75 minutes, whilst for a gel-based pcr it is over 120 minutes. in this study, the lamp reactions were incubated for 60 minutes: a positive result was defined as a positive signal within 60 minutes, while a negative result was designated for samples that did not yield a detectable lamp product after this time. depending upon the detection format used future work with the lamp assays will be required to define an appropriate assay time to allow positive and negative samples to be clearly differentiated.

the successful application of the capv lamp assay onto a lfd with the use of ligand-labelled internal primers provides a potential simple-to-use tool for field based detection of the virus and is a less ambiguous method than the hydroxynapthol blue indicator method that has been previously described for capv  <cit> . an important consideration that will need to be accommodated in the development of robust lamp tests for routine use is to minimise the potential for cross-contamination between samples. existing simple detection methods  require opening of reaction tubes after amplification which in their current format may not be ideal for routine use. however, practical solutions to this problem may be achieved using new diagnostic platforms for lamp that are currently under development. in order to be able to deploy this assay into a simple field format, a simple nucleic acid extraction procedure also needs to be developed, preferably not requiring any form of lengthy kit-based extraction process. previous studies have noted that lamp is less likely to be affected by any possible contaminants from the dna isolation process and will still effectively amplify nucleic acid derived from relatively simple methods of extraction  <cit> . the most common of these crude methods of extraction appears to be a heat treatment approach performed at 95°c for 10 minutes on blood samples. this has previously led to the detection of both viruses and protozoa  <cit> . research into these procedures would greatly reduce the number of steps needed prior to the use of lamp in conjunction with a lfd.

CONCLUSIONS
this new isothermal assay for the detection of capv dna, provides a rapid and simple approach that can be deployed to support improved reporting systems to combat the spread of these important livestock diseases.

