BACKGROUND
wheat  is one of the three most important grain crops and is widely cultivated worldwide due to its value as a staple food and protein source. total wheat production is more than  <dig> million tons, which accounts for more than 20% of the world’s food supply  <cit> . wheat grains are primarily composed of the embryo and the endosperm, both of which play important roles in seed germination and subsequent plant growth and development. the embryo forms a radicel, a plumule, and the new plant, whereas the endosperm contains reserve substances to supply nutriments for subsequent plant growth, the basis of wheat yield and quality.

the embryo and endosperm play different roles in wheat seed germination. the embryo contains most of the genetic information that controls germination. upon imbibition, the substrate and energy starvation activate the embryo to produce phytohormones . the gas can diffuse to aleurone and initiate a signaling cascade that leads to synthesis of α-amylases and other hydrolytic enzymes. these enzymes then secrete into the endosperm to drive the degradation of storage compounds, including starch, lipid, and protein, for seedling establishment  <cit> . studies of endosperm function have demonstrated that the endosperm can secrete signals to control embryo growth  <cit> ; thus, germination is a systemic response that involves bidirectional interactions between the embryo and endosperm.

seed germination generally proceeds from heterotrophic to autotrophic and involves a series of physiological, biochemical, and morphological changes. it is highly related to seedling survival rate and subsequent vegetative growth and therefore directly affects wheat yield and quality. storage materials of starch and protein are mainly deposited in the endosperm. dry seeds’ water content is usually low , and their metabolic activity almost ceases. when the dry seeds imbibe water, germination begins, and when the radicle breaks through the episperm, germination is finished  <cit> . in general, the seed germination process can be divided into three phases: fast water uptake , metabolism reactivation , and radicle emergence   <cit> . phase ii is the most critical stage, because all necessary metabolic pathways and physiological processes are reactivated and germination is initiated in this phase. germination involves many events, such as proteolysis, synthesis of macromolecules, respiration, changes in subcellular structures, and cell elongation  <cit> .

the metabolic pathway of wheat germination is highly complex. early work reported the activity of some key enzymes in glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway , the tricarboxylicacid cycle , and amino acid metabolism during germination  <cit> . aoki et al.  detailed the pathway of starch hydrolysis and sucrose transport during germination  <cit> . in the embryo, some germination-specific gene products were found, including catabolic enzymes associated with the mobilization of reserves from endosperm  <cit>  and germin , which is related to cell wall restructuring  <cit> . caliskan et al.  identified four new members of the wheat “germin” gene family  <cit> . in the past several decades, most of our knowledge about initiation of germination has come from the arabidopsis thaliana model system  <cit> . several large-scale -omics methods, including transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic methods, recently have been established to investigate the mechanisms of seed germination  <cit> . the great achievements in genomics have led to application of large-scale gene expression analysis at both mrna and protein levels to uncover the features of seed germination. for instance,  <dig>  transcripts were identified during the five seed germination stages of elite chinese bread wheat cultivar jimai  <dig> using the affymetrix wheat genome array  <cit> . microarrays containing  <dig> genes expressed in developing arabidopsis seeds were reported  <cit> . at the same time, considerable proteomics work on seed germination in different plants has been performed, such as cress  <cit> , sugar beet  <cit> , medicago truncatula  <cit> , barley  <cit> , maize  <cit> , and rice  <cit> . the development of proteomic techniques has provided a unique opportunity to study the proteome changes during wheat seed germination  <cit> .

although different proteomic studies on seed germination in some plants have been conducted, these investigations were focused only on a single organ or tissue such as whole seeds, endosperm, or embryo. this approach does not provide overall understanding of the metabolic and regulatory networks occurring in both embryo and endosperm tissues. in the present study, we performed the first integrative proteome analysis of embryo and endosperm during wheat seed germination by a comparative proteomic approach. our results revealed that distinct differentially expressed proteins in seed embryo and endosperm are cooperatively involved in seed germination, which provides new insights into the proteomic mechanisms of wheat seed germination.

RESULTS
seed morphological and structural changes during germination
seed morphological and structural characteristics in the four germination periods are displayed in figure  <dig>  including phase i , phase ii , phase iii , and phase iv . along with water imbibitions, seed size increased gradually during the seed germination process. as shown in figure 1a, at phase iii, radicels broke through the episperm, indicating that seeds would soon sprout. at phase iv, green germs and three radicles were visible. during the germination process, seed weight increased with imbibition . in early germination, water uptake is rapid, and after 5 hours, it increased slowly. endosperm slices from four germination periods were observed by light microscope , and results showed the endosperm cell structure had changed little from germination stages i to iii, but stage iv brought significant change: starch granule sizes were enlarged and starch granule numbers clearly decreased in some areas due to the mobilization and degradation of reserved starch. observation of embryo slices by light microscope showed that embryo structures displayed significant changes during the germination process  and gradually disappeared; at phase iv in particular, embryo structures could not be observed due to the emergence of germ and radicles. results from light microscope observation showed that the embryo cells in the dry seed  were hydropenic, and thus a larger cell interval was present. cells expanded when they absorbed water , and cell interval became significantly smaller .figure  <dig> 
morphological and structural characteristics of wheat seeds during the four germination stages. a. seed morphological changes during the four germination stages . b. changes in  <dig> -seed weight during the germination process. c. endosperm slice from the four germination periods observed by light microscope magnified  <dig> times . d. embryo slice from the first three periods observed by light microscope magnified  <dig> times . e. embryo slice from the first three periods observed by light microscope magnified  <dig> times.



protein expression profiles of embryo and endosperm during seed germination
the embryo and endosperm proteins from four germination periods were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis , and both tissues displayed distinct protein expression profiles on the gel during seed germination . the molecular weight  of protein spots from embryos in phase i, ii, and iii ranged from  <dig> to 98 kda, and most were present in ph 4- <dig>  in the last phase, the protein mr ranged from  <dig> to 85 kda, and most were present in ph 4- <dig>  the protein spots were roughly evenly distributed on the gels . the protein mr from endosperm ranged from  <dig> to 85 kda, and most were present in ph 4- <dig>  the protein spots mainly concentrated in a particular area on gels and showed an uneven distribution compared with those in embryo .figure  <dig> 
proteome maps of wheat embryo  and endosperm  during four germination periods by linear 2-de. the dep spots with at least 2-fold changes during seed germination are indicated on 2-de gels.



the protein spots on 2-de gels from four germination periods of embryo and endosperm were compared, and dep spots with at least two-fold differences in abundance were determined. after image analysis,  <dig> and  <dig> dep spots from embryo  and endosperm , respectively, were recognized and selected for maldi-tof/tof-ms analysis. in total,  <dig> and  <dig> dep spots representing  <dig> and  <dig> unique deps from embryo and endosperm were identified, respectively. eight common deps were present in both tissues, and  <dig> and  <dig> deps were specific to embryo and endosperm, respectively . detailed is in additional file 2: table s <dig>  and peptide sequences are shown in additional file 3: table s <dig> 

the identified dep spots from the embryos were grouped into  <dig> different functional categories, mainly including stress-induced proteins , carbohydrate metabolism , proteometabolism , nucleic acid metabolism , inhibitors , sucrose biosynthetic process , and other metabolism processes , as shown in figure  <dig>  the deps from endosperm were classified into seven functional categories: storage proteins , carbohydrate metabolism , stress-related proteins , inhibitors , proteometabolism , amino acid metabolism , and other metabolisms  . in order to obtain more information about the predicted proteins, their protein sequences were used as queries to search for homologues by the blastp  tool. the identified corresponding homologues classified into different functional groups are listed in additional file 2: table s <dig>  the majority of spots shared above 90% positive %, identity %, or query coverage % with homologues at the amino acid level, suggesting similar functions. following this process  <dig> deps remained as having unpredicted functions, namely other proteins metabolism in additional file 2: table s <dig> figure  <dig> 
functional classification and the proportion of dep spots identified in wheat embryo and endosperm.




the transformed log  was used for cluster analysis. the expression pattern analysis of deps was performed using the euclidean distance method over a complete linkage dissimilarity matrix , which can represent quantitative differences in deps during the four germination periods. as shown in figure  <dig>  the embryo had five distinct expression patterns at protein level, designated as a-e. pattern a displayed a down- to up-regulated expression trend represented by  <dig> protein spots . pattern b, the largest group of identified deps, had  <dig> protein spots representing  <dig> deps and showed an up-regulated expression, with particularly significant up-regulation during the last germination stage . this group was mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism and proteometabolism. in pattern c,  <dig> protein spots representing  <dig> deps displayed an up-down-up expression trend. these proteins were mainly related to basic metabolic activity such as carbohydrate metabolism and proteometabolism. pattern d contained  <dig> protein spots  that exhibited a down-regulated expression and decreased especially rapidly in phase iv; these proteins were mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism and stress-related proteins. pattern e displayed an up- to down-regulated expression trend containing  <dig> protein spots .figure  <dig> 
hierarchical clustering analysis of the expression patterns of dep spots in wheat embryo and endosperm during seed germination. clustering was based on the protein expression levels across phase i, ii, iii, and iv of seed germination. red color indicates a positive abundance in protein spots; green indicates a negative abundance in protein spots. different expression trends of dep spots identified in embryo and endosperm were classified. embryo: a. down-up regulation; b. up-regulation; c. up-down-up regulation; d. down regulation; e. up-down regulation. endosperm: f. down-up regulation; g. up-regulation; h. down-regulation.



endosperm exhibited three main expression patterns  at protein level, as shown in figure  <dig>  pattern f, with  <dig> protein spots representing  <dig> unique deps, displayed a down- to up-regulated expression trend, and proteins were mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism and protein storage. in late germination, the deps in pattern f increased during mobilization of reserved substances. pattern g showed an up-regulated expression trend, including  <dig> protein spots and  <dig> unique deps. on the contrary, pattern h included  <dig> protein spots and  <dig> unique deps and displayed a down-regulated expression trend, and proteins were mainly involved in storage and stress-related roles.

comparative proteome analysis of embryo and endosperm during different seed germination stages
the results listed in additional file 4: table s <dig> showed greater proteome differences during seed germination between embryo and endosperm. we compared the protein spots between both organs which were different spots only identified as the same protein name. only eight common deps were present in both embryo and endosperm, and they were mainly responsible for carbohydrate metabolism, proteometabolism, amino acid metabolism, stress responsive proteins, and protease inhibitors. however, six of the proteins displayed different expression patterns, and only two deps  showed the same expression trend during seed germination. glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase   was the first enzyme for which sequence data of the calvin cycle/glycolysis homologues became available  <cit> . it was up-regulated  in the seed embryo  but had a down- to up-regulated expression  in endosperm . as an important physiologically active molecule involved in amino acid metabolism, methionine synthase   showed down- to up-regulation  and up-regulation , respectively . m <dig> exhibited pattern d in the embryo, n <dig> showed pattern g in the endosperm, and both were identified as beta-amylase, a major enzyme that hydrolyzes starch for glucose provision during late seed germination. in addition, m <dig> and n <dig> , m <dig> and n <dig> , and m <dig> and n <dig>  also displayed different expression patterns in embryo and endosperm .figure  <dig> 
expression patterns of  <dig> important dep spots from embryo  and endosperm  during seed germination. a, c: the close-up view of the expression levels for  <dig> protein spots on 2-de gels during four germination periods. b, d: the expression trends of the abundance  of the  <dig> dep spots.



figure 5a-b shows the expression patterns of  <dig> key dep spots in the embryo that generally displayed up-regulated expression during seed germination and were mainly involved in basic metabolisms and stress response. six dep spots showed particularly significant up-regulation at late germination stages, especially at phase iv, including gpd  and fructose-bisphosphate aldolase , which were involved in carbohydrate metabolism, glutathione transferase  related to amino acid metabolism, proteasome subunit beta type-4-like , translocase of inner membrane  <dig>  , and cyclophilin  involved in proteometabolism. five dep spots exhibited a tender up-regulation during seed germination: alcohol dehydrogenase  , protein disulfide-isomerase precursor  , methionine synthase , methionine synthase  <dig> enzyme , and calreticulin-like protein ; however, utp-glucose-1-phosphate  showed an up-down expression pattern and had a higher expression level at stages i and ii.

the expression patterns of nine key dep spots in endosperm shown in figure 5c-d were mainly related to storage proteins, carbohydrate metabolism, inhibitors, and stress response proteins. the storage proteins γ-gliadins , α-gliadins , gliadin/avenin-like seed proteins , and avenin-like proteins  were generally down-regulated during germination. among carbohydrate metabolism, β-glucanase   participated in the degradation of cell wall related to the mobilization of reserved substances and transportation and showed an up-down expression pattern . cytoplasmic aldolase  as an important enzyme in glycolysis and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase  as part of the multienzyme complex, which catalyzed pyruvic acid to acetyl-coa, exhibited a down-up-regulation pattern during germination, as shown in figure  <dig>  both xylanase inhibitor protein i   and serpin-z2b  displayed an up-regulated expression, particularly with a much higher expression level at stages iii and iv . heat shock protein  <dig>   was related to protein folding and participated in basic metabolic activity, and its expression abundance increased until phase iii, then decreased .

protein-protein interaction network analysis of the key deps
our results showed that the endosperm had limited deps, mainly storage proteins and carbohydrate metabolism-related proteins  that could provide nutrition for germination and subsequent seedling growth, during the seed germination process . but in the embryo, considerable deps were identified during seed germination, including those involved in multiple metabolic processes such as stress response, carbohydrate metabolism, and proteometabolism . these deps could interact each other or with other proteins and function in seed germination. thus, an interaction network of some key deps identified in the embryo was constructed using online analysis software string . proteins with different gi numbers may have the same kog number, such as spots m <dig> and m <dig> sharing kog <dig> and m <dig> and m <dig> sharing kog <dig>  all  <dig> kogs listed in additional file 5: table s <dig>  including  <dig> deps in the embryo, were displayed through cytoscape . to improve the reliability of this analysis, the confidence score was set to  <dig> . as shown in figure  <dig>  six main interacting proteins were frequently located at the central part of the interaction network. kog <dig>  which represents atp synthase beta subunit , was used to extract the potential interacting proteins from the whole protein-protein interaction network, and an atp synthase beta subunit-centered sub-network was constructed  and showed that the atp synthase beta subunit interact with  <dig> proteins involved in carbonmetabolism, amino acid metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, proteometabolism, sucrose biosynthesis, and defense. the atp synthase beta subunit aids atp biosynthesis  and is the universal enzyme that synthesizes atp from adp and phosphate using the energy stored in a transmembrane ion gradient  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
protein-protein interaction network of atp synthase and related proteins. nodes with pink background color represent the kogs of atp synthase; nodes with yellow background represent the kogs of main deps in each functional group; nodes with green background represent the kogs of related deps in each functional group.



transcriptional expression patterns of six key protein genes during seed germination
the transcriptional expression changes of the genes encoding six representative deps identified from wheat embryo and endosperm during seed germination are shown in figure  <dig>  including adh1a, gpd, and met from the embryo and β-glu, hsp <dig>  and xip-i from the endosperm. three types of expression patterns  were recognized after careful analysis. in pattern a, the gene expression level was first up-regulated then down-regulated. proteins encoded by genes corresponding to this pattern included met, β-glu, and hsp  <dig>  pattern b showed an up-regulated trend and included xip-i and gpd. in pattern c, the adh1a gene was first up-regulated, then down-regulated, and up-regulated in the last stage. a possible explanation is that when germination was complete, oxygen consumption in the embryo increased continuously but decreased in storage tissues because of the exhaustion of reserve substances or decreased dependence of seedlings on reserve substances. the expression patterns of all six genes were consistent with their protein expression trends .figure  <dig> 
the dynamic transcriptional expression changes of the genes encoded six key dep spots during seed germination as revealed by qrt-pcr. three genes encoding alcohol dehydrogenase , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , and methionine synthase  were from embryo, and three genes encoding β-glucanase  and hsp  <dig> and xylanase inhibitor protein-i  were from endosperm.



discussion
energy requirements for seed germination
respiration and energy production play key roles in whole seed germination. seeds in the activation process begin soon after absorbing plenty of water. the activation sequence is amino acid metabolism, glycolysis, and the tca cycle. due to limited oxygen content, tca cycle efficiency is not high in the early germination stages, and energy is supplied mainly by glycolysis and alcohol fermentation  <cit> . the energy provided by anaerobic respiration cannot satisfy the needs of germinated seeds at this point, but the tca cycle also provides a large amount of energy in oxygen-rich conditions. the energy for seed germination is provided mostly by anaerobic respiration in the early stages, then respiratory activity increases as oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide release accelerate during imbibition  <cit> . the embryo and storage tissues of most seeds during germination exhibit a basic pattern of oxygen consumption  <cit> : they imbibe plenty of oxygen at the beginning of germination, after which they enter a lag period when the need for oxygen in the embryo is little. oxygen consumption then increases sharply when the radicles break through the episperm, and germination is finished.

in the embryo, adh  is believed to participate in the glycometabolism pathway from pyranic acid to alcohol. the energy demands of germinating cereal seeds seem to be met mostly by glycolysis in the absence of oxygen  <cit> . it has been reported that adh is involved in coleoptile growth under oxygen-limiting conditions, and rice coleoptile growth is depressed by deficiencies of adh  <cit> . adh increased from phase i to ii and decreased in phase iii in this study ; the variation trends correspond with the seeds’ pattern of oxygen consumption  <cit> , an expression trend that was also found in dark-germinated pea seeds  <cit> . in addition, the gene expression of adh at the transcription level also first increased, then decreased , consistent with the expression of adh at the translation level.

gpd  was a key enzyme during glycolysis, and its expression trend was up-regulated during all four seed germination stages . the transcription expression of this enzyme corresponds well with its protein expression pattern . however, in the endosperm, gpd  decreased quickly in the first three periods and increased when germination was complete , so we can draw the conclusion that the speed of the glycolytic pathway in the seed embryo is slower than in the endosperm. in the process of seed germination, all kinds of stored substance  are broken down into a variety of small molecules, thus providing the respiration substrates as well as substance transformation and synthesis and a number of raw materials to form the new cells. triosephosphat-isomerase  also participates in glycolysis. when germination begins, all embryo cells need more energy to form new organs such as the radicel and germ, so glycolysis increases and all enzymes related to glycolysis also increase. when germination is finished, consumption of reserve substances slows down and leads to slower glycolysis. glycolysis is the dominant pathway for formation of pyruvic acid and atp during germination. in our study, gpd always increased in protein expression and kept the same pattern at the transcriptional expression level during the seed germination process .

aconitate hydratase  exists in cells, not only in cytoplasm but also in mitochondria, and participates in the tca cycle in mitochondria  <cit> . in dry seeds and seeds that imbibed early, mitochondrial structure and function were found to be defective  <cit> . our observations showed that the structures of embryo cells in early germination were also defective ; therefore, the requirement of enzymes involved in the tca cycle was low, and some of them were degraded during early germination such as dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase  <dig>  and alpha-glucan phosphorylase . these enzymes displayed lower expression quantity in early germination stages . m <dig> is an enzyme that catalyzes the reversible phosphorylation reaction, converting malt sugar, starch, or glycogen into glucose-1-phosphate; therefore, it plays an important role in carbohydrate metabolism  <cit> . its expression was an up-down-up trend, increasing especially rapidly in the last period , which corresponded with the pattern of oxygen consumption by the seeds  <cit> . in endosperm, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase  is a component of the plastidial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which participated in the preparation for pyruvic acid entering tca cycle. its expression trend first decreased then increased , suggesting that the pattern of oxygen consumption by seed endosperm may be in accord with the basic oxygen consumption pattern by seed. correspondingly, due to the continuous synthesis of pyruvate, which was turned into alcohol and entered the fermentation pathway, pyruvic acid could be further degraded through the tca cycle. thus, most tca cycle-related proteins identified in this work, such as aconitate hydratase , dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase  <dig> , and alpha-glucan phosphorylase  , were generally up-regulated.

when the germination is complete, and the one promoting factor  produced by the embryo induced certain endosperm cells to express a number of enzymes involved in the mobilization of most storage proteins, starch, and triacylglycerol  from the endosperm  <cit> . in fact, most of these enzymes existed in the endosperm in the first place, but they were inactive until they were activated or re-synthesized prior to mobilization  <cit> . at this time, most reserve substances from endosperm began to be mobilized to supply nutriments for seedling growth, so only a small amount was degraded during the germination process  <cit> .

in the late germination stages, the hydrolysis of some storage proteins produces amino acids and peptides that may either remain in the endosperm or be transformed into asn or gln, then transported to the seedlings  <cit> . most storage proteins, such as γ-gliadin , α-gliadin , gliadin/avenin-like seed protein , and avenin-like protein , are degraded when germination is complete . this phenomenon demonstrated that the main storage proteins were mobilized after germination at the molecular level.

starch and sucrose metabolism
starch is the major reserve in mature cereal seed. wheat seeds contain about 70% starch and 10% storage proteins. the degradation of these materials provides energy for seed germination and seedling growth. when the seed endosperm imbibes a certain amount of water, starch mobilization occurrs after deposited sucrose degradation. the mobilization of starch is a complex process including the lysis of endosperm cells wall, starch hydrolysis, and the synthesis or transport of sucrose. β-glucanase , one kind of hemicellulase, which participates in the degradation of cell wall, first increased then decreased during seed germination in this study , which corresponded well with its transcriptional expression pattern . the consistency of β-glucanase gene expression at transcriptional and translational levels confirmed that the mobilization of starch happened during germination at the molecular level. the decomposition products of triacylglycerol were glycerol and fatty acid . fa could be oxidized and used for respiratory metabolism, and glycerol could be not only oxidized by tca cycle but also transformed into glucose by a suite of metabolic reactions  <cit> . then sucrose was synthesized from glucoses and transported to seedlings in the form of sucrose. beta-amylase  increased gradually in the first three germination periods and increased dramatically to about four times during the fourth period , suggesting that starch degradation metabolism is vigorous at the end of seed germination. similar results were also found in the germination of barley seeds  <cit> . these results imply that large-scale starch mobilization might happen during the late germination stage and after germination to provide nutriments for subsequent seedling growth. beta-amylase is a major enzyme that hydrolyzes starch for glucose provision during late germination. we can conclude that starch hydrolysis becomes more and more intense during the germination process. starch is converted to glucose after a series of catabolism, and sucrose is further synthesized, then transported to the seedlings for growth and development. previous work found that the majority of sucrose resulted from storage lipid degradation, not from other soluble sugars within arabidopsis seeds  <cit> ; however, our results revealed that the majority of sucrose comes from the mobilization of storage starch and lipids, similar to germinating barley seeds  <cit> . sucrose may be resolved into glucose and fructose by sucrose synthase, then enter glycolysis. we found that sucrose synthase type  <dig>  increased in the latter germination stages for seedling growth .

protein metabolism
besides starch, the other most important energy reserves are seed proteins, especially storage proteins. dry seeds of wheat have various kinds of enzymes or proteins, but most of them have no activity. when seeds begin to germinate, they could participate in a series of basic metabolic activities immediately, such as energy metabolism and synthesis of proteins. dry seeds contain not only the above proteins but also numerous components related to the synthesis of proteins  <cit> . once the dry grains contact water, mrnas and ribosomes assemble rapidly into polysomes, then immediately begin to synthesize proteins with other components  <cit> . during early germination, the rna required for protein synthesis exists in dry seeds and supports the synthesis of early germination proteins, including proteins concerned with basic metabolic activity and germination  <cit> . in addition to early proteins, other proteins are degraded into amino acids for early protein synthesis. as germination progresses, protein synthesis becomes increasingly dependent on the synthesis of mrna, the compositions of which are changing, and then the types of proteins expressed in the embryo change  <cit> .

proteasome , a large protein aggregate with several proteolytic activities, has  <dig> different α and β subunits, respectively, in eucaryon  <cit>  and participated in proteolysis. proteins are marked for degradation by the proteasome when they are modified by the addition of ubiquitin  <cit> . pdi  and tim  <dig>  are associated with the transport and processing of protein, and their expression is mainly up-regulated . pdi  is an essential protein that facilitates the isomerization of disulfide bonds  <cit> , especially in assisting the folding of synthesized proteins  <cit> . tim  <dig> was concerned with protein transport. these two enzymes from the embryo participate in basic metabolic activity, so they increase as germination begins. in endosperm, proteins are catabolized upon the initiation of germination by hydrolytic enzymes secreted from the aleurone layer. the hydrolyzed storage proteins act as an energy source, providing carbon and nitrogen for seed germination and subsequent seedling establishment. most storage proteins, such as γ-gliadins , α-gliadins , gliadin/avenin-like seed proteins , and avenin-like proteins , are down-regulated after germination .

amino acid and nucleic acid metabolism
met  is an important amino acid metabolism enzyme. it catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from methyl-cobalamin to homocysteine  <cit> . the expression of this enzyme decreased in early germination then increased, as shown in figure 5a-b. the expression of m <dig> quantity increased to its maximum during the fourth period, an expression trend implying that these were not early germination proteins. the expression of the met gene at the transcriptional level was generally up-regulated and achieved its peak expression in the third period . protein translation is known to lag behind the transcriptional expression of protein, so gene expression at the transcription and protein level was also consistent. in the endosperm, met  content increased throughout germination, suggesting that it is the early germination protein in endosperm and undergoes protein degradation. hence, the embryo is in the process of protein synthesis at this moment, but the endosperm undergoes protein degradation. the metabolism of nucleotides was not active at early stages of germination because few enzymes required for nucleotide metabolism were detected. both utp--glucose-1-phosphate  and adenylosuccinate synthetase  were nucleic acid metabolism proteins, which play a central role as glucosyl donors in cellular metabolic pathways. adenylosuccinate synthetase  plays an important role in the de novo synthesis of adenylmonophosphate and in the salvage pathway of purine nucleotide biosynthesis  <cit> ; its express trend is a down-up-down pattern , and a possible reason is injured rna  molecules in dry seeds  inside the cell membrane system. as the water absorps, cells begin repair activities, and new rna is constantly formed to synthesize various enzymes. when germination is complete , rna synthesis decreases, so adss content dropped significantly.

stress-related proteins mobilization
due to changes in external environments, wheat seeds are able to activate a series of mechanisms to respond to many biotic and abiotic stresses during germination  <cit> . calreticulin-like protein  is an abundant ca2+-binding protein predominantly located in the endoplasmic reticulum  of higher plants. it is a key player in plant growth and development, a powerful regulator of plant responses to various stresses, and can help assemble other proteins correctly  <cit> . it also serves as a calcium-binding protein in the endoplasmic reticulum with functions like lectin combined with molecular calcium  <cit> . its expression trend was mainly up-regulated, especially in the last period of germination , which hints that wheat seed may encounter stress in late germination  <cit> . cyclophilin  has multiple biological activities involved in signal transduction, cell apoptosis, and protein folding. it is highly conservative and possesses peptidyl-proly cis-trans isomerase activity  <cit> . in higher plants, cyclophilin genes from zea mays and brassica napus were separated and expressed  <cit> . our results show that m <dig> increased slowly in first three germination stages but increased sharply in the last stage . because the cellular structure is not complete in early germination, metabolic activities such as protein synthesis are low, so cyclophilin expression is very low. in the following three phases, however, it increased significantly along with the perfection of the cellular structure and the increase of metabolic activities in germinating seeds.

reactive oxygen species  are produced in all living organisms, and their overaccumulation of ros can result in oxidative stress. reducing oxidized proteins is another critical way for plants to cope with ros. upon imbibition, ros contents increased gradually. ros can be scavenged efficiently by the antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutases  , glutathione s-transferase  , and peroxidases . many of these redox regulation proteins were identified during germination  <cit> . in this study, these proteins showed gradually up-regulated expression when germination began . all of them can reduce the target proteins’ disulfide and keep these proteins functional  <cit> . this result indicates that wheat may prefer to protect functional proteins from ros attack during seed germination.

stress responsive proteins, including hsps and late embryogenesis abundant  proteins , accumulated during seed maturation  <cit> . hsps participate in diverse cellular processes by acting as molecular chaperones. they belong to a huge glycoprotein gene family, of which hsp  <dig>  is the most conservative  <cit> . they also are described as being developmentally regulated, abundant in dry mature seeds, and disappearing during germination  <cit> . in agreement with these findings, the expression of hsp <dig>  at both transcriptional and translational levels increased at phase iii and decreased by the end of the germination process  in accord with the synthesis of plentiful enzymes that participated in the mobilization of reserve substances. its down-regulation after germination suggests that the metabolic activity of endosperm weakened when accompanied by the large consumption of reserve substances.

other protein metabolisms
according to our results, the photosynthesis process was mobilized slightly after initiation of reserve mobilization during seed germination, indicating that subsequent  growth depends not only on mobilization of energy reserves but also on photosynthesis. ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase  increased rapidly in the late germination stages . it methylates 'lys-14' of the large subunit of rubisco and also can use chloroplastic fructose-bisphosphate aldolases with lower efficiency  <cit> . so we can conclude that the photosynthetic apparatus was gradually integrated into the seed in late germination.

the atp synthase beta subunit  contributes to catalytic sites that bind atp and adp. it plays a pivotal role in energy transduction in living cells  <cit> . its expression trend showed an up-regulated pattern  and indicated that energy metabolism continuously strengthened the process of germination. translation elongation factor 1-beta  stimulates the exchange of gdp bound to elongation factor-1-alpha to gtp and has actual gdp/gtp exchange activity  <cit> . it displayed a generally up-regulated trend , especially in the last period. we speculate that new protein synthesis is more active when germination is complete, and this may be related to the emergence of germs and radicles. pyridoxine biosynthesis protein  is a limited velocity enzyme in the process of vitamin b <dig> synthesis. studies have shown that it relates to the plasma membrane and inner membrane systems. vitamin b <dig> is related to membrane system repairs in early germination and may play an important role in the function of the membrane  <cit> . its expression pattern in this study  was up-down-regulated. its expression decreased significantly when germination was finished . so we can know that seed undergoes membrane system repairs in early germination and related enzymes content will increase accordingly. in addition, 27 k protein  as a glycoprotein with mannose and fucose residues may belong to the family of γ-interferon-inducible thiol reductases. it is also a kind of serine/arginine-rich  protein and could modulate pre-mrna splicing reaction  <cit> . its expression showed a down-regulated pattern , suggesting that the synthesis of mrna decreased greatly in the late germination stages.

overview of central metabolic pathways during wheat seed germination
to better understand the central proteomic changes of embryo and endosperm during wheat seed germination, a putative metabolic pathway was proposed, as shown in figure  <dig>  in the embryo, the activation process begins soon after seeds absorb plenty of water. the activation sequence is amino acid metabolism, glycolysis, and the tca cycle. the energy demands of germinating cereal seeds seem to be met mainly by glycolysis  <cit> . the tca cycle also provides a large amount of energy in oxygen-rich conditions. many important related proteins are involved in various metabolic pathways. the embryo synthesizes and secretes ga that is transferred to the aleurone layer of the endosperm. ga then induces the synthesis of β-amylase in the aleurone layer, which secretes hydrolysis enzymes to the starchy endosperm  <cit> . the embryo utilizes sugars released by starch degradation for its growth. in the endosperm, all storage proteins showed a down-regulated expression trend and were broken into small molecules and used for the development of the embryo and seedling growth. some stress-related proteins and ros scavenging proteins were activated and displayed an up-regulated pattern. upon imbibition, the contents of ros increased gradually, resulting in further oxidative stress. ros can be scavenged efficiently by antioxidant enzymes such as sods , gst , and peroxidases . the cooperative functions of these important proteins provide a sound basis for regular germination of seed and subsequent seedling growth.figure  <dig> 
a putative metabolic pathway of wheat embryo and endosperm during the germination process. m1: putative aconitate hydratase; m6: methionine synthase; m15: em protein h5; m16: calreticulin-like protein; m21: adenylosuccinate synthetase; m <dig>  alcohol dehydrogenase adh1a; m25: sucrose synthase type 2; m26: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; m40: triosephosphat-isomerase; m42: proteasome; m47: manganese superoxide dismutase; m52: sucrose synthase type 2; m53: phosphoglucomutase; m54: beta-amylase; m56: putative late embryogenesis abundant protein; m64: cytosolic 3-phosphoglycerate kinase; m67: adenosine kinase 2; m69: glutathione s-transferase; m72: peroxiredoxin-2e-1; n2: methionine synthase; n4: beta amylase; n9: hsp70; n16: class ii chitinase; n21: class ii chitinase; n22: alpha gliadin; n25: gamma- gliadin; n27: avenin-like protein; n30: proteasome subunit alpha type-3; sps: suc phosphate synthase; f-6-p: fructose-6-p; g-6-p: glucose-6-p; g-1-p: glucose-1-p; g-3-p: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.



CONCLUSIONS
in this study,  <dig> and  <dig> dep spots representing  <dig> and  <dig> unique proteins were identified from embryo and endosperm, respectively, during seed germination. seed embryo and endosperm display distinct differentially expressed proteins involved in seed germination; in particular, deps from the embryo were mainly related to carbohydrate metabolism, proteometabolism, amino acid metabolism, nucleic acid metabolism, and stress response, whereas those from the endosperm were mainly involved in storage proteins, carbohydrate metabolism, stress response, and protein synthesis. during germination, the embryo and endosperm of wheat seeds possibly have a basic pattern of oxygen consumption. they consume plenty of oxygen at the beginning of germination, enter lag period, then oxygen consumption increases sharply when the radicles have broken through the episperm. when germination is complete, oxygen consumption increases continuously in the embryo but decreases in the endosperm. reserve substances from the endosperm begin to be mobilized when the germination is finished, and more enzymes involved in these processes are synthesized in large quantities. the mobilization also possibly concerns the activation of enzymes and inactivation of inhibitors. storage proteins produce amino acids, peptides, and their derivatives, which are used to synthesize new proteins or transformed into asn or gln, then transported to the seedling. a putative metabolic pathway was proposed, which displays the central proteomic changes of embryo and endosperm during wheat seed germination.

