BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling using microarray technology is a powerful method to investigate the phenotype of complex biological systems  <cit> . over the last decade, developments by academic and private sectors have improved the reproducibility, standardisation and accuracy, and have decreased the cost of this technology. however, the main drawback of this technology was the large amount of input rna needed to carry out microarray experiments, preventing expression analysis on small samples. this problem has been largely overcome thanks to rna amplification methods. standard target preparation protocols now allow large-scale gene expression profiling to be performed from nanogram quantities of input rna. however, cell selection technologies that allow the isolation of 1– <dig> cells such as cell-sorting methods  <cit>  or laser capture microdissection   <cit> , have driven the development for further reduction. only a few protocols are designed for the amplification of picogram amounts of input rna and allow the potential investigation of the transcriptome of few cells isolated by cell-sorting techniques or lcm.

the most routinely used amplification method is based on linear amplification by in vitro transcription  of a cdna template into complementary rna , using t <dig> rna polymerase  <cit> . several protocols based on this technique have been developed and are commonly used to perform gene expression profiling experiments using microarrays  <cit> . recently, a new rna amplification system based on the linear isothermal amplification of double-stranded cdna that encompasses a unique rna/dna heteroduplex at one end using the rna-dependent dna polymerase activity has been developed  <cit> . this technique has been used to perform gene expression profiling experiments  <cit> .

we assume that the purification of total rna from cultured cells or tissue after isolation using these methods can be largely method-, cell- or tissue-dependent. in this study, to minimise this source of error and to focus on the amplification method, a commercial source of total rna, i.e. human universal rna, was used. we compared four commercial rna amplification protocols to the standard target labelling procedure proposed by affymetrix in side-by-side experiments to evaluate the most suitable method to perform gene expression profiling from picogram amounts of input rna on affymetrix genechip microarrays. the following amplification protocols were compared: i) arcturus riboamp™ system, ii) ambion messageamp™, iii) epicentre targetamp™, and iv) nugen wt-amplification™ pico system. protocols proposed by arcturus, ambion and epicentre are adapted from the ivt method first described by eberwine et al.  <cit> . the system proposed by nugen is based on the rna-dependent dna polymerase activity  <cit> . although amplification methods have already been evaluated elsewhere  <cit> , no comparative study of rna amplification procedures from picogram amounts has been published.

RESULTS
qualitative and quantitative analysis of the input total rna confirmed its high quality .

qualitative and quantitative analysis of amplification products
for each protocol, one rna amplification was performed from  <dig> pg and one from  <dig> pg of human universal rna by two operators in two independent laboratories. a negative control  and a positive control  were included in each experimental batch. the quality of each amplified product  was assessed using microfluidic electrophoresis  and compared to the amplified arna obtained from  <dig> μg and  <dig> ng rna inputs following the standard protocol proposed by affymetrix .

the size of the main population of arnas synthesised according the protocol proposed by ambion  ranged between  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt with an average of  <dig> nt which is shorter than the manufacturer's indicated length. moreover, an unexpected short-sized arna population of  <dig> nt was consistently observed. the population of arna obtained using the arcturus protocol ranged in size between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides  with an average of  <dig> nt, but arnas longer than  <dig> nt were systematically observed . the arna population generated according to the epicentre targetamp™ protocol  ranged in size between  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, with an average of  <dig> nt, which is shorter than indicated in the manufacturer's specifications. the electrophoretic traces of the arna obtained during the duplicate amplifications of  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of starting total rna were also different. the size of cdnas obtained using the amplification method proposed by nugen  was distributed between  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt  according to the manufacturer's protocol. however, a discrete population cdna of  <dig> nt was systematically observed, clearly corresponding to non-specific products that were also detected on amplification of the negative control.

the quantities of arna and cdna obtained after amplification are presented in table  <dig>  yields were sufficient to perform target preparation and hybridisation according to the manufacturers' protocols except for amplification performed using epicentre targetamp™ system. moreover, yields obtained with the protocols proposed by epicentre and arcturus appeared to be laboratory-dependent and non-reproducible in our hands . regardless of the protocol used, similar yields of about  <dig> μg of non-specific amplification products were synthesised when amplification was performed without rna .

for each protocol, one rna amplification was performed from  <dig> pg and one from  <dig> pg of human universal rna by two operators in two independent laboratories. arcturus and epicentre kits contain an internal positive control rna. these rna were systematically included when performing experiments with those chemistries. negative control experiments  were also performed to evaluate template-independent nucleic acid synthesis.

overall quality of expression profiles
after amplification, each labelled crna or cdna target was biotinylated, fragmented and hybridised on affymetrix hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  to assess the impact of each protocol on expression profiles. raw .cel files were normalised using the mas <dig> algorithm from affymetrix, and metrics for all hybridisations were analysed and compared . targets synthesised with each of the methods assessed showed acceptable average background values compared to affymetrix specifications, ranging between  <dig> and  <dig>  background values of chips hybridised with cdna targets  were homogeneous and significantly lower than those of the other chips. percentage of present calls  ranged from 40% to 50%, as expected when analysing human universal rna, except for the hybridisation performed from  <dig> pg of input rna according to the arcturus riboamp™ method . biases toward amplification of 3' and 5' ends of gapdh and β-actin were also computed  in order to evaluate the efficiencies of cdna template synthesis and amplification reactions. the 3'/5' ratios for housekeeping genes should be at most  <dig> when one-round amplification is performed, and at most  <dig> for two-round amplification procedures. the 3'/5' ratios obtained were dramatically above the cut-off values when targets were synthesised using the protocols proposed by arcturus, ambion, and epicentre but remained acceptable  for cdna targets prepared according to the nugen method.

'-': no hybridisation performed due to poor yield after amplification.

targets were synthesised, in each laboratory , with the five protocols and hybridised to hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  array. a rapid analysis was performed with expression console .

reproducibility and inter-system comparability
raw signal distributions before  and after normalisation  were analysed and compared. after normalisation, the signal distributions of chips hybridised with all protocols were homogeneous and can be compared. note that the results obtained, before normalisation, with rna amplified according to the ambion messageamp™ protocol highlight the discrepancies in signal distribution that appear to be batch- or laboratory-dependent.

to assess the overall reproducibility of amplifications, pearson's correlation coefficients between technical replicates were computed and averaged for each protocol . the average of correlation coefficients for all protocols was about  <dig>  indicating high reproducibility of measurements. correlation coefficients between results obtained from  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of rna input were also averaged for each method to evaluate protocol reproducibility and robustness across quantitative modulations of rna inputs . almost no difference was observed for correlations between technical replicates and correlations between  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of rna input for the ambion and nugen protocols, suggesting that the amount of rna input has little impact on expression data. a lower correlation coefficient  was observed between the results obtained with different amounts of rna input when using the arcturus riboamp™ protocol.

the correlation of the gene expression data obtained with each evaluated methods and the reference one-round and two-round affymetrix amplification protocols were also compared to assess the value of each protocol . not surprisingly, reproducibility within a given protocol was higher than across protocols. major discrepancies between hybridisations of cdna synthesised according to the nugen wt-amplification™ protocol and arna produced according to the ivt amplification protocols  were observed. moreover, more marked discrepancies were observed between data from affymetrix one-round ivt amplification and data from all two-round ivt amplifications, than between each of the two-round ivt amplifications. not surprisingly, the most strongly correlated results were obtained using similar amplification systems.

further assessment of the nugen protocol
the nugen wt-ovation™ pico system was further characterised, as the overall best results were obtained using this protocol. additional amplifications and microarray hybridisations from  <dig> pg,  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of input rna were performed in duplicate as previously. the amounts of input rna evaluated therefore ranged from  <dig> pg to  <dig> ng . the quality of each amplified cdna was assessed . not surprisingly, the discrete peak corresponding to non-specific amplification products previously observed in negative controls, increased relative to the specific cdna target quantity when the amount of input rna decreased. amplification yields  decreased slightly with the amount of input rna. except for the amplifications performed from  <dig> pg of input rna, more cdna was generated than required for genechip hybridisation according to the nugen wt-amplification™ pico protocol . amplified cdna products, including those containing less than  <dig> μg, were biotinylated, fragmented and hybridised on affymetrix hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  under the same experimental conditions as those described previously. hybridisation metrics were analysed and compared as described previously . average background values were low and homogeneous with those obtained previously with  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of input rna. the other metrics were within the expected range according to the usual specifications for amplifications of  <dig> pg,  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg, but the percentages of present calls decreased for amplifications of  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of rna, and 3'/5' ratios for housekeeping genes were significantly higher for amplifications performed from  <dig> pg of rna . to further investigate the impact of rna input amounts on expression data, pearson's correlation coefficients between all experimental data were computed . a weaker correlation was observed for data obtained from the smallest amounts of input rna .

targets were synthesised in each laboratory with the nugen protocol at five amount of input rna and hybridised to hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  array. a rapid analysis was performed with expression console .

to assess the sensitivity of nugen system and to determine whether it allowed the measurement of differential gene expression, the expression profiles of two cell lines  were compared using the nugen wt-amplification™ pico system and the affymetrix one-cycle ivt amplification.  <dig> pg and  <dig> μg of rna of each cell line were amplified according to the protocols proposed by nugen and affymetrix, respectively, and hybridised on affymetrix hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  genechip. as expected, affymetrix and nugen protocols showed similar yields of reproducibility with correlation coefficients up to  <dig>  between replicates . differential gene expression analysis was performed for each system using the present, absent, marginal increase, marginal decrease, increase and decrease criteria proposed by affymetrix and implemented in gcos software . although the two systems allowed identification of the same number of up- or down-regulated genes, only about 50% of these genes were differentially expressed in the same direction when using the other protocol. the other set of genes was mostly non-modulated. the direction of differential expression was divergent in only  <dig> % of measurements between the nugen wt-amplification™ pico system and the affymetrix one-round ivt amplification system. another evaluation of the differential gene expression measurement has been performed. for each chemistry, ratios of the expression values obtained for each cell line were calculated and graphed . although ratios show dispersion with respect to the chemistry, no particular bias was noticed. in addition, differences in the direction of differential expression were observed for 4% of the probesets . moreover, almost all of those probesets show a low differential expression .

targets were generated from rnas of two cell lines using affymetrix 1-round ivt and nugen chemistries. after hybridisation, differential gene expression results were analysed. status is defined as decrease , increase , marginal increase , marginal increase , and no change .

discussion
gene expression profiling on several hundred cells isolated by cell-sorting technologies, or by lcm prompts the development of new amplification procedures. over recent years, academic, private sector and commercial researchers have been developing tools and methods to generate expression profiles from small amounts of biological material. improvements have been made in all steps of the process of expression profiling experiments such as sample collection, rna purification, or acquisition and analysis of expression data. over the last few years, improvements in rna amplification methods now allow the synthesis of sufficient targets to perform microarray hybridisation on as little as picogram amounts of input rna. in this study, we evaluated and compared four commercial rna amplification protocols using picogram amounts of input rna. this comparative study will be useful to researchers when planning new experiments involving samples derived from a few cells.

this comparative study was based on several assessments of amplification products. first of all, electrophoresis was performed and examined in combination with crna or cdna yields. this analysis is performed routinely prior to hybridisation, as it provides an estimate of the overall amplification performance. unusual traces or insufficient yield correspond to either abnormal input rna, or amplification failure. the poor yield obtained with the protocol proposed by epicentre is due to amplification failures since the quality of the commercial rna has been checked. experimental errors might be the cause of these failures. however, as amplifications were carried out in duplicate by two experienced operators in two laboratories, the quality of the batch and its reproducibility may be responsible for these errors.

the overall size of arna, estimated by the electrophoretic profile, has been previously described as a good metric when looking at within-sample fidelity  <cit> . as expected, a high level of consistency in amplified product sizes and electrophoretic profiles was observed within each technology, since all amplifications were performed using the same input rna. the repeated observation of products of very large size  obtained with the arcturus riboamp™ kit are surprising and might be due to the transcription of non-specific ligation of cdna templates. as for other microarray technologies, probes designed for affymetrix gene expression assay are biased towards the 3' end of the transcripts: the length of the target is therefore not a critical metric provided the targets cover the first  <dig> bases from the 3' end of the transcripts. however some probes  represent sequences over  <dig> bases from the 3' end, and short amplification products may therefore not address these probes. the impact of this issue can be easily estimated by the 3'/5' ratios of housekeeping genes. affymetrix hg u <dig> plus  <dig>  genechips include probe sets selected in the 5' region of housekeeping genes in addition to conventional probes within a maximum of  <dig> nt from the 3' end. the signal intensity ratio of the 3' probe over the 5' probe  is a good metric to evaluate the qualitative performance of first strand cdna synthesis and arna transcription . abnormally high ratios were obtained when using t7-ivt-based amplification chemistries suggesting that the 3' biased expression issue should be taken into consideration when analysing these data. the lower 3'/5' ratios observed in the nugen wt-amplification™ approach could be explained by the fact that i) in addition to the conventional poly-t priming for the initial reverse transcription, the system proposed by nugen also includes random priming, and ii) amplification is performed in one cycle thus avoiding shortening of targets at the 5' end by performing a random primed reverse transcription of first-round amplified arna.

the percentage of present call has been previously described as a good metric when evaluating the sensitivity of a method  <cit> . gene expression analysis performed on small amounts of input rna, can be logically expected to give a reduced sensitivity. however, only arcturus riboamp™ chemistry showed significantly reduced sensitivity compared to the standard procedure. poor sensitivity was also observed when conducting experiments using nugen wt-amplification™ system using the lowest amounts of input rna , suggesting that the minimum input limits of the protocol had been reached.

with respect to hybridisation specificities, the nugen technology shows a fundamental difference as it generates a single-stranded cdna target whereas others protocols yields crna targets. as rna/dna interactions are stronger than dna/dna interactions, cdna hybridisations should theoretically be more specific but also less sensitive. however, the protocol proposed by nugen was not associated with decreased sensitivity and the lower average background value of the chips hybridised with cdna targets  suggests reduced non-specific target/background interactions but additional studies should be conducted to evaluate the potential increased specificity of the probe/target interaction and its biological impact on expression profiling.

practical criteria should be considered to choose an amplification approach to carry out expression profiling experiments. these include completion time, handling difficulties and labour intensiveness. major differences were observed between the various protocols evaluated in terms of these criteria. ivt-based amplifications  involve numerous steps and are therefore time-consuming and labour-intensive. however, the high quality of technical support and optimisation of chemistries  simplify the handling of the ambion and arcturus systems. the nugen technology is fundamentally different from the ivt-based amplifications. fewer steps are needed to achieve amplification, and the process does not include delicate rna handling during the amplification process. the nugen wt-amplification™ protocol is therefore shorter and easier to complete, and consequently less error-prone. ultimately, investigators will need to compare experimental results obtained by different laboratories. experimental variables  on expression data could be limited if fewer steps are needed to achieve amplification.

when expression profiling experiments are performed on just a few cells, it is currently impossible to strictly assess the quality and quantity of the purified rna. even the most modern and accurate spectrophotometers or microfluidic-based electrophoresis chips require at least  <dig> pg of rna to characterise nucleic acids extracted from such minute samples. the results presented here show that a two-fold variation of the amount of input rna had almost no impact on the transcriptomes analysed when starting with picogram amounts of rna. moreover, high reproducibility within a given protocol  was observed for amplifications that were carried out in two different laboratories by two different operators. this shows that trained laboratories could conduct amplifications with the technologies proposed by ambion, arcturus, or nugen and produce data that could effectively be compared across laboratories using the same amplification protocols. however, the results obtained in this study indicate large variations between different protocols. this suggests, as previously shown, that i) when conducting expression profiling experiments the same amplification protocol should be used in order to maximize the comparability of the results  <cit> , and ii) that rna amplification affects the expression measurements  <cit> . however, researchers who already have a large volume of affymetrix two-round amplification data, and who want to conduct a project including comparison of these data, might decide to choose the ambion messageamp™ amplification protocol despite its very high bias towards the 3' to 5' ends, as expression profiles estimated according to this protocol exhibited the best correlation with the results of affymetrix amplification .

amplifications were performed by two operators in two different laboratories in order to mimic "real experimental conditions" of expression profiling. in our hands and under these experimental conditions, nugen wt-amplification™ pico protocol appeared the most suitable. additional experiments were performed in order to further assess this system. amplifications were performed on amounts of input rna ranging from  <dig> pg to  <dig> ng to test the system at the upper and lower limits of input amounts corresponding to a few cells isolated by facs or lcm. the results obtained show that the overall quality, comparability and reproducibility of expression measurements were very good for rna input amounts ranging from  <dig> pg to  <dig> pg. the system was less efficient with  <dig> pg and  <dig> pg of rna inputs with respect to sensitivity and reproducibility. it is important to analyse this result in the light of manufacturer's specifications indicating that the minimal rna input of the system is  <dig> pg.

the results of a differential gene expression experiment using nugen wt-amplification™ chemistry or affymetrix one-round ivt amplification were also compared. if we strictly count the number of probesets with the same status  in both chimistries, discrepancies were observed only for 25% of probesets. however the direction of differential expression diverged in few measurements. these results show that most genes have similar differentially expressed patterns and that one amplification protocol does not create an artificial variability of the measurements compared to the other. the observed discrepancies do not appear to be due to the decreased sensitivity of one of the two protocols because the same proportion of genes was modulated when using the affymetrix and nugen protocols. although the effects of rna amplification on differential gene expression measurements have been previously reported  <cit> , a large proportion of these discrepancies might be due to fundamental differences between the two approaches, such as the influence of the molecular nature of the targets  on expression measurement, or the use of random priming to synthesise double-stranded cdna templates.

the preservation of the relative abundance levels of gene transcripts is an important issue when performing rna amplification prior to genome-wide expression measurements. this issue has been widely studied in comparing expression measurements i) from the amplification of different amounts of rna  <cit> , ii) from amplified and unamplified materials  <cit> , iii) using different amplification procedures  <cit> , iv) to a gold standard amplification procedure <cit> , v) using different expression evaluation methods such as quantitative-reverse-transcription-ploymerase-chain-reaction   <cit> . most of these studies were performed using ivt-based amplification methods. those methods were different from the ones evaluated in this report, and were not optimised for picogram amounts of input rna. only two studies were conducted using nugen amplification technology but not the wt-amplification™ pico system evaluated here  <cit> . the general conclusion that could be drawn from these articles is that either ivt-based or nugen-like rna amplifications were globally able to maintain relative transcripts abundance with only slight differences. however, it has been pointed out that, in most of these reports, the statistical analyses or the comparison with qrt-pcr data were restricted only to subsets of genes such as outliers or highly expressed genes  <cit> . furthermore, several studies have seriously questioned the preservation of the relative transcript abundance during rna amplification. sequence dependent biases  <cit> , and a drop of fidelity for low expressed transcripts  <cit>  have been demonstrated. in addition, it has been shown that low expressed genes were subject to stochastic fluctuations that increase as the sample size decreases  <cit> . however, we obtained high correlations between technical replicates using either ambion, arcturus or nugen methods . it shows that no or negligible stochastic fluctuations occur at these levels of input rna . on the other hand, stochastic event could explain the lower reproducibility observed for smaller amount of input rna  using nugen method.

therefore, a) we do not recommend to perform amplification from less than  <dig> pg of input rna, and b) when it is possible, researchers should try to increase the rna input quantity to at least  <dig> pg to be more confident in the biological interpretation of the results, particularly concerning low express transcripts.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we evaluated and compared four commercial rna amplification protocols using picogram amounts of input rna. an operational flow chart was designed to evaluate the effects of laboratory and operator intervariability on expression results. in our hands, the wt-ovation™ pico system proposed by nugen appears the most suitable for amplification and gene expression analysis. the amplification method proposed by nugen is fast, easy to perform, and does not require several rounds of amplification or exponential pcr cycles. it provides a high quality expression profile that appears to allow identification of differentially expressed genes. finally, the reproducibility of the results of amplification across laboratories and across amounts of rna input indicates that this system is an efficient tool to conduct gene expression profiling experiments from lcm or cell-sorted isolated samples.

