BACKGROUND
dinoflagellates are unicellular eukaryotes found in both marine and freshwater environments. some are crucial symbionts of reef-building corals, and others sometimes cause toxic algal blooms  <cit> . dinoflagellates are rich sources of structurally unique and bioactive secondary metabolites and are of interest to natural product chemists, biologists, and ecologists. these metabolites are unique in size, structure, and potency, and many are of polyketide origin .

dinoflagellate toxins have been classified into three main categories:  polycyclic polyethers,  macrolides, and  linear polyethers  <cit> . the majority of these compounds display remarkable biological activities, including ion channel modulation, phosphatase inhibition, hemolysis, mycotoxicity, and cytotoxicity . one possible explanation for their high potency is to compensate for high dilution when they are released into the water  <cit> . much is known regarding the biosynthesis of polyketides from terrestrial and freshwater organisms; however, only in the last decade have dinoflagellate polyketides been investigated.

polyketides are synthesized by specific enzymes called polyketide synthases, through a series of condensation and reduction reactions involving at least three protein domains. these include ketosynthase , acyl transferase , and acyl carrier protein   domains. in addition, polyketide synthesis may involve three optional domains: ketoreductase , dehydratase , and enoylreductase   <cit> . in  <dig>  full-length transcripts of type i-like, modular pks were sequenced from karenia brevis, with seven out of eight transcripts containing single pks domains, a feature typical of type ii pks  <cit> . eichholz et al.  <cit>  characterized five transcripts for type i-like, pks-encoding ks proteins that are expressed as monofunctional units, from the dinoflagellates, alexandrium ostenfeldii and heterocapsa triquetra. transcriptomic analysis of the non-toxic heterocapsa circularisquama, revealed  <dig> polyketide synthase-encoding expressed sequence tags  contigs, including one contig with two domains   <cit> . similar analysis revealed type i-like polyketide synthases in the toxic dinoflagellate, gambierdiscus polynesiensis, the main producer of ciguatoxins  <cit> . meyer et al.  <cit>  reported finding all genes essential for polyketide toxin synthesis in azadinium spinosum, known to produce azaspiracid toxins. recently, kohli et al. catalogued  <dig> unique transcripts encoding complete ks domains in two species of gambierdiscus, which are putatively involved in polyketide biosynthesis  <cit> .

among marine dinoflagellates, the genus symbiodinium includes major coral symbionts that are also associated with other invertebrate taxa   <cit> . the draft genome of s. minutum, encoding ~ <dig>  protein-coding genes, has provided an opportunity for better understanding of its pks system  <cit> . snyder et al.  <cit>  reported type i pkss in several dinoflagellates, including symbiodinium sp.; however, there has been no detailed survey of genes involved in polyketide synthesis in s. minutum. we probed the s. minutum genome with respect to enzymes involved in polyketide synthesis and phylogenetically analyzed the ks domains of pkss. we found a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase  hybrid and confirmed that pkss of s. minutum belong to the protistan type i pks group, along with some unexpected sequences associated with a bacterial clade.

RESULTS
diversification of ks domain-containing genes in the s. minutum genome
in total,  <dig> genes with ketoacyl synthase domains  were screened from the predicted  <dig>  genes in the s. minutum genome . using blastp searches, we also checked s. minutum genes similar to reported pkss and confirmed the aligned sequences manually. after removing sequences for partial domains,  <dig> genes that encoded full ks domains in s. minutum were selected for sequence characterization  and molecular phylogenetic analysis. sequence comparisons with ks domains showed that the most similar genes are those reported from other dinoflagellates, although several genes were unexpectedly most similar to bacterial  genes. eleven ks domain-containing genes likely encode multifunctional proteins with other domains related to pks synthesis  . careful examination of the s. minutum genome identified  <dig> intron-rich genes for ks sequences  that are expressed under standard culture conditions . only one ks gene  is likely to be more highly expressed than genes  <cit>  for rna polymerase . quantitative expression analysis under different conditions will be useful for functional predictions. an interesting feature was the presence of tandemly aligned ks genes  on scaffold  <dig> , in addition to two ks genes on scaffold  <dig>  . since domain combinations are not conserved completely, duplication and/or splitting are hypothesized as the mechanisms for these expansions . this hypothesis is not unreasonable, considering a recent report of dinoflagellates possessing por  gene duplicates  <cit> . gene duplications can have metabolic advantages and can eventually become fixed in a population.table  <dig> ks domain-containing genes in symbiodinium minutum



a
am amp-binding, at acyltransferase, dh dehydratase, er enoylreductase, kr ketoreductase, ks ketosynthase, pp pp-binding

fig.  <dig> a molecular phylogenetic tree of type i ks domains from prokaryotic and eukaryotic pks and fas, analyzed by bayesian inference, reveals the diversification of the ks domain gene family. symbiodinium minutum possesses genes belonging to three major groups within this gene family. type ii pks and acyl carrier protein synthases  were used as outgroups. numbers at nodes indicate posterior probabilities. details regarding s. minutum sequences are provided in table  <dig>  red stars indicate s. minutum proteins with single pks-related domains. green circles indicate s. minutum proteins with multiple pks-related domains. dinoflagellate kss  are classified as a well-supported group within the protistan type i pks clade.



bayesian inference and maximum likelihood analysis of the  <dig> ks sequences were carried out with acyl carrier protein synthase  and type ii pks sequences as outgroups to understand relationships of ks sequences from s. minutum compared with those of other dinoflagellates. after alignment and trimming, a sequence of  <dig> amino acids  was used for analysis. molecular phylogenetic analyses significantly placed most sequences with those of other dinoflagellate type i pkss . bayesian inference clearly demonstrated that 22 s. minutum proteins and other protistan proteins were included in that clade . there was strong bayesian support  for a ‘protistan’ clade of type i pks sequences comprising of apicomplexan, dinoflagellate, chlorophyte, and haptophyte sequences . these major groups formed two separate sub-groups within the protistan clade. one sub-group with all existing sequences from a. ostenfeldii, a. spinosum, g. polynesiensis, and h. triquetra, included  <dig> proteins of s. minutum with one pks-related domain . the second sub-group, with chlorophyte/haptophyte proteins, contained four s. minutum sequences with multiple pks-related domains. the third sub-group, with bacterial proteins, contained two s. minutum proteins . interestingly, the sequences were more closely related to cyanobacterial ks sequences than to other eukaryote sequences. a similar pattern has been reported in k. brevis, in which some sequences grouped with cyanobacterial proteins  <cit> . dinoflagellate proteins were not found in clades of animal fatty acid synthase  and fungal pks. it is worth mentioning that nrps-pks hybrid  was in a clade with pks and fas of chlorophyta/haptophyta , which encode the largest pks protein in s. minutum. maximum likelihood analysis provided additional support for a “protistan clade” containing type i pks sequences .

to explore the possibility of spliced leader trans-splicing from a large transcriptome to single-domain, protein-coding transcriptomes, we mapped transcriptome data from the tss . the mapping of sl -removed tss  showed that each of three gene models  predicts two transcripts by sl trans-splicing . they are genes with single pks-related domains . therefore, proteins with multiple pks-related domains are likely to be expressed in cultured s. minutum.

presence of a hybrid nrps-pks gene in s. minutum
one gene model of  <dig>  amino acids was identified as a hybrid nrps-pks, based on pfam domain analysis and confirmed by anti-smash   <cit> . it was composed of eight modules, three nrpss, and five pkss . the first nrps is followed by three pks modules, which contain at least a ks domain with different domain combinations. a second nrps with condensation  and adenylation  is also present, followed by an additional nrps-like assembly . thioesterase  domains are usually located in the final nrps module where they catalyze product release  <cit> . substrates of adenylation  domains in the nrps module can be predicted based on residues in the binding pocket  <cit> . the reported a domains in nrps proteins are responsible for recruiting amino acids into the final product. in this case, the first a domain has the sequence dlfnlsli while the second a domain has dvwxfsli. in silico methods were used to infer a hypothetical metabolite produced by the hybrid nrps-pks gene. based on antismash server prediction, the hybrid cluster could result in a natural product consisting of a core scaffold made from two amino acids  . i-tasser  <cit>  3d protein structure prediction showed that the at domain at the start of the cluster resembled an acyl-carrier-protein malonyltransferase  and may provide malonyl groups for polyketide biosynthesis.fig.  <dig> an unusual, very large nrps-pks protein is present in the symbiodinium minutum genome. a consensus schematic representation of the nrps-pks hybrid from s. minutum based on the pfam database and anti-smash. acyl carrier protein  is represented as phosphopantetheine . the third a domain didn’t yield any prediction for a specific substrate using anti-smash. amino acid  positions show starting points for major domains. at: acyl tansferase, c: condensation, a: adenylation, ks: ketosynthase, dh: dehydratase, kr: ketoreductase, mt: methyltransferase, te: thioesterase b core scaffold of the hypothetical molecule, based on assumed pks-nrps co-linearity



surveys of other pks domains and conserved n-terminal sequences of s. minutum ks
blast screening of the s. minutum genome and comparisons of domain structure resulted in identification of candidates for all domains involved in polyketide synthesis: ks, at, acp , kr, dh, and er. first, we examined whether functionally important amino acid residues required for enzymatic activity  are present near the dtacss-motif of s. minutum ks enzymes. we found that most sequences  contain these residues . other domains can also be identified by comparing sequences and signature motifs: hxxxgxxxx with two active residues  in dh  <cit> , lxhxxxggvg in er with important residues   <cit> , gxgxxgxxxa in kr with three glycine and one alanine as essential residues  <cit>  and the signature motif, ghslg, in at domains . the phylogenetic relationship of the pks n-terminal region among dinoflagellates is shown in a maximum likelihood phylogeny . the tree reflects the same dinoflagellate resolution found in the ks-based phylogeny  with one main sub-clade consisting of a. spinosum, a. ostenfeldii, h. triqueta, and k. brevis, one sub-clade comprising only one s. minutum and two k. brevis sequences, and a third clade consisting of three s. minutum sequences. alignment of n-terminal regions revealed several conserved amino acid positions, including the highly conserved exexgylg in most dinoflagellates . in symbiodinium, only one of the  <dig> sequences contained the signature gylg and three other variants, dylg, eylg, and gymg. many variations were found in other sequences at the same position showing the diversified nature of the n-terminus in s. minutum .

identification of zad-d in cultured s. minutum by nanolc-ms
zad  was identified based on high-resolution mass data . a nanolc-ms  profile of the methanol extract of s. minutum showed ions at m/z  <dig>   and  <dig>  for the + and +, respectively . the ammonium adduct + at m/z  <dig>   was also observed. it should be noted that other polyhydroxy molecules were also observed in the crude methanol extract, but none of them corresponded to other reported zooxanthella polyhydroxy molecules .table  <dig> high-resolution ms of the target molecule, zad-d45


+
+
+


discussion
the ks domain is the most conserved domain of type i pks proteins and has divergent homologs, which permit comparative phylogenetic analysis of pkss  <cit> . our phylogenetic trees resolved previously reported clades  <cit> . addition of novel sequences from s. minutum to the ks phylogenetic dataset provided evidence for three groups of dinoflagellate ks during pks gene evolution. other protist groups that diverged earlier also retain their ks evolutionary signatures and remain within well-supported clades, as shown by our analysis. a smaller clade comprising only s. minutum and k. brevis sequences showed alterations in their active sites . this topology may indicate a history of early gene duplication within the dinoflagellate clade.

as in pkss, nrpss also produce diverse secondary metabolites and have modular organizations with each module assuming specific functions. formation of hybrid systems or clusters has been reported in bacteria  <cit> . fungal and bacterial nrps and pks have gained attention in recent years, mainly due to their complex evolutionary histories . lawrence et al.  <cit>  provided evidence for horizontal gene transfer  of the hybrid nrps-pks gene from a putative bacterial donor in the burkholderiales and suggested a hgt early in the history of the fungal phylum ascomycota. bushley and turgeon  <cit>  identified nps genes encoding nrps and nrps-like proteins in fungal genomes and suggested mechanisms for this modular architecture. in aspergillus spp., genes involved in secondary metabolite biosynthesis tend to be located in subtelomeric regions, which may contribute to their rapid evolution  <cit> . gene transfer from cyanobacteria to dinoflagellates has been suggested by lópez-legentil et al.  <cit>  and this could explain the grouping of two s. minutum sequences with cyanobacterial sequences. the hybrid gene symbb <dig> v <dig> . <dig> t <dig> shares features with chlorophyte/haptophyte sequences used in our analysis. a data mining study found a surprisingly high number of hybrid nrps-pks gene clusters across three domains of life and this might be a consequence of long-term convergence between nrps and pks  <cit> . our survey showed that the s. minutum genome encodes only one nrps domain-containing gene. hybrid nrps-pkss have been reported in other dinoflagellates . dinoflagellate genomes are punctuated with a high number of simple and complex repeats and well known for frequent recombination events  <cit> . additionally, these genomes contain genes in high copy numbers, an indication of frequent gene duplication events during dinoflagellate evolution  <cit> . shoguchi et al.  <cit>  predicted that a total of  <dig>  genes of s. minutum might have originated by gene duplication. it will be interesting to determine what types of natural products are synthesized by this nrps-pks gene and what role they do play in s. minutum.

eichholz et al.  <cit>  speculated that the n-terminus is related to the monofunctional nature of ks domains and may play a role in structural rearrangements, substrate docking, or protein-protein interactions. the n-termini of pks multi-enzymes contain regularities in amino acid sequences. recent studies have highlighted the potential role of these regions as “linkers” and their interactions with linker regions at the c-termini of pks multi-enzymes  <cit> . a low degree of conservation was noted within the n-terminal exexgylg signature sequence of symbiodinium ks sequences. the gylg conserved sequence has also been reported in g. polynesiensis, along with several variants   <cit> . alteration of this signature has also been reported in a. spinosum   <cit> . eichholz et al.  <cit>  found that pks domains are expressed as monofunctional units and that this feature may be unique to dinoflagellates. however, a transcript containing more than one domain has been reported in which one est contig encoding two type i pks domains was found in the transcriptome of h. circularisquama, raising the possibility that there may be multi-modular pks genes in dinoflagellates  <cit> . one feature suggesting this possibility is the presence of the acp , upstream of the ks domain. such a group could serve as a swinging arm to present substrates to catalytic sites on pks. modular type i pks proteins have been reported in a closely related apicomplexan  and in a haptophyte  with several different enzymatic domains arranged in distinct modules  <cit> . given that there is partial or complete absence of the conserved gylg sequence in the n-terminus and that acp precedes the ks domains, our genome-wide survey provides evidence for multifunctional pks genes in the symbiodinium genome along with monofunctional units.

zad-d is a linear polyhydroxylated polyketide and has been reported from symbiodinium strain jcucs- <dig>  <cit> . it is related to amphidinols isolated from the dinoflagellate, amphidinium sp.  <cit> . this molecule is a polyhydroxy amide consisting of a c22-acid moiety and a c32-amine moiety; it furnishes three tetrahydropyran rings and six isolated butadiene chromophores. apart from zad-d, other unknown polyhydroxy molecules were found in the methanol extract, and characterization of these unknown compounds could be interesting . other natural products have been isolated from symbiodinium sp. that displayed significant biological activities . hybrid nrps-pks systems are capable of incorporating both amino acids and short carboxylic acids into final products, eventually leading to greater chemical structural diversity. it is not yet known what type of natural products are synthesized by the hybrid nrps-pks reported here; further work is needed to characterize its end products as well as products of other pkss in order to determine their role in s. minutum.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that three structural types of enzymes for polyketide synthesis, single-domain pks, multi-domain pks, and nrps-pks hybrid, are present in the dinoflagellate, s. minutum. based on the ketosynthase domain, dinoflagellate pkss can be evolutionarily classified into three groups. it is not yet clear why s. minutum possesses a polyketide biosynthetic pathway and how these multifunctional pks proteins have evolved. genomic characterization of dinoflagellate pks genes will likely provide insights for combinatorial biosynthesis of polyketides with wide range of applications. due to large and complex dinoflagellate genomes, it is more difficult to perform comprehensive analyses; however, cultured s. minutum, which has a comparatively small genome, might provide further insights into these phenomena.

