BACKGROUND
the spatial scales at which individuals within a population interact and the geographic extent of larval dispersal shape the dynamics of marine populations. dispersal capabilities of some species extend across entire ocean basins  <cit> , but larval propagules of many other species are retained close to their source  <cit> . larval development can impose limits on dispersal. species that brood their offspring  tend to have more restricted distributions than species with long-lived, planktonic larvae  <cit> , though exceptions exist  <cit> . species that aggregate in small patches may interact and reproduce with other individuals in an area encompassing a meter or less  <cit>  and larvae that lack broad dispersal potential may recruit to their natal population  <cit> . a sampling scheme that fails to account for the localized effects of self-recruiting patches may create an appearance of panmixia, even if substructure exists among patches  <cit> .

species dependent on deep-sea hydrothermal vents are restricted to patchy, ephemeral habitats that limit the areal extent and occurrence of populations. hydrothermal vent fields are found on mid-ocean ridges, back-arc spreading centres, and submarine volcanoes  <cit> . organisms that thrive at vents are supported by chemoautotrophic microbes that metabolize reduced compounds in the vent effluent  <cit> . vent habitats are transient, at temporal scales ranging from days to hundreds of years  <cit> , and constituent species may be subject to frequent local extinction and recolonization events  <cit> . survival of vent species therefore depends on fast growth, rapid reproduction, and dispersal abilities that shape the diversity and genetic structure of populations  <cit> .

at mid-ocean ridges, deep-sea hydrothermal vents are distributed along roughly linear axes that may function as dispersal corridors  <cit> . geographic populations of hydrothermal vent-dependent species can be panmictic across the extent of their range  but this is not always the case.

evidence for isolation-by-distance in vent species has sometimes been ambiguous due to small sample sizes and inconsistency in the resolution of various genetic markers  <cit> . considerable evidence exists for geographic subdivision associated with geomorphological features that affect different taxa to varying degrees. for example, the easter microplate is associated with isolation of northern and southern east pacific rise populations of mussels, but not of polychaete annelids  <cit> . a 2000-m long "habitat gap" across the equator is implicated in the isolation of some east pacific rise species and variable impedance of gene flow in other species  <cit> . similarly, a 350-km long ridge offset, the blanco transform fault, isolates juan de fuca and gorda ridge limpet populations  <cit> . the same barrier interacts with current regimes and is correlated with southward unidirectional gene flow in the vent polychaete ridgeia piscesae  <cit> . life history and behavioral attributes of various taxa result in these differing responses to shared dispersal barriers  <cit> .

identification of population structure at various spatial scales depends in part on the choice of genetic markers. for example, amplified fragment length polymorphisms were used to test for fine-scale differentiation among discrete patches of the tubeworm, riftia pachyptila, separated by as little as  <dig> m in a venting area along the east pacific rise, although sample sizes were small . more conservative mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences in r. pachyptila revealed panmixia at local scales and isolation-by-distance  <cit>  at greater geographical scales  <cit> .

in contrast to mid-ocean ridge systems, limited attention has been afforded to the population structure of vent organisms from western pacific back-arc basins. these basins are distributed in a non-linear pattern, reflecting the complex tectonic history of the region  <cit> . hydrothermal vents in western pacific back-arc basins are geographically isolated from vents on the east pacific rise  <cit> . regional isolation of species was detected among western pacific vents  <cit> : the okinawa trough and izu-ogasawara arc have a faunal assemblage distinct from that of other western pacific hydrothermal vents, and the faunal composition of the marianna trough is distinct from that of neighbouring basins  <cit> . vent species tend to be shared among manus, north fiji, and lau basin, but are distinct from species that occur at the okinawa and marianna troughs or the izu-ogasawara arc  <cit> .

because back-arc basin hydrothermal systems in the western pacific are located on isolated ridge segments , it has been hypothesized that reduced connectivity among western pacific back-arc basins may yield more endemic vent fauna within discrete back-arc basins  <cit> . some species endemic to these basins appear to be panmictic across multiple basins , whereas others are restricted to single basins . provannid snail species in the genus alviniconcha represent a cryptic species complex composed of at least three evolutionary lineages, one that occurs at hydrothermal vents in north fiji basin, one that is restricted to vents in the marianna trough, and one that co-occurs in both manus and north fiji basin  <cit> . a similar pattern of strong genetic differentiation may exist within other species. to date, comprehensive efforts have not been made to characterize population structure within vent taxa of western pacific back-arc basins.

ifremeria nautilei is a provannid gastropod that occurs in manus, north fiji, and lau basins and depends on sulphur-oxidizing bacterial endosymbionts for nutrition. sessile adults live in discrete patches near the effluent of diffuse-flow hydrothermal vents  <cit> . females possess a specialized brood-pouch in their foot and they release ciliated pre-veliger larvae  that are hypothesized to have long-distance dispersal capabilities  <cit> . preliminary studies indicated that i. nautilei exhibits distinct mitochondrial haplotypes in manus and north fiji basins  <cit> , but population structure has not been assessed at smaller spatial scales--among vent fields within basins , among sulphide mounds within vent fields , or among discrete patches on vent mounds .

we examined genetic population structure of ifremeria nautilei from hydrothermal vents in manus, north fiji, and lau basins at multiple scales, ranging from meters to thousands of kilometres . a nested sampling strategy was employed within manus basin to test the null hypothesis that i. nautilei exhibits no population structure among discrete patches at spatial scales of meters to  <dig> kilometres. the entire manus basin population was then compared to north fiji and lau basin samples to assess the relationship between increasing spatial scales  and genetic differentiation. genetic markers for differentiation at these scales included partial sequences of mitochondrial cytochrome-c-oxidase subunit i, and an array of nuclear dna microsatellite loci  <cit> . by comparing these two types of molecular markers, we can separate evolutionary processes, revealed by coi sequence data and dependent on mutation rates, from ecologic processes, revealed by microsatellite allele frequencies and based on the recombination of alleles with each generation  <cit> . if the specialized warén's larvae produced by ifremeria nautilei are adapted for long-distance dispersal  <cit> , population structure should be minimal over all scales. alternatively, if i. nautilei disperse in a manner consistent with other sessile invertebrates with specialized habitat needs  <cit>  genetic differentiation may occur at spatial scales less than one kilometre.

RESULTS
summary statistics
ifremeria nautilei were sampled from manus, north fiji, and lau basins . thirty-six partial coi haplotypes  were identified from  <dig> ifremeria nautilei sampled from manus basin; an additional  <dig> haplotypes were identified from  <dig> individuals from north fiji and lau basins. haplotype diversity  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>   and nucleotide diversity  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . indices of genetic diversity and tests for selection are reported in table  <dig>  fu's fs values were negative, consistent with allelic excess driven by recent population expansion   <cit> , with two exceptions .

all sites from north fiji basin are within  <dig> m of each other and marked with the same coordinates.

n = number of individuals, h = number of haplotypes, hd = haplotype diversity , fs = fu's fs with significance  indicated in bold. fs are only reported for patches with a sample size greater than or equal to  <dig> 

nine microsatellite loci were amplified from  <dig> to  <dig> individuals per site within manus basin . total alleles per locus ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . in permutation tests, allelic richness  did not vary significantly among patches, mounds, or sites . three loci  were monomorphic at the patch level but were polymorphic among patches.

only eight microsatellite loci were amplified from  <dig> to  <dig> individuals per site from north fiji and lau basin . one locus  failed to amplify in any north fiji or lau basin samples. the total number of alleles per locus ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . in permutation tests, allelic richness  did not vary significantly among sites or basins .

microsatellite marker quality
tests for hwe deviation were used to assess the quality of sampled microsatellite markers. in manus basin, heterozygote deficiency was detected in one locus . heterozygote excess was detected in only one locus at the site level . significant deviation from hwe was not detected at any other patch, mound, or site from manus basin .

two microsatellite loci deviated significantly from hardy-weinberg equilibrium at sites within north fiji basin . four microsatellite loci were not in equilibrium at the basin level . neither directional nor balancing selection was detected among microsatellites at any spatial scale within manus basin , but one microsatellite locus  was under positive selection  at the basin level.

microsatellite marker identity and excluded markers
identity tests were used to assess the utility of each microsatellite marker set. within manus basin, probability of identity tests  and probability of sibling identity tests  indicated that the nine microsatellite markers identify individuals , including those that shared 50% genetic similarity . ima coalescent models require that microsatellite markers adhere to the stepwise mutation model; only four of nine microsatellite markers  adhered to this model and could be used for ima analysis. identity tests for these four markers suggested that they are insufficient for assessment of population structure .

within north fiji and lau basins, four of nine microsatellite markers  failed to amplify, were out of equilibrium, or were under selection. these markers were excluded from all analyses involving north fiji and lau basins. the five remaining microsatellite loci could identify individuals , even those that share 50% genetic similarity . only two of those microsatellites  adhered to the stepwise mutation model and could be used in ima analyses. identity tests for these two markers suggested that they are insufficient for assessment of population structure .

population structure within manus basin
mitochondrial genealogies revealed two frequent haplotypes at all manus basin sites . less abundant haplotypes radiated from the dominant haplotypes in a star-like pattern . south su contained the most private haplotypes , followed by solwara  <dig>  and solwara  <dig> .

no indication of population structure was detected at the patch, mound, or site level within manus basin: analysis of molecular variance  indicated no variation among haplotypes using either mitochondrial or microsatellite markers ; pairwise comparisons of fst and φst revealed no significant genetic differentiation ; hierarchical analysis of fst and φst did not reveal any significant population differentiation among nested samples ; assignment tests indicated that all i. nautilei collected in manus basin constitute a single population .

p-values indicated in parentheses.

population structure among manus, north fiji, and lau basin
haplotypes present in manus, north fiji, and lau basins segregated into three groups . haplotype group  <dig> included all samples from manus basin while haplotype group  <dig> contained a mix of individuals from north fiji and lau basin . haplotype group  <dig> also contained a mix of individuals from north fiji and lau basin but was not directly connected to haplotype group  <dig> .

assignment tests of individual multi-locus genotypes identified two geographical regions hosting distinct populations of ifremeria nautilei : one in manus basin and a second occupying north fiji and lau basins. structure output suggests that one individual from north fiji basin may be second-generation migrant from manus basin and one individual from manus basin may be a second-generation migrant from the north fiji/lau basin population. hierarchical analyses of f-statistics also detected significant differentiation at this regional level , but no significant differentiation was detected at lower levels . pairwise fst and φst values did not show a significant increase in differentiation with geographical distance among samples separated by less than  <dig> km .

pairwise fst from  <dig> microsatellite loci reported above the diagonal, pairwise φst from 404-bp coi sequences reported below the diagonal. significant differentiation after correction for multiple tests  indicated in bold.

estimates of migration, effective population size, and divergence time
as reported above, the few microsatellites that adhered to the stepwise mutation model were insufficient to adequately assess gene flow. only the mitochondrial coi data yielded consistent results in the ima runs. coalescent estimates of migration rate  could not rule out the possibility of equal and bidirectional migration within manus basin populations. due to the high level of connectivity between manus basin samples, it is unlikely that estimates of gene flow would converge on the most likely solution. the posterior probabilities display multiple peaks and gradually increasing probabilities and thus results from these analyses should be approached with caution.

across samples of i. nautilei from all three western pacific basins, coalescent estimates of migration rate  suggest that migration between north fiji and lau basin is high . consistent with a single panmictic population, m-values could not be constrained between north fiji and lau basin . no evidence for migration between manus and either north fiji or lau basin was detected , suggesting that i. nautilei from manus basin are isolated from north fiji and lau basin . posterior probability estimates for gene flow between north fiji and lau basin were inconsistent, due to the fact that ifremeria nautilei from north fiji and lau basin are part of a single, undifferentiated population. an interpretation of directional migration between these two basins should be approached with caution.

θ <dig> = effective size of population  <dig>  θ <dig> = effective size of population  <dig>  θa = effective size of ancestral population, m <dig> = migration into population  <dig> from population  <dig>  m <dig> = migration in to population  <dig> from population  <dig>  τ = splitting time between populations. splitting time is calibrated against two mutations rates: μ <dig> =  <dig> × 10- <dig>  <cit> , μ <dig> =  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  <cit>  adjusted for the number of base pairs in the sequence. posterior probability densities are provided in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig> 

for manus, north fiji, and lau basin samples of ifremeria nautilei, estimates of effective population size using either microsatellite linkage disequilibrium or coalescent analysis could not constrain population sizes among basins, suggesting that within each basin, effective population size is functionally infinite. estimates of splitting time place the oldest divergence between north fiji and manus basin, with a relatively recent split between north fiji and lau basin .

discussion
the complete absence of genetic subdivision in populations of ifremeria nautilei at distances up to  <dig> kilometres suggests this species is able to colonize distant vent habitats and that the ciliated warén's larvae produced by i. nautilei are adapted for long-distance dispersal, as hypothesized by reynolds et al.  <cit> . despite this dispersal potential, a barrier to gene flow exists between manus and north fiji/lau basin populations that are separated by  <dig> kilometres. although mitochondrial coi gene sequences and nuclear microsatellite loci are informative at different temporal scales, both markers indicated identical patterns of population structure in i. nautilei, regardless of spatial scale.

local population structure within manus basin
ifremeria nautilei from the three manus basin sites belong to a single, panmictic population based on mitochondrial coi gene sequences and nuclear microsatellite markers. although patch sizes were generally small, several patches  had a sufficient sample size to test and reject the hypothesis that self-recruiting patches of i. nautilei might create the appearance of panmixia within this sample set.

ifremeria nautilei from south su had the highest abundance of private haplotypes and private alleles. under a scenario of colonization with subsequent migration, this pattern could suggest that south su might serve as a source population that contributes individuals to other sites sampled in manus basin. this directional gene flow is consistent with the path of the st. george's undercurrent, which enters manus basin from the southeast and travels northwest, encountering south su first, then solwara  <dig> and solwara  <dig>  before merging with the vitiaz straight undercurrent to form the new guinea coastal undercurrent  <cit> . this hypothesis could be tested with development of additional genetic markers that provide more detailed genealogical information than the microsatellite markers used in this study and by sampling and analysis of individuals from sites further west that are known to support ifremeria nautilei. rapid population expansion, as suggested by fu's fs and the star-like mitochondrial genealogies, could account for the emergence of private haplotypes and alleles at each sampled site within manus basin. alternatively, the negative fu's fs values could be a result of a selective sweep on the mitochondrial genome. additional sequenced-based nuclear markers would be needed to rule out this possibility.

basin-scale population structure
individuals of ifremeria nautilei sampled from across the known range of the species in the south western pacific could be subdivided genetically into two populations, one restricted to manus basin and one distributed throughout north fiji and lau basins. under an isolation-by-distance scenario, genetic differentiation is expected to gradually increase with distance  <cit> , but distance alone does not appear to create a significant barrier to gene flow. north fiji and lau basin samples, separated by ~ <dig> kilometres, were undifferentiated. coalescent estimates of gene flow suggest that genetic isolation of i. nautilei populations between manus basin and north fiji/lau basins may have existed, with occasional migration, for several hundred thousand generations , but without an understanding of mutation rates and average generation times in these snails, it is impossible to place these estimates in a geological time frame.

the phylogeographic break between populations from manus and north fiji/lau ifremeria nautilei is striking, considering the high degree of mixing within each population. phylogeographic breaks are often associated with oceanographic features  that form effective dispersal barriers for a wide range of taxa . a related provannid snail complex, alviniconcha spp., occurs throughout southwestern pacific basins  <cit>  and is comprised of several cryptic species  <cit> . the observed phylogeographic isolation of i. nautilei populations thus does not reflect a pattern that is shared by other southwestern pacific vent taxa.

the phylogeographic break between manus and north fiji/lau populations of ifremeria nautilei is not likely the result of a colonization event. colonization would result in a founder effect, where the founded population contains a subset of alleles from the source population  <cit> . the single mitochondrial haplotype shared between the manus and north fiji/lau populations is intermediate between dominant haplotypes from the two populations and may be a product of incomplete lineage sorting between formerly connected populations  <cit> . haplotype group  <dig>  is more closely related to haplotype group  <dig>  and it consists of as many missing haplotypes as it does actual haplotypes. this abundance of missing haplotypes, relative to other haplotype groups, could be the result of inadequate sampling, or it may suggest that disproportionately more haplotypes in that lineage have gone extinct. our interpretation is that the two populations once existed as a single population spanning manus, north fiji, and lau basins and that this population became isolated through a vicariant process that remains to be determined. the presence of potential second-generation immigrants in each population suggests that isolation might not be complete between the two regions..

while ifremeria nautilei occurs throughout manus, north fiji, and lau basins, populations of i. nautilei follow the trend of greater endemism and limited connectivity hypothesized for species endemic to back-arc basin spreading centres  <cit> . in this context, it is not surprising that a population of i. nautilei is distributed through north fiji and lau basin, as these two basins share genera and species  <cit> . water masses tend to be retained within lau basin, with some movement of northwestward flowing undercurrents from lau into north fiji basin . this undercurrent movement is consistent with the weak signal of directional gene flow from lau into north fiji basin . likewise, the barrier to dispersal between north fiji and manus basin that limits gene flow between i. nautilei populations is consistent with a barrier that was hypothesized to restrict species dispersal between these two basins  <cit> . the barrier could be caused by geomorphological obstacles , the lack of depth overlap between sites in manus basin and sites in north fiji and lau basin, or by a yet to be determined oceanographic feature.

CONCLUSIONS
theoretical and experimental studies suggest that spatially and temporally unstable environments favor broad dispersal capabilities  <cit> , which in turn should lead to shallow or absent population subdivisions. in dynamic systems such as hydrothermal vents, where habitat availability is unpredictable, survival depends on long-distance dispersal of propagules. no significant genetic differentiation was found among samples of western pacific ifremeria nautilei at the patch, mound, or site levels within the manus basin. no differentiation was observed between samples of i. nautilei collected from north fiji and lau basins, which are separated by ~ <dig> kilometres. the manus basin population of i. nautilei is isolated from that of the north fiji and lau basins by an unknown process that limits contemporary gene flow.

reproductive mode and larval type are often poor predictors of population structure in marine environments  <cit> . species with broad dispersal potential have been reported with high levels of differentiation at spatial scales of a few kilometres or less  <cit> , while species that would otherwise be expected to show fine-scale population structure have been reported to show surprisingly high levels of connectivity throughout their geographic range  <cit> . the absence of ifremeria nautilei population structure at all but the broadest spatial scales is consistent with long-distance dispersal and the barrier to gene flow between the north fiji and lau basin population and the manus basin population is likely extrinsic and not related to life history characteristics.

fine-scale spatial sampling and genetic analysis such as that used in this study can inform mitigation and best-management practices for mineral extraction at deep-sea hydrothermal vents. the solwara  <dig> site is targeted for deep-sea mineral extraction  <cit> . a robust understanding of population genetic structure at multiple spatial scales can define natural conservation units that can be used to minimize loss of genetic diversity within and among populations of vent-restricted species  <cit> . for ifremeria nautilei, high rates of gene flow among the sampled manus basin sites suggests that the solwara  <dig> vents are likely to be repopulated from other manus basin localities, including south su and solwara  <dig>  monitoring of species recovery and genetic diversity as the solwara  <dig> population recovers after extraction operations cease should add insight into the rates at which novel haplotypes and alleles accumulate in this species, providing a means to estimate the ages and sizes of extant populations. the manus basin population of i. nautilei comprises a genetically distinct unit that should be managed separately from the north fiji/lau population.

