BACKGROUND
brain activities supporting human social interactions have recently become an important topic of scientific inquiry  <cit> . considerable research indicates that synchronized neuronal activity in perception and action  <cit>  and oscillatory couplings between cortical and muscle activities during voluntary movement  <cit>  are among the mechanisms supporting brain-body-world interactions  <cit> . a substantial part of these interactions consists in synchronized goal-directed actions involving two or more individuals  <cit> . in everyday life, people often need to coordinate their actions with that of others. some common examples are walking with someone at a set pace, playing collective sports or fighting  <cit> , dancing  <cit> , playing music in a duet or group  <cit> , and a wide range of social bonding behaviors .

little, if anything, is known about brain mechanisms implementing interpersonally coordinated behavior. these mechanisms most likely will have to meet two constraints:  they need to be sufficiently fast to permit fluidity in interpersonal action coordination;  they need to integrate and regulate sensory, motor, and brain activity to generate and sustain action coordination between two or more persons. synchronous oscillatory brain activities appear to meet both criteria. first, brain oscillations bind spatially distributed but functionally related information at the level of individual neurons, cell assemblies, and cortical areas  <cit> . onset times and frequency ranges of coherent or synchronized oscillations are sufficiently fast  <cit>  to permit, in principle, the speed and precision of information exchange required by interpersonal action coordination. second, coherent oscillations support both perception  <cit>  and motor performance  <cit> . specifically, coherence between neuronal activities measured by magnetoencephalography  or electroencephalography  and muscle activity measured by electromyography  has been observed during voluntary movement control  <cit> . thus, coherent oscillations between brains may support interpersonally coordinated behavior through reciprocal sensory and motor feedbacks. in two interacting individuals adjusting their activity patterns through reciprocal sensory and motor pathways, synchronous brain activity can arise through temporally adjusted activity modulation  <cit>  and does not need a substrate in form of connected neurons. such interbrain synchronization could represent and also support interpersonal action coordination and social interaction.

recently, applying high-resolution spectral analysis to electrical brain activity of two persons measured simultaneously during visually mediated social interaction  <cit> , it was found that power increase of the phi <dig> rhythm was associated with independent behavior, whereas power increase of the phi <dig> rhythm was related to coordinated behavior. a possible mechanism is that phi <dig> expresses the inhibition of the human mirror neuron system and phi <dig> its enhancement. both of these oscillatory components reflect asymmetric spectral power between the interhemispheric pairs of electrodes in rows  <dig> and  <dig> of the 10%-montage. these two rhythms are in the frequency range between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hz and were located above the right centro-parietal cortex. at the same time, the authors observed a depression in occipital alpha and mu rhythms during social interaction regardless of whether the behavior was coordinated or not. however, the authors did not directly examine the role of interbrain synchronization in coordinated action.

in the current study, we investigated whether the phase synchronization of brain oscillations within and between the brains is enhanced in pairs of guitarists during the preparatory period of metronome tempo setting and while playing a melody together. synchronization at frontal and central electrode sites may indicate coordinated firing of neuronal assemblies located in the motor and somatosensory cortices, which control and coordinate motor activity and are activated during music production  <cit> . furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that neural activity in medial prefrontal cortex is selectively enhanced during theory of mind tasks and the sensory representation of others  <cit> . in accordance with these findings, we expected that action-related within-brain synchronization and between-brain coherence would be most pronounced over fronto-central sites. activation and synchronization at temporal and medial parietal brain regions were expected as well because these regions have been shown to be involved in music production  <cit>  and coordinated behavior  <cit> . based on findings in the literature that are related to coordinated behavior, we decided to restrict our analyses to frequency bands below  <dig> hz. oscillatory components in the alpha frequency range between  <dig>  and  <dig> hz have been found during visually mediated social coordination  <cit> . moreover, changes in the p <dig> erp component, which probably reflect low-frequency oscillations , have been observed in the context of interpersonally shared task representations  <cit> . in addition, low-frequency oscillations are involved in limb and hand movements  <cit> , and in sensorimotor integration  <cit> . in sum, the frequency range up to  <dig> hz seemes to be involved in interpersonal coordination and sensorimotor interaction, which are both important for interpersonal action coordination.

RESULTS
by simultaneously recording the eeg of two people, we measured brain electrophysiological activities from eight pairs of guitarists while playing a short melody together over about  <dig> trials . the melody the guitarists played was taken from the first six measures of a modern jazz-fusion piece, "fusion # <dig> " composed by alexander buck . the piece has the time signature of four quarter notes per measure, and was played in e minor. at the beginning of each trial, at least four metronome beats were played through a loudspeaker to both guitarists of each pair. the metronome frequencies, which were chosen by the different pairs of guitarists, ranged from  <dig>  hz to  <dig> hz . thereafter, the lead guitarist  gave a sign to start, and then the duo started to play the melody together in unison. synchronous brain activities within and between brains were investigated and analyzed by the phase locking index  and interbrain phase coherence , respectively. pli reflects invariance of phases across trials measured from single electrodes within a brain in the time-frequency domain. ipc represents the degree of constancy in phase differences across trials between two electrodes measured from two brains simultaneously . we analyzed 3s-sequences  that were time locked either  to the second metronome beat or  to the start of guitar playing by guitarist a . using complex gabor transformations, we calculated pli and ipc for frequencies up to  <dig> hz with a frequency resolution of  <dig>  hz. with respect to within-brain analyses, pli values were firstly computed for  <dig> electrodes. results from six the fronto-central electrodes  were averaged in the time-frequency domain and are reported below. with respect to analyses of interbrain coherence , ipc values were first computed from all possible pairwise connections  across the  <dig> electrodes selected for within-brain analyses. the same six fronto-central electrode pairs used for within-brain analyses were averaged in the time-frequency domain and reported below. across all frequency bins, the statistical significance of observed pli and ipc values was estimated relative to baselines that were defined to be  within the  <dig> ms window elapsing between two metronome beats, or  within the  <dig> ms window preceding playing onset, respectively. mean pli or ipc values three standard deviations above baseline were considered as statistically significant . values below this level are not presented in the time-frequency diagrams. table  <dig> reports averages of the maximum pli and ipc values for the  <dig> electrodes averaged across the  <dig> pairs of guitarists. in addition, maximum pli and ipc values for each of the  <dig> electrodes and for each pair of guitarists are presented as radar plots in additional file  <dig> .

pli = phase locking index; ipc = interbrain phase coherence; a = guitarist a; b = guitarist b; ab = cz electrode of guitarist a to the other electrode of guitarist b; ba = cz electrode of guitarist b to the other electrode of guitarist a; m = mean; sd = standard deviation.

synchronization during the preparatory period
synchronization within the brains as measured by pli during the preparatory period of metronome tempo setting was highest at fronto-central sites . averaged pli values from the six fronto-central electrodes  were calculated in the time-frequency domain for each frequency bin and time lag. based on the averaged pli, synchronization within the brains was particularly high in the frequency range between  <dig> and  <dig> hz with the maximum in the theta frequency band . this effect was strictly related to the onset of the metronome beats  and was found practically in all participants . as for synchronization between brains as measured by ipc, coherence was also strongest for fronto-central connections . averaged ipc values from the cz electrode of guitarist a to the six fronto-central electrodes  of guitarist b and vice visa were thus calculated. based on the averaged ipc, between-brain synchronization was most clearly observable in the frequency range between  <dig> and  <dig> hz, with the maximum being around  <dig> hz . interbrain phase coherence tended to be stronger in the pairs of guitarists who also showed high synchronization within brains .

synchronization after play onset
synchronization within the brains during the time window of play onset was also highest over fronto-central sites  but at a lower frequency range, that is, between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hz with a maximum around  <dig>  hz . synchronization between brains in this case again primarily involved fronto-central connections  and was also strongest in the frequency range between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hz with a maximum around  <dig>  hz . interestingly, synchronization  was strongly related not only to play onset but also to the leading guitarist's starting gesture immediately prior to play onset, and to the onset of the starting note while playing . here, interbrain synchronization was again higher in pairs who showed higher synchronization within brains .

to examine synchronization during the playing of the entire piece, we analyzed three further 3s-sequences that were time-locked to the start of guitarist's a onset of play. significance levels were first determined for each of the four 3s-sequences and then averaged across these sequences . though synchronization both within and between the brains was considerably reduced relative to the first 2s after play onset, synchronization patterns in delta/theta frequency, especially in the time between the 5th and 8th seconds of the music piece, were found. these synchronization patterns were also related to the onset of the starting note while playing. interestingly, in the time window between the 8th and 11th seconds, that is, after the end of play, between-brain synchronization disappeared completely.

relation between synchronization and behavioral measures
to test whether synchronization patterns were related to behavioral measures, we determined absolute phases in single trials and sorted them according to the time difference  between the play onsets of the two guitarists recorded through microphones. we computed this relationship for the two frequency bins that included the synchronization maxima, as mentioned above. we note that these frequencies happened to be identical to the second and the third harmonic of the metronome frequency . for each of the two guitarists the results indicated a strong phase alignment that closely followed behavioral onset asynchrony .

discussion
synchronized brain activities within one brain have been observed before in relation to various tasks including music perception  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, however, interbrain synchronization in general as well as within-brain synchronization during music production in particular has not been reported before. synchronized theta  oscillations both within and between the brains were most pronounced when the musicians listened to the metronome to set their tempo and when they started playing a short melody together. recently, increased brainwave synchronization at delta frequency measured by itc  was found as a response to periodic stimulation with slow repetition rates of 1– <dig> hz  <cit> . accumulating evidence indicates that behavior-dependent neuronal oscillations in the mammalian cortical network can be observed across a wide frequency range from approximately  <dig>  to  <dig> hz. network oscillations may functionally bias stimulus selection, form transient binding of neuronal assemblies, and facilitate synaptic plasticity  <cit> . oscillations in the theta frequency range are prominent in the human and animal eeg, with possible functional roles covering a wide spectrum of behaviors, ranging from orienting reflexes to conditioning, arousal, attention, learning, and memory binding mechanisms  <cit> . other than perceptual and cognitive functions, it has been suggested that theta oscillations are also important for motor functions. for instance, vanderwolf's "voluntary movement" hypothesis  <cit>  suggests that theta rhythms support intentional movement. the findings of synchronized brain activities at the theta frequency both within and between brains lend support to this hypothesis, and extend it to interpersonally coordinated voluntary movements.

beyond coordinating voluntary movements among adults, interbrain oscillatory couplings as observed here may also serve important functions in early social development  and for 'theory of mind' capabilities   <cit> . given the relatively low spatial resolution of eeg, we can only speculate about the neuronal circuitry contributing to within-brain and interbrain synchronization during music production. increased synchronization at frontal and central electrode sites may indicate coordinated firing of neuronal assemblies located in motor and somatosensory cortex, which control and coordinate motor activity. furthermore, we conjecture that neural networks supporting social cognition, in general, and theory of mind abilities, in particular, might also support interbrain couplings during interpersonally coordinated voluntary actions. neural activity in medial prefrontal cortex is selectively enhanced during theory of mind tasks  <cit> . specifically, these increments may reflect synchronization of cell assemblies representing  the coordinated behavior between oneself and others  <cit> . to further explore the social and developmental functions of interbrain coherence, future studies require measures and methods with higher spatial resolution and experimental designs that specifically aim at social perspective taking.

as predicted, frontal and central regions showed the strongest synchronization patterns within and between the brains. at the same time, as shown in table  <dig> and in figure s <dig>  temporal and parietal regions also showed relatively high synchronization in at least half of the guitarist pairs . thus, activities in the temporal and parietal regions might also be involved in the processes supporting interpersonal action coordination and music production. there is evidence to suggest that these regions could be activated during music perception and also during music production  <cit>  as well as through pleasant feelings induced by the music  <cit> .

another question arising here is to what extent interbrain synchronization observed during preparatory metronome tempo setting and coordinated play onset reflects 'genuine' inter-person interactions. synchronizations were observed at low eeg frequencies, suggesting contributions from stimulus- and movement-related processes. during metronome tempo setting, both guitarists heard the same stimuli, that is, they shared the same sensory inputs. therefore, it may not come as a surprise that they showed similar patterns of within-brain phase locking. while this "passive", stimulus-induced mechanism may have contributed to interbrain phase coherence during preparatory metronome tempo setting and coordinated play onset, we doubt whether it can fully explain the observed patterns of interbrain synchronization. as is to be seen in figure s <dig>  all pairs of guitarists showed strong within-brain synchronization practically to each metronome tap, but the extent of interbrain synchronization was considerably reduced and not always present, and also depended on the frequency in which the guitarists synchronized their brain potentials. the same observation holds for the coordinated play onset presented in figures  <dig> and s <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  synchronization both within and between the brains was strongest in the time period directly after play onset and was reduced thereafter, in other words, it followed an intrinsic dynamic, that was apparently related to the dynamic or structure of the musical piece itself . in addition, this synchronization was strongly related to behavioral measures of play onset asynchrony, as shown in figures  <dig> and s <dig>  here, phase alignment in the two frequencies, which showed synchronization maxima, strongly followed the time onset differences between the two guitarists. based on this evidence, we contend that the observed degree of between-brain synchronization cannot be reduced to processing similarities induced by attending to identical external stimuli, but also reflects the outcome of dynamic behavioral interactions between the two guitarists.

identifying the brain mechanisms supporting interpersonal action coordination is exceedingly difficult. if two or more subjects share the same sensory inputs and produce similar motor outputs, interbrain synchronizations might arise because of similar neural responses to the shared sensory inputs and motor outputs, without necessarily reflecting neural processes of social interaction. to some extent, this quandary cannot be overcome because interbrain synchronization as a mechanism for interpersonal action coordination crucially depends on the presence of shared percepts, including the perception of the other person's actions , or the perception of the product of these actions .

the present experiment has limitations and leaves room for questions to be addressed in future research. first, the sample size of our study was small. however, the main patterns of within- and between-brain synchronization replicated across all of the eight pairs of guitarists we investigated. second, the synchronization measures used in this study referred to synchronization across trials. in future analyses, single-trial algorithms should be considered as well, as they allow investigating direct relations between synchronization indexes and performance parameters of interpersonal coordination. third, the synchronization measures used in this study reflect only one aspect of phase synchronization, namely, 1: <dig> synchronization, or synchronization at a given frequency. relative  synchronization as well as nonlinear  synchronization  <cit>  may also be important for interbrain dynamics and should be investigated in the future. fourth, we did not analyze the directionality of interbrain synchronization processes using asymmetric synchronization measures  <cit> . in conjunction with high-density behavioral assessments, such measures will shed further light on behavioral and neuronal mechanisms of interpersonal action coordination.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that data acquisition and analysis methods for simultaneous eeg recordings from multiple persons are important for discovering interbrain oscillatory couplings during interpersonal interactions. the results of the study show that interpersonally coordinated actions are preceded and accompanied by between-brain oscillatory couplings. synchronization patterns during guitar playing assessed in terms of phase alignment after play onset were also related to behavioral play onset asynchrony . thus, patterns of interbrain synchronization reflect the temporal dynamics of interpersonal coordination. however, the present findings do not provide a firm answer to the question whether interbrain synchronization is causally linked to mechanisms of interpersonal action coordination, or whether it merely reflects the similarities in the percepts and movements of the interaction partners. future research needs to examine more closely whether between-brain oscillatory couplings play a causal role in initiating and maintaining interpersonal action coordination.

