BACKGROUND
our understanding of biology has been greatly improved by studying genome structure and gene function of a broad sampling of model organisms such as mus musculus , drosophila melanogaster , danio rerio , caenorhabditis elegans , and arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . comparative genomics has made it clear that orthologs of many proteins that act as signal transduction components, transcriptional regulatory factors, and metabolic enzymes can be identified between and among these model organisms  <cit> . as a result, the knowledge gained from comparative and evolutionary studies of these species can provide insights into homologous processes in a wide range of other organisms, varying from crop plants to humans  <cit> . within plants however, most of the efforts in genomics have been focused on crop plants or economically important plants such as oryza sativa , zea mays , and lycopersicon esculentum   <cit> . thus, coupled with the sequencing of the a. thaliana genome, these efforts have provided data on only a single branch of the plant evolutionary tree, namely members of the monocotyledonae and dicotyledonae, collectively termed the angiosperms and commonly known as flowering plants. as a result, the community of plant scientists has little sequence data on other plant lineages that could provide insights into common mechanisms of how plants develop and survive in a terrestrial environment, nor do they have any kind of evolutionary benchmarks that might reveal how angiosperms have come to dominate most world ecosystems  <cit> .

clear evidence for the existence of angiosperms is present in the fossil record of the lower cretaceous , and some evidence suggests their existence  <dig> million years earlier, around the same time that conifers and ginkgos arose  <cit> . in contrast, fossil evidence for the lycophytes is found in strata dated to approximately  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . thus, this clade diverged very early from the lineage that led to all other vascular plants , and has existed on earth over twice as long as plants that are the most common subjects of current laboratory and agricultural research. as such, the study of lycophytes may provide novel insights into plant biology that would not be provided by research that focuses only on flowering plants.

selaginella is an extant genus of the lycophyte clade. it is sometimes referred to as a 'seed-free' plant to highlight the fact that it has not evolved flowers and seeds in the time since its divergence from other plant lineages. it has a number of characteristics that would make its study convenient for, and valuable to, the plant biology community  <cit> . for example, like many other species of selaginella, s. moellendorffii  is a small diploid plant that can be easily grown in the laboratory. further, it has an approximate genome size of  <dig> mbp  <cit> , smaller than that of a. thaliana, and among the smallest published genome sizes for 'seed-free' genera. because of these attributes, s. moellendorffii was recently chosen as one of the non-crop plants for bac library construction in a nsf funded green plant bac library project  <cit> . more importantly, the department of energy joint genome institute  has officially announced that it will sequence the s. moellendorffii genome  <cit> , making this species a target of extreme interest for research into comparative plant genomics, biochemistry, and development.

expressed sequence tag  sequencing has been used as an efficient and economical approach for large-scale gene discovery  <cit> . it has also successfully provided frameworks for many genome projects  <cit> . recently, a large number of ests have been generated from various plant species and deposited in genbank, including both model and crop plants like a. thaliana, rice, wheat, and maize as well as species representative of clades other than angiosperms, such as gymnosperms, cycads, and mosses  <cit> . although over  <dig> ests from another selaginella species s. lepidophylla, also known as the resurrection plant, have also been deposited in genbank  <cit> , no manuscript has been published reporting on their analysis. in this paper, we describe  <dig> ests generated from a s. moellendorffii cdna library. these ests were assembled into  <dig> clusters, annotated using the blastx algorithm, surveyed for their abundance within the dataset, and classified into functional groups according to the gene ontology  hierarchy. finally, a comparative genomics approach was used for comparing s. moellendorffii ests with those of a. thaliana and physcomitrella patens to look for genes unique to s. moellendorffii.

RESULTS
generation of s. moellendorffii cdna library and ests
to gain a broad coverage of s. moellendorffii transcripts, we collected and pooled whole s. moellendorffii plants for mrna extraction and subsequent cdna library construction. to enrich for full-length cdna clones, double-stranded cdna was size-fractionated before cloning. based upon the average insert sizes of  <dig> cdna clones chosen at random from the library, we estimate that the cdna library has an average insert size of  <dig> bp.  <dig> clones were sequenced from the 5' end of the cdnas, which generated  <dig> vector-trimmed est sequences with an average sequencing read length of  <dig> bp.

assembly of s. moellendorffii ests
to identify overlapping est sequences, reduce sequencing error and produce non-redundant est data for further functional annotation and comparative analysis,  <dig> ests were assembled into clusters through stackpack v <dig>  clustering system  <cit> . based upon regions of nucleotide identity, est sequences were merged into contiguous consensus sequences . one thousand three hundred and one non-redundant est clusters, putatively regarded as unigenes, were generated, consisting of  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons. the cluster size varied from one to  <dig> copies of any given est . manual inspection of the assembled ests identified  <dig> clusters counted as unigenes that may actually represent non-overlapping sequence reads from cdnas corresponding to four single genes. as an example, three unigenes were found to be best aligned to three different regions of the same protein in a blastx analysis , suggesting we lack a complete transcript for their accurate assembly. conversely, we also found that some clustered ests did not necessarily have identical sequences within their overlapping regions. in most of the cases, regions of sequence disagreement within the clusters tend to appear towards the ends of the est reads, which is likely to be caused by errors generated during sequencing. in some other cases, it may due to failure to discriminate between gene family members during clustering, or allelic diversity in s. moellendorffii.

annotation of s. moellendorffii ests
to annotate s. moellendorffii ests, the  <dig> putative unigenes were translated dynamically in all  <dig> reading frames and searched for homology against the ncbi non-redundant  protein database using blastx  <cit> . blastx hits with e-values less than 10- <dig> were taken to be significant. among  <dig> unigenes,  <dig>  had blastx hits in the nr database, while the remaining  <dig>  had hits with e-values greater than 10- <dig> or no hit. when a less permissive cutoff e-value of 10- <dig> was adopted, the numbers of unigenes with blastx hits and without blastx hits changed slightly to  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. our dataset showed that the inferred translation products of most s. moellendorffii ests appear to be similar to proteins in other organisms but that there was also a percentage of ests that represented potential selaginella- or lycophyte-specific genes. interestingly,  <dig> ests had at least their top five blastx hits from non-plant organisms, including six from bacteria or cyanobacteria , two from fungi , one from an insect , three from nematodes , one from fish , and two from mammals . these data suggest that homologs have either not yet been identified or are absent from other plant lineages, although in one case , a more distantly related a. thaliana gene was returned by blastx, and in a further three cases, blastn analysis of the est-others database identified potential homologs in p. patens  and s. lepidophylla .

highly represented s. moellendorffii ests
est copy number can be used to approximate gene expression levels in an organism, although there are artifacts of cdna library construction that may limit or over-represent certain transcripts  <cit> . table  <dig> summarizes the first  <dig> most abundantly represented transcripts in the s. moellendorffii est collection, having six or more est copies in each cluster, with their identities putatively assigned by blastx analysis of the assembled contigs. as expected, a large number of the s. moellendorffii ests are photosynthesis-related genes, with  <dig> clusters containing  <dig> ests  corresponding to genes involved in photosynthesis. there were seven clusters matching to core proteins of photosynthesis reaction centers, including four subunits of photosystem i , and three photosystem ii proteins . there were four contigs corresponding to light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins, including one early light-induced protein. we also found ests for the rubisco small subunit, carbonic anhydrase, plastocyanin, one subunit of cytochrome b6f complex, ferredoxin and ferredoxin/nadp oxidoreductase, proteins involved in carbon fixation and photosynthetic electron transport. there were two putative anti-oxidative proteins found within s. moellendorffii ests: chloroplastic iron superoxide dismutase and catalase, presumably required for the decomposition of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . the blastx results show that all of these highly expressed s. moellendorffii photosynthetic genes had homologs in a. thaliana genome, consistent with previous observation that the photosynthesis machinery has been highly conserved throughout plant evolution.

non-redundant protein database includes all non-redundant genbank cds translations + refseq proteins  +pdb + swissprot  + pir + prf. the identities of ests were putatively described by the top blastx hit  of the assembled est contigs.

three highly expressed s. moellendorffii transcripts corresponded to genes encoding enzymes of metabolism, including an aldolase-like protein, a putative glutamine synthetase cytosolic isoenzyme involved in nitrogen assimilation  <cit> , and a putative s-adenosylmethionine synthetase required for the synthesis of the major methyl group donor involved in the methylation of a variety of biomolecules ranging from histones to secondary metabolites, and for the biosynthesis of ethylene  <cit> .

other relatively abundant ests included one encoding a putative subtilisin-chymotrypsin inhibitor, exhibiting 49% amino acid sequence identity with the wheat subtilisin-chymotrypsin inhibitor, which may play a role in plant defense by inhibiting the serine proteinases of pathogens  <cit> . two transcripts that matched an a. thaliana expressed protein and pisum sativum core protein may function as membrane channel proteins. interestingly, one highly expressed est matched with an e-value of 10- <dig> a c. elegans protein of unknown function, and is only more distantly related to an a. thaliana late embryogenesis abundant protein.

there were five highly expressed ests that did not yield significant matches using blastx . these are putative selaginella-specific genes and may encode proteins with functions unique to selaginella or lycophytes. the first two highly expressed ests in this project, represented by clusters smoc1_cn <dig> and smoc1_cn <dig>  had  <dig> and  <dig> copies in their clusters respectively, but returned no blastx hits with the nr protein database or blastn hits with the ncbi est-others database. to determine whether these sequences represented bona fide selaginella genes, we amplified the corresponding sequences by pcr using genomic dna as a template . both sequences amplified successfully, and both had introns, indicating that they were not derived from dna contamination from prokaryotic symbionts. the rational translation of smoc1_cn <dig> contig contains a three repeats of the motif "xxxgxxtcdkcaqtgvctcgkn", which aligns with similar cysteine-rich motifs in proteins with epidermal growth factor repeats. using a low blastx stringency , smoc1_cn <dig> matched to a cynodon dactylon metallothionein-like protein . the other three highly expressed s. moellendorffii specific ests lack hints for functional annotation. the biological function of the proteins encoded by these genes, and the question of whether high transcript abundance is predictive of high protein expression will be a matter for future investigation.

functional categorization of s. moellendorffii ests
the most sensitive method to find new members of known gene families among est sequences is to search for homology of the translated ests to motifs extracted from a multiple alignment of known gene family members  <cit> . to functionally categorize s. moellendorffii ests using motif homology searches, we translated the  <dig> unigenes in six reading frames and imported them into interproscan  <cit> , which aligned  <dig> clusters to interpro entries . mapping of interpro entries to go  <cit> , assigned  <dig> out of  <dig> interpro hits with  <dig> go accession numbers. the  <dig> accession numbers further generated  <dig> individual go mappings in the three major ontologies   <cit> . the apparent discrepancies between these values arises from the fact that not all interpro hits had available go accession numbers associated with them, one interproscan entry could be assigned to more than one go accession numbers, and one go accession number could be mapped under multiple parental categories  <cit> .

tables  <dig> and figure  <dig> summarize the go assignment of s. moellendorffii ests in terms of biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components, covering a broad range of the go functional categories. using the downloaded a. thaliana go assignments from the tigr a. thaliana gene index  <cit> , we compared the distribution of go categories between s. moellendorffii ests and a. thaliana tentative consensus sequences . table  <dig> shows that the distribution patterns of go assignments of s. moellendorffii and a. thaliana transcripts were generally similar, with a few exceptions in some categories. besides the true differences in functional distribution of unigenes, some of the differences could be due to the difference in est data sources between these two species. for example, in terms of biological processes, a. thaliana has a higher percentage in 'response to stimulus and stress' and 'development' than s. moellendorffii. considering that among the a. thaliana ests in the tigr database, some were generated from plants at specific developmental stages or from plants exposed to specific biotic or abiotic stimuli, it is very likely that ests from orthologs of these genes would be missing from the s. moellendorffii ests which were generated from normal mature plants.

note that one gene product may be assigned to more than one go terms, and one children term can fit into multiple parental categories. the representation means the number of non-redundant ests that can be mapped to a certain go term. the representation percentage is based on the total number of go mappings in each of the three major ontologies .

the go assignments for a. thaliana ests were obtained from tigr  <cit> . the percentage of go assignments for a. thaliana was calculated based on the total numbers of go mappings in each of the three major ontologies with the number of unknown terms deducted from them . the functional categories present in a. thaliana but not in s. moellendorffii were not listed in the table.

the current go annotations for plants are based solely on the annotated proteins of a. thaliana and o. sativa, both of which are angiosperms. since the lycophyte clade diverged from other plant lineages  <dig> million years ago, and  <dig> million years before angiosperms, it is perhaps to be expected that a large proportion of s. moellendorffii genes could not be accurately assigned to go categories in the database containing only angiosperm gene entries. we expect that the representation of plant species other than angiosperms will certainly benefit resources as interpro and in turn will lead to further resolution within go.

comparative genomics of s. moellendorffii ests
one important objective of comparative genomics is to trace gene evolution including the emergence, development, and loss of orthologous genes in different organisms over evolutionary time  <cit> . to survey the s. moellendorffii ests in an evolutionary context, we used the s. moellendorffii unigene sequences as queries to search for homologous sequences in the a. thaliana and p. patens est databases using tblastx algorithm . there were two reasons that we chose a. thaliana and p. patens ests as tblastx databases. first, a. thaliana and p. patens are representatives of the most diverged lineages of land plants, namely angiosperms and bryophytes. they flank selaginella in the plant phylogenetic tree, and last shared a common ancestor over  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , thus providing ample opportunity for the evolutionary divergence of individual genes and gene families. second, the large quantities of a. thaliana and p. patens ests in genbank  provide a substantial coverage of the transcriptome in these two species. using them as blast databases makes it possible to do a relatively comprehensive genomic analysis even in the absence of the full genome sequence of p. patens.

CONCLUSIONS
we sequenced  <dig> ests from the lycophyte s. moellendorffii, putatively representing  <dig> unigenes. our data showed that a large proportion of the genes had homologous genes in the well-studied model plant a. thaliana and other plant species. by browsing the putative functional annotations of these ests, researchers will be able to choose s. moellendorffii genes of interest and compare them to their othologs in other species. we also found a substantial number of putative selaginella-specific genes that do not share similarity with known genes, with some of them even representing very highly expressed genes. considering the complexity of the plant kingdom and a time span more than  <dig> million years between the divergences of lycophytes and angiosperms, it will not be surprising to identify gene functions in s. moellendorffii that are not present in a. thaliana. when the draft genome sequence of s. moellendorffii is completed and released, this est resource will also play an important role in the mapping and annotation of the genome. as a member of a clade that arose after the bryophytes and before all other vascular plants, s. moellendorffii will provide new opportunities in studying plant evolution, particularly those adaptations relating to fundamental traits that facilitated the transition of green plants to the land, such as lignification in vascular plants, root/stem/leaf organography, complex patterns of sporophyte branching, and the elaboration of reproductive structures.

