BACKGROUND
about  <dig> million years ago, green algae belonging to the class charophyceae emerged from their aquatic habitat to colonize the land  <cit> . this important event in the history of life gave rise to all the land plant species that make up the flora of our planet. the few thousand species of charophycean green algae that are alive today exhibit great variability in cellular organization and reproduction  <cit> . with the land plants, they form the green plant lineage streptophyta  <cit> , whereas all other green algae , with perhaps the exception of mesostigma viride, belong to the sister lineage chlorophyta  <cit> . five monophyletic groups of charophycean green algae have been recognized: the chlorokybales, klebsormidiales, zygnematales, coleochaetales and charales  <cit> , given here in order of increasing cellular complexity. mesostigma may represent an additional lineage of the charophyceae, the mesostigmatales, as indicated by phylogenetic studies that placed this unicellular green alga at the base of the streptophyta  <cit> . this lineage, however, remains controversial, considering that separate analyses based on a large number of chloroplast- or mitochondrial-encoded proteins  <cit>  and on the chloroplast small and large subunit rrna genes  <cit>  identified mesostigma before the divergence of the chlorophyta and streptophyta.

on the basis of morphological characters alone, the two charophycean groups that exhibit the greatest cellular complexity, i.e. the charales and coleochaetales, have been proposed to be the closest relatives of land plants  <cit> . recent analyses of the combined sequences of four genes from the nucleus , chloroplast  and mitochondria  of  <dig> charophycean green algae and eight green plants revealed that the charales and land plants form a highly supported clade; however, moderate bootstrap support was observed for the positions of the other charophycean groups  <cit> . the best trees inferred by bayesian and maximum likelihood methods in this four-gene analysis support an evolutionary trend toward increasing cellular complexity  <cit> . in contrast, all phylogenies of charophycean green algae previously inferred from a smaller number of genes failed to provide any conclusive results concerning the branching order of the charophycean green algae and their relationships with land plants  <cit> .

we have recently undertaken the sequencing of complete chloroplast genomes from representatives of the various charophycean lineages in order to elucidate the branching order of these lineages and also to understand the evolution of chloroplast dna  within the streptophyta. we have reported thus far the cpdna sequences of mesostigma   <cit>  and chaetosphaeridium globosum   <cit> . comparative analyses of the mesostigma cpdna sequence  with its land plant counterparts  revealed that the chloroplast genome underwent substantial changes in its architecture during the evolution of streptophytes . at the levels of gene content , intron composition  and gene order, chaetosphaeridium cpdna is remarkably similar to land plant cpdnas, implying that most of the features characteristic of land plant lineages were acquired from charophycean green algae. like the cpdnas of many chlorophytes, those of mesostigma, chaetosphaeridium and most land plant species exhibit a quadripartite structure that is characterized by the presence of two copies of a rdna-containing inverted repeat  separated by large and small single-copy regions. all the genes they have in common, with a few exceptions, reside in corresponding genomic regions.

in this study, we report the complete cpdna sequences of two members of the zygnematales that belong to distinct lineages, staurastrum punctulatum and zygnema circumcarinatum. although the chloroplast genomes of these charophycean green algae closely resemble their chaetosphaeridium and bryophyte counterparts at the primary sequence and gene content levels, they feature substantial differences at the levels of structure, gene order and intron content. like the cpdna of the zygnematalean alga spirogyra maxima  <cit> , both staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas lack a large ir. clearly, loss of the ir appears to be a major event that shaped the architecture of the chloroplast genome in the zygnematales, an event that apparently occurred early during the evolution of this group of charophycean green algae.

RESULTS
selection of taxa
the zygnematales as circumscribed by bold and wynne  <cit>  comprise the green algae whose mode of sexual reproduction is conjugation. this is the most important charophycean lineage in terms of diversity and number of species   <cit> . classification schemes based on cell wall organization have recognized two groups of conjugating green algae: first, the unicellular or multicellular green algae with an ornamented and segmented cell wall, also called placoderm desmids and often treated as members of the order desmidiales, and second, the green algae that bear a smooth cell wall, which are often classified separately in the zygnematales  <cit> . among the latter group are found filamentous forms and the saccoderm desmids that consist either of unicells or loosely joined cells. phylogenies inferred using rbcl  <cit>  or the combined rbcl and nuclear small subunit rrna genes  <cit>  support the monophyly of placoderm desmids and place the filamentous and saccoderm desmids together in a distinct monophyletic group. for our study, we have selected a representative of each of these two monophyletic groups: staurastrum is a unicellular, placoderm desmid, whereas zygnema is a filamentous green alga with a non-ornamented cell wall.

general features
the  <dig> -bp staurastrum  and  <dig> -bp zygnema  cpdnas map as circular molecules containing  <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively . both genomes lack a rdna-containing ir and no remnant of such a sequence could be detected during our analysis of repeated elements. all genes are present in single copy, with the exception of the duplicated zygnema trne gene, the sequences of which differ at two positions. note that the matk gene was not included in the total number of genes calculated for zygnema cpdna, because this gene occurs as an intron orf in all other streptophytes where it has been identified. aside from the absence of the ir, the most prominent differences displayed by the two zygnematalean cpdnas relative to their counterparts in chaetosphaeridium  <cit>  and land plants  are their larger size  and their smaller number of cis-spliced group ii introns . the larger size of zygnematalean cpdnas is mainly explained by the expansion of intergenic spacers . the latter sequences represent 42% of the genome in both staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas compared to about 20% in chaetosphaeridium and land plant cpdnas. introns have also expanded in size in both zygnematalean cpdnas compared to their chaetosphaeridium and land plant homologues .

gene content
gene order
staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas differ substantially from one another and from their chaetosphaeridium and land plant counterparts at the level of gene organization . eighty-two genes in the two zygnematalean cpdnas form  <dig> blocks of colinear sequences, which are highly scrambled in order . a minimum of  <dig> inversions would be required to convert the gene order of staurastrum cpdna into that of zygnema cpdna .

of the two zygnematalean cpdnas, that showing the most similar gene arrangement with its chaetosphaeridium and land plant counterparts is staurastrum cpdna . in both staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas, the gene organization more closely resembles that of marchantia than that of chaetosphaeridium . staurastrum cpdna shares with its marchantia counterpart  <dig> blocks of colinear sequences that contain a total of  <dig> genes, whereas zygnema cpdna shares  <dig> blocks featuring  <dig> genes . close inspection of these blocks relative to those conserved between mesostigma and marchantia cpdnas  <cit>  reveals that  <dig> ancestral gene clusters, including those containing the rdna, atpa, psbb and rpob operons, were fragmented at  <dig> sites during the evolution of the zygnematales . eleven of these rearrangement breakpoints are common to the two green algal cpdnas, whereas  <dig> and  <dig> breakpoints are unique to staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas, respectively. assuming that these unique rearrangement breakpoints appeared after the divergence of the two zygnematalean species, we infer that the chloroplast genome of the common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema shared a number of derived gene clusters with chaetosphaeridium and land plants. for example, the cluster of  <dig> genes extending from petl to trni in marchantia cpdna and that of  <dig> genes delimited by rps12b and atpi were likely present in the common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema. only four gene clusters are shared specifically between zygnematalean and marchantia cpdnas: rps4-trns-ycf <dig> , atpb-atpe-trnv-trnme-ndhc-ndhk-ndhj , trnh-ftsh-trnd , and trne-cysa-trnt .

the higher degree of ancestral characters displayed by staurastrum cpdna compared to its zygnema homologue at the gene organizational level is also evident when one examines the genomic region in which each gene locus would be expected to map if the ir had been retained . in staurastrum cpdna, the  <dig> genes predicted to have been present in the small single-copy region occupy a discrete region just beside five of the eight genes that usually make up the ir; in zygnema cpdna, however, the genes usually located in the small single-copy region and the ir are more widely dispersed in the genome.

intron composition
as in chaetosphaeridium cpdna, the introns in staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas represent subsets of those found in land plant cpdnas . both zygnematalean cpdnas share with their chaetosphaeridium and land plant counterparts one group i intron in trnl, two cis-spliced group ii introns in rpl <dig> and trng, and one trans-spliced group ii intron in rps <dig>  only three group ii introns in staurastrum and/or zygnema cpdnas  have no homologues in chaetosphaeridium cpdna. evidence for a charophycean green algal origin of land plant group ii introns is lacking for only the clpp intron at site  <dig>  the staurastrum trans-spliced rps <dig> intron resembles its chaetosphaeridium homologue in exhibiting a large orf in domain iv. the putative protein of  <dig> amino acids encoded by the staurastrum orf is related to reverse transcriptases, whereas the smaller protein  specified by the chaetosphaeridium orf lacks similarity with such proteins.

like its chaetosphaeridium and land plant counterparts, the cis-spliced group ii intron in staurastrum trnk encodes the maturase matk. as mentioned earlier, a freestanding matk gene was identified in zygnema cpdna even though an intron is absent from trnk in this charophycean green alga. close inspection of the regions immediately flanking the zygnema matk gene for the presence of sequences conserved in domains v and vi of group ii introns failed to reveal any evidence that this gene had once been an integral part of a group ii intron. the zygnema matk is most probably a functional gene because its predicted protein features the vast majority of the conserved amino acids that the trnk intron-encoded matk of staurastrum shares with its chaetosphaeridium, chara, nitella and land plant homologues .

repeated sequences
comparison of each zygnematalean cpdna sequence against itself using pipmaker  <cit>  indicated the presence of repeats in many intergenic regions of zygnema cpdna and the virtual absence of such sequences from staurastrum cpdna. analysis of the zygnema genome sequence with reputer  <cit>  revealed that the great majority of the repeat regions larger than  <dig> bp are composed of short tandem repeats. each of the  <dig> repeat regions identified consists of  <dig> to  <dig> bp units that are repeated in tandem  <dig> to  <dig> times . most regions  feature repeat units of  <dig> or  <dig> bp, and the regions with gtat, atac, tagaa, ttcta and ctta units occur at more than one location on the chloroplast genome . all three regions carrying the ctta units feature sequences that are in direct orientation relative to one another; however, the  <dig> regions with the gtat and complementary atac units and the four regions with the tagaa and complementary ttcta units form a population of dispersed repeats that are in direct or inverted orientation relative to one another. eighty percent of the repeat regions  reside outside the blocks of sequences that are colinear with staurastrum cpdna. we estimate that at least  <dig>  bp of zygnema cpdna, i.e. about 60% of the increased size of the zygnema intergenic regions compared to their staurastrum homologues, are accounted for by short tandem repeats.

only two loci of the staurastrum chloroplast genome contain short tandem repeats: a region composed of four units of the gaataaata sequence in the infa-rpl <dig> spacer and a region containing nine units of the gtattt sequence in the rps16-odpb spacer. aside from two copies of 45-bp sequence  that are in direct orientation, no dispersed repeats larger than  <dig> bp were detected in staurastrum cpdna.

discussion
although staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas bear high similarity in primary sequence and gene content to their chaetosphaeridium and land plant counterparts, they differ substantially from one another and from the latter genomes in overall structure, gene order and intron content. from our comparative analysis of streptophyte cpdnas, we infer that the chloroplast genome of the last common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema probably lacked a large ir encoding the rrna genes, had a low gene density, and more closely resembled chaetosphaeridium and land plant cpdnas at the gene organizational and intron levels than do zygnema and staurastrum cpdnas. at least  <dig> of the  <dig> intron positions commonly found in land plant cpdnas, including three sites that have not been identified in chaetosphaeridium, were probably present in the common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema.

considering the absence of an rdna-encoding ir region in both staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas, it is not surprising that these genomes are considerably rearranged relative to their coleochaetalean and land plants counterparts that have retained the quadripartite structure. all green plant cpdnas that have lost the ir tend to be highly scrambled in gene order  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that the loss of the ir enhances opportunities for intramolecular recombination between small dispersed repeats  <cit> . in agreement with the idea that there is a direct link between the frequency of intramolecular recombination events and the abundance of small dispersed repeats  <cit> , we identified more rearrangements in the repeat-rich genome of zygnema than in the repeat-poor genome of staurastrum. as in the cpdnas of the nonphotosynthetic, parasitic flowering plant epifagus virginiana  <cit>  and the evening primrose oenothera  <cit> , the repeated sequences in zygnema cpdna consist essentially of tandem repeats that probably arose by replication slippage.

a single event of ir loss likely accounts for the absence of a quadripartite structure from both staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas. this hypothesis is more parsimonious than the alternative scenario involving two independent losses, and is consistent with previous evidence that the cpdna of spirogyra  has no ir  <cit> . it is also supported by our finding that staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas share  <dig> rearrangement breakpoints within ancestral gene clusters. given the close connection between ir loss and gene rearrangements, several of these shared breakpoints might have appeared following the loss of the ir in the lineage leading to the last common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema. considering that this ancestor occupies a basal position in the tree describing the relationships among zygnematalean green algae  <cit> , then most, if not all, of the algae belonging to the zygnematales are expected to lack an ir in their chloroplast genome.

as introns appear to be generally stable in land plant cpdnas  <cit> , the important difference in intron content displayed by staurastrum and zygnema cpdnas is unexpected. the two zygnematalean cpdnas share only five of the  <dig> intron insertion sites they exhibit in total.staurastrum cpdna lacks seven of the  <dig> introns that are present in zygnema cpdna, whereas the latter cpdna lacks five of the eight introns found in the former genome. the intron distributions in these cpdnas are best explained by assuming that all  <dig> insertion sites were populated with introns in the common ancestor of staurastrum and zygnema and that subsequently, several introns were specifically lost in each of the lineages leading to these green algae. obviously, we cannot exclude the possibility that chloroplast introns occupying common insertion sites were lost independently in the staurastrum and zygnema lineages; thus, the predicted number of introns in the common ancestor of these algae may represent a minimal estimate. given that intron losses are thought to result from insertions, through homologous recombination, of intron-less cdna copies generated by reverse transcription  <cit> , the frequency of homologous recombination events or the level of reverse transcriptase activity might be higher in the chloroplasts of conjugating green algae than in land plant chloroplasts. in this respect, it is interesting to note that the staurastrum trans-spliced rps <dig> intron specifies a reverse transcriptase and is the only known streptophyte chloroplast intron encoding such an activity.

our finding that matk is free-standing in zygnema cpdna together with the absence of the trnk intron in which it usually resides strongly suggests that its putative maturase product is essential for the splicing of group ii introns other than the trnk intron. circumstantial evidence that matk functions in splicing of multiple introns has previously been reported for land plant chloroplasts. the matk gene is located within the group ii intron of trnk in all photosynthetic land plants, but occurs as a free-standing gene in epifagus cpdna  <cit> . in vivo splicing analyses of the complete set of chloroplast group ii introns in land plant mutants lacking chloroplast ribosomes disclosed specific splicing defects involving mainly group iia introns , thus implying that cpdna-encoded protein act as splicing factors  <cit> . it has been proposed that matk evolved from a trnk intron-specific maturase to a more versatile maturase that assists the splicing of most or all group iia introns of land plants  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our structural analyses of the staurastrum and zygnema chloroplast genomes have revealed that many of the features considered earlier as typical of land plant cpdnas originated before the emergence of the coleochaetales and zygnematales. while the chloroplast genome appears to have remained relatively stable in the coleochaetalean lineage, it has lost the ir and has undergone many changes in gene order and intron content during the evolution of the zygnematales.

