BACKGROUND
polyphosphate  is a ubiquitous linear polymer of hundreds of orthophosphate residues  linked by phosphoanhydride bonds. polyp has been found in all tree domains of life . in bacteria, the main enzymes involved in the metabolism of polyp are the polyphosphate kinases  that catalyze the reversible conversion of the terminal phosphate of atp  into polyp and the exopolyphosphatase  that processively hydrolyzes the terminal residues of polyp to liberate pi  <cit> .

polyp is a reservoir of phosphate and, as in atp, of high-energy phosphate bonds. furthermore, biochemical experiments and studies with ppk <dig> mutants in many bacteria have indicated additional roles for polyp. these include inhibition of rna degradation  <cit> , activation of lon protease during stringent response  <cit> , involvement in membrane channel structure  <cit> , and contribution to the resistance to stress generated by heat, oxidants, osmotic challenge, antibiotics and uv  <cit> . particularly, a ppk <dig> mutant of pseudomonas aeruginosa pao <dig> was impaired in motility, biofilm development, quorum sensing and virulence  <cit> .

in addition to ppk <dig>  another widely conserved polyp enzyme is ppk <dig>  <cit> . in contrast to the atp-dependent polyp synthetic activity of ppk <dig>  ppk <dig> preferentially catalyses the polyp-driven synthesis of gtp from gdp. orthologs to both proteins have been found in many bacterial genomes and curiously there are many bacteria with orthologs of either ppk <dig> or ppk <dig>  or both, or neither  <cit> .

polyp in bacteria is localized predominantly in volutin granules, also called polyp granules, or in acidocalcisomes  <cit> . many biochemical pathways are connected and a given metabolite such as polyp can be generated and/or consumed by several enzymes or cellular processes. the genetic background, culture conditions and environmental factors can influence polyp levels. its absence, as mentioned above, causes many structural and functional defects. the link between genotypes and phenotypes observed during polyp deficiency can be the result of complex networks of interaction that can be elucidated by using omics technology  <cit> .

recombinant pseudomonas sp. b <dig> that overexpressed yeast exopolyphosphatase also showed the functional deficiencies in motility and biofilm development reported for ppk <dig> mutants from p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  <cit> . in addition, new structural and functional defects such as changes in colony morphology, lps structure and cellular division are reported in this communication. finally, to study the proteomic changes that occurred during polyp deficiency recombinant strains were compared under different growth conditions and phases of growth. interesting proteins related to energetic metabolism were overexpressed during polyp scarcity, such as three enzymes from the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, and one atp synthase subunit. protein folding, fatty acid catabolism and amino acid biosynthesis were other gene onthology  categories overrepresented during polyp deficit. on the other hand, motility and transport proteins were the only categories underrepresented in this condition.

the proteomics results suggest a link between polyp and central metabolism that can be further explored to clarify the multiple structural and functional defects found during the lack of polyp in bacteria.

RESULTS
structural and functional defects in polyphosphate deficient bacteria
overexpression of ppx resembled the functional defects found in motility and biofilm formation in a ppk <dig> mutant from p. aeruginosa pao  <cit> . despite several functional and structural defects have been reported in p. aeruginosa pao <dig> ppk <dig> mutant  <cit> , our polyp deficient cells showed new functional and structural phenotypes not previously reported. ppk <dig> is essential for biofilm development and virulence of p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  considering that lipopolysaccharide  is also very important in both cellular processes; the electrophoretic profile of lps from recombinants pseudomonas sp. b <dig> were analyzed. interestingly, changes in the core of the lps were observed in tricine/sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis . to our knowledge, the structure of the lps core from pseudomonas sp. b <dig> has not yet been elucidated and consequently it is difficult to determine the structural nature of the change found in the lps core. it would be interesting to determine the structure of lps in both strains  to reveal the change in the lps and its probable link with polyp.

it was found that inorganic polyp influences not only biofilm formation but also colony morphology phenotype. changes were seen when the colony phenotype of control cells was compared with that of polyp-deficient ones. wild type and control cells were highly motile forming a rough colony with an irregular border . in contrast, polyp-deficient cells displayed a round regular smooth colony . the change observed in colony morphology could be directly a consequence of the absence of exopolymer production observed in the cells  and in a p. aeruginosa pao <dig> ppk <dig> mutant  <cit>  but also due to the variation in the lps core reported here. altogether, the results suggest that biofilm formation capabilities of polyp-deficient mutants, may not only be attributed to the defect in exopolymer formation, but also to their altered lps structure.

finally, during the entrance in stationary phase of growth in rich medium  it was observed that polyp-deficient cells became highly filamentous compared to control cells most likely reflecting a cell division malfunction . different defined media supplemented with various carbon sources were tested and this behaviour was found only during the entry into the stationary phase of growth in lb medium.

differential proteomics of polyp-deficient pseudomonas sp. b4
to gain insight into the effect of polyp deficiency and the metabolic adjustments taking place during the cellular response, the proteomes of pseudomonas sp. b <dig> polyp-deficient and control cells were compared by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  . we analyzed extracellular and total cell-free proteomes from planctonic cells grown in lb medium during exponential and stationary phase of growth and also analyzed the total cell-free proteome of the colony biofilm. these  <dig> samples were analyzed by using biological and experimental duplicates. this procedure yielded  <dig> spots of interest  that were analysed by mass spectrometry resulting in  <dig> proteins that could be identified. thirty-five different proteins whose expression consistently changed between the control and polyp-deficient cells in the conditions assayed are listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  gel spots details are seen in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  next, a summary of some relevant functional categories over- and under-represented during polyp deficiency is presented.

protein folding
tricarboxylic acid cycle
metabolic process
atp synthesis proton transport
fatty acid metabolic process
metabolic process
fatty acid biosynthetic process
cysteine biosynthetic process serine
amino acid biosynthetic process
branched chain family amino acid biosynthetic process
translational elongation
atp binding
antioxidant activity
go: gene ontology term annotation; spot numbers correspond to spots in 2d-page; growth phase ; culture medium lb ; ipr: interpro entry; ncbi accession number from ncbi database; theo. mr /pi: theoretical molecular mass and isoelectric point; exp. mr /pi, experimental molecular mass and isoelectric point estimated from the 2d-page gels.

regulation of transcription termination
transport
polyamine transport
transport
amino acid metabolic process
ciliary or flagellar motility
hydrolase activity
conditions and abbreviations are the same as those in table <dig> 

energy metabolism
the polyp-deficient strain overexpressed three tca cycle enzymes during exponential phase: aconitase, isocitrate dehydrogenase and succinyl-coa synthetase. the last two proteins are directly involved in producing nadh and gtp  respectively. additionally, in solid medium, this strain overexpressed atp synthase f <dig>  that synthesizes atp coupled to an electrochemical protons gradient in the respiratory chain  <cit> . several catabolic pathways converge on the tca cycle and particularly; beta-oxidation is the process by which fatty acids are broken down to generate acetyl-coa, the entry molecule for the tca cycle. curiously, during stationary phase of planktonic polyp cultures, cells overexpressed two proteins belonging to the mutifunctional fatty acid oxidation complex that generates acetyl-coa species: enoyl-coa hydratase and 3-hydroxyacyl-coa dehydrogenase. both enzymes catalyze successive reactions, and their substrates are also related to polyhydroxyalkanoates  biosynthesis  <cit> . this polymer is accumulated in anaerobic cultures during stages in which polyps are degraded  <cit> , and perhaps low polyp levels may enhance pha accumulation. it would be interesting to find out if the absence of polyp affected other storage biopolymers such as triacylglycerols , wax esters, polyhydroxyalkanoates  and glycogen.

protein folding and stress response
three proteins involved in protein folding were overexpressed during exponential phase by the polyp strain: trigger factor, grpe and clpb. additionally, groel was increased in the same strain during stationary phase. all of them are considered chaperones that prevent inappropriate molecular interactions by binding to hydrophobic regions in non-native proteins and allow proper protein folding acting as a molecular network  <cit> . trigger factor is a ribosome-associated bacterial chaperone that begins nascent protein folding in an atp-independent manner  <cit> . on the other hand, grpe is a co-chaperone that works as a nucleotide exchange factor on a dnak domain, whereas clpb rescues stress-damaged proteins from an aggregated state asissted by dnak  <cit> . groel interacts with recently synthesized proteins after their release from the ribosome  <cit> . with the exception of trigger factor, the other three chaperones form an atp-dependent network.

also, an alkyl hydroperoxide reductase  was overexpressed in exponential phase of polyp-deficient cells. this enzyme reduces peroxides to water or alcohols and prevents oxidative stress in bacteria coupled to the tca cycle and respiratory chain. additionally, it regenerates the nad pool and keeps oxidative and reducing balance  <cit> . peroxiredoxin could act as protection factor against ros generated by the stress caused by low polyp levels. finally, increased levels of the translational factors ef-tu and ef-ts were found during polyp scarcity. this response has also been described in e. coli during acid stress and heavy metal  exposure. it is suggested that these elongation factors could fold proteins in a way similar to that of stress chaperones  <cit> . finally, as the gtp hydrolysis step is catalysed by ef-tu, which binds to the large ribosomal subunit, it has been proposed that the interaction between polyphosphate and the large ribosomal subunit promotes translation fidelity by influencing the ef-tu gtpase reaction  <cit> .

altogether, these results suggest that during polyp scarcity a general stress state occurred and cells succeeded by overexpressing protein-folding chaperones.

transport proteins
from the  <dig> total proteins identified whose expressions decreased during lack of polyp,  <dig> were identified as transporters. energy consuming abc-type transporters responsible for carrying different solutes such as sugars, peptides, polyamines, amino acids and fe3+ were identified. also, c4-dicarboxylates trap transporters and outer membrane protein opre, which has been involved in virulence process in the genus pseudomonas  <cit> , were reduced in polyp cells.

other processes and hypothetical proteins
the present study also yielded some results that appear to be conflicting. we, and others, have demonstrated that despite the lack of motility of polyp-deficient cells, the flagellum was intact . nevertheless, we found flagellin, the major component of flagella filaments, diminished in the total and extracelullar proteome of polyp-deficient cells.

finally two protein spots present in the total proteome matched orf sequences designated 'hypothetical' or 'conserved hypothetical" proteins. these hypothetical proteins identified here should be subjected to further characterization to confirm their possible role in polyp metabolism and to ascertain their true biological function.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
polyp has numerous and diverse biological functions that have been discovered mainly by studying ppk <dig> mutants in bacteria. a p. aeruginosa pao <dig> ppk <dig> null mutant exhibits pleiotropic phenotypes including decreased virulence, defective in motility, quorum sensing, biofilm formation and failure in responses to various stresses  <cit> . many of these features were also observed in ppk <dig> mutants of other bacteria such as vibrio cholerae, salmonella, shigella and others  <cit> . nevertheless, new functional and structural defects were found in our recombinant cells that overexpressed the exopolyphosphatase, the enzyme in charge of polyp degradation to pi. these results might be explained by the higher extent of polyp depletion when using this approach. in the genus pseudomonas, despite the lack of detectable ppk <dig> activity , these mutants still possess as much as 20% of the wild-type levels of poly p as is the case of p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  <cit> . we previously reported that the overexpression of exopolyphosphatase removed more than 95% of cellular polyp  <cit> .

the changes observed in the colony morphology are not surprising taking into account that polyp deficient p. aeruginosa pao <dig> cells fails to produce extracellular polysaccharide  <cit> . similar results and an additional change in the lps profile were seen in our polyp-deficient cells. although, the lps structure of pseudomonas sp. b <dig> is not known in detail it can be speculated that the change seen in the lps could be due to an alteration in the phosphate moiety of the lps core or that polyp regulates some enzyme able to modify the lps. further experiments should be done to clarify this finding but it will be interesting to find out if some of the lps kinases reported in the genus pseudomonas  could use polyp instead of atp during phosphorylation of heptose i in the inner core of lps. furthermore, taking into account the role of lps during pathogenesis development in many bacteria, this change might explain some dysfunction during virulence of polyp-deficient bacteria.

bacterial cell division occurs through the formation of an ftsz ring  at the site of division. the ring is composed of the tubulin-like ftsz protein that has gtpase activity and the ability to polymerize in vitro . our observation of cell division failure in polyp-deficient cells during entry into the stationary phase is in agreement with the finding that during polyp-deficiency energy metabolism, and particularly nucleoside triphosphate  formation, was affected . as seen in figure  <dig>  the cells were apparently able to form the septum, but did not complete the separation process. it is possible that polyp scarcity affects the function of ftsz, since its gtpase activity needs both, gtp and a bivalent ion. considering that polyp can provide both, phosphate for the generation of gtp , was induced 100-times in the stationary phase  <cit> . in this phase of growth gtp is necessary for the synthesis of alginate and other functions such as cellular division. at present, we cannot discard that other proteins from the divisome, that also employ gtp for their activity, are affected by the absence of polyp.

living cells constantly require energy for maintaining their highly organized structures, synthesize cellular components, generate electric currents, and many other processes. polyp acts as a reserve for high energy pi and regulates intracellular atp in combination with oxidative and substrate level phosphorylation. our proteomic data support the hypothesis that polyp is an important component for energy regulation, and particularly in atp regeneration  <cit> . during polyp deficiency, cells would prevail by increasing the flux of important energy generating pathways such as β-oxidation, citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation as proposed in figure  <dig>  we found eight different proteins related to these pathways increased during polyp deficiency and in the case of the tca cycle enzymes two of them are directly involved in the generating nadh and gtp by their activity . interestingly, a previous link between polyp and the tca cycle was reported in p. aeruginosa. algr <dig>  a global transcriptional factor, positively regulates nucleoside diphosphate kinase  and succinyl-coa synthetase, enzymes critical in nucleoside triphosphate  formation  <cit> . thus, algr <dig> positively regulates the production of alginate, gtp, ppgpp and inorganic polyp in p. aeruginosa  <cit> . it is possible then that polyp-deficiency induces algr <dig> expression to increase gtp and polyp production. this could explain the increase of succinyl-coa synthetase in our polyp deficient cells.

active transport of ion and molecules across the membrane consumes energy and atp. we found that the majority of protein spots decreasing their levels in polyp cells belong to the transport protein category . it is possible that diminishing energy-consuming processes such as active transport can help the cells to overcome this polyp deficiency.

the defects in the ppk <dig> mutant described in p. aeruginosa  <cit> , and those seen in the same e. coli mutant  <cit> , suggest a failure to respond to a variety of stresses. we found that the levels of many important chaperones and enzymes related to stress response are increased in polyp deficient cells. it is suggested that a general stress response occurs during polyp deficiency and cells prevail by augmenting the levels of general chaperones and enzymes that would remove reactive oxygen species. in fact, our previous results showed that growth of pseudomonas sp. b <dig> in certain conditions generates an oxidative stress and produced a massive increase of polyp  <cit> .

altogether the results presented in this communication demonstrate the usefulness of proteomics to study the effect of polyp deficiency in order to generate new hypothesis to clarify its role in bacteria. new suggestions such as the possible link between the central metabolic pathways and polyp metabolism proposed here should be the focus of future metabolic flux experiments. the integrations of omics technologies will definitely help in elucidating the role of polyp in bacteria and its importance during pathogenic process.

in summary, polyp has numerous and varied biological functions in bacteria that have been discovered mainly by studying its deficiency. to better understand the function of polyp we used broad-host-range constitutive and regulated vectors to deplete cellular polyp and found new functional and structural changes. in addition, it is generally accepted that energy supply of the cells could be severely compromised in the absence of polyp. we confirmed this evidence by using differential proteomic studies and suggested that during polyp scarcity energy metabolism and particularly nucleoside triphosphate  formation were affected, generating a general stress condition. we propose that bacterial cells prevail by increasing the flux of energy-generating metabolic pathways such as tricarboxilic acid  cycle and β-oxidation and by reducing energy-consuming ones such as active transporters and amino acid biosynthesis.

