BACKGROUND
scientific-technological advances over the last decades have produced ever-increasing experimental knowledge about brain organization and dynamics. in particular, modern anatomical techniques have provided extensive data on the interconnections of cerebral cortical areas in the brains of animals such as the cat or rat, or non-human primates such as the rhesus monkey. the intricate, non-random connectivity of cortical brain regions mediates the diverse and flexible sensory, cognitive and behavioral functions of the mammalian brain. however, the topological organization of these networks  <cit>  as well as their spatial layout in the brain  <cit>  are still incompletely understood. this is particularly apparent for the connectivity of the human cerebral cortex, which is largely unknown, due to experimental limitations  <cit> .

a fundamental open problem in systems neuroscience is the relationship between specialized features of local nodes, such as areas of the cerebral cortex, and the global interaction and integration of these nodes in the neural networks. one aspect of this relationship concerns the question from which features of the local nodes structural connectivity between them might be predicted.

we address this question with the help of network analysis approaches  <cit> . because cortical networks are typically complex, little insight can be obtained through their visualization alone. therefore, useful objective and quantitative characterizations of complex networks ultimately rely on the estimation of a number of complementary measurements of their properties  <cit> . network measurements typically provide information about specific topological or geographical features of the networks. for instance, the node degree provides a simple and valuable quantification of the intensity of connections between a specific node and the rest of the network. however, it says nothing about the origin or destinations of such connections. on the other hand, the clustering coefficient of a node provides an objective quantification of the degree in which the immediate neighbors of a node  are interconnected, but provides no information about the rest of the network. because of the specificity and complementariness of typical network measurements, an essential question arises regarding what subsets of measurements are more complete, in the sense of allowing accurate, or at least reasonably approximate, reconstruction of the original network from its respective topological or geographical measurements. remarkably, this question has been little explored in the complex networks literature .

it is important to note that the problem of network reconstruction from topological features is in a sense circular. such features are derived from the complete connectivity of the network, so global connectivity may be inferred by taking itself into account. however, this is by no means a trivial task. for instance, guessing which nodes are specifically interconnected, based on measurements such as their degree or clustering coefficient, is almost invariably an impossible task. the exercise of trying to reconstruct the connections from a collection of topological measurements therefore provides an interesting new way to look at specific properties and structural organization of a complex network. for instance, in case the connectivity could be reasonably guessed from the node degree correlations, this would provide a key insight about its underlying organization.

we consider topological as well as spatial parameters, as biological networks, and brain networks in particular, are embedded in space. it is an interesting question to ask how the topological and spatial organization of these networks relates to each other. in particular, how do the topological and spatial features of individual nodes relate to the connectivity and layout of the whole network? answers on these questions may inform current theories on the evolution and development of complex biological networks.

the methods section of this article presents the adopted topological and spatial features and describes the reconstruction methodology based on similarity between sets of features. the analysis was applied to primate cortical brain connectivity . in order to provide a comparative case, we also describe the application of the same methodology to c. elegans neuronal connectivity .

RESULTS
overview and community analysis
given a network, it is often the case that a subset of its nodes is more interconnected with one another than with the remainder of the network. such a subset of nodes, together with the respective interconnections, is called a community inside the original network. the intensity of the separation between the community and the rest of the network can be quantified in terms of its modularity index, which varies between  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . in order to determine the main communities in the cortical system, we applied newman's spectral method  <cit>  and obtained the two regions identified in figure  <dig>  this approach to community detection is based on rewriting the modularity function of the network in terms of matrices, so that the best partition in two communities can be obtained in terms of spectral analysis of those matrices. further subdivision of such regions was unjustified because of the low modularity values obtained for such subdivisions. our approach helped to ensure that the subsequent analysis was not biased by gaps between different datasets describing the cortical network .

communities  <dig> and  <dig> were of comparable size and included n <dig> =  <dig> and n <dig> =  <dig> nodes, respectively, and e <dig> =  <dig> and e <dig> =  <dig> directed edges. the clustering coefficients obtained for the two identified communities were found to be equal to  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. this might be explained by the higher number of connections within communities. whereas the global edge density of the network was  <dig> , the densities within the communities were  <dig>  and  <dig> .

topological characterization
now we focus our attention on the analysis of the local node properties and connectivity of these two communities. figure  <dig> presents the histograms for node degree, clustering coefficient, and matching index with respect to the two identified communities. similar histograms were obtained for most measurements, except the node degree, which resulted markedly different in each community, being more evenly distributed in the case of community  <dig>  clustering coefficients of individual nodes in both communities were above  <dig> . in addition, the average clustering coefficient was both above the global density as well as above the edge density within the respective community. the probability of average shortest path distances appears to decay with the distance. the matching index within the communities was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  as would be expected from nodes within the same community. note, however, that some nodes had a matching index below  <dig>  indicating outlier nodes.

spatial characterization
an important issue to be considered while adopting several measurements is the quantification of possible relationships between them, which can be indicated by the pearson correlation coefficients for all pairwise combinations of measures. the pearson coefficients calculated independently for the topological and spatial measurements are given in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  it follows from the results in table  <dig> that the node degree is strongly correlated with the matching index, while exhibiting moderate anticorrelation with the average shortest path distance. as could be expected, the local density was found to be weakly anticorrelated with the area size .

except for the strong correlation between the node degree and matching index, all other pairs of measurements were unremarkable, supporting the complementariness of the adopted sets of features.

comparison between original and reconstructed networks
we performed an exhaustive search while taking into account all 1-by- <dig>  2-by- <dig> and 3-by- <dig> combinations of each of the two types of considered measurements for a whole sequence of threshold values t  in order to identify those combinations producing reconstructed networks which are most similar to the original network g. table  <dig> presents the combinations of measurements and respective geometrical average of r <dig> and r <dig> with respect to the two main cortical communities considered in this work. it is clear from this table that the best synthesized networks were obtained by the matching index for the first community and the combination of  for the second community.

the qualities of the reconstructions obtained by considering the  <dig> spatial features are given in table  <dig>  the best reconstruction of communities  <dig> and  <dig> were obtained for the local density and local density/area size, respectively.

in order to investigate how the combinations of topological and spatial features perform with respect to the network reconstruction, we also considered hybrid combinations between the two topological  and the two spatial  features which were found to produce the best results in table  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. the results are given in table  <dig>  the best reconstruction of community  <dig> was obtained as before by considering only the matching index. however, a small improvement was observed for community  <dig> as allowed by the combination between the two topological features plus the area size. the respective network reconstruction is not shown as it is very close to that obtained for the two topological features .

interestingly, a comparison between the adjacency matrices in figure  <dig> and  <dig> immediately shows that the networks inferred on the basis of the measurements of topological properties at each node reproduced the original connectivity better than networks constructed by the consideration of the spatial properties.

it is quite surprising that such good reconstructions of the original matrices could be obtained by considering relatively simple topological and spatial features. table  <dig> summarizes the comparison between the original and reconstructed communities while considering topology and geometry. it is clear from this table that reasonable reconstruction can be obtained for the global organization of the cortical communities based on their local node properties. the geometrical averages also indicate that the two communities are possibly organized according to different topological and spatial influences, with community  <dig> being more strongly constrained by the adopted measurements.

predicting unknown connections
connections which have not yet been tested in tract tracing studies were so far treated as absent in this study. this is due to the fact that only one of the three compilations contributing to the present dataset distinguished between absent and unknown connections. for this compilation  <cit> , which forms a  <dig> ×  <dig> area subgraph, we reviewed reconstructed networks in the light of whether they were able to predict previously unknown connections. in this analysis, one area, vp, had to be excluded from the original matrix due to its unknown spatial position. for the combination of the best two topologic and two spatial measures,  <dig> currently unknown projections were predicted to exist, and  <dig> connections were predicted to be absent, yielding a realistic ratio for predicted existing connections of 39%, out of all unknown connections. the predicted projections are shown as yellow fields in the reconstructed subgraph matrix in fig.  <dig>  the figure also indicates mismatches  between the original and reconstructed matrices, either existing connections that were left out of the reconstructed matrix  or absent connections filled in the reconstructed matrix . most entries , however, were confirmed to exist  or to be absent .

we also explored the impact of the potential existence of the currently unknown connections, by creating two additional simulated versions of the  <dig> ×  <dig> area subgraph matrix, in which  all unknown connections were assumed to exist ,  31% of the unknown connections were assumed to exist . reasonable reconstructions were obtained in all these three cases, as demonstrated by the respective hamming distances and geometrical average errors .

discussion
we have explored the role of local topological and spatial features in determining cortical connectivity. topological features had been analyzed before  <cit>  with a measure similar to the matching index used here as a predictor of primate visual cortex connectivity. previous studies were also applying the notion of neighborhood as a predictor of connectivity which suggests that spatially close regions tend be connected by fiber tracts  <cit> . in this article, we have expanded such notions by testing the relative impact of several topological and spatial constraints on neural network organization.

in general, a small number of local features is sufficient for predicting connections between regions. in the case of the topological features, the matching index represented the most effective individual feature for reconstruction of both communities, while the best selection for community  <dig> also required the clustering coefficient. this result substantiates the particular role of this feature for cortical organization  <cit>  and means that cortical areas which have similar inputs and outputs also tend to be connected with each other. the best reconstructions obtained from spatial features were obtained by considering the local density for both communities. the area size was also required for the best reconstruction of community  <dig>  these results suggest that regions with similar local densities tend to connect to one another. in the case of community  <dig>  region interconnections also appear to favor similar area size.

concerning single features for the prediction of connections, topological features led to a better estimation than spatial features. this may be partly explained by the fact that topological node features by their definition are indirectly linked to global network organization, as mentioned previously. it is, however, surprising that the 'purest' spatial parameter  did not result in a strong prediction for connectivity, as spatial distance has been previously put forward as an important factor in primate cortical connectivity  <cit> . this can be explained by the existence of a significant number of long-range connections in cortical networks, resulting from the fact that some regions are part of a network cluster but nonetheless spatially distant. in these cases, such as the frontal eye field being spatially distant from the rest of the visual cortex, spatial proximity would not predict a connection. indeed, there exists a significant proportion of long-distance connections in biological neural networks  <cit>  which ensures a low number of processing steps across these systems  <cit> .

since previous tract tracing studies have focused on the visual cortex, there might exist additional connections mainly within and between motor, auditory, and somatosensory cortices. as demonstrated for a smaller subgraph of the primate cortical network, our reconstruction approach could be used to guide future experimental studies, by deriving hypotheses about currently unknown projections which would be expected to exist or be absent. the analysis of different versions of this subgraph, with varying proportions of unknown connections assumed to exist, also demonstrated that the principal conclusions of this study do not depend on the number of currently unknown connections which may be discovered in the future.

an earlier analysis of the relationship between the surface size of cortical areas and the number of projections they send or receive found no significant correlation between these parameters  <cit> . the present analysis suggests that area size may be a factor contributing to the prediction of connections, after all . thus, perhaps what matters is not the absolute area size, but the matched size of the connected regions.

for the feature analysis we transformed unidirectional projections into bidirectional connections. this resulted in  <dig>  directed edges compared to the original  <dig>  directed edges. this step was necessary as the reconstruction based on spatial distance depends on the euclidean distance which is symmetric in both directions. it may be an interesting task for the future to repeat the topological analyses based on unidirectional measures.

the observed relationships between local node properties and global connectivity may hint on developmental rules. as the reconstruction approach worked well for the primate network, but not for the neuronal connections in c. elegans , it appears that the organization of neural networks is subject to different constraints in these two systems. one possibility is that the neuronal network of c. elegans, which is identical in each organism, could be largely determined by genetic factors  <cit>  which may prescribe a specific connectivity independent of simple topologic or spatial rules. for larger neural systems, however, it may be impossible to encode the entire connectivity between cortical regions within the genome, resulting in a larger contribution of spatial and topologic constraints in the self-organization of systems connectivity.

although the connectivity in non-human primates such as the macaque monkey is relatively well known, there is still only little information available about human connectivity. new methods such as diffusion tensor imaging  <cit>  or post-mortem tract tracing  <cit>  are applied to human brains but are still hindered by severe experimental limitations. it is our hope that the topological and spatial features reported in this study may complement and steer the current experimental approaches. these features could provide a basis for assessing the reliability of fiber tract predictions that are based on non-invasive methods.

CONCLUSIONS
the reconstruction of neural connectivity from local node properties offers insights into constraints of network organization. in particular, it suggests that neuronal networks in c. elegans and neural networks in the primate cerebral cortex developed under different constraints, and that the layout of primate cortical brain networks is not entirely determined by spatial properties.

