BACKGROUND
microarrays completed their first steps involving technical development and extraction of candidate genes by comparing small sets of samples. with the availability of data from public databases, e. g. geo  <cit>  and arrayexpress  <cit> , establishment of standards , and more and more hybridizations at hand, attention is now turning to the interpretation of larger datasets spanning many experimental conditions. various fields of research nowadays have a considerable throughput of microarray experiments. in order to fully interpret those datasets, it is necessary to properly annotate them in all relevant aspects.

however, not only is a sufficient level of detail an issue, but there are also matters of data format  <cit> . while free text format grants some flexibility for storage, enabling to store protocols from all over the world for example, it complicates statistical access. even sophisticated text mining methodology does not match the human brain in language interpretation. it often recovers only a small fraction of the information represented in the text that would be available to a human reader. in fact, it is still common practice to read through texts to collect values for variables to account for in subsequent statistical analysis. for large datasets, however, converting textual descriptions into a computer-readable format by human interaction is a tedious task. alternatively, experiment annotations can be aquired in computer-readable format from the beginning, such that their entire information can be directly subjected to automated analysis  <cit> .

automated analysis requires that instances of occurance of any annotation are countable. in practice, for large datasets the annotation values need to be identifyable by a computer, i. e. completely specified by fixed terms, using a controlled vocabulary.

in general, microarray data can be viewed as a "genes × experiments" data table. additional information worthy of being taken into account may be annotated both to the rows or the columns of the table, i. e. the genes and experiments. so far, microarray data annotation mostly means gene annotation. also, many published methods and software tools are available for interpreting microarray data in the light of gene information, ranging from genomic localization  <cit>  over transcription factor binding sites  <cit>  to pathway information  <cit>  or entire go annotation  <cit> , just to name few examples. comparably little has been done to apply protocol or sample information.

this may, at least in part, result from differences in data structure. for gene annotation, many methods take advantage of the straightforward structure of the gene ontology . most terms apply to nearly all organisms under investigation. in spite of ongoing debates on semantics, the concept prooved successful for data analysis.

on the experiment side, statistical access to such data seems to be a more complex goal. some parameters, such as size or temperature, are not readily captured by terms but show a continous value range.

continous ranges need to be discretized  before frequencies of, e. g., small, middle and large individuals can be counted. further, experiment annotations fundamentally differ from organism to organism. tumor type makes no sense for yeast research and components of yeast media differ from growth conditions of plants, complicating the development of a common ontology.

to our knowledge, previous publications concerned with statistical analysis of experiment annotations deal with relatively small numbers of traits rather than comprehensive experiment descriptions. sese et al. account for only  <dig> annotation values  <cit> . segal et al. extracted  <dig> values from the literature   <cit> . these are mainly clinical, i. e. sample-related, lacking information about the experimental protocols involved. moreover, the clustering algorithms of both publications do not reveal the spread of arrays making up a clinical trait nor do they simultaneously visualize genes, arrays and traits.

in contrast to e. g. the microarray gene expression data  ontology  <cit> , the lists of experiment annotation parameters stored in m-chips  are tailored to the specific needs of a particular field of research  <cit> . any source of controlled vocabulary may be used. they currently comprise between  <dig> and  <dig> defined values, plus, between  <dig> and  <dig> annotations of continuous value ranges, enabling an unprecedented level of detail. moreover, common to all fields of research, the annotations cover technical parameters of array, rna preparation, labelling, hybridization, washing and signal detection in order to pin down artifacts.

not all of the annotated traits correspond to the signal patterns observed in an experimental context under study and it is not known in advance which of them do. we provide means to preprocess these annotations and extract traits that correlate with transcription. those are visualized by correspondence analysis   <cit> . ca has been shown to reveal intricate details not visible with hierarchical clustering  <cit> . like other projection methods, it represents the columns of our "genes × experiments" data table as vectors in a high-dimensional space spanned by its rows . we will refer to this space as 'transcription space'. any possible status of the transcriptome  occupies a particular position in it. for visual inspection, the data points are projected onto a two-dimensional map that accounts for the main variance in the data.

whereas both experiment annotations  <cit>  and ca of microarray data  <cit>  have been reported earlier, the two approaches remained unconnected yet. by representing the experiment annotations in transcription space, we enable ca to account for associations both among and between single genes, experiments and relevant experiment annotations in a single plot. moreover, each trait can be judged according to the spread of hybridizations annotated thereof. one can recognize it as being either locally confined or spanning a wider area in transcription space and genes can be identified as being associated to it. in mapping the transcription space with well-known tags, the experiment annotations allow for a "guided tour" through the interpretable variance of the transcription data. for systematic interpretation a top-down and a bottom-up approach are presented. moreover, we found experiment annotations particularly valuable in detecting artifacts as well as flaws in experimental design. to demonstrate the general applicability of our methods, we show data examples aquired with single and two-channel platforms, stemming from yeast, fruit fly and human cancer.

RESULTS
each dataset was normalized and filtered . it may be regarded as a table, each row representing a gene , each column standing for a transcription measurement. in the following, we refer to any measured atomic set of values of a hybridization, e. g., the cy <dig> channel for half of the spots on an array with each gene spotted in duplicate, as "measurement". an experimental condition is recorded by multiple measurements, also involving repeated sampling, labelling, and hybridization. additional parameters or variables provide further information about the measurements. we will refer to these variables  as "experiment annotations", to the values  taken by these as "annotation values". figure  <dig> illustrates these terms. in transcription space, each annotation value is represented as the centroid  of the according experimental conditions.

correspondence analysis
basis for visualization is a data table, rows representing the genes, columns the experimental conditions or annotation values . the information content of such a table can be judged by its total inertia which is computed by deviding the χ <dig> statistic of the table by its grand total. high associations between rows and columns are reflected by a large inertias . in this sense, a "differential" gene, i.e. a gene deviating from its "normal expression", in a particular column, shows a large contribution to the total inertia of the table. the larger the deviation from its expected value, the farther the gene will be located from the plot center. it will lie in the same direction as the associated column  in case of positive association, or in the opposite direction if it is particularly downregulated in this column. if several transcriptionally related conditions that are also annotated by the same annotation value are combined into one column representing this annotation value, it will be located in the center of gravity of the combined conditions, with all associated genes being located in the same direction.

transcription patterns integrated with clinical data 
before focusing on biologically relevant parameters, the variance should be critically assessed for potentially confounding effects that may distort further analysis or that may even abolish comparability of the data within larger datasets. the supplementary material  provides two data examples demonstrating that experiment annotations are capable of detecting analysis-interfering artifacts and pitfalls in experimental design.

the following dataset assessing pancreas carcinoma along with healthy tissue samples was selected to demonstrate the methods' applicability for navigation through a large number of biologically relevant parameters that correlate with transcripton .

investigating the data with no further hypothesis by exploratory data analysis , it appears desirable to visualize all parameters in a crude overview before breaking down the interpretable variance into details .

but not all annotation values should be taken at face value. some do not carry considerable amounts of information in terms of transcription behaviour. we assess this by computing their inertia contributions. the inertia, computed as the χ <dig> statistic devided by the grand total of the data table, is a means of assessing the variance or information content of a data table. here, each table column contains the  transcription profile of a particular experiment annotation value, contributing a certain share to the total inertia of the table. the discretized annotation values are filtered according to the variance they contribute in the context of all values of all annotations .

however, this criterion alone is not sufficient for filtering relevant experiment values. each of the annotation values is a centroid of all experimental conditions annotated by this value. these conditions may cluster densely around their centroid, well-separated from all other conditions, or they may show inhomogenous transcription, overlapping with conditions annotated by another value. to assess if an annotation value annotates a distinct cluster of conditions or not, we compute the silhouette value . let there be an experimental annotation a taking values i∈a. one sv per annotation value i and measurement j is computed as sij = /max, where aij is the average distance of annotated measurement j to all other measurements annotated with i and bij is the minimum of average distances of measurement j to all measurements not annotated with i. here, the silhouette scores were computed on the basis of the χ <dig> distances.

a sv close to one will result for measurements well-separated from the measurements of neighboring clusters . a score around zero means that the measurement could be assigned to another annotation value, as well. a score close to minus one denotes that the object is most likely misclassified, i. e. transcriptionally affiliated to another but the annotated annotation value. the average sv of all measurements annotated with a particular annotation value i is used as a second criterion for filtering the annotation values .

among all  <dig> values taken by any annotation of the data after discretization , fig.  <dig> plots the  <dig> filtered out for showing inertia contributions above 1% and positive sv, i. e. considerable variance of the values and clustering of measurements annotated thereof. they are shown both by ca b as well as by hierarchical clustering c.

two transcriptionally relevant features a and b cluster together, if a and b are similar in terms of transcription behaviour of the samples having these traits. the sets of measurements annotated by a and b may overlap by many measurements showing both features. on the other hand, although neighbouring in transcription space, they may also be completely disjoint . thus, apart from the similarity in transcription, the overlap  can be read out for neighbouring features in fig. 2c.

features annotating identical sets of measurements  and those discretized into one category  have been combined into one. in fig. 2c, the merging of many features potentially yields longer rows. for the truncated rows, the number in square brackets refers to the rank in table  <dig> of additional file  <dig> 

the hierarchical clustering has been performed by merging two clusters, if the variance-reduction introduced by combining this particular pair is minimal among all possible pairs. the variance-reduction for each merge can be read out from the scale at the bottom of fig. 2c. here, in order to obtain a broad overview over the transcription space, the hierarchical tree is cut arbitrarily at the level of four resulting clusters , such that all but one more general cluster comprise a characteristic tumor type. the more general  cluster would actually contain the annotation value 'tumor type = pancreas serous cystadenoma' , which is an inhomogenous class in terms of transcription profiles and was therefore filtered out for negative sv.

these clusters can be interpreted in terms of their annotated features. ordered by increasing malignancy, the first cluster  comprises normal tissue as well as intraductal papillary mucinous tumor  samples. the second one  containing the serous and other tumor samples, comprises more general features such as no pain, no weight loss, and pt stage zero  that apply to a wider area in transcription space. the third cluster  comprises the mucinous tumor types along with present alcohol consumption, diabetes, weight loss and moderate pain. the only sample annotated with 'severe pain' was of uncertain pathology. it is characteristic for pancreatic cancer, that patients sense no greater pain before a late stage, in which, due to metastazation, the cancer is inoperable in most cases and is thus not among the biopsies studied here. the most malignant type of pancreas cancer contained by the data  is characterized by short-term survival, pn stage  <dig>  who stage iii, metastases , pre- and post-operational chemotherapy, and, interestingly, past alcohol consumption.

fig. 2a shows a ca visualizing  <dig> %  of the total inertia of the filtered annotation values. these are color-coded according to above clusters. as in fig. 2c, the variance among and within the clusters is visualized. also, ca  confirms that the predominant variance is between the two malignant clusters  on one side and the two more benign ones  on the other. extending what is visible from fig. 2c, ca also shows the genes responsible for this. it tends to display genes  associated to, i. e. upregulated under a particular condition on a line from the plot center to this condition, the stronger the association, the larger the distance to the center. the majority of the differential genes  correspond to this difference. their transcripts are most abundant either both in the first two or both in the second two clusters. a much lower number of genes discriminates between the two malignant and/or between the two benign clusters.

in order to accurately afflilate associated genes to the above clusters, the individual traits have been combined to one representative transcription profile per cluster . fig.  <dig> shows a ca projecting the variance of the genes according to these cluster-centroids, explaining  <dig> % of the inter-cluster variance . as already visible in fig. 2c, the four clusters overlap to differing amounts in terms of the sets of annotated measurements. their individual ranges are scetched by circles comprising 80% of all measurements  annotated with at least one of the traits in the cluster. the center of the circle is in the location of the transcription profile most representative for the particular combination of traits. the least malignant cluster  <dig>  including the control tissues, for example, has the smallest range, representing by and large a subset of cluster  <dig>  while not intersecting with the cluster  <dig>  of high malignancy.

many genes associated to cluster  <dig>  and  <dig>  are indicative of normal, differentiated and functional pancreatic tissue , encoding for proteins required for food digestion. exclusively associated to cluster three  are the connective tissue growth factor  which will be discussed in context of present alcohol consumption as well as the glutathione peroxidase  <dig>  which was reported to be overexpressed in ovarian cancer  <cit> . on the left, we find genes associated with both cluster  <dig> and  <dig> , indicating e. g. proliferation of epithelial and interstitial connective tissue. further discussion and literature are provided in additional file  <dig> 

exclusively associated to the fourth cluster  are genes applicable to discriminating the highly agressive tumors from the mucinous, such as the fibroblast growth factor  <dig> , the clostridium perfringens enterotoxin receptor  which was discussed in context of prostate cancer  <cit> , and glutathione  <cit> . also applicable to discriminating the highly agressive tumors from the mucinous are mucin  <dig> , which is in agreement with  <cit> , as well as two more genes described as follows. increasing evidence has accumulated in support of the hypothesis that growth hormone  and insulin-like growth factors  play a role in carcinogenesis. insulin like growth factor binding protein  <dig>  is upregulated in pancreatic endocrine tumors and its overexpression is significantly more common in metastatic disease  <cit> . high expression of igfbp <dig> has been associated with invasiveness and poor prognosis in other cancer types  <cit> . gh receptor antagonist treatment decreased colon carcinoma growth in nude mice, associated with reduction in circulating igfbp <dig> levels  <cit> . elongation factor 1γ  is overexpressed in esophageal cancer with severe lymph node metastasis and far advanced stages of the disease compared with non-overexpressing cases  <cit> . in summary, genes affiliated to cluster four are known to be associated with metastasis, advanced stage disease and poor prognosis of pancreatic and other cancers.

after assessing the variance between the trait-clusters, one can go into more detail by analyzing each cluster alone, assessing the variance within. this strategy can be recursively taken to increasingly smaller variances until inspecting differences between single traits. discussing the entire variance of the pancreas dataset is beyond the scope of this paper. figs.  <dig> and  <dig> in the additional file  <dig> show the analysis of cluster four, focusing on the most malign samples.

picking aspects of interest 
in a bottom-up  approach, the experiment annotations may serve to first pick aspects of particular interest, investigating the data aspect by aspect. in the extreme, a single annotation or only a subset of its values can be projected, before visualizing certain aspects together to assess their interaction. knowing from tab.  <dig>  which parameters correlate to transcription, one can select one or several of special interest. fig.  <dig> projects the values taken by the annotation 'alcohol consumption' . its right half  displays genes already discussed for the overview such as ppy, pnlip and prss <dig>  which are expressed by healthy pancreatic cells for food digestion and which are downregulated upon alcohol consumption . on the opposite side along the green line, genes are located which are upregulated with both past and present alcohol consumption: fibronectin , and collagens type i  and iii  have already been discussed above in context of the strong desmoplastic reaction of pancreatic cancer. matrix metalloproteinase  <dig>  has been found to be expressed in pancreatic cancers and has been positively correlated with metastasis  <cit> . furthermore, mmp <dig> has been found to be a diagnositc marker for pancreatic carcinoma in pancreatic juice  <cit> . in summary, the geneset negatively or positively associated to alcohol consumption in general characterizes healthy pancreatic tissue on one hand and the dense connective tissue reaction of pancreatic cancer involving fibronectin and collagens type i and iii on the other.

the difference between present and past alchohol consumption is shown statistically significant and extensively discussed in terms of associated genes in additional file  <dig>  in summary, genes associated with past alcohol consumption have been linked to physiological processes associated with increased risk for malignant transformation, pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, survival, invasion, metastasis, and impaired cell differentiation . in contrast to past alcohol consumption, present alcohol intake appears associated with the expression of immediate response genes to tissue damage, repair and remodeling, inflammatory and stress response .

discussion
whereas there is a wealth of methods published to analyze microarray data together with gene annotation, little has been done to integrate experiment annotation related to experimental protocols and sample description. general titles about ontology-driven analysis of microarray data often obscure that a publication is concerned solely with gene annotations. that does not mean that experiment annotations are regarded dispensable or not being worked on. there are projects under way to explicitly capture sample and experiment descriptions in unified ways. also, there are first attemtps to statistically analyze particular traits together with the transcription data. but the two approaches have remained unconnected yet.

we use large hierarchically ordered lists of factors in a way that renders all the data readily available for statistical access. rather than using only one framework for all fields of microarray research, these lists satisfy the specific requirements of each field, allowing for arbitrary levels of detail. we take into account also technical parameters to identify artifacts as well as flaws in experimental design. in providing means to statistically analyze explicit experiment descriptions covering all aspects that may be relevant, our approach links between sophisticated and holistic, yet complex, incomplete and therefore not readily statistically accessible standardization on one hand, and statistical analysis of few traits manually extracted from the literature on the other.

when processing detailed experiment descriptions, not all annotated traits correspond to transcription in a particular experimental context. they need to be preprocessed and filtered. afterwards, it is advisable to first consider technical artifacts before proceeding to biological variations that may well comprise smaller variance in some cases. after dealing with the technical variance feeding into the design of follow-up experiments, or simply resulting in the exclusion of hybridizations from further analysis, biological variabilities can be visualized. apart from the advantages listed in ref.  <cit> , ca is particularly convenient for the integration of characteristic traits common to more than one experiment because it works on the χ <dig> distance. this is the only one of its kind possessing a property called the 'principle of distributional equivalence'  <cit> : if column profiles are identical or similar, the corresponding columns can be merged by summation with no or little change to the positions of the rows. in our context, this guarantees the stability in distances between genes, when similar experimental conditions are merged into a representative trait common to all of them.

thus visualized, experiment annotations can be employed as landmarks in transcription space. they can be used to map crude overviews down to intricate details , allowing for a systematic interpretation of the entire variance of large datasets . there is no way of discussing the entire interpretable variance of the pancreas data within this paper. both a top-down and a bottom-up approach are sketched in example by their first step. not all of the biological variance may be of interest to a researcher. in a bottom-up  approach, the experiment annotations may serve to first pick aspects of particular interest, investigating the data aspect by aspect . in extreme, a single annotation  or only a subset of its values can be projected, before adding more annotations to study their interaction.

for explorative data analysis, however, it is more convenient to plot an overall overview as a first step before devisively splitting up the variance . figure  <dig> shows all traits meeting our filter-constraints, both projected by ca  and hierarchically clustered . by means of the latter, more general clusters can be identified. the single traits, by meeting the filter-criteria, stem from tightly clustered experimental conditions and correspond to relatively small, well-defined areas in transcription space. in contrast, the more general clusters show different ranges in transcription space .

another consequence of reducing the accounted variance to a small number of cluster-centroids is the enhanced projection quality. the two dimensions shown in fig. 2a explain only 87%  of the variability among the single traits. the same applies to the variability of the genes in respect of these traits. in practice, that means that many genes cannot be accurately characterized in two dimensions .

in general, n objects can be projected onto an n- <dig> dimensional  plane such that all their distances are preserved. as a consequence of reducing to three or four data points in gene-dimensional space, the two-dimensional ca plot perfectly or almost perfectly explains the complete remaining variance , respectively. differential genes can be accurately affiliated to the feature clusters, reflecting the behaviour of genes in an 'average' measurement showing the traits of one of the four clusters.

thus, few large areas in transcription space are characterized in terms of associated experiment annotation values as well as in terms of corresponding genes. the process may be iterated, investigating any of these areas  alone and recursively taken to subtle transcription patterns as a "guided tour" through the interpret able variance.

CONCLUSIONS
currently, data interpretation represents the main bottleneck in transcriptional profiling experiments on microarrays  <cit> . experiment annotations provide a means to systematically interpret microarray data. represented as prototype  profiles in transcription space, the experiment annotation traits function as tags for organizing an overwhelming amount of information for interpretation, breaking it down into digestible pieces that can be understood and catalogued. yet more variables, such as promotor sequences and protein levels could be integrated by ca, either as done so far, i. e. by applicative arrangement in a two-way table, or by multiple or joint correspondence analysis.

