BACKGROUND
the evolution of the vertebrate globin superfamily has been extensively studied for many decades by comparing the structure and function of members of the gene families. these are principally haemoglobin, myoglobin, cytoglobin and neuroglobin and, more recently, globin x  and globin y .

haemoglobin genes  are of particular interest because of their critical role in oxygen transportation from the respiratory surfaces to the inner organs, and because of the dire effects of mutations in human globin genes that cause haemoglobinopathies  <cit> . the genes contained in the alpha - and beta -globin clusters are expressed at different stages of development and in different tissues. together, gene products from both clusters form the functional tetrameric haemoglobin molecules needed to fulfil oxygen requirements.

the evolutionary history of α- and β-globin genes can be traced back to the common ancestors of fish, amphibians and amniotes , by comparing gene structure and composition of α- and β-globin clusters across vertebrates. in the amphibians xenopus laevis and x. tropicalis, α- and β-globin genes are tightly juxtaposed as 5'-α-β-3'  <cit> . in the antarctic notothenioid fish , there is also a single 5'-α-β-3' locus  <cit> , although in pufferfish  there are two globin clusters , which are located on different chromosomes  <cit> .

in amniotes, α- and β-globin clusters are located on different chromosomes. it was proposed that the ancestral α- and β-globin genes were located together in the common ancestor of amniotes, as they are in fish and amphibians, but became separated, either by chromosome fission or translocation between α- and β-genes, or by chromosome/genome or in trans duplication and gene loss  <cit> .

further duplications then occurred in amniote lineages. the ancestral α-globin gene is thought to have duplicated twice before the divergence of the bird-mammalian lineages, to produce progenitors of embryonic globin genes π/ζ, and adult αd and αa, all of which are present in birds   <cit>  and mammals  <cit> . the order and timing of these duplications is still debated, as is their origin: for instance, αd may have evolved by duplication either of adult αa , or of an embryonic α-like gene  <cit> . after the avian and mammalian lineages diverged, there were further tandem duplications of the π/ζ and αa lineages to produce more complex marsupial and eutherian  mammalian α-globin clusters, 5'-ζ-ψζ'-αd-ψα3-α2-α1-θ-3' . the timing of these duplication events is also uncertain, because we do not know whether these seven α-like globin genes all existed at the stem of the mammalian radiation.

as for many other gene families  <cit> , comparisons of globin genes between distantly related mammals have provided unique insight into the evolution and function of the mammalian globins. marsupials diverged from eutherian mammals about  <dig> million years ago , and mammalian subclass theria that contains these groups diverged from monotremes  about  <dig> mya  <cit> , so comparisons between these major mammal groups provide depth for evolutionary comparisons. monotremes retain many anatomical and developmental features shared with birds and reptiles. their small genome, too, and disjunct chromosome size classes are reminiscent of reptile genomes, and the  <dig> sex chromosomes in a karyotype of  <dig> chromosomes is unique among mammals  <cit> . their importance for comparative studies is now increasingly recognised after the sequencing of the genome of a monotreme, ornithorhynchus anatinus , to a depth of six to eight times by the washington university genome centre, st louis  <cit> .

indeed, studies of marsupial globins have clarified the timing of some of the duplications. the finding of single ε-  and β-globin  genes together in the marsupial β-globin cluster indicated that a two-gene cluster  was present in the common therian ancestor  <cit> . genes in the cluster were further duplicated to produce the ancestral eutherian β-globin cluster of 5'-ε-γ-η-δ-β-3' , which then underwent further tandem duplication events. in contrast, the bird  β-like globin genes  show very little homology to the mammalian β-like globin genes  <cit> .

the discovery of a β-like globin gene  adjacent  to the α-globin cluster in marsupials led to a re-interpretation of globin evolution in birds and mammals  <cit> . comparative sequence and phylogenetic analysis suggested that the ω-globin gene was more closely related to bird β-like globin genes than to other mammalian β-like globin genes. the specific function of the ω-globin gene is not yet known, but it is expressed just before birth and in the early stages of pouch young development  <cit> . in addition, the ω-globin product binds to α-like globin chains to form functional haemoglobin, so it is likely to be involved in oxygen transportation  <cit> .

this finding of a remnant β-like globin gene  beside the α-globin cluster in marsupials  <cit>  provided some support for the alternative hypothesis  <cit>  that the α- and β-globin clusters in birds and mammals arose by in trans duplication of a chromosomal region, rather than simply by separation of the ancestral α-β globin cluster by chromosome fission or translocation. wheeler et al.  <cit>  proposed that before the divergence of birds and mammals , the chromosome region bearing the ancestral α-β clusters duplicated to form two clusters  on different chromosomes, and their contents diverged independently in mammals and birds by silencing of some genes within each cluster . to account for the apparent orthology of the marsupial ω-globin gene and bird β-like globin genes, wheeler et al.  <cit>  suggested that the α <dig> and β <dig> were silenced in the eutherian lineage, but β <dig> was retained in marsupials as the ω-globin. in contrast, α <dig> and β <dig> were silenced in the bird lineage . on this hypothesis, then, both the α clusters and the β clusters of birds and mammals are paralogous  rather than orthologous .

this paralogy hypothesis , as well as the dates and types of other duplications, could be further tested by studying globin genes of monotreme mammals, and using comparative data to infer the ancestral globin gene arrangement of a mammal ancestor  <dig> mya. the availability of platypus genomic sequences now provides an efficient way to discover all of the globin genes and regulatory signals, and to understand their function and evolution. studies of globin genes in monotremes are also interesting because the specialized features and lifestyle of these unique mammals may have given rise to special adaptations of globin genes to fulfil unusual oxygen requirements. these features include the need for oxygen by diffusion through the egg membrane to the embryo after birth and the physiological response to hypoxic conditions during hibernation, burrowing and diving  <cit> .

little is known about monotreme α- and β-globin families. more than  <dig> years ago, studies of adult blood revealed a single adult α and β globin protein in the platypus  <cit>  and echidna . lee et al.  <cit>  later isolated an adult β-globin gene in the echidna that encoded a polypeptide identical to the previously isolated echidna β-globin  <cit> . to date, there is no evidence of any monotreme embryonic ζ- or ε-globin genes.

we used platypus genomic sequences from bacterial artificial chromosomes  to characterise the α- and β-globin gene families of the platypus and investigate their molecular evolution. in particular, we searched for embryonic and ω-globin genes and any novel globin genes that might fulfil the requirements for oxygen transport under hypoxic conditions. we investigated the genome context in order to infer the structure and origin of the ancestral α- and β-globin clusters at the stem of the mammalian radiation. our results strongly support the hypothesis that the mammalian α- and β-globin clusters are orthologous to the avian α- and β-globin clusters, respectively, and that the β cluster evolved by transposition of a copy of the beta-like ω-globin gene in an amniote ancestor.

RESULTS
identification of bac clones containing the α- and β-globin clusters
the draft sequence assembly of platypus  <cit>  is readily available on the university of california santa cruz  genome browser  <cit> . however, currently the assembly is incomplete for the α- and β-globin clusters, as individual globin genes appear on different contigs. there are also sequences of the platypus bac clones available in ncbi genbank that are not yet annotated and assembled, nor is part of the platypus genome assembly. two of these are oa_bb-2l <dig>  and oa_bb-131m <dig> , which were identified from the encyclopaedia of dna elements project to contain parts of the α-globin cluster . the bac clone oa_bb-484f <dig>  containing the β-globin cluster was obtained by screening a male platypus bac library  and was subsequently fully sequenced and assembled by the washington university genome sequencing centre . these sequences were therefore used in this study to characterise the whole α- and β-globin clusters in the platypus.

genes in these sequenced bac clones were predicted by programs genscan  <cit>  and genomescan  <cit> . many genes were predicted, which were then used for blast searches of nucleotide  and amino acid  databases to help identify them . phylogenetic analyses were also conducted for the platypus α- and β-like globin genes to further verify the identity of each gene . with only one exception , the identities of all of the genes inferred by blast analyses were supported by phylogenetic analyses with high posterior probabilities and bootstrap support values.

predictions and characterisation of genes in the platypus α-globin cluster
one bac  contained two embryonic α-like globin genes, and a second bac  contained six α-like globin genes and a β-like globin gene . these two bacs were found to overlap by  <dig>  base pairs , resulting in a contig of  <dig>  bp that contained the entire platypus α-globin cluster and flanking genes.

the  <dig>  bp α-globin contig was found to contain six α-like globin genes, a β-like globin gene, and a gene that bore little similarity to α- and β-like globin genes but some similarity to cytoglobins . these six α-like globin genes have a three-exon/two-intron structure and conserved donor/acceptor splice sites  typical of all vertebrate α-like globin genes. they are separated from each other by  <dig> to  <dig> kilobase pairs . full details of the exon/intron lengths, location of the putative poly-a addition site  and the lengths of the coding domains with the predicted encoded polypeptide for each predicted gene are given in table  <dig>  figure 5b shows the predictions for some of the well-characterised protein-binding sites in the 5' promoter region . these include caccc  <cit> , caat  <cit> , tata  <cit> , gata  <dig>  <cit> , eklf  and have been experimentally shown to control the stage- and tissue-specific expression of α- and β-like globin genes in other mammals  <cit> .

length/
genes





poly-a

peptide 
for each predicted gene, the length of the exons and introns, position of poly-a addition site  from the stop codon, and the length of their putative coding domain  and encoded polypeptide are shown. all genes contained consensus splice sites  in both introns.

two genes at the 5' end of the α-globin cluster were both identified as ζ-like  and predicted to encode polypeptides of  <dig> amino acids , which are typical of known functional mammalian α-like globin genes. the amino acid sequence alignment of ζ and ζ' shows 95% identity. in the promoter region of both genes, caccc and caat consensus boxes are conserved at similar positions, and in comparable order to that of human ζ and ζ' .

adjoining the two ζ-like globin genes, four other α-like globin genes were identified. one was an orthologue of bird and reptilian αd, and the other three were orthologues of adult α genes . the long and uninterrupted open reading frame  of αd strongly suggests that it encodes a functional polypeptide of  <dig> aa, typical of known functional αd globin genes. the platypus αd globin gene contains introns of  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp  that are very large compared with those of other α-like globins, which are usually less than  <dig> bp.

analyses of the platypus adult α-like globin genes reveal three adult  globin genes in the α-globin cluster. the sequence of α <dig>  was found to be almost identical to α <dig>  in their exon and intron regions, as well as in flanking regions of about  <dig> bp on both sides. the coding region was 100% identical, and just two sites in intron  <dig> were found to be different between the two genes. in order to confirm that identification of these two identical genes was not due to an error in the assembly of the original sequence data, the boundaries of the region containing the homology between α <dig> and α <dig> was further analysed by a blast search of the platypus whole-genome shotgun  database . two contigs were identified with homology to α <dig> and α3; these had identical sequences on one side of the boundary but different sequences on the other, confirming the presence of two separate genes. further confirmation was obtained by performing a southern blot on the α-globin-containing bacs, digested with an enzyme  that does not cut within the α <dig>  α2and α <dig> . probing with α1/α <dig> revealed two bright bands, corresponding to α <dig> and α <dig>  and one fainter band between them, corresponding to α <dig>  probing with α <dig> produced the same three bands, but in this case the middle one was brighter, corresponding to α <dig>  and the outer bands were fainter, corresponding to α <dig> and α <dig>  these analyses confirmed the existence of separate genes α <dig> and α <dig> in the platypus α-globin cluster. the α <dig> gene, located between α <dig> and α <dig>  was distinct from both genes in the coding sequence , in intron lengths  and in the promoter region .

the amino acid sequence encoded by α <dig> and α <dig> was identical to the platypus adult α-chain previously identified by whittaker and thompson  <cit> , implying that at least one of these genes is expressed in the adult platypus. the coding domain of α <dig> and α <dig> is shorter  than that of α <dig> , because it lacks the first three nucleotides of exon  <dig>  the orf of α <dig> gives a strong indication that it is translated into a functional polypeptide of  <dig> aa, typical of known functional mammalian α-like globin genes.

on the 3' side of the six α-like globin genes, a β-like globin gene was predicted, which was identified as the orthologue of the marsupial ω-globin gene. this platypus ω-globin gene has a typical three-exon/two-intron structure, conserved donor/acceptor splice sites, and encodes a polypeptide of  <dig> aa, typical of all vertebrate β-like globin genes . the promoter region located 5' of the ω-globin initiation codon contains conserved sites for caat-eklf-caccc in an order identical to that of marsupial ω-globin gene.

unexpectedly, genomescan predicted a gene based on the protein similarities with the α- and β-polypeptide chains, approximately  <dig>  kb 3' of the ω-globin gene. like other α- and β-globins, this gene also has a three-exon/two-intron structure and conserved donor/acceptor splice sites . the lengths of its exons  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> are  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively, compared with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp in other β-like globin genes. however, it has much larger introns of  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp . the long and uninterrupted orf of this gene can be translated into a polypeptide of  <dig> aa, which is atypical of any known α- or β-like globin genes. a blast search of the amino acid sequence of this gene obtained the best hit with globin y  of the amphibian x. laevis , and weaker identity scores with cytoglobins  of other species, such as the fish danio rerio , x. tropicalis , chicken  and human  at the protein level. we designated this gene 'gby' based on similarities with x. laevis gby, and its similar position adjoining the globin cluster  <cit> . the predicted polypeptide of platypus gby  was shorter than x. laevis gby , and quite different from x. laevis cygb , d. rerio cygb <dig>  and cygb <dig> , and human cygb . using the expressed sequence tag  database, a blast search of the platypus gby also obtained an identity score of 38% with x. tropicalis gby that was expressed in both tadpoles and adults, but produced no significant matches with any other mammalian genes. the present work was the first opportunity to analyse the promoter region of any gby gene .

predictions and characterisation of genes in the platypus β-globin cluster
in the platypus, only two β-like globin genes were predicted within the  <dig>  bp bac clone  by genscan and genomescan . when the predicted amino acid sequences were subjected to blast search, the 5' gene had best hits with mammalian embryonic ε-globin genes. although the phylogenetic analyses using bayesian inference  indicated that this gene was more closely related to the platypus and echidna adult β-globin genes than to therian ε-globin genes, the position of this gene on the 5' end of the β-globin cluster and expression data  supports its orthology with mammalian embryonic ε-globin genes, and is henceforth referred to as ε. the 3' gene encoded a protein identical to the previously identified platypus adult β-chain  <cit> , and is henceforth referred to as β.

both genes encode polypeptides of  <dig> aa, typical of known functional mammalian β-like globin genes. the promoter region of the platypus β has conserved sites of caccc and caat in all three extant of mammals. however, the promoter region of the platypus ε appears to be quite different from other mammalian ε-globin genes and even from the platypus β . the promoter of platypus ε contains only one predicted motif , whereas the promoters of other mammalian ε, β and the platypus β contain many predicted motifs.

expression studies of the platypus α- and β-like globin genes
transcription studies were performed to gain insight into the expression and function of all of the predicted platypus globin genes. adult liver, kidney, spleen, testis, lung and brain were obtained for this project: no embryonic samples were available  for this vulnerable and iconic species. observation of the expression of any of the predicted genes would constitute a good indication that the gene is transcriptionally active and functional.

reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  of all predicted platypus genes showed that they are all expressed in at least some of these adult platypus tissues . platypus genes α1/α <dig>  α <dig> and β, whose orthologues are usually expressed in the bone marrow of an adult human, were expressed in almost all platypus tissues tested, suggesting a broader expression of these genes in the monotreme lineage. surprisingly, the genes ζ, ζ' and ε, whose therian orthologues are expressed only at embryonic stages of development, were expressed in adult spleen and testis, but not in the other tissues of adult platypus. this suggests that persistent expression of these genes in some adult tissues was selected for in the platypus, perhaps in response to its aquatic lifestyle and the hypoxic conditions of a confined burrow. also, the expression pattern of platypus ε is similar to embryonic α-like ζ and ζ' but different from that of adult globin genes . the ω and αd globin genes, whose functions are unknown, were also expressed mainly in the spleen. gby was expressed in all adult platypus tissues, most strongly in testis.

phylogenetic analyses
phylogenetic analyses of the α-like globin genes using bi and maximum parsimony  produced several noteworthy results. the platypus adult α globin genes  grouped closely together to the exclusion of eutherian and marsupial α- and θ-globin genes for all analyses, although posterior probability  and bootstrap support  for this arrangement were relatively weak . this finding suggests that the duplication leading to the marsupial and eutherian θ-globin lineage occurred after the divergence of the monotreme and therian lineages. this is consistent with the absence of a θ-globin gene from the region between platypus α1- and ω-globin, its expected location based on its position in marsupial α-globin clusters  <cit> .

both platypus ζ-globin genes grouped closely together and formed a sister group relationship with chicken π, supported by a high posterior probability of 97% . a sister group relationship was also found in mp trees for analyses of the entire platypus coding region , and when third positions in the codon were excluded, was supported by 73% bootstrap pseudoreplicates . this differs from the expectation that platypus ζ-globin genes would group with other mammalian ζ-globin genes to the exclusion of chicken π, suggesting that other factors  operated to maintain a similar sequence in birds and monotremes.

there is still considerable uncertainty in the phylogenetic position of the αd-globin clade. it has recently been proposed that the αd globin lineage resulted from duplication of the embryonic α-globin lineage, with phylogenetic analyses supporting a sister lineage relationship of these lineages to the exclusion of the adult α-globin lineage  <cit> . however, this arrangement was not supported in bi analyses of the data set used here, and the position of the αd lineage was different in the different analyses. analyses using bi  supported the sister lineage relationship of the αd and adult α-globin lineages , with 87% posterior probability support. in contrast, all mp analyses supported the sister lineage status of αd and embryonic α-globin genes, indicating an uncertainty in the phylogenetic position of the αd-globin clade.

phylogenetic analyses of the β-globin genes provided results similar to recently reported phylogenetic analyses  <cit> , with one notable exception. the bi analyses of coding sequence data  provided strong support  for the sister relationship of bird and mammalian β-like globin genes, contradicting previously published phylogenies of mammalian β-globin genes showing a sister relationship of marsupial ω-globin and bird β-like globin genes  <cit> . mp analyses , excluding third position in the codon, gave a similar tree arrangement, albeit with very low bootstrap support . in marked contrast to the bi analyses of dna sequence data, bi protein analyses  supported the sister relationship of bird β-like globin and mammal ω-globin lineages with a high posterior probability .

lastly, phylogenetic analyses using bi indicated that the platypus ε gene was more closely related to the platypus and echidna adult β-globin genes than to therian ε-globin genes, suggesting it may not be orthologous to marsupial and eutherian ε-globin . bi analyses of β-globin protein data and mp analyses of the coding sequence data, with third codon positions excluded, grouped the gene as an ancestral lineage to eutherian and monotreme adult β-globin genes . this ancestral position suggests that the lineage evolved following duplication of an ancestral β-globin gene prior to the divergence of monotremes and therians.

location of the α- and β-globin clusters in the platypus
the location of the verified bac clones containing the α-  and β-globin  clusters in the platypus was determined by fluorescence in situ hybridisation  . the β-globin cluster localised to one of the largest autosomes, giving unambiguous signals on the long arm of chromosome  <dig> . the α-globin cluster localised to the smallest autosome,  <dig>  whose two arms are not distinguishable by size or dapi banding pattern  <cit> . this is the first gene that has been localised on the platypus chromosome  <dig> 

loci flanking the α- and β-globin clusters in the platypus and other vertebrates
to explore the genome context of the α- and β-globin clusters in the platypus and other vertebrates, the platypus bac sequences and the genomes of other sequenced species were searched for loci residing beside the α- and β-globin clusters.

as well as globin genes, genscan predicted within the platypus α-globin  <dig>  bp contig many genes that flank the platypus α-globin cluster , which were identified by blast analyses. these include il9rp3-polr3k-c16orf33-c16orf8-mpg-c16orf <dig> upstream  of the α-globin cluster, and, luc7l-itfg3-rgs11-arhgdig-pdia2-axin <dig> downstream  of the α-globin cluster .

to compare the α-globin flanking loci of the platypus and other vertebrates, the genes closest to the α-globin cluster, mpg, c16orf <dig> and luc7l were searched for in the human, opossum , chicken, frog  and zebrafish  genomes that were accessible from ensembl  <cit> . figure 8a shows that the locations of mpg, c16orf <dig> and luc7l are conserved adjacent to the α-globin cluster of birds and mammals, and in the same position adjacent to the α-β cluster of amphibians, and all but luc7l were also present in fish. these results are consistent with the previous analyses of flint et al.  <cit>  and hughes et al.  <cit> . thus the flanking loci analyses reveal that the genome context of the platypus α-globin cluster is the same as the α-globin clusters in therian mammals and birds, and this is the same as for the α-β cluster of fish and frogs.

genscan also predicted numerous genes other than globin genes in the platypus β-globin bac . these were identified by a blast search as members of the olfactory receptor gene  family that are responsible for odour detection. three conserved org members were identified at the 5' end of the platypus β-globin cluster and one conserved org member at the 3' end .

to compare β-globin flanking loci, org genes, as well as other genes that are closest to the β-globin cluster in other species, rrm <dig>  cckbr and ilk were searched for in the human, opossum, chicken and zebrafish genomes that were accessible from ensembl  <cit> . data from frog  was not useful since all of these loci lie on different contigs or scaffolds due to assembly problems. the locations of multiple org genes, rrm <dig>  cckbr and ilk were found to be conserved adjacent to β-globin cluster of birds and mammals  <cit> , but not for the α-β cluster of fish and frogs, nor beside the second α-β cluster of zebrafish and pufferfish . thus the genome context of the platypus β-globin cluster is the same as in therian mammals and birds, but this is different from the α-β cluster of fish and frogs.

discussion
the phylogenetic position of monotremes makes comparisons with platypus of special value for exploring the organization, function and evolution of mammalian genes and genomes. the availability of platypus genome sequence data now makes many such studies possible, and have been used here to characterise the platypus α- and β-globin gene clusters and explore their evolutionary history.

the platypus α-globin gene cluster
the platypus α-globin cluster contains at least eight genes within more than  <dig> kb, including six α-like globin genes , one β-like globin gene  and a gene belonging to another member of the globin super-family  arranged in the order 5'-ζ-ζ'-αd-α3-α2-α1-ω-gby-3' . the cluster maps to chromosome  <dig>  the smallest autosome in platypus. all eight genes are likely to be functional since their expression was detected in tissues of an adult platypus.

the platypus α-globin cluster is almost identical to the arrangement of α-like globin genes in the ancestral therian cluster reported by cooper et al.  <cit> . the one exception is the absence of a θ-globin gene from the platypus cluster. phylogenetic analyses support the basal position of the monotreme adult α-globin lineage relative to marsupial and eutherian α- and θ-globin lineages, implying that the duplication of an adult α-globin to produce θ-globin occurred in the therian lineage after its divergence from the monotreme lineage . however, although the numbers and arrangements of genes is so similar in platypus and therians, the presence of three adult α-globin genes and two embryonic ζ-globin genes in their common ancestor was not supported by phylogenetic analyses, which showed independent groupings of the three adult and embryonic genes within each separate mammalian lineage . this result can be interpreted literally as resulting from independent duplications in each mammalian lineage to produce three adult and two embryonic genes in each. however, this seems unlikely to explain the convergence in gene number of the α-globin cluster in these distantly related mammalian lineages. we suggest that a more parsimonious explanation is that the common ancestor of monotremes and therians contained three adult α-globin genes and two ζ-globin genes, which were homogenised by ongoing gene conversion events, leading to the gene tree that does not match the duplication history of the individual genes. the close similarity of the platypus α <dig> and α <dig> loci suggests a very recent gene conversion event that homogenised their sequences. therefore, we propose that the platypus α-globin cluster of eight genes  represents the ancestral mammalian α-globin cluster arrangement , in which all genes were transcriptionally active.

importantly, the platypus α-globin cluster contains a copy of the β-like ω-globin gene, also found in the marsupial α-globin cluster, but absent in humans, supporting the hypothesis that ω-globin was present in the common ancestor of all mammals. phylogenetic analyses also confirm the ancient ancestry of the ω-globin gene, as concluded by wheeler et al.  <cit> . among adult platypus tissues this gene was expressed only in the spleen. in marsupials, expression of the ω-globin gene was detected just prior to birth and during early pouch young development  <cit> , although the site of expression was not studied, and there was no evidence of adult expression in blood cells.

discovery of a mammalian gby globin gene adjoining the α-globin cluster
we discovered a globin gene gby in the platypus that is adjacent  to ω in the α-globin cluster. it has a typical three-exon/two-intron structure like other α/β-globin genes, contains an orf encoding a polypeptide chain of  <dig> aa, and is expressed in almost all adult tissues, most strongly in testis. the amino acid sequence is unrelated to any of the other globin genes in the cluster, so it is unlikely to be derived by duplication of α- or ω-globin within the monotreme lineage. rather, it shows sequence similarity to gby of x. tropicalis and x. laevis, a gene thought to be related to cytoglobins  <cit> .

little is known of the function of amphibian gby, or its relationship with other globins. fuchs et al.  <cit>  reported that amphibian gby encodes a bona fide globin of  <dig> aa, having all of the sequence features of a functional respiratory protein. gby was expressed in all adult tissues tested in x. laevis, most strongly in ovary, kidney and eye, and was present in  <dig> expressed sequence tag clones from different stages of x. laevis and x. tropicalis embryonic and adult development  <cit> , suggesting that it is expressed in embryonic as well as adult stages. phylogenetic analysis of all vertebrate globins  <cit>  showed that the gby lineage diverged at the base of two separate clades, one comprising all vertebrate cytoglobins, myoglobins, agnathan globins and bird globin e, and the other comprising the haemoglobin α- and β-chains.

the position of platypus gby adjacent to the α-globin cluster and flanked by luc7l mirrors its position in x. tropicalis between the main α-β cluster and luc7l  <cit> . another common feature of both was strong expression in gonads , so gby has sex-related expression in both lineages. thus gby is not specific to amphibians, as was thought, but was a component of the cluster in an ancient tetrapod, and has been lost, or has diverged beyond recognition, in birds and therian mammals.

the platypus β-globin gene cluster
characterisation of the platypus β-globin cluster revealed two β-like globin genes over about  <dig>  kb that are arranged in the same order as marsupials, 5'-ε-β-3' . this cluster is located on platypus chromosome 2q <dig> . both genes appear to be transcriptionally active and are likely to be functional.

at the time of revising this paper, an independent paper on monotreme β-like globin genes was published by opazo et al.  <cit>  in which they reported the presence of ω, εp and βp in the platypus. largely on the basis of phylogenetic analyses of flanking and coding sequence data, they proposed that platypus εp and βp were not 1: <dig> orthologues of therian ε and β, respectively, and arose by independent duplication of an ancestral β-globin gene in the monotreme lineage, with a separate duplication event, just prior to the divergence of therians, producing the progenitors of ε and β of therians. this hypothesis was strongly supported by our bi phylogenetic  analyses, but not by mp analyses of coding sequence data, with third codon sites excluded , or bi analyses of protein sequence data . these contradictory analyses highlight the difficulty in resolving deep relationships among globin genes, particularly when the time periods between duplication and speciation events are relatively small, the phylogenetic signal at third codon positions is potentially saturated, and non-synonymous sites may be subjected to purifying or positive selection. despite a very high posterior probability  for the grouping of platypus ε with monotreme β, this value is a bayesian probability and depends on the model adequately representing the evolution of the gene. furthermore, although it was reported  <cit>  that the 5' flanking sequences of platypus ε and β were similar, we found no evidence for similarity of the promoter signals of these two genes .

we consider that a more parsimonious explanation is that the platypus ε is orthologous to the marsupial and eutherian embryonic β-like globin lineages , and arose by duplication of an ancestral β-globin gene prior to the mammalian radiation . the sequence of platypus ε may have been homogenised by some gene conversion events, leading it to group with other monotreme adult β-like globin genes. in addition to the mp analyses reported above, this explanation is further supported by the conserved position of ε to the 5' side of the adult β-globin gene in the platypus cluster, which is similar to that found in other therian β-globin gene clusters  <cit> ; see also  <cit> ). amino acid sequence analyses  also provided additional support for the orthology of platypus ε to other mammalian ε-globin genes. although we were unable to examine the expression of the genes in embryonic tissues, it was found that the expression profile of the platypus ε was similar to the embryonic α-like globins ζ and ζ' of the platypus, but not to the adult β-globin gene, supporting its potential role as an embryonic β-like globin gene.

the ω-globin gene and the evolution of the β-globin cluster
the discovery of the marsupial ω-globin gene in the α-globin cluster  <cit>  was critical in re-interpreting the relationships of the α- and β-globin clusters in amniotes  to favour the hypothesis that these clusters in birds and mammals are paralogous, having diverged independently from different ancestral copies of the vertebrate α-β-globin locus  <cit> .

our observation of an ω-globin gene in the α-globin cluster in the platypus, as well as in the marsupials, confirms that the ancestral mammal α-globin cluster contained a β-like globin gene that was lost in eutherians, as proposed by wheeler et al.  <cit> . however, the position of monotreme and marsupial ω in the phylogeny  is more consistent with the original hypothesis  <cit>  that mammal and bird β-globin are orthologous, having descended from the same β-globin progenitor in an amniote ancestor, and this is strongly supported by flanking sequence data . our data support the proposition that the ω -globin gene represents an ancient β-like globin gene lineage that is ancestral to a group containing both mammalian and bird β-globins with a high posterior probability . this arrangement, however, was not supported by analyses of amino acid sequence data, indicating that there is uncertainty in the phylogenetic position of ω-globin relative to bird β-globins, or that convergent evolution of bird β-globin genes and ω-globin resulted in their similarity at the protein level. to further resolve the key question of whether bird and mammal β-globin gene clusters are orthologous we carried out comparative analyses of flanking loci of the α- and β-globin clusters.

genome context of vertebrate α- and β-globin clusters
we found that the platypus α-globin cluster is flanked by mpg, c16orf <dig>  gby and luc7l, and that the same genes  flank the α-globin cluster in mammals and birds  <cit> . the same genes flank the α-β cluster of frog, and even zebrafish and the α-cluster of pufferfish  <cit>  , implying that a very ancient region containing these genes , or perhaps an even larger region, was present in their common ancestor and has been conserved since the evolution of jawed vertebrates more than  <dig> mya.

in contrast, the amniote β-globin clusters reside in a very different genome, sharing none of the flanking loci with the mammal and bird α-globin clusters, or the α-β cluster of frogs and fish. in platypus, as well as in therian mammals  <cit> , the β-globin clusters are flanked by numerous org genes on both sides. in birds, also, the β-globin cluster is embedded in org genes  <cit> . even the outside loci rrm <dig>  cckbr and ilk lie in the same orientation with respect to the bird and mammalian β-globin clusters  <cit> , suggesting that the 5'-rrm1-org-β -org-cckbr-ilk-3' arrangement has been conserved since before the divergence of birds and mammals, more than  <dig> mya. therefore, the bird β-globin cluster is orthologous to the β-globin clusters of mammals.

CONCLUSIONS
new model for the evolution of α- and β-globin clusters in amniotes
this analysis of flanking loci, in addition to the phylogenetic analyses reported above, refutes the prevailing hypothesis that mammal and bird α- and β-globin clusters evolved from different  copies of an ancestral α-β-globin region containing mpg-c16orf35-α -β -gby-luc7l. rather, the context of β-globin clusters within olfactory receptor genes in birds as well as mammals suggests that a copy of a β-globin locus was moved into a region replete with org genes before the divergence of birds and mammals  <dig> mya. the precise mechanism for this translocation is unknown, but is likely to be either by transposition of a tandem duplicate of an ancestral β-globin gene, or retrotransposition of an intron-containing primary transcript. phylogenetic analyses suggest that this ancestral β-globin gene within the α-globin cluster is represented by the platypus and marsupial ω-globin gene. the transposed β-globin gene then independently duplicated several times within the avian and mammalian lineages to form the different clusters of differentially expressed β-globin genes. full details of this new model are given in figure 9a and 9b.

this hypothesis could be further tested by investigating the gene organization of the α- and β-globin clusters in reptiles such as lizards and snakes, which form a sister group to birds. our hypothesis predicts that reptiles should possess a mpg-c16orf35-α -β -gby-luc7l cluster, and an unlinked rrm1-org-β -org-ccbkr-ilk cluster like birds and mammals. the full genome sequence of the first reptilian species,anolis carolinensis, will provide an opportunity to test this hypothesis.

