BACKGROUND
fluorescence in situ hybridisation  is used extensively and routinely in plant genome analysis . it is particularly useful for applications such as comparing genome organisation in series of species or accessions  or identifying introgressions  where relatively large numbers of samples may be desirable. a major limitation in such studies is the low capacity of fish methods, especially when compared to the high throughput of complementary molecular methods, such as southern hybridisation and pcr. this limitation is further exacerbated by the need to make a number of duplicate experiments to control for variation between slides when comparing differential fish signals. an approach that has been widely though infrequently used for comparative fish is to combine substrates on a single slide  <cit> . although far more exacting controls are required for accurate quantification  <cit> , this approach does enhance reproducibility and allows a greater number of samples to be processed per slide. here we present an optimised, combined substrate method suitable for both monocot and dicot plant species.

RESULTS
two factors were found to be of critical importance for the success of multi-substrate hybridisation experiments, namely the conditions used for enzymatic digest of each species and the conditions used for placing the substrates onto slides. provided that these conditions are optimised, we find that separate distribution of the various substrates can be reliably achieved, allowing comparison even of samples with similar or identical karyotypes . the optimal time of enzymatic digestion is that which allows intact meristems to be easily extruded from the root tip. shorter times prevent complete removal of surrounding tissues such as root epiderm and calyptra, which compromise the quality of the chromosome spread, while longer times may result in disintegration of meristems and subsequent dispersal of chromosomes across the slide when cover slips are applied. optimal digest times must be established for each species separately.

it is also necessary to transfer each of the substrates in a small volume, no more than  <dig> μl, and to dispense them so that each substrate is approximately the same distance from the nearest edge of the cover slip . these arrangements minimise displacement and possible loss of material when applying the cover slip. we found  <dig> mm ×  <dig> mm cover slips most suitable for making triple-substrate preparations. it is difficult to achieve well distributed but non-overlapping spreads of samples if smaller cover slips are used, while use of longer, rectangular cover slips impedes even spreading of acetic acid, frequently leading to incorporation of air bubbles.

triple substrate chromosome preparation of avena
cultivated oat, avena sativa, is a hexaploid made up of two genomes  which are closely related, plus a third  that may be easily distinguished from the first two by gish  using total nuclear dna from wild avena species. the a and d genomes have only recently been distinguished by fish  <cit>  and it is of interest to clarify their relationship to genomes of wild species. root tip meristems from three different species of avena  were used for triple substrate chromosome preparations and subjected to multicolour fish with a mixture of three retrotransposon sequences. probe kk <dig>   is restricted to centromeric regions of chromosomes belonging to both of the two genomes in a. agadiriana , one of the two genomes in a. murphyi  and two of the three genomes in a. sterilis . probe kk <dig>   labels intensely only one of the two genomes in a. agadiriana , to a slightly lesser extent, one of the two genomes in a. murphyi , and one of the three genomes in a. sterilis . probe kk <dig>   is totally absent from the chromosomes of a. agadiriana  but paints intensively the chromosomes of one genome in both a. murphyi  and in a. sterilis . thus, a. agadiriana is seen to be an ab tetraploid and lacks the c-genome specific kk <dig>  target, and a. sterilis is an acd hexaploid, with the a and d genomes differentiated by the kk <dig>  probe. the use of multi-substrate fish allows an accurate comparison to be made of the extent of hybridisation of the kk <dig>  probe, so that it can easily be seen that the non-c genome in a. murphyi shows levels of the kk <dig>  target intermediate between the a. sterilis a and d genomes, indicating that it is not a recent progenitor of a. sterilis or, by extension, cultivated hexaploid oat.

triple substrate chromosome preparation of brachypodium
wild tetraploid and hexaploid accessions of b. distachyon were found which formed a series based upon 2n = 2x =  <dig>  and were proposed to be autopolyploids  <cit> . however, our comparative gish analyses  <cit>  indicated that accession abr <dig> is in fact an allotetraploid containing two genomes similar or identical to those in two diploid species previously described as abr <dig> and abr <dig> accessions of b. distachyon. multiple substrate fish allowed us to investigate this further. figure 1d-i shows distribution of selected clones of a b. distachyon bac library landed in chromosomes of b. distachyon and two closely related species. the 41-a <dig> clone  hybridises to the distal part of one arm of the largest and metacentric pair of chromosomes in the complement, while 59-f <dig>  gives well defined signals in the proximal and pericentromeric part of the same arm. the 47-f <dig> clone  maps to the distal part of the short arm on small subterminal chromosomes, while the 25s ribosomal dna probe  gives prominent hybridisation signals in the distal part of the short arm on the shortest pair of chromosomes in the complement. strikingly, apart from the rdna probe, the bac dna-based probes do not hybridise to abr <dig> chromosomes , while the results observed in abr <dig>  are the perfect amalgam of those obtained separately for b. distachyon abr <dig> and for abr <dig> 

two further clones, 41-e <dig>  and 1-h <dig> , hybridise to the interstitial regions of two different arms of the second largest and metacentric pair of chromosomes in the complement of b. distachyon abr <dig> . in abr <dig>  the same clones map subterminally in two different pairs of chromosomes , while in abr <dig> , as in the case of the bac clones described above , the number and chromosomal distribution of bac-fish signals makes the sum of the results obtained for b. distachyon abr <dig> and for abr <dig>  which further confirms putative allotetraploid status of the accession abr <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the main aim of this study was to develop a method of chromosome preparation that would improve the efficiency of fish as a technique for comparing closely related species in genera such as avena and brachypodium. our results show that multi-substrate preparations may offer not only significantly higher throughput but also better reproducibility and reliability of semi-quantitative comparisons of signal intensity than routinely used single-substrate chromosome preparations, especially when hybridised simultaneously to several dna probes in multicolour fish experiments. this improvement in efficiency has allowed us to use fish as an alternative to some molecular analyses, for example in screening repetitive sequences for potential species-specific variation in distribution, and so will accelerate studies aimed at understanding the evolution of complex plant genomes.

