BACKGROUND
development of the central nervous system  is inherently complex. neural plate induction is evident as thickening of epiblasts to form neuroectoderm. however, the precise interplay between the molecular pathways responsible for nervous system induction are less apparent. early specification of central epiblasts to a neural fate is influenced by fibroblast growth factor  production while induction of non-neural epithelium in the periphery occurs through wingless-type  and bone morphogenic protein  expression. fgf along with molecules that emanate from the organizer  later serves to limit bmp expression to the neural/epidermal border and thus maintain neural plate boundaries  <cit> . maturation of the neural plate/neuroectoderm reenlists developmental pathways that are recycled to function as directors of proliferation, migration or establish repulsive/attractive environments within synaptogenesis. for example, after initial induction of the cns, fgfs are subsequently re-utilized to maintain caudal progenitors by inhibiting differentiation  <cit> , and later establish repulsive  versus attractive  environments to aid in directing cell migration  <cit> . finally, fgfs are again used in cns maturation by orchestrating neuronal networking through synaptogenesis  <cit> .

once established, the cns has limited regenerative capacity  <cit> . inhibitory factors associated with myelin are released after cns damage and block axonal outgrowth. several potent myelin-associated inhibitors of neurite outgrowth have been isolated, including nogo-a  <cit> . antibody neutralization of nogo-a allows axon growth into myelin  <cit>  and identifies this factor as a critical endogenous inhibitor of cns regeneration. nogo/ is a member of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated "reticulon"  family whose members have two hydrophobic, membrane spanning domains in the carboxyl-terminus. the nogo gene gives rise to three main transcripts based on alternative splicing and variant promoter usage: nogo-a, nogo-b and nogo-c . between the two membrane spanning domains is a  <dig> amino acid extracellular loop that acts as a ligand to a specific nogo <dig> receptor   <cit> . however, only in nogo-a, the largest transcript, has the receptor/ligand interaction been linked to neurite inhibition. two other functional domains  have been identified that inhibit neurite outgrowth.

in adults, nogo-a predominately localizes to oligodendrocytes  <cit>  and can also be found at low levels in neurons of thalamic nuclei, cranial nerve nuclei and the purkinje cell layer of the cerebellum  <cit> . in contrast, nogo-a is widespread in fetal neurons  <cit> . interestingly, the nogo receptor  is absent in the embryonic and fetal brain  <cit> . thus, the presence of nogo-a during cns development when regeneration is possible  <cit>  and ngr is absent, hints at an additional role for nogo-a.

in this report we describe the induction and temporospatial expression of nogo-a from the earliest stages of cns development with the induction of neuroectoderm. we also describe a progressive increase in nogo-a expression with chick brain development. we further localized and correlated this progressive increase in nogo-a expression to specific cell types and key events of cns development within the highly organized chick optic tectum. collectively, our results suggest a fundamental role for nogo-a in cns development and maturation that is unrelated to its later role as an inhibitor of axonal regeneration.

RESULTS
isolation and northern analysis of chicken nogo-a
we isolated and cloned the chicken nogo-a coding and 3' untranslated region. the nogo-a sequence aligned to chromosome  <dig> of the chicken genome with  <dig> exons spanning  <dig> kb . sequence comparison with the chicken genome revealed the nogo-a sequence to be lacking  <dig> bp within the first exon. given that nogo-a and -b isoforms originate from alternative splicing, we deduced our isolated sequence to be a shorter splice variant, classified as nogo-a <dig>  northern analysis with a nogo-a specific probe  confirmed the secondary splice product. the larger nogo-a <dig> and nogo-b isoforms were predicted based on the chicken genome and northern hybridization. the chicken nogo-c sequence was described previously  <cit> .

to determine the expression profile of nogo-a during cns development, we used the nogo-a specific probe for northern analysis. hybridization with poly-a rna isolated from chick brains of hh <dig> , hh <dig> , hh <dig>  and hh <dig>  revealed a  <dig>  kb band , consistent with nogo-a transcripts in other species  <cit> , and a shorter  <dig>  kb band  . at the earliest stage  the longer nogo-a <dig> transcript was nearly absent. overall, combined nogo-a expression increased with development reaching a maximum just prior to hatching .

to ascertain whether nogo isoforms were differentially expressed during development, we designed a probe to the 3' end of nogo which was common to the nogo-a, nogo-b and nogo-c isoforms and performed northern blot analysis of the same embryonic stages as above. in agreement with our previous data,  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb transcripts were found corresponding to nogo-a <dig> and a <dig>  in addition,  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb bands corresponding to the nogo-b and nogo-c isoforms were also identified . collectively, nogo transcription increased with development. the nogo-a profile demonstrated by the common probe was the same as that of the nogo-a specific probe. the progressive changes in nogo-b expression were similar to nogo-a at early stages, but showed a marked increase at e <dig>  in contrast, nogo-c, which localizes to neurons and mesenchymal tissues, exhibited strong somewhat uniform expression throughout development. northern analyses were quantified by densitometry of the autoradiographs and normalized to β-actin levels .

identification of evolutionarily conserved regions
multiple alignment of the chicken nogo-a shared 49%, 47%, 46% and 32% identity with human, mouse rat and xenopus , respectively. the c-terminal 189aa, i.e., the common nogo/reticulon region, exhibited significant conservation  consistent with what has been previously reported  <cit> . in addition, eight conserved regions  were found within the nogo-a specific coding sequence, suggesting potential functional domains . conserved regions had ≥ 70% for  <dig> or more amino acids with a sequence identity/strong group conservation. strong group refers to amino acids with similar chemical structure and function. interestingly, there was no significant conservation found within the first two coding regions shared by nogo-a and -b isoforms, although this region corresponds to a previously identified inhibitory domain in rat, nirΔ <dig>  <cit> . rather, the first conserved region  initiated at the first amino acid residue of the nogo-a specific coding region. additionally, cr4- <dig> correspond to a potent inhibitory domain, nigΔ <dig>  <cit> .

expression during neurulation
the quantitative limitations of northern analysis precluded our ability to detect nogo-a expression at the earliest stages of chick cns development. thus, we used whole mount in situ hybridization  to detect and localize low levels of transcript expression to developing structures and cell layers. nogo-a gene expression was detected as early as hh <dig> within the primitive streak and node  and remained within these organizing structures until their regression. nogo-a subsequently localized to the forming cns during neural plate induction . expression was lacking in the notochord and overlying neuroectoderm of the presumptive neural groove . furthermore, expression was asymmetric within the primitive node, being restricted to the right side. nogo-a expression increased during neural tube formation  and attained the full length of the body axis within the primitive spinal chord by hh <dig>  also of note was the focal presence of nogo-a associated with forming somites .

expression during tectal development
spatiotemporal expression of nogo-a during pivotal stages of tectal development was next characterized. the expression was then correlated with stage-specific functional markers by ihc.

during cellular proliferation
neuroepithelial proliferation peaks at hh <dig> ; by hh <dig>  proliferation decreases to minimal levels  <cit> . to determine whether nogo-a expression is related to proliferative activity, we compared expression at hh <dig> and hh <dig>  at hh <dig>  the primitive optic tectum is composed of a psuedostratified layer of neural ectoderm, i.e. the generative zone . nogo-a expression was weak and diffuse throughout the gz. in contrast, proliferative cell nuclear antigen  staining was intense within most nuclei . at hh <dig>  nogo-a expression increased within the residual neuroepithelium, now termed ventricular zone , whereas pcna staining is nearly absent in the post-proliferative vz .

during cell migration
the eventual stratified organization of the tectum mandates reorganization of the proliferating neuroectoderm through migration and sequential lamination. to evaluate the expression of nogo-a during early lamination, we examined the optic tectum at hh <dig> . at this stage there is an undifferentiated layer of proliferating neuroepithelium , an expanding migratory zone , and the first neuronal lamina  . nogo-a expression could be distinguished within all layers of the e <dig> tectum . to differentiate the expression of nogo-a between neurons and the supporting cells of the mz, specifically radial glia, we performed ihc for neurofilament-m and vimentin, respectively. magnified views of the mz  show nogo-a expression more closely resembled the neurofilament staining of the neuronal nuclei and their delicate processes . however, the intensity of nogo-a expression was similar in all three zones and did not appear to be limited to actively migrating neurons within the mz .

during network establishment
to evaluate the expression of nogo-a during network establishment, i.e. neuronal maturation, fiber growth, and synaptogenesis, we compared expression patterns of pre-synaptogenic  and post-synaptogenic  stages. at e <dig>  prominent nogo-a expression was present at the periphery of the vz and radiated towards the cellular cortex . magnified view of nogo-a in the tectal cortex showed heightened expression within the compartment stratum griseum centrale , the presumptive layer of tectal projection neurons and the only well defined compartment at this stage . nogo-a is not a marker of cellularity as the sgc is cell poor relative to adjacent developing lamina . expression was also increased throughout cells of the forming tectal-associated nuclei , in contrast to the nearby fibers of the unmyelinated optic tract .

by e <dig>  the tectum has formed the basic architecture with all lamina represented. nogo-a expression does not appear to have increased with expansion and maturation of the tectum . rather, a redistribution of expression to larger neurons has occurred throughout the tectum and tectal-associated nuclei. at higher magnification, nogo-a expression continued to be accentuated within somata of larger neurons, as again exemplified by multipolar neurons of the sgc . increased expression was also present within some of the larger neurons of the now formed multi-laminated stratum griseum et fibrosum superficiale , the major retinal afferent layer of the tectum.

immunohistochemistry for neurofilament  in a tectal associated nuclei, the nucleus spiriformis lateralis, co-localized nogo-a with large neurons typical of tectal associated nuclei while stains for astrocytes  and glial progenitor cells  showed less overlap with nogo-a . although nogo-a expression correlated best with these large neurons, it should be noted that nogo-a could also be seen at low levels in cell bodies that were neither nf, vimentin nor gfap positive, which likely represent differentiating oligodendrocytes.

during myelination of axon tracts
the transition between network establishment and maintenance is coupled to myelination of established axonal tracts. oligodendrocyte differentiation within the chick tectum occurs between e12–e <dig>  <cit> . to determine the correlation of increased nogo-a expression within axon tracts and oligodendrocyte related myelination, we again looked at the e <dig> and e <dig> chick brain, stages which precede and follow oligodendrocyte differentiation. axonal tracts of the e <dig> chick brain are noticeably devoid of nogo-a expression in comparison to the surrounding nogo-a positive neurons . in contrast, the e <dig> brain reveals significant nogo-a expression within the axonal tracts relative to the surrounding tissue.

nogo-a is up-regulated by fgf4
because nogo-a expression coincides with the formation of the neural plate, we evaluated whether nogo-a could be induced in cranial non-neural epiblasts in response to ectopic application of fgf , an early initiator of neural programming. a number of fgfs are expressed during neural induction  and might play a role in the initiation of the neural program. fgf <dig> is often used in overexpression assays because it causes neural induction at a significantly lower concentration than other fgfs. this is believed to be due to the fact that fgf <dig> binds to a number of fgf receptors and is likely to reproduce the activity of other fgfs  <cit> . we found that nogo-a expression was up-regulated around beads soaked in fgf <dig>  three hours after application in hh 3+/ <dig> chick embryos . this rapid fgf induced up-regulation of nogo-a was equivalent to sox <dig>  an early pre-neural marker . nogo-a expression persisted around the bead for at least  <dig> hours . pbs control beads did not up-regulate either sox <dig> or nogo-a .

discussion
a role for nogo-a as an inhibitor of cns regeneration is well known, where expression is restricted to the axon ensheathing oligodendrocytes  <cit> . nogo-a found within the plasma membrane of oligodendrocytes inhibits neurite outgrowth by promoting growth cone collapse. it was unexpected, therefore, when we and others found this inhibitory protein expressed during cns development, and in particular, within developing neurons  <cit> . our study profiles the expression of nogo-a as it relates to key phases of cns development: induction, proliferation, migration/differentiation, and network establishment. while the embryonic expression of nogo-a has been reported  <cit> , most fetal studies have focused on its role as an inhibitor of cns regeneration  <cit> . our results imply that during development nogo-a has a function that is different from its "adult" role of inhibiting cns regeneration.

conservation of the nogo-a sequence
when aligned with human, rat, mouse and xenopus amino acid sequences, the chicken nogo-a sequence has a high degree of identity  in the carboxyl-terminal, reticulon-specific portion that is present in all three major isoforms . multiple alignment of widely different species also revealed eight conserved regions  within the nogo-a specific coding sequence . this conservation implies preservation of domains that are functionally significant. previous functional domains have been identified in regions common to all nogo isoforms , and in the nogo-a specific region , but have been linked to inhibitory roles in neurite outgrowth and cell spreading  <cit> . the nigΔ <dig> inhibitory domain overlaps three highly conserved regions identified in our analysis  suggesting a conserved function across taxa. interestingly, nirΔ <dig> does not correspond to one of the highly conserved regions and previous reports have demonstrated poor preservation of this region in amphibians  <cit> . collectively, these data may indicate a mammalian specific role for nirΔ <dig>  several highly conserved regions remain in this long protein without known functional roles. it is likely that one or more of these regions are important for nogo-a's participation in development, however, further studies are needed to validate this prospect.

differential regulation of nogo during development
expression of the nogo-c isoform was broad and persistent in the developing brain by northern analysis and was in accord with adult expression profiles, where nogo-c can be found in neurons as well as skeletal muscle  <cit> . the larger  isoforms showed progressive expression with development . interestingly, we identified two nogo-a transcripts in the chick, which confirms an earlier report identifying two nogo-a bands by immunoblot  <cit> . sequence analysis against the published chicken genome verified the two bands as alternative splice products, with the smaller band resulting from a secondary splice site in exon  <dig>  similar to what is observed in xenopus  <cit> . it is unclear what functional advantage these two splice variants offer, however, there appears to be differential stage-specific expression by northern analysis which suggests stage-specific roles.

a role for nogo-a in cns induction
the onset of neurulation is defined by formation of the neural plate. nogo-a is induced in the neural plate during its formation and persists in structures derived from neuroectoderm. furthermore, our data demonstrate that transformation of non-neural ectoderm into presumptive neuroectoderm by ectopic fgf is characterized by rapid induction of sox <dig>  and nogo-a . recent microarray analysis supports this finding with the identification of nogo-a in human and porcine neural precursor cells  <cit> . these findings suggest that nogo-a participates in specifying neuronal identity and/or differentiation.

however, non-neuronal nogo-a expression was also present in the primitive streak and node, structures which precede neural plate formation . nogo-a expression persists within these structures until their regression. this differential induction indicates tissue specific and temporal-spatial regulation of nogo-a. interestingly, there was asymmetrical right-sided nogo-a expression within the primitive node  and scant expression in the notochord and presumptive neural groove immediately overlying the notochord. this unique expression pattern is complimentary to the expression of sonic hedgehog , a morphogen critical to patterning of the developing neural tube . nogo-a also exhibits focal expression associated with somite formation at what may be the sites of future dorsal root ganglia and spinal nerves. we and others have shown that dorsal root ganglia have robust nogo-a expression   <cit> .

the cells of the neural plate, primitive streak/node and somites all demonstrate rapid growth and patterned structural transformations. it is possible that nogo-a may have neural-specific roles and additional broader roles related to morphogenesis. changes in cell shape and migration are orchestrated by cytoskeletal reorganization. nogo-a signaling has been linked to the downstream activation of the small gtpase, rhoa  <cit> . in development, the rho family, through rho kinases, regulates cytoskeletal reorganization associated with changes in cell shape such as the formation of axons and dendrites  <cit> . moreover, the published expression of rho kinase α  <cit>  overlaps the expression of nogo-a shown here. inhibition of rho kinases results in disrupted formation of the brain/neural tube, reduced caudal extension of the primitive streak and loss of left-right asymmetry. the asymmetric expression of nogo-a within the primitive node, and its expression within the primitive streak may indicate an additional role for this protein in organogenesis and tissue identity.

additional roles in later cns development
many molecules critical to cns development have multiple functions. molecules such as fgfs, shh, bmps and wnts, once thought to play isolated roles in development, have now also been linked with several steps in neurulation and cns development including formation of the neuronal circuitry through axon guidance and synaptogenesis  <cit> . the expression of nogo-a at key phases of cns development from neural induction to definitive network establishment suggests that this factor may also have multiple functions.

to examine potential roles of nogo-a during specific phases of cns development we utilized the chick optic tectum. this highly structured region serves as an ideal model for understanding formation of the vertebrate brain, attaining a high level of complexity while completing most of its maturation prior to hatching. nogo-a was present in the tectum at all stages of embryonic development observed, nevertheless, clear patterns emerged when looking at embryonic stages correlating to the specific phases of cns development.

nogo-a during proliferation and migration
proliferation is a critical part of early development of the expanding neural tube. we saw no correlation between nogo-a expression and proliferative nuclear cell antigen  positivity when comparing neuroepithelium during peak proliferative and relative quiescent stages   <cit> . thus, it is unlikely that nogo-a has a role in proliferation.

from e <dig> onward a migratory zone of post-mitotic neurons can be visualized in the tectum  <cit> . nogo-a expression in the e <dig> tectum was homogenously expressed across the pre-migratory generative zone, the expanding migratory layer, and the post-migratory, first neuronal lamina. immunostaining for neuronal and glial cells linked nogo-a expression to the soma of neurons, however, nogo-a expression was not limited to the neuronal population actively undergoing migration. thus, our data does not support a role for nogo-a limited to directing the migration of neurons. rather, the continued expression of nogo-a within all populations of developing neurons is further support of a role marking early neural identity and may be related to the state of maturity/differentiation. this concept is in agreement with previous studies that reported a high neuronal nogo-a mrna expression during differentiation of the spinal cord  <cit> , and a down regulation of nogo-a mrna following migration and terminal differentiation of rat olfactory neurons  <cit>  and cerebellar granule cells  <cit> .

nogo-a during neuronal differentiation
neuronal differentiation is also characterized by the outgrowth of neurites and the formation of synapses. neuritogenesis and synaptogenesis coupled with later refinement of connections by cell death and neurite pruning comprise the process of "network establishment." the stratum griseum centrale  of the chick optic tectum is sparsely populated by large, multi-polar principal efferent neurons with extensively branched dendrites and robust projecting axons  <cit> . by e <dig>  extension of axons and dendrites is abundant in the sgc and intense expression of nogo-a can be seen within these large neurons. heightened nogo-a expression can also be seen in nearby tectal associated nuclei, which are conspicuous by their large, projecting neurons.

by e <dig>  the first synaptic junctions of the tectum are observed. however, their numbers rise drastically between e <dig> and the first hours after hatching with more intense retinal input  <cit> . loss of retinal input to the tectum can be disturbed by embryonic enucleation of the chick eye optic anlagen. deafferentation causes neuronal degeneration of the sgc through loss of synaptic input and prevention of forming synaptic connections  <cit> . correspondingly, there is an overall decrease in nogo-a expression within the sgc and the tectal associated nuclei suggesting nogo-a expression is dependent upon synaptic activity .

increased nogo-a immunoreactivity has been demonstrated at the onset of axon growth in developing rat olfactory neurons  <cit>  and also within sprouting dendrites of cerebellar purkinje cells  <cit> . interestingly, over expression of nogo-a within cos cells leads to the formation of long processes that resemble neurites  <cit> . as mentioned earlier, nogo-a can regulate rhoa dependent cytoskeletal reorganization which is intensely active during neuronal differentiation and neuritogenesis. collectively, these data combined with our findings provide strong support for a nogo-a specific role in neuronal differentiation and neuritogenesis.

nogo-a during the transition to adulthood
at e <dig>  nogo-a expression within the tectum is strictly neuronal. oligodendrocyte related myelination in the chick tectum takes place between e12–e <dig>  <cit>  and accordingly, unmyelinated fiber tracts within the tectum are distinctive for an absence of nogo-a. by e <dig>  these same fiber tracts have begun to acquire myelination by oligodendrocytes and are now positive for nogo-a expression. studies marking glial differentiation found nogo-a to be expressed at all stages of oligodendrocyte development  <cit>  and our data found nogo-a expression within cells of tectal associated nuclei that were neither positive for neuron, astrocyte or glial progenitor specific stains. this later nogo-a expression within smaller cells of the tectum is a likely sign of increased oligodendrocyte formation and may reflect the beginning transition of expression from neuronal differentiation and network establishment to myelin derived maintenance of the circuitry.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have demonstrated nogo-a induction to be coincident with the earliest indication of the cns, neural plate formation. furthermore, nogo-a expression persists in neurons throughout development. nogo-a is also upregulated by fgf which is known to transform ectoderm into neuroectoderm. collectively, these data support a functional role for nogo-a linked to neural identity.

accentuated nogo-a expression is later observed within large projection neurons, as exemplified by neurons of the stratum griseum centrale in the optic tectum. projection neurons are characterized by extensive dendritic branching and broad prominent axons. nogo-a expression peaks during the formative stage of this lamina  and may indicate an additional role for nogo-a in neuritogenesis and axon branching.

the unique portion of the chicken nogo-a isoform is  <dig> amino acids in length and contains  <dig> conserved regions  across five species . three of these conserved regions  correspond to a previously identified inhibitory domain . this leaves  <dig> conserved regions that may represent important nogo-a specific functional domains relevant to development. although conservation suggests functional importance, further studies are needed to validate this premise.

