BACKGROUND
identifying groups of co-expressed genes through cluster analysis has been successfully used to elucidate affected biological pathways and postulate transcriptional regulatory mechanisms  <cit> . the integration of biological knowledge in such analyses has been most commonly facilitated by assessing the enrichment of clusters with genes from pre-defined functionally coherent gene lists . the concept of "functionally related genes clustering together" has been established by ad-hoc visual examination of hierarchical clustering results and their enrichment by genes from the same functional category  <cit> . the first assessment of statistical significance of such enrichments was performed by analyzing results of k-means clustering  <cit>  using the hypergeometric distribution  <cit> . similar strategies have also been used in the analysis of lists of differentially expressed genes  <cit> , gene lists constructed based on genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation   <cit>  and epigenomics experiments  <cit> , as well as the general approach to integrate lists of genes derived by various experimental and knowledge-based procedures  <cit> . introducing biological knowledge through such post-hoc analysis has been important for interpreting results and separating reproducible, biologically meaningful gene clusters from clusters that may have resulted from random fluctuations in the data. for both of these objectives, reproducibility of conclusions made is of utmost importance.

the first two concept defining papers  <cit>  also highlight the dichotomy that exist in using hierarchical vs. partitioning clustering procedures to this days. hierarchical procedures do not necessitate specifying the "right" number of clusters, a parameter generally unknown in advance whose estimation from the data leads to instability in clustering results  <cit> . on the other hand, selecting "meaningful" clusters in a hierarchical clustering that can be then correlated with functional categories using the hypergeometric distribution is still mostly performed by ad-hoc visual inspection of related heatmaps. algorithms for systematic testing of all possible clusters have also been developed  <cit> , but results of such analyses are difficult to summarize. postulating the "right" number of clusters or choosing "good" clusters in an ad-hoc fashion before correlating them with functional categories can result in poor reproducibility since a slightly different number of clusters or slightly different "good" clusters can result in a different interpretation of the results. this problem is akin to choosing the "optimal" cut-off criteria for selecting differentially expressed genes before performing similar functional analyses. it has been shown that results of such analyses are highly sensitive to changes in the cut-off used with different cut-offs yielding different conclusions  <cit> . in the analysis of differentially expressed genes computational alternatives have been developed that do not require setting such thresholds  <cit> , but they are generally not applicable in the knowledge-based assessment of clustering results.

a frequently encountered problem in analyzing genome-wide experimental data is to choose among results produced by different clustering algorithms. criteria such as homogeneity and separation are relatively straightforward to compute but are mostly of theoretical interest. a more relevant criterion from a biological perspective is the overall functional coherence of resulting gene clusters. most of the methods developed to date for this purpose require specification of the number of clusters  <cit> . comparing different methods at a fixed number of clusters is problematic as some methods might create a better clustering structure when more clusters are allowed and others could create better clusterings when few clusters are allowed. to circumvent this problem roc curves have been used to assess false and true positive rates of co-clustered gene pairs using the functional categories as a gold standard <cit> . however, this same strategy lacked discriminative power when a large number of large functional categories, such as gene ontology  terms, served as a gold standard and required again fixing the number of clusters  <cit> .

we developed an analytical framework and flexible computational infrastructure for integrating knowledge-based functional categories into the cluster analysis of gene expression data. the framework is based on the simple, conceptually appealing and biologically interpretable gene-specific functional coherence clustering enrichment analysis  score derived by correlating the clustering structure as a whole with functional categories of interest. the clean score is gene-specific and it differentiates between the levels of functional coherence for genes within the same cluster. the statistical significance of coherence scores is established by comparing them to the empirical null-distribution obtained by randomly permuting gene identifiers. the corresponding computational infrastructure is based on an open-source r package for the data analysis and open-source java viewer for visually integrating and analyzing expression data and associated knowledge-based functional categories.

we investigate the reproducibility of the findings based on the clean scores, and demonstrate its utility in comparing the functional coherence of clusterings produced by different algorithms and in selecting genes with informative expression patterns. being gene-specific, the clean score facilitates easy comparisons of functional coherence of different hierarchical structures  and selection of genes based on functional coherence of their expression pattern without the need to fix the number of clusters. on the other hand, we demonstrate that differentiating between the levels of functional coherence for genes within the same cluster leads to significant improvements in reproducibility of findings across independent microarray datasets when compared to traditional cluster-wide analyses. furthermore, genes selected based on the clean score produced more precise sample groupings than genes selected using the cluster-wide score.

RESULTS
given a hierarchical clustering of genes based on their expression profiles and a set of functional categories , the clustering enrichment analysis  score for a gene is calculated as follows :

 <dig>  fisher's exact test for enrichment is calculated for all functional categories containing the gene and for all possible clusters containing this gene. .

 <dig>  the clean score is then computed as the maximum -log <dig> of enrichment tests across all pairs of clusters containing the gene and functional categories containing the gene .

the clustering-specific null-distribution of the clean score is established by randomly permuting gene identifiers. statistically significant scores are then used to facilitate selection of genes or gene clusters, as well as the assessment of functional coherence and the comparison of clustering results produced by different algorithms. the integrated clustering viewer/browser, functional treeview , is used for integrative browsing and visual display of gene clusters and associated functional categories.

when multiple category types are used, the joint clean score is calculated as the maximum of clean scores for each category type. here we focus on three sets of functional categories: gene ontology  categories  <cit> , kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways  <cit> , and a custom set of co-regulation groups  based on the computational analysis of gene promoters and regulatory motif definitions in the transfac database, version  <dig>   <cit>  .

all currently used algorithms assign statistical significance of functional enrichment to whole clusters instead of individual genes within the cluster. to compare the properties of the clean score to currently used methods we define a cluster-wide clean  score to serve as a surrogate for this traditional type of analysis. the cwclean score is defined as the maximum of -log <dig> for all clusters containing the gene regardless of whether the enriched functional categories contain the gene or not . we analyzed several public microarray datasets to demonstrate the statistical properties and utility of the clean framework, and to compare its performance to traditionally used approaches.

comparing clustering results using the clean score
the clean score provides a tool to compare the functional coherence of clustering results produced by different clustering algorithms on a gene-by-gene basis without requiring a pre-defined number of gene clusters. we used four independent large-scale breast cancer gene expression datasets  <cit>  to demonstrate utility of the clean score in choosing the clustering structure with the highest functional coherence. for each dataset we compared the performance of three typical clustering algorithms: context specific infinite mixture model   <cit> , euclidian distance based and pearson's correlation based hierarchical clustering. for all three algorithms, the hierarchical clustering was constructed using the average linkage principle and algorithms were applied to expression data with and without prior variance-rescaling . clustering algorithms were used to cluster data from four independent breast cancer gene expression datasets with geo accession numbers gse <dig>  <cit> , gse <dig>  <cit> , gse <dig>  <cit> , and gse <dig>  <cit> .

for each clustering algorithm the total number of genes  with the clean score higher than the given threshold was plotted against all possible threshold levels . there are two conclusions that can be immediately made based on results in figure  <dig>  first, variance-based rescaling of the data significantly improved the functional coherence of resulting clustering. while the csimm model is capable of compensating this effect to some extent, the performance of both csimm and euclidean distance based algorithms improved after data was re-scaled. since the pearson's correlation coefficient implicitly performs such re-scaling, there is little difference between its performance with and without re-scaling. after the data was re-scaled, all three algorithms perform almost identically indicating that the re-scaling is the key step in improving the functional coherence of the data. the second conclusion is that these non-trivial results are perfectly reproducible across four independent breast cancer datasets, which is an important indication about their applicability to other datasets of this type.

reproducibility and the comparison with cluster-wide scores
we used the same four independent breast cancer gene expression datasets  and a study comparing tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mouse and human  <cit>  to investigate reproducibility of the clean scores. we first assessed the contribution of the functional data to the reproducibility of the clustering results by comparing the correlation between the clean scores  to correlation of pair-wise distances used to construct the hierarchical clustering of genes  in the two datasets . in this analysis pairwise distances are based on the bayesian posterior pairwise probabilities  produced by the csimm algorithm  <cit> . significantly increased correlation for the clean sore  indicated a significant increase in reproducibility of results in terms of functional coherence of the gene expression patterns over the simple clustering that does not incorporate an assessment of functional coherence. the heatmap of expression profiles for the genes with the highest clean scores in both datasets  showed a coherent pattern of expression within both datasets  and all these genes are related to immune system, which is a commonly implicated functional group in the etiology of cancer in general.

next, we performed a comprehensive study of the reproducibility of the clean scores in four breast cancer datasets and five clustering algorithms described in the previous section . the heatmap in figure  <dig> represents the similarities of clusterings for different algorithms and different datasets in terms of the clean and the cwclean scores. three groupings of clusterings-by-score type combinations clearly emerge: clusterings formed using euclidean distances and un-scaled data, cwclean scores for clusterings based on the re-scaled data and csimm algorithm using un-scaled data, and clean scores based on the re-scaled data and csimm algorithm using un-scaled data.

the improvement in reproducibility was further assessed by analyzing differences in correlations between clean and cwclean scores of all  <dig> pairs of breast cancer datasets for three different clustering algorithms . since all differences are positive, this indicates that the correlation coefficient was higher for clean scores in each of the  <dig> pairs for all three algorithms. the increased reproducibility was also evident in the analysis utilizing the statistical significance cut-offs established by randomizing the gene labels for each clustering separately. for each pair of datasets we constructed a 2-by- <dig> contingency table based on the statistical significance scores , and calculated differences in the odds ratios and the statistical significance of overlaps between lists of statistically significant genes in different datasets for a given algorithm and functional coherence score  . all differences in odds ratios were positive implicating again higher reproducibility of clean scores. similarly, differences in the statistical significances ) of the fisher's exact tests for the same contingency tables were also all positive implicating the higher reproducibility of clean scores .

this table shows results for the gene-specific clean score. the odds ratio is  <dig>  and the fisher exact test p-value is  <dig>  × 10- <dig> 

we repeated a similar type of analysis for a mouse and human datasets profiling gene expression in different tissues .  <cit> . after matching human and mouse probes using homologene identifiers  <cit>  we obtained  <dig>  common genes that were represent on both microarray platforms. we constructed csimm-based gene clusterings for both species and applied clean separately for the human and mouse datasets using both go and kegg based functional categories. statistically significant correlation between the genes with statistically significant scores, using the fisher's exact test for two-by-two tables, was firmly established for both clean and cwclean scores . however, the statistical significance and the strength of association was considerably higher for the clean score  than for the cwclean score .

when using the cluster-wide cwclean the odds ratio is  <dig>  and the fisher p-value is  <dig>  × 10-17

unsupervised selection of informative genes
reproducibly identifying genes whose expression patterns can delineate biologically meaningful groups of samples has been an important problem in computational biomedicine. we focus on the situation when the identity of samples belonging to different groups or even the number of the groups is not known in advance. in this case, the informative genes have to be selected in an unsupervised fashion. by studying the problem of classifying samples from different tissue types in the integrated mouse-human dataset, we demonstrate the utility of using the clean score to select informative genes. we first identify genes with statistically significant clean scores in mouse and human tissue expression profiling datasets. then we show that expression profiles of these genes facilitate better separation of samples from different tissue types than expression profiles of genes not having statistically significant clean scores. furthermore, we demonstrate that the improvements in precision are significantly larger when using the clean score than when using the cluster-wide cwclean scores.

we created a total of  <dig> different gene lists and assessed their abilities to distinguish different tissue types in the combined human-mouse expression dataset. gene lists were as follows:

all genes
all  <dig>  genes present in both microarray platforms.

significant clean score
genes with significant clean scores in both human and mouse datasets.

non-significant clean score
genes with not significant clean scores in both human and mouse datasets.

significant cluster score
genes with significant cwclean scores in both human and mouse datasets.

non-significant cluster score
genes with not significant cwclean scores in both human and mouse datasets.

copa genes
genes identified by applying the cancer outlier profiler analysis   <cit>  analysis. this copa list of  <dig>  genes was generated by performing copa separately for human and mouse datasets, selecting the top  <dig>  genes, and using the overlapping genes in the two datasets. this procedure was tuned to produce a number of genes that is similar to the number of genes with significant clean scores.

tissue samples were then clustered based on each of these gene lists using euclidean distance, average linkage hierarchical clustering. co-clustered pairs of samples derived from the same tissue type  were considered true positives, and co-clustered pairs of samples derived from different tissues were considered false positives. by cutting the hierarchical tree structure at all possible levels and each time recording the number of true and false positives we determined the receiver operating characteristic  for each of the gene lists. since the number of positive pairs  is small compared to the number of negative pairs , we used the ratio of number of false positive pairs divided by the total number of positive pairs, as recently described  <cit> , instead of the traditional false positive rates on the x-axis. genes with significant clean scores in both human and mouse tissue expression sets were significantly better in separating different tissue types than the genes with non-significant clean scores . genes with significant cwclean scores were marginally better in separating different tissue types than genes with non-significant cwclean scores , but the difference was considerably smaller than for the clean score. using copa for selecting informative genes was completely ineffective as it did not show any improvement over using all genes .

computational infrastructure
we developed an open-source r package  <cit>  that performs clustering enrichment analysis . typically, the user will provide a gene expression data set and a clustering of the genes. the package is intended for hierarchical clusterings but can also accommodate non-hierarchical clusterings such as k-means  <cit> . the package is compatible with a number of common input formats. go and kegg functional categories are derived from respective bioconductor packages  <cit> , and users can provide their own functional categories. the clean package provides functions to compute the clean score and generate output files to interactively display expression data together with gene and sample clusterings, and functional cluster annotation.

in addition, we extended the java-based expression data viewing software treeview  <cit>  to interactively display functional cluster annotations and the cwclean scores produced by the clean r package. figure  <dig> shows a screenshot of the new viewer we named functional treeview  displaying clean results for the breast cancer dataset gse <dig>  <cit> . panel  <dig> displays the per-gene functional coherence scores for individual category types. the broader the red bars are the higher is the score. green indicates statistically non-significant functional coherence scores. guided by the display of the clean scores, the user can choose a subset of genes by selecting a branch of the hierarchical gene clustering tree . functional cluster annotations generated by clean for the selected group of genes displayed in panel  <dig>  the interactive display of functional annotations is the major new feature of ftreeview, and it allows for seamless integration and browsing of functional categories associated with each cluster of genes. such an integrated view of clustering results, expression patterns and the enriched functional categories, facilitates a straightforward interactive identification of functionally coherent patterns of expression. for example, the selected cluster of genes  which we identified based on the overall high clean scores  is highly enriched for genes associate with immunity related gene ontology terms  as well as two kegg pathways, and putative targets of the interferon consensus sequence-binding protein  transcription factor. ftreeview is available as a stand-alone or as a web start application from our server .

discussion
integrating biological knowledge encoded in lists of functionally related genes into the analysis of genome-wide functional genomics data is an increasingly important aspect of analyzing genomics data. in the context of cluster analysis, such integration is necessary for selecting meaningful clusters of genes, and for the adequate biological interpretation of patterns defined by such clusters. we developed a computational framework for analytically and visually integrating knowledge-based functional categories with the cluster analysis of genomics data. the framework is based on the gene-specific functional coherence score derived by correlating the clustering structure as a whole with functional categories of interest. the statistical significance of coherence scores is established by comparing them to the empirical null-distribution obtained by randomly permuting gene identifiers.

we established the reproducibility of the clean score across related gene expression datasets, and its utility in comparing the functional coherence of different clusterings and in unsupervised selection of genes that discriminate between biologically meaningful groups of samples. when compared to the commonly used cluster-wide assessment of functional coherence, the clean score exhibits higher reproducibility across different microarray datasets. genes selected based on the clean score produced more precise sample groupings than genes selected using either cluster-wide score or by using copa algorithm.

it is important notice that by using the clean score instead of the traditional cluster-wide approach one cannot use the guilt-by-association principle  <cit>  to hypothesize the function of non-annotated genes. our analysis of the four breast cancer datasets yielded one obvious example of a relevant gene  with a high cwclean score and the clean score of zero in all four breast cancer datasets. foxm <dig> is a proliferation-associated transcription factor  <cit>  which has recently been clearly implicated to be an important regulator in the cell cycle progression  <cit> . however, functional annotations for this gene  do not reflect these recent findings and consequently foxm <dig> was not associated with the "cell cycle" cluster based on the clean score .

one way to think about the differences between clean and cwclean score in terms of differences between assuming functional coherence based on co-clustering  vs. having some additional pre-existing evidence of functional relationship . our results in this context implicate that in the case of breast cancer and tissue datasets the previous evidence of functional relationship is overall more reliable than guilt-by-associations relationships arising only from the cluster analysis on their own. it is possible that in some other situations, new functional relationships would dominate the existing one and the opposite would be the case. calculating the difference between the two scores can quickly implicate novel functional relationships arising from the data analysis alone.

a systematically different approach to integrating the experimental data and prior knowledge is to incorporate the functional information into the clustering algorithm itself  <cit> . while conceptually appealing, such methods have a more limited applicability than the framework presented here and have not been widely used. our framework follows the commonly utilized post-hoc integration approach in which cluster analysis is performed first using the experimental data and integration is achieved in the post-hoc analysis. the ability to validate the clusters produced by analyzing experimental data, and the transparency about how exactly the different types of information is utilized in constructing clusters is most likely the reason for the popularity and the wide usage of post-hoc approaches. when the functional knowledge is used in the process of constructing clusters, it can no longer be employed to provide the guidance in selecting biologically meaningful clusters.

CONCLUSIONS
we directly demonstrate that integrating prior biological knowledge encoding in the lists of functionally coherent genes improves the reproducibility of clustering results. we also demonstrate that our gene-specific functional coherence score, which differentiates between the levels of functional coherence for genes within the same cluster, shows higher reproducibility than the cluster-wide score. the clean score also produced more informative genes for distinguishing different sample types than the cluster-wide score. this implicates that the gene-specificity of the clean score is a fundamentally different and, at least in some circumstances, better approach for integrating biological knowledge with results of the cluster analysis than previously used cluster-based scores.

