BACKGROUND
translocation of proteins, from the bulk of the cytosol to the plasma membrane, is a critical step in the transfer of information from membrane-embedded receptors to the cell interior. just to cite a few examples, both rtks and gpcrs recruit, upon activation, effector proteins such as sh2-containing adaptor proteins  <cit> , various enzymes and the desensitizing proteins arrestins  <cit> . in addition, other classes of effector proteins, such as those of the broad protein kinase c family  <cit> , are activated upon translocation to the plasma-membrane microenvironment, independently of receptor binding. detailed knowledge of the translocation of specific proteins, not only in physiological, but also in pathological conditions, may therefore highlight key aspects of defined signalling pathways. impaired or excessive translocations of specific proteins are known in fact to play important roles in the pathogenesis of diseases .

in the past, the classical approaches employed to investigate translocation were immunocytochemistry and subcellular fractionation followed by western blotting of the isolated fractions. although adequate to reveal the existence of the process these approaches suffered of many drawbacks and limitations: possible artefacts, low time and space resolution, low sensitivity, problems in the precise identification of the cellular structures involved, that have limited their use to the low-throughput investigation.

the introduction of gfp fluorescent probes and, more recently, of the restoration of the β-galactosidase activity following complementation of two inactive fragments of the enzyme  <cit> , has made possible the kinetics of protein translocation to be investigated in living cells. however, with gfp probes the increases in fluorescence are relatively small, often mixed up by the interference of endogenous fluorophores. the novel β-galactosidase complementation procedure is intrinsically complex. two chimeric reporters, the translocating protein and its specific target, localized in a precise subcellular structure, are necessary. the translocation process is inevitably influenced by the binding of the two fragments and the proteins addressed to unknown targets cannot be investigated, limiting this technique for a screening purpose.

here we have employed a new procedure based on the use of chimeric constructs where the translocation protein is included in frame with aequorin, a well known bioluminescent photoprotein, per se a ca2+ probe , used so far primarily for the study of ca2+ homeostasis  <cit> . the translocation of the aequorin-containing chimera to the sub-plasmalemma rim is able in itself to detect such signal because of the much higher   generated locally upon cell stimulation . given the strength of the light signal emitted by aequorin upon ca2+ binding , and the lack of bioluminescent molecules within mammalian cells, the procedure has an excellent signal-to-noise ratio.

here we report results obtained by following the translocation of two interesting proteins : β-arrestin- <dig> , addressed to a precise receptor target; and pkcβii, for which no protein target is known in the plasma membrane. by the use of a robot the procedure could be made more powerful, providing information about specific aspects of the translocation process, including its time-course and the dose-dependence of its activation.

RESULTS
generation of chimeric probes
cohesive cdna constructs, encoding aequorin and β-arrestin- <dig> or pkcβ were fused in frame and the reporter chimeric proteins are denominated βarr2-aeq and pkcβ-aeq , respectively.

the initial experiments were carried out to establish, using the classical approaches, i.e. immunocytochemistry  and subcellular fractionation followed by western blot of the fractions , whether the aequorin tag does affect or not the activity-dependent translocation of the two proteins investigated, βarr <dig> and pkcβii, after agonists or pharmacological stimulations. the cells used for the studies were hela, that do express only very low levels of endogenous β-adrenergic receptor . the βarr2-aeq cdna was therefore co-transfected transiently with either the β2ar  <cit>  or an empty vector, and the distribution of βarr2-aeq probe was established before and after stimulation with the receptor agonist, isoprenaline .

in resting cells βarr2-aeq exhibited a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution ; upon isoprenaline addition the chimera was rapidly  translocated to the periphery, however only in the cells transfected with the β2ar . the stimulation time chosen for the luminescence assays with this chimera was therefore of  <dig> min.

other batches of hela cells were transfected with the pkcβii-aeq cdna and treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate , a potent activator of classical pkcs  <cit> . in this case, the translocation of the probe, from its diffuse distribution at rest to a peripheral distribution, required less than  <dig> min of pma treatment .

these times match those reported previously for the translocations of the two proteins upon the two types of stimulation. thus, the aequorin tag does not affect the activity-dependent translocation of either investigated protein.

analysis of βarr2-aeq and pkc-aeq translocation by luminescence assay
to confirm the validity of the aequorin chemiluminescence procedure to reveal the differential distribution of a protein in the subplasmalemma rim and the cytosol, hela cells were seeded onto  <dig> mm coverslips and transiently transfected with two chimeric aequorin cdnas, one encoding a constitutively cytosolic probe   <cit> , the other a probe addressed to the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane   <cit> . thirty six hr after transfection, the probes were reconstituted adding  <dig> mm coelenterazine in krebs-ringer modified buffer  and the coverslips were transferred to the chamber of a single-well luminometer. with both the cyt-aeq and snap-aeq probes the traces recorded in ca2+-free buffer  were slightly above background  . upon re-addition of  <dig> mm cacl <dig> , the rapid ca2+ influx  caused an increase in light emission. as expected, such an increase was over 10-fold greater in the cells expressing the snap-aeq than in those expressing the cyt-aeq probe . indeed, given the steep ca2+ response curve, significant light emission is detected only when the aequorin pool  is exposed to high . accordingly, the probe for bulk cytosolic  shows a very small light emission upon the large ca2+ rise following ca2+ readdition to cell maintained in ca2+-free media . figures 3a and 3b illustrate also the results obtained with the cells co-transfected with the βarr2-aeq and β2ar cdnas, treated or not with isoprenaline  for  <dig> min prior to ca2+ re-addition. in the untreated cells the increase of light emission upon ca2+ re-addition was only slightly higher than that observed in the cells transfected with cyt-aeq , whereas in those treated with the β2ar agonist it was much higher, almost as high as that observed with the plasma membrane addressed snap-aeq probe . similar results were obtained in the cells transfected with the pkcβii-aeq cdna and then tested according to the same protocol, with the exception that the pkc stimulant, pma , was administered for  <dig> min before ca2+ re-addition . also in this case the emission peak of the stimulated cells was nearly 10-fold higher than that of resting cells, reaching levels analogous to those of the snap-aeq-transfected cells .

automatization assay
the power of the approach was further investigated by carrying out automated tracing assays in a luminescence plate reader, using 24-well plates governed by a robot. figure  <dig> illustrates results obtained in βarr2-aeq/β2ar cdnas expressing hela cells stimulated with isoprenaline . at first, we verified whether in this experimental setup, in which luminescence is not recorded in the injection phase and thus the upstroke of the rise is lost, a reproducible difference in aequorin light emission can be recorded when the βarr2-aeq chimera translocates to the plasma membrane. figures 4a and 4b show that this is indeed the case. the recording of the aequorin peaks elicited by ca2+ re-addition to krb in each of the multi-well plates was in fact much higher in the treated cells than in the controls. additional parameters were investigated. figure 4c shows the time-course of the βarr2-aeq translocation to the plasma membrane upon agonist addition. the maximal response, observed after approx.  <dig> s of stimulation, was followed by a persistent plateau. the concentration dependence of the isoprenaline-induced translocation of βarr2-aeq is illustrated in figure 4d. detectable increases were observed at concentrations as low as 10- <dig> m and maximal responses at 10- <dig> m. interestingly, this concentration response curve matches closely the curve of βarr <dig> binding to the β2ar reported previously in clc <dig> cells using the β-galactosidase complementation procedure  <cit> .

discussion
the possibility of randomly developing thousands of new drugs by combinatorial chemistry, and to rapidly develop lead compounds, represents an immense value in pharmaceutical research. to take full advantage of this technological potential, however, screening methodologies must be available that are robust, reproducible and amenable to medium/high throughput applications. in some cases , the tools commonly employed in basic research, the intracellularly trappable fluorescent dyes, such as fura- <dig> or fluo- <dig>  proved highly effective in high-throughput screenings, and are commonly employed for the development of the vast array of drugs acting on ca2+ signalling  <cit> . these probes, however, can monitor one of the earliest events following receptor activation, but the data thus obtained are difficult to interpret for the understanding of other downstream signalling processes: protein translocation to the plasma-membrane is a typical example: it is a signalling step common to many diverse pathways   <cit> , but the currently available probes and techniques do not allow wide-range screenings or require complex and error-prone data analyses.

in this contribution, we have developed a novel approach that utilizes a ca2+ sensitive photoprotein, aequorin, for a task different from the measurement of calcium signalling itself, and stems from an experimental observation and a technical aspect. the first is the measurement of the  in the thin rim of cytoplasm beneath the plasma membrane, where both at rest and in particular upon stimulation the flow of ca2+ from the extracellular medium produces a local  that is at least one order of magnitude higher than in the deeper, bulk cytosol  <cit> . thus, aequorin can act as a tag of protein translocation, as the simple movement of the tagged protein to the plasma membrane markedly changes the  to which it is exposed. the second startpoint of the new methodology is an intrinsic property of the photoprotein, i.e. the logarithmic correlation between  and light emission  <cit> . this property, that greatly increases light output with relatively small  increases, represents in most cases an experimental concern, as it tends to amplify the contribution of highly responding cells or cell domains in signalling studies. in the case of the new methodology reported in this paper, the high reponsiveness of the photoprotein represents a major plus, as it allows to detect protein translocation  also when only a fraction of the protein actually moves within the cell. together with the other advantages of a luminescence-based probe , this property provides a striking advantage over existing methodologies .

we have thus developed aequorin-based probes, that allow to detect the translocation of two classes of signalling proteins, a receptor adapter   <cit>  and an important enzyme transducer, a member of the broad and complex family of pkc  <cit> . the engineered probes, βarr2-aeq and pkcβ-aeq were uniformly distributed in the cytosol at rest, and translocated to the plasma membrane upon stimulation with suitable compounds , triggering a dramatic increase in aequorin photon emission. in both cases, the probes proved very effective also with automated multi-well detectors. for β-arrestin, the pharmacological characterization of a receptor agonist proved its reliability, not only in the identification of active compounds, but also in the complete assessment of its functional properties.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, the understanding of the subcellular heterogeneity of ca2+ homeostasis and the experience with a recombinant luminescent ca2+ probe has allowed us to develop a robust, highly reproducible methodology for monitoring, in research applications and screening platforms, the translocation of specific proteins to the plasma membrane. this innovation will allow deciphering, and pharmacologically tackling, a critical step in a wide variety of signalling pathways including the whole complement of gpcrs and rtks and kinases recruited to the plasma membrane independently of receptor activation  <cit> . this cellular assay, based on a single reporter protein and the unique single-to-noise ratio of the luminescent probe, meets the expanding demand for cost-effective screening procedures. it may therefore prove a highly valuable tool for identifying new blockbuster drugs in compound libraries of thousands of chemicals.

