BACKGROUND
in nature and in agriculture, plants suffer from a diverse community of herbivores and pathogens. upon attack by these organisms, plants undergo rapid physiological changes which take place not only at the site of attack, but also in the undamaged parts of attacked leaves and in distal undamaged  leaves, thereby increasing resistance plant-wide  <cit> . two hormone signaling pathways play a major role in the regulation of defense responses: the jasmonic acid -pathway, which is generally induced by herbivores and necrotrophic pathogens  <cit> , and the salicylic acid -pathway, which orchestrates defenses mainly against biotrophic pathogens  <cit>  as well as phloem-feeding herbivores  <cit> .

the ja and sa defense pathways have often been observed to display negative cross-talk, whereby an increase in the level of one phytohormone reduces the defense responses under control of the other  <cit>  and this is possibly adaptive since it could allow plants to fine-tune the balance between different defensive strategies  <cit> . yet, some herbivores have adapted to manipulate plant defenses to their own benefit  <cit> . some of these, such as whiteflies, suppress ja defenses via induction of sa defenses  <cit>  while others, for instance the red tomato spider mite tetranychus evansi, suppress both ja and sa defenses  <cit> . suppression may also occur independent from both the ja and sa pathways as observed for spodoptera littoralis caterpillars  <cit> .

in communities of organisms attacking plants, where different species can differentially activate host plant defenses, induction by one species may also affect the performance of another  <cit> , implying that apart from directly competing for the same resource  herbivores may also indirectly compete with each other via induced changes in the quality of the plant   <cit> . thus, although induction or suppression of defenses may demote or promote an herbivore’s reproductive performance when feeding in isolation, the actual fitness benefits may be uncertain within its community since competitors may share the same benefits.

the two-spotted spider mite   and the tomato russet mite   are minute tomato pests: the first belongs to the tetranychidae of which adults reach a body size of around  <dig>  mm and the second to the eriophyidae, the smallest terrestrial animals on earth, of which adults reach a length of about  <dig> to 140 μm . we observed in field-grown tomatoes in italy that tomato russet mites often co-occur with two-spotted spider mites. on such co-infested plants in the field, spider mites reached significantly higher population densities than on plants without russet mites. based on these observations, we asked the question whether russet mite infestations change the host plant’s physiology in a way that benefits spider mites. our data show that russet mites suppress ja-defenses and promote the performance of spider mites. however, the latter is not directly caused by the first: both mite species also induce sa defenses and these responses add up when the two species are together, resulting in a second suppression event, that is, that of the spider mite-induced ja-defense response due to the antagonistic effect which the doubled sa response has on this ja-response  <cit> . in contrast, we found that suppression of ja-defenses by russet mites alone occurs independently from sa. furthermore, we show that growth of the bacterial pathogen pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato dc <dig>  is inhibited by russet mite-induced sa. finally, we show that russet mite population growth decreases in the presence of spider mites, indicating that the benefits of defense suppression for an herbivore that monopolizes its feeding site can backfire in the presence of competitors.figure  <dig> 
spider mites benefit from suppression of ja-defenses by russet mites in wt tomato plants to the same extent as they benefit from the
def-1
mutation. an adult female of the two-spotted spider mite   residing together with the tomato russet mite   on a tomato  leaflet . average number of eggs produced by spider mites  on wild-type   and ja-deficient def- <dig> plants that were pre-infested with russet mites  or not . values in the bars  indicate mean oviposition rates and different letters above bars denote significant differences . three leaflets per plant were analyzed. in total, eight plants per treatment were analyzed . anova, analysis of variance; ja, jasmonic acid; lsd, least significant difference.



RESULTS
spider mites reach higher densities on plants with russet mites in the field
tomatoes growing in the field in italy were sampled to determine the occurrence of plant-eating mites and their respective densities earlier and later in the season. spider mites and/or russet mites were found at  <dig> sampling sites and in  <dig> of those sites the two species were found together on the same plant . spider mites reached significantly higher densities on leaflets with than on leaflets without russet mites . in contrast, the number of russet mites was reduced on dual-infested leaflets compared to leaflets on which russet mites were feeding alone, albeit not significantly  .

russet mites promote reproductive performance of spider mites on tomato
to test the hypothesis that spider mites benefit from russet mite infestations, plants were infested with russet mites and spider mites and spider mite reproductive performance was assessed by comparing the number of spider mite eggs produced on plants that had been pre-infested with russet mites versus plants that had been infested with spider mites only. spider mites produced over 25% more eggs on wild-type  plants that had been pre-infested with russet mites as compared to plants infested with spider mites only . we hypothesized that this effect may be linked to tomato ja-defenses since these constitute a major anti-spider mite defense  <cit> . indeed, compared to wt plants, spider mite reproductive performance increased to the same magnitude on the ja-biosynthesis mutant defenseless- <dig>   <cit>  , while the number of eggs produced was reduced on transgenic 35s::prosystemin  plants . prosys + plants display a constitutively activated ja-signaling pathway  <cit> , and, hence, this confirms that spider mites are susceptible to ja-dependent defenses  <cit> . in contrast to wt plants, russet mites did not affect spider mite oviposition rate on def- <dig> plants  nor on prosys + plants , suggesting that suppression of inducible ja defenses by russet mites accounts for the observed effect on spider mite fecundity.

russet mites suppress ja-defenses
to test the hypothesis that russet mites suppress ja-defenses in tomato, we measured defense responses in leaflets of spider mite- and russet mite-infested plants by quantifying levels of the phytohormones ja, ja-ile and sa as well as transcript levels of a few well-established ja- and sa-related defense marker genes. as markers for the ja-pathway we used four genes:  polyphenol oxidase-f , expressed in tomato leaves and also in type vi glandular trichomes  <cit> ,  threonine deaminase-ii , involved in resistance against herbivores and tightly regulated by the ja-signaling pathway  <cit> ,  jasmonate-inducible protein  <dig> , inducible to high levels by wounding and methyl jasmonate  <cit>  and  wound-induced proteinase inhibitor ii   <cit> , known to be induced in tomato by spider mites  <cit> . as a marker for the sa-pathway we selected pathogenesis-related protein  <dig> , which is also induced by spider mite feeding on tomato  <cit> .

as compared to uninfested control plants, both russet mites and spider mites induced the accumulation of ja and ja-ile in wt tomato . strikingly, whereas in spider mite-infested plants expression of the ja-related marker genes was strongly upregulated as well, this did not happen in russet mite-infested plants , despite the upstream phytohormone accumulation. expression of ppo-f was upregulated 9-fold by spider mites but not by russet mites whereas expression of td-ii, jip- <dig> and wipi-ii was upregulated 11-, 84- and 58-fold above control levels by spider mites respectively, yet only 4-, 5- and 2-fold by russet mites . furthermore, both russet mites and spider mites induced a strong increase in the levels of sa  and, accordingly, both species triggered a strong and comparable up-regulation of pr-p <dig> . hence, even though both mite species induce similar levels of sa, ja and ja-ile only spider mites upregulate ja-marker genes, indicating that russet mites suppress the downstream ja-defense response.figure  <dig> 
phytohormone levels in leaflets infested with spider mites, russet mites, and both species simultaneously. the amounts of endogenous ja , ja-ile  and sa  in wild-type  tomato  and nahg leaflets infested with spider mites , russet mites  or both species  together . values represent the means  in nanogram  per gram fresh weight  of nine to ten plants from two independent experiments. different lowercase letters denote significant differences for wt plants; uppercase letters denote significant differences for nahg plants . anova, analysis of variance; ja, jasmonic acid; lsd, least significant difference; sa, salicylic acid; se, standard error.
russet mites suppress spider mite-induced expression of ja-marker genes but induce expression of a sa-marker gene. relative transcript levels of ppo-f
, td-ii
, jip-21
, wipi-ii
 and pr-p6
 in wild-type  tomato  leaflets infested with spider mites , russet mites  or both species  together . values  represent the mean of  <dig> to  <dig> plants from three independent experiments. different letters above the bars denote significant differences in expression levels between treatments . anova, analysis of variance; ja, jasmonic acid; lsd, least significant difference; sa, salicylic acid; se, standard error.



to test whether the presence of russet mites on plants suffices to down-regulate the spider mite-induced ja-response as well, we assessed defense responses in plants infested with both mite species. we found that ja, ja-ile and sa accumulated to significantly higher levels in plants infested with both species compared to plants that had been infested with either of the two species alone . however, despite increased accumulation of ja and ja-ile, transcript levels of all four ja-defense marker genes were suppressed to intermediate levels significantly below the levels in leaflets infested with spider mites only , whereas, in contrast, induction of the sa-marker gene pr-p <dig> doubled . the fact that ja-levels remained high in simultaneously infested plants strengthens the conclusion that suppression occurs downstream from ja-biosynthesis.

russet mites suppress ja-defenses independent from sa, but suppression of spider mite-induced ja-defenses depends on sa
subsequently, considering the significantly increased pr-p <dig> expression levels in simultaneously infested plants, we tested if suppression of ja-defenses is mediated via the antagonistic effect of sa on the ja-pathway. for this test, we used tomato plants carrying the 35s::nahg transgene, which converts endogenous sa into catechol. nahg plants are therefore unable to accumulate sa  <cit> .

as in wt plants, spider mites as well as russet mites induced a significant accumulation of ja and ja-ile in nahg plants . in nahg plants, only marginal amounts of sa were detected , confirming that sa accumulation is effectively blocked due to degradation by the enzyme salicylate hydroxylase. furthermore, as in wt plants, spider mite feeding caused a strong up-regulation of all four ja-marker genes in nahg plants whereas these genes were induced only marginally by russet mites alone and  <dig> to  <dig> times less than by spider mites . expression levels of ppo-f, td-ii, jip- <dig> and wipi-ii were upregulated respectively 8-, 15-, 111- and 244-fold above control levels by spider mites, yet only 3-, 3-, 6- and 7-fold by russet mites , similar to the pattern observed in wt plants. however, in contrast to wt plants, spider mite-induced expression of three out of the four ja-marker defense genes  was restored in nahg plants infested with both mite species simultaneously . these results indicate that suppression of ja-responses by russet mites alone and suppression of ja-responses induced by spider mites are two distinct events. suppression of the spider mite-induced ja-response by russet mites is due to the antagonistic effect of sa on the ja-pathway, whereas suppression of downstream ja-defenses by russet mites is independent from sa.figure  <dig> 
russet mite-mediated suppression of the spider mite-induced ja-response depends on sa. relative transcript levels of ppo-f
, td-ii
, jip-21
 and wipi-ii
 in nahg plants infested with spider mites , russet mites  or both species  together . values  represent the mean of  <dig> to  <dig> plants from three independent experiments. different letters above the bars denote significant differences in expression levels between treatments . anova, analysis of variance; ja, jasmonic acid; lsd, least significant difference; sa, salicylic acid; se, standard error.



spider mites inhibit population growth of russet mites
spider mites displayed an increased reproductive performance on tomato wt leaflets previously infested with russet mites. to determine the consequence of increased spider mite fecundity on russet mite performance, russet mite-infested plants were subsequently infested with spider mites and russet mite population growth was measured as compared to plants infested with russet mites only. after 14 days of infestation, russet mite population size was approximately 50% lower on tomatoes infested with spider mites than on plants without, and a similar effect was observed on def- <dig> plants , indicating that russet mites suffer from competition by spider mites.figure  <dig> 
spider mites inhibit russet mite population growth. russet mite population size  on wild-type   and def- <dig> plants that had been infested with russet mites alone  or co-infested with spider mites  14 days after infestation with rm. plants had been infested with rm for seven days when sm was introduced. values represent the mean of  <dig> to  <dig> plants. asterisks represent significant differences as determined by student t-test . se, standard error.



russet mite-induced sa-defense inhibits bacterial growth
to assess if the observed induction of russet mite-induced sa-defenses is biologically significant, we assessed its consequence for growth of the sa-sensitive bacterial pathogen pst dc <dig>  <cit> . dc <dig> is frequently found on tomatoes in the same rural areas where the two mite species also occur . bacterial growth was strongly reduced in leaflets of wt plants that had been pre-infested with russet mites compared to uninfested control leaflets, whereas, on nahg plants the presence of russet mites did not affect pst growth . hence, this result indicates that russet mites increase resistance of tomatoes to pst and also that pst is susceptible to russet mite-induced sa.figure  <dig> 
russet mite-induced sa inhibits growth of
pst
dc <dig> on tomato.
pst population growth, quantified as the number of colony forming units , in wild-type   and nahg plants that were either without rm  or had been pre-infested with rm  for seven days. in total, seven plants were used per genotype and per treatment. the asterisks indicate a statistically significant difference . rm, russet mites; sa, salicylic acid; se, standard error.



to assess whether reduced bacterial performance would affect russet mite performance, we then infiltrated russet mite-infested plants with pst and measured mite population growth on wt and nahg plants. nahg plants were included as a control treatment, since on these plants russet mite infestations did not interfere with pst growth . pst infections did not have a significant effect on russet mite population growth, neither on wt nor on nahg plants , indicating that the effect of russet mites on pst growth cannot be explained by differences in russet mite density. moreover, since russet mite population growth was similar on wt and nahg plants , it is clear that russet mites are not affected by the sa-mediated defenses they induce in wt plants.

russet mites display a faster growth rate on a ja-defense mutant
russet mites facilitate spider mites, but interfere with the population growth of pst, indicating that there are considerable ecological costs and benefits associated with induction and suppression of plant defenses . to test if we could demonstrate the costs associated with defense suppression by russet mites we subsequently allowed russet mites to build up a population on ja-deficient def- <dig> plants in comparison to wt plants. this experiment suggests that suppressing defenses is costly since after 16 days of infestation  russet mite populations had grown larger on def- <dig> than on wt tomatoes .

discussion
by combining data on tomato defense-gene expression and phytohormone levels we have dissected the relative contribution of ja- and sa-defense responses to the reproductive performance of spider mites and russet mites alone as well as when sharing a host plant. even though both russet mites and spider mites induced the accumulation of ja and its active form ja-ile  <cit>  in tomato leaflets , we found that feeding by russet mites did not, or only marginally, upregulate the expression of ja-defense marker genes, whereas spider mites upregulated these genes to much higher levels . from this result, we conclude that russet mites suppress the ja-mediated downstream defense response. in contrast, both spider mites and russet mites induced accumulation of sa  and expression of the sa-defense marker gene pr-p <dig> . hence, although the two mite species feed from different tomato cell types, that is, russet mites from epidermal cells and spider mites from parenchyma cells  <cit> , they induce tomato sa-defenses similarly.

in agreement with previous studies, spider mite feeding resulted in a strong ja-defense response  <cit> , as evidenced by a significant increase in ja-ile accumulation  and in ja-marker gene expression . however, in simultaneously infested plants the expression of ja-defense marker genes was reduced to levels significantly below the levels in leaflets infested with spider mites only , while pr-p <dig> transcript levels doubled in the presence of both mite species . therefore, considering the well-documented antagonistic cross-talk between ja and sa  <cit> , we subsequently tested if suppression of ja-marker genes by russet mites could be attributed to the antagonistic interaction of sa onto ja. we observed that spider mite-induced ja-marker gene expression was restored in sa-deficient nahg plants that had been simultaneously infested with russet mites , suggesting that, indeed, suppression of spider mite-induced ja-defenses is due to negative cross-talk with sa. however, russet mites alone still suppressed ja-responses in nahg plants . therefore, we conclude that in leaflets infested with both mite species cross-talk is a consequence, and not the cause, of the primary suppression of ja-defenses by russet mites and that in plants infested with both species their induced sa-responses add up and antagonize the spider mite-induced ja-response as a secondary effect. these results also suggest that suppression of ja-responses by russet mites occurs fairly locally near feeding sites and does not spread throughout the whole leaflet. we did not find evidence for cross-talk at the phytohormone level as absence of sa did not lead to an extra increase in spider mite-induced ja or ja-ile  <cit> . in fact, levels of ja-related phytohormones tended to be lower in nahg plants compared to wt plants .

interestingly, the intermediate expression of wipi-ii in simultaneously-infested wt plants  was not restored in nahg. this suggests that jip- <dig>  ppo-f and td-ii are antagonized differently than wipi-ii by russet mites. since wipi-ii expression depends negatively on nonexpressor of pathogenesis-related proteins <dig>   <cit> , other hormones, for example, sa-derivatives  <cit> , may modulate npr <dig> as well or be co-regulated by npr1-independent processes  <cit> .

most notably, spider mites induced sa themselves to similar levels as russet mites. since spider mites induce ja- and sa-responses simultaneously  this raises an intriguing question: why does the russet mite-induced sa-response suppress spider mite-induced ja defenses but the sa induced by spider mites alone does not? we hypothesize that actually spider mite-induced sa-responses also antagonize simultaneously induced ja responses, albeit to intermediate induction levels while only the total sa-response induced by the two mites together is powerful enough to suppress these intermediate levels to levels significantly below those in plants infested with spider mites only. this hypothesis is supported by the spider mite-induced ja-marker gene expression data in nahg: the relative expression of three of the four ja-defense markers was much stronger in nahg compared to wt plants, that is, relative expression of td-ii, jip- <dig> and wipi-ii was, respectively, about 40%, 30% and 400% higher in nahg plants than in wt plants , suggesting that the spider mite-induced ja-response may be partially suppressed by the simultaneously induced sa-response in wt plants. if so, induction of sa-responses by spider mites could be adaptive. however, this suppression does not increase with increasing mite densities since the levels of both hormones, and their downstream responses, increase similarly when more sm are feeding  <cit> .

the fact that suppression of defenses affects responses induced by a competing species begs the question if such indirect interactions can influence an herbivore’s community structure. cultivated tomato can be attacked by as many as  <dig> to  <dig> different arthropod herbivores  <cit> , and russet mites are a worldwide pest of tomatoes  <cit> . considering this, it is likely that, in field grown crops as well as in greenhouses, russet mites often co-occur with other pest species. hence, we investigated the consequences of russet mite-induced defenses for two naturally co-occurring pest species of russet mites: the two-spotted spider mite t. urticae and the bacterial phytopathogen pst dc <dig>  as shown here, spider mites had a significantly higher reproductive performance in the presence of russet mites, whereas growth of pst was inhibited. this may explain why russet mites induce sa-defenses: it may limit the occurrence of secondary infections by pathogens. however, since pst did not limit russet mite growth  we did not find direct evidence that sa-induction is adaptive for russet mites. yet, since pst-infected plants probably will die earlier, suppressing it could be beneficial for the mite. russet mite population growth did not differ between wt and nahg plants indicating that they are not affected by the sa-defenses they induce . since russet mites suppress ja-defenses independent from sa this finding was in line with our expectation. however, nahg mutants suffer from catechol-related side-effects  <cit>  and, therefore, confirmation using an independent tomato sa-mutant would be desirable.

one may wonder to what extent the presence of russet mites on a spider mite-infested plant also affects the performance of these spider mites via direct interference. if so, reduced ja-defenses could be due to a reduced spider mite feeding intensity. however, several data contradict this direct interference hypothesis. first, we observed that spider mites reached higher densities on russet mite-infested plants in the field indicating facilitation . second, in the lab we observed that spider mites laid more eggs on wt tomato plants that had been pre-infested with russet mites as compared to uninfested plants , suggesting their food intake increased rather than decreased. third, expression of pr-p <dig> was doubled in wt plants simultaneously infested with both species compared to plants infested with either of the species alone, also suggesting that their feeding intensity increased rather than decreased. fourth, for three of the four ja-marker genes suppression was not observed in simultaneously infested nahg plants, which implies that spider mites keep on eating and damaging these plants, also in the presence of russet mites. hence, plant-mediated factors must have been the primary cause for the observed effects. notably, russet mites densities in greenhouses have been reported to be much higher than those used in the present study  <cit> . therefore, it is well possible that under such conditions the intermediate responses we have observed during co-infestation may escalate to full suppression, thereby boosting the performance of spider mites even more. previous studies have shown that induction of the ja and/or sa pathway may decrease  <cit>  or increase  <cit>  the performance of competing organisms on the same host. in addition, a few studies, on spider mites, whiteflies and aphids, have examined the effects of defense suppression on other species. ja-defense suppressing genotypes of the spider mite  were found to have a significant positive effect on the performance of ‘inducer’ t. urticae genotypes  when sharing the feeding site with ‘suppressor’ genotypes  <cit> . also, t. urticae laid more eggs on leaf discs on which the ja-defense suppressing spider mite t. evansi had fed previously, whereas feeding by the inducer species t. urticae resulted in decreased oviposition by t. evansi  <cit> . similarly, the cabbage aphid  inhibits ja-accumulation, and this correlated with increased growth and development of caterpillars of the large cabbage white butterfly   <cit> , and, finally, suppression of ja-defenses by whiteflies  improved the performance of spider mites on lima bean   <cit> . notably, in the whitefly-spider mite  <cit> , as well as in the aphid-caterpillar example  <cit> , suppression of ja defenses was shown to be independent from sa, even though the latter was induced by whiteflies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results highlight the central role of plant-mediated indirect interactions in shaping herbivore communities  <cit> . the results of our study show that crosstalk between the sa and ja pathways plays an essential role in the spider mite-russet mite interaction, despite the observation that russet mites suppress ja-defenses independent from sa. this suggests that russet mites secrete effector molecules into their host plant to target the ja-signaling pathway directly. moreover, our data show that the fitness benefits of defense suppression depend on the community structure and that such suppression may backfire when competitors take advantage of it as well. our results imply that the outcome of interactions between multiple herbivores on a shared host can be unpredictable and counter-intuitive since they depend on simultaneous reciprocal changes between individual community members. also, these interactions can be bidirectional since one herbivore population may respond to plant defenses induced or suppressed by another and, subsequently, also vice versa. although we did not test all permutations, it is to be expected that the time point, sequence of arrival as well as infestation density of all attackers present on a plant play a major role in determining the strength of these interactions. in summary, we show that herbivore-plant-herbivore interactions are subject to bidirectional causality in that plant herbivores induce plant responses that may positively or negatively impact them and their competitors, implying that ultimately an herbivore’s fitness depends on how they themselves indirectly alter interactions within their community. we believe these findings have major implications for understanding under which conditions induction and suppression of plant defenses can be adaptive.

