BACKGROUND
multiple congenital ocular anomalies  syndrome is a hereditary condition consisting of a wide range of ocular defects. it was first described in the rocky mountain horse breed  <cit> . most affected horses have a coat color called silver . this color is associated with a missense mutation in pmel <dig> and has a dominant mode of inheritance  <cit> . the mutation causes a dilution of eumelanin , most noticeable in mane and tail, into gray or white. the body of the horse becomes slightly diluted in color and often displays a dappled pattern. the pmel <dig> mutation does not have an obvious effect on phenomelanin , making it virtually impossible to detect it phenotypically in horses lacking dark pigment, for example chestnuts, white grays, palominos, pearl- and champagne-colored horses. these horses must be genotyped in order to determine if they are carriers of the mutation. the pmel <dig>  exon  <dig>  mutation has been detected in an ancient sample recovered from south siberia. radiocarbon dating of this sample revealed that the silver phenotype was present as early as  <dig> years bc  <cit> . it is still unclear if the mcoa locus and silver locus are two separate but closely linked loci, or if only one mutation is present with pleiotropic effects, influencing both coat color dilution and ocular development  <cit> .

horses with the mcoa syndrome can be categorized into two separate groups depending on the severity of disease  <cit> . horses that are heterozygous for the disease-causing allele have less severe ocular anomalies, mainly displaying peripheral cysts of the iris, cillary body or retina . horses that are homozygous for the mutation have multiple anomalies, including fluid-filled cysts of the iris, ciliary body or retina, retinal dysplasia, megaloglobus, miotic pupils, iris stromal hypoplasia and cataract   <cit> . hence, the mutation displays a dose effect, were double mutants have more serious defects than horses carrying only one copy of the disease-causing allele  <cit> .

extensive breeding of horses with the desirable silver coat color has lead to a high frequency of mcoa syndrome in rocky mountain horses. it has been argued that the ocular defects are caused by a recent mutation that is restricted to horses that are related to the rocky mountain horse breed. isolated findings of mcoa syndrome have been reported in the related kentucky mountain saddle horse, mountain pleasure horse and morgan horse breeds  <cit> . two mcoa cases have also been reported in the american shetland pony  <cit> , however this breed was developed by crossing imported shetland ponies to finer-built domestic breeds  <cit> .

in this study, we describe identical lesions in icelandic horses, a breed developed in relative isolation on iceland during the last  <dig> years  <cit> .

RESULTS
we have examined  <dig> icelandic horses and established that the mcoa syndrome is present in this breed. four of the horses were categorized as having the mcoa-phenotype, which is the most severe form of the mcoa syndrome. this was in agreement with their genotype as they were homozygous for the exon  <dig>  pmel <dig> mutation . an abnormal corneal contour, megaloglobus was observed bilaterally in two horses with the mcoa-phenotype. iridal stromal hypoplasia was found in all four horses. miotic pupils that were irresponsive to light stimuli and repeated administration of tropicamide were seen in two horses, whereas the other two horses in this group had slightly miotic pupils that constricted when light was shone into the eye and instillation of tropicamide caused some, but not normal dilation of the pupils . a widened, densely white perilimbal zone indicating iridocorneal angle anomalies was evident in the temporal quadrant in two of these horses . nuclear cataracts extending into the epinuclear and cortical areas were present in three homozygote mcoa horses examined, but not in a  <dig> month-old mare. all four horses with the mcoa-phenotype had multiple translucent, fluid-filled iridociliary cysts in the temporal quadrant of the eye. involvement of the peripheral retina, always in the temporal quadrant, was seen as ophthalmoscopically visible cysts extending over the ora serrata or demarcation lines and focal retinal atrophy where the neuroretina previously had been detached .

light-microscopic examination of one globe showed redundant duplication of non-pigmented ciliary body epithelium, sometimes forming cysts bulging into the posterior chamber. in the peripheral retina localized areas of retinal atrophy and loss of photoreceptors were seen.

fourteen horses were classified with the cyst-phenotype, and were shown to be heterozygous for the pmel <dig> mutation. all of these horses showed translucent, fluid filled cysts, ranging from single small cysts in both eyes of one individual, to large lobulated cysts  with or without curvilinear streaks extending into the temporal retina. all horses with the cyst-phenotype showed normal pupillary light reflexes, dazzle reflexes and menace responses and normal dilation of the pupil after tropicamide application, contrary to the mcoa-phenotype horses.

three additional horses displayed the silver phenotype, were heterozygous for the pmel <dig> mutation, but did not display any detectable clinical signs of the cyst-phenotype. three non-silver icelandic horses were examined as controls. none of these displayed the cyst- or the mcoa-phenotype.

numerous pigmented folds indicating multifocal retinal dysplasia in the dorsal tapetal fundus were frequently observed in horses with the cyst- or the mcoa-phenotype.

discussion
in this study we have shown that the mcoa syndrome is segregating with the pmel <dig> mutation in the icelandic horse population. this makes the hypothesis that the mcoa mutation has recently arisen unlikely. icelandic horses are believed to be descendant from horses brought to iceland by the vikings around  <dig> ad. they were possibly interbred later with ponies brought over from ireland/ united kingdom, which were the ancestors of the shetland, highland, and connemara ponies. the icelandic parliament banned import of horses into iceland in  <dig> ad, and consequently the breed has been isolated for more than  <dig> years.

it is probably not a coincidence that mcoa syndrome was first found in the rocky mountain horse breed. stallions and mares of this breed expressing the silver phenotype have been used extensively in breeding. as the frequency of the silver allele increased in the population, so did the frequency of the double mutants . in homozygous individuals, the ocular defects become the most obvious. this is reflected both in a phenotypic characteristic with bulging eyes  and in an increased number of horses with impaired vision. in other breeds of horses where the mutation is not as common, carriers are most likely to be heterozygous  <cit> . this poses a particular problem to breeders as ocular anomalies in heterozygotes are usually only detected after careful examination by a trained ophthalmologist. therefore, breeding societies may be unaware of the prevalence of the disease in their silver horses, which warrants further clinical investigations.

we could not detect any clinical signs of mcoa syndrome in three pmel <dig> heterozygous horses. this has also been reported in previous studies  <cit> . to date, we do not know if this was caused by limitations in our detection method or if it was due to non- penetrance of the mutation. however, horses without detectable cysts, that carry the pmel <dig> mutation, still produce affected offspring  <cit> .

horses with the mcoa-phenotype are at particular risk of having impaired vision, and difficulties in adapting to changing light conditions are probably a common phenomenon in these horses. some individuals have more severe impairment of their vision, causing abnormal behavior and an inability to perform. mcoa and pmel <dig> are tightly linked, so breeding pmel <dig> mutation carriers only to known non-carriers would practically eliminate the risk of producing horses with vision threatening abnormalities caused by this syndrome.

CONCLUSIONS
mcoa syndrome is segregating with the pmel <dig> mutation in the icelandic horse population. this should be taken in to consideration for breeding decisions and highlights the fact that the mcoa syndrome is present in a breed that is not closely related to the rocky mountain breed of horses.

